@@@@@


doc= 35311


Olsson, Julius (1864-1942), marine painter, was born in Islington, London, on 1 February 1864, the third son of Martin Olsson, a Swedish timber agent, and his English wife, Elizabeth Henrietta Tucker. He should not be confused with the Swedish-born painter Bror Julius Olsson (1878-1955), who became a pioneer of post-impressionism in Chicago and changed his surname to that of his mother, Nordfelst. Julius Olsson grew up in Sweden, at Varmland and Karlstrand, and in his childhood he often crossed the North Sea between Gotenberg and Milwall with his father. He was twice married: first, in 1885, to Catherine Mary (died 1923), daughter of Charles Butt, timber merchant, of Hull; second, in 1925, to Edith Mary, daughter of Charles Luke Ellison, a horse breeder from Castlereagh. There were no children of either marriage. According to his nephew H. William Olsson he was self-taught as a painter. He first painted landscapes in Sweden but settled in St Ives, in Cornwall, in 1888. He was among the first artists of what became the St Ives school, and his place as its founder was secured by the popularity of his paintings of that area and by his teaching of several painters of the next generation who remained in St Ives. He was typical of one strand of the great inundation of sea painting in Britain in the 1880s in that he concentrated on the romantic mood of the sea itself, as subject, rather than the work of fishermen, and in this he was distinct from the rival art colony at Newlyn. His heavily textured oil technique allowed dramatic effects of light and shade, and he specialized in painting nocturnal scenes under moonlight. The titles of his seascapes, for example 'Moonlit Shore', purchased in 1911 for the Chantrey collection at the Tate Gallery, record Olsson's interest in a certain effect of light on the sea. He painted the coast also in Dorset, the Channel Islands, the Mediterranean, and especially in Ireland. His pupils included the Canadian modernist Emily Carr (1871-1945), about 1900, and the artists who became the leaders of the St Ives school in the 1920s, R. Borlase Smart (1881-1947) and John Anthony Park (1878-1962). 
Olsson exhibited, plentifully and with success, at the Royal Academy from 1890 to 1940. He joined the Royal Institution of Painters in Oils in 1897 and was its president from 1919 until his death. He twice won gold medals at the Paris Salon, where he exhibited from 1910, and twice served on the committee of the Carnegie International Exhibition in Pittsburgh. He was appointed an associate of the Royal Academy in 1914 and Royal Academician in 1920. In Cornwall he became a justice of the peace and was captain of the West Cornwall Golf Club. 
From about 1912 Olsson lived in London, and during the First World War he advised the Admiralty on ship camouflage. He was nevertheless included in the opening exhibition in 1927 of the St Ives Society of Artists, and the first exhibition at the Porthmeor Gallery, where the members showed, was officially opened by Olsson in 1928. After his London home was damaged by bombing he moved to Dalkey, near Dublin, where he died on 8 September 1942. 


@@@@@


doc= 35312


Oman, Sir Charles William Chadwick (1860-1946), historian, was born on 12 January 1860 at Mozaffarpur, India, the only child of Charles Philip Austin Oman (1825-1876), indigo planter, and his wife, Anne (1832-1907), daughter of William Chadwick, railway constructor. The family returned to England almost immediately, and by 1866 had settled in Cheltenham. Charles was sent to public school at Winchester, where he held a scholarship. As an only child, he was anyway solitary, and at 6 feet tall, he stood out awkwardly among his peers, both of which traits led to difficulties. He seems to have taken to academic studies as something of a refuge from bullying and sports, although even then he was conscious that his classical scholarship fell somewhat short of the purest linguistic and philosophical standards. He therefore specialized in ancient history, with modern history as its natural auxiliary, although in the course of his career that relationship would gradually be reversed. In both fields he excelled, winning first place in the scholarship election to New College, Oxford (1878), and then taking a first in 'literae humaniores' (1882) and in modern history (1883). Yet he did not fit into the liberal and modernist senior common room at New College, and was not appointed to the fellowship there that he had hoped for. He felt the rejection keenly, but quickly bounced back by winning a still more prestigious fellowship at All Souls, Oxford, to which he devoted the remainder of his life. He divided his time between teaching, writing, and a variety of university activities such as the union, the Non Placet Society, the Kriegspiel Club, the Phantasmagorical Society (an early exercise in the classification of paranormal events), and frequent attendance at church services and sermons, preferably high Anglican. On 16 December 1905 he became Chichele professor of modern history, having been the deputy since 1900. Also in All Souls he was instrumental in setting up the Chichele chair of military history in 1909, and was active as the Codrington's librarian for some thirty years. 
Oman worked as a member of only the second generation of professional British historians, and so there were still great swathes of general history that stood in need of elementary school and undergraduate textbooks, or 'manuals' as he called them. His production of such works was as prolific as it was influential. His most successful included 'A History of Greece from the Earliest Times to the Macedonian Conquest' (1890), 'The Byzantine Empire' (1892), 'Europe, 476-918' (1893), 'A History of England' (1895), 'England and the Hundred Years' War' (1898), 'England in the Nineteenth Century' (1899), and 'Seven Roman Statesmen of the Later Republic' (1902). If he had written nothing beyond these, his reputation would already have been secure. However, it was in what he called his 'research' books, which included 'Warwick the Kingmaker' (1891), 'The Great Revolt of 1381' (1906), and his military histories, that he felt most free to pursue his many and diverse personal interests. 
Unlike a more meticulous or plodding type of scholar, Oman flitted freely from one arcane subject to another with a rapidity that would suggest shallowness, but which he was normally able to sustain by the liveliness and force of his scrutiny. He was apparently as much at home describing the politics of the Roman senate for his manuals as the design of medieval castles for the Great Western Railway, or of wallpapers and silverware for the Victoria and Albert Museum. Having collected Roman coins as a boy, he had a lifelong interest in numismatics, which he saw as an essential archaeological underpinning for all historical studies, and he would eventually serve as president of both the Royal Numismatic Society and the Royal Archaeological Institute. Still more formative was his early exposure to military history, first through his father's memories of life under siege during the Indian mutiny, then through attending military parades, visiting battlefields, and reading such works as Napier's 'History of the War in the Peninsula'. He was already making his mark in military studies as early as his seminal Lothian prize-winning essay, 'The art of war in the middle ages' (1884). This was expanded into a book in 1885, with further developments and revisions in 1898 and (in two volumes) 1924. It held the field with few serious competitors until the 1960s, and was later complemented by an article, 'The art of war in the fifteenth century' (1936), and a particularly valuable book, 'A History of the Art of War in the Sixteenth Century' (1937). However, Oman's greatest achievement was to supersede Sir William Napier with his own 'History of the Peninsular War' (7 vols., 1902-30), together with many associated essays -- notably those collected as 'Wellington's Army' (1913) and 'Studies in the Napoleonic Wars' (1929). His 'History of the Peninsular War' is unlikely ever to be displaced as the fullest basic military narrative of that conflict, even though a few of the facts and many of the opinions may be revised in the light of more recent research. Its first volume is excessively compressed and prejudiced; but the remaining six volumes show Oman as a mature post-Victorian historian, diligent in his researches, robust in his nationalist convictions, and lucidly assured in his exposition. The work conveys a great sense of clarity and completeness, notably by its full account of the Spanish operations, which had been skimmed over by Napier, and by its innovative compilation of statistics for manpower and casualties. However, it is perhaps unsurprising that the scholarly apparatus lags sadly behind the most advanced practice of his day, since Oman's militant conservatism gave him a strong aversion to all new-fangled 'theories' or 'philosophies' of historiography. He was content to remain a middlebrow historian of 'kings and battles', but as such he was unsurpassed. 
Outside All Souls Oman's long, lanky, white-haired figure, his 'rogue-elephant look' (Rowse, 49), and his ever discursive conversation quickly became well known, if not notorious, in many different locales. He helped to organize historical pageants and war games, and he loved to travel, especially to Scotland, Italy, and Paris. For long he was active in Oxford University politics, firmly opposing innovation, and from 1919 to 1935 he sat as a Conservative burgess for the University of Oxford in the House of Commons, where he was nicknamed 'Stone Age Man' (ibid., 52). During the First World War he worked for the press bureau and the Foreign Office, for which he was knighted (KBE) in 1920. This experience also led him to conduct a most exhaustive study, 'The German losses on the Somme, July-December 1916', which was published in 1927 (G. S. Clarke [Lord Sydenham] and others, 'The World Crisis, by Winston Churchill: a Criticism'). This showed that the British official historian had set the enemy's losses too high, while W. S. Churchill had set them too low. Oman was elected FBA in 1905, served as president of the Royal Historical Society, and advised on the library of the Imperial War Museum. He became an honorary fellow of New College in 1936, and received honorary degrees of DCL (Oxford, 1926) and LLD (Edinburgh, 1911; Cambridge, 1927). 
In 1892 Oman married Mary Mabel (1866-1950), the sixth and youngest child of General Robert Maclagan RE. They had three children: Dulce Roberta (1894-1971), Carola Mary Anima Oman (1897-1978), later a noted biographer, and Charles Chichele (1901-1982, later a noted antiquary), who all knew him first as C.O. and then, after he had secured his chair, as the Prof. From 1892 to 1897 they occupied a central Oxford house in Beaumont Street next to the Ashmolean Museum and then lived at 39 St Giles, before moving in 1908 into the grandeur of Frewin Hall, off the Cornmarket. Sir Charles Oman died at Frewin Hall on 23 June 1946. 


@@@@@


doc= 35313


Oman, John Wood (1860-1939), theologian, was born on the farm of Biggins in the parish of Stenness, Orkney, on 23 July 1860, the second son of Simon Rust Oman, a farmer who in earlier years had been master of a sailing vessel, and his wife, Isabella Irvine Rendall. He owed his early education mainly to a tutor engaged for a neighbouring family and shared by a few other boys. Many references in Oman's works reveal how deeply his mind was shaped by the freedom and simplicity of his boyhood -- its close contacts with the soil and the sea, and with the hardy and vigorous folk who gained their living from them. He himself described his father, in the dedication of his Kerr lectures, as 'a scholar only of life and action, but my best teacher'. He entered Edinburgh University in 1877, graduating in 1882 with first-class honours in philosophy and winning the Gray and Rhind scholarships. Thence he proceeded to the theological college of the United Presbyterian church in Edinburgh, and at the conclusion of the course there he studied at the universities of Erlangen, Heidelberg, and Neuchatel. On his return to Scotland he served for a brief period as assistant minister at St James's Church, Paisley. In 1889 he accepted a call to be minister of Clayport Street Church, Alnwick, thus passing into the Presbyterian Church of England, in the service of which he remained to the end of his life. While at Alnwick he married in 1897 Mary Hannah, daughter of Henry Hunter Blair JP of Gosforth, a very happy union broken only by her death in 1936. They had four daughters. 
It was during his ministry at Alnwick that Oman's quality as an unusually learned, powerful, and original thinker in the field of theology -- already known to his intimates -- began to be more widely known, mainly through the publication in 1902 of 'Vision and Authority, or, The Throne of St Peter' (rev. edn, 1928), and in 1906 of his Kerr lectures, 'The Problem of Faith and Freedom in the Last Two Centuries'. The former revealed a mind singularly able to keep profound and informed theological reflection in close relation with the religious life and its problems; the latter showed an easy, firsthand mastery, issuing in penetrating and original judgements, of the works of every relevant writer of importance from Pascal to Albrecht Ritschl. Before the publication of these two works he had produced in 1893 the first translation into English of F. E. D. Schleiermacher's epoch-making 'Reden uber die Religion'. 
In 1907 Oman was appointed professor of systematic theology and apologetics in Westminster College, Cambridge, the theological college of the Presbyterian Church of England, where he remained until his retirement in 1935, having become principal in 1922. At Westminster College he was one of a remarkably distinguished teaching staff, his colleagues being John Skinner, Charles Anderson Scott, and Patrick Carnegie Simpson. During this time Oman came to be recognized, first in Cambridge and later more widely, as one of the most learned and original minds at work in theology. He was thrice (1913-16, 1919-22, 1929-31) appointed Stanton lecturer in the philosophy of religion in the University of Cambridge, and served for many years on the board of the faculty of divinity and on its degree committee. In 1909 he became a member of Queens' College and in 1935 an honorary fellow of Jesus College; the honorary degree of DD was conferred upon him by the universities of Edinburgh and Oxford. In 1938 he was elected a fellow of the British Academy. His own church honoured him by electing him moderator of the general assembly in 1931. He died at Cambridge on 7 May 1939. 
Oman's eminent position as a thinker was achieved partly through his work as a teacher, which greatly influenced all his students, but more through his published writings, among which, besides those already named, should be mentioned 'The Church and the Divine Order' (1911), 'Grace and Personality' (1917), 'The Paradox of the World' (1921), 'The Natural and the Supernatural' (1931), 'Concerning the Ministry' (1936), and 'Honest Religion' (published posthumously in 1941 with a memoir of the author by George Alexander and Herbert Henry Farmer). Of these 'Grace and Personality' and 'The Natural and the Supernatural' were the most important, both as affording insight into Oman's characteristic teaching and as permanent enrichments of theological literature. Oman's theology was built round a strongly personalistic doctrine of man and of God's dealings with man. Man's true end can only be achieved through a reverence which never subordinates sacred values to expediency or profit, a freedom which accepts all the risks of freedom, a sincerity which walks steadfastly by its own insight. All these needs and prerogatives of personality God himself unwaveringly respects, having himself created and bestowed them. In 'Grace and Personality' this theme is worked out in relation to the central Christian doctrines of grace and forgiveness with a thoroughness, consistency, and power which made it, in the words of a critic, 'one of the major treasures of theological literature'. In 'The Natural and the Supernatural' the same basic thoughts were made the clue to the understanding of the nature and history of religion, and of the processes of knowledge, evolution, and the natural order, the whole constituting a sustained argument to justify the contention that there is direct awareness of the supernatural which leads on to fuller knowledge of God only as men live in loyalty to those sacred values through which he discloses himself to their souls. 
Oman's writing is not always easy to follow, demanding close attention and a willingness to weigh every sentence with care; but it rises at times to real, if restrained, eloquence, is interspersed with apt illustration, and always rests on a vast knowledge which is masked from the uninformed by a refusal to adorn his pages with references to other authors. His character, in its massive and at times almost formidable integrity, was an impressive embodiment of his own teaching. Physically also he was impressive, being tall and with a noble head. 
H. H. Farmer', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35314


Ommanney, Sir Erasmus (1814-1904), naval officer, born in London on 22 May 1814, was the seventh son, in a family of eight sons and three daughters, of Sir Francis Molyneux Ommanney (1774?-1840), a naval agent and from 1818 to 1826 MP for Barnstaple, and his wife, Georgiana Frances, daughter of Joshua Hawkes. The Ommanneys had long distinguished themselves in the navy: Erasmus's grandfather was Rear-Admiral Cornthwaite Ommanney (died 1801), and his uncles were Admiral Sir John Acworth Ommanney and Admiral Henry Manaton Ommanney. Major-General Edward Lacon Ommanney RE was his eldest brother and Prebendary George Druce Wynne Ommanney was a younger brother. Ommanney entered the navy in August 1826 under his uncle, John Ommanney, then captain of the 'Albion' (74 guns), which in December convoyed to Lisbon the troops sent to protect Portugal against the Spanish invasion. The ship then went to the Mediterranean, and on 20 October 1827 took part in the battle of Navarino. The captured flag of the Turkish commander-in-chief was handed down by seniority among the surviving officers until 1890, when Ommanney, the sole survivor, presented it to the king of Greece. 
In 1833 Ommanney passed his examination, after which he served for a short time as mate in the brig 'Pantaloon'. On 10 December 1835 he was promoted lieutenant, and in the same month was appointed to the transport 'Cove' (Captain Clark Ross), which was ordered to Baffin's Bay to release a number of whalers caught in the ice. He received the special commendation of the Admiralty for this dangerous service. In October 1836 he joined the frigate 'Pique' (Captain Henry John Rous), and a year later was appointed to the 'Donegal' (78 guns), as flag-lieutenant to his uncle, now Sir John Ommanney, commander-in-chief on the Lisbon and Mediterranean stations. He was promoted commander on 9 October 1840, and from August 1841 to the end of 1844 served on board the steam sloop 'Vesuvius' in the Mediterranean. Here he was employed on the coast of Morocco for the protection of British subjects during the French hostilities, which included the bombardment of Tangier by the Prince de Joinville's squadron. He married, on 27 February 1844, Emily Mary (died 1857), daughter of Samuel Smith of HM Dockyard, Malta. Their son, Erasmus Austin Ommanney, entered the navy in 1863, retired with the rank of commander in 1879, took orders in 1883, and was vicar of St Michael's, Southsea, from 1892 to 1911. Ommanney was promoted captain on 9 November 1846, and in 1847-8 was employed under the government commission during the famine in Ireland, carrying into effect relief measures and the new poor law. 
When Captain Horatio Austin was appointed to the 'Resolute' for the command of the Franklin search expedition in February 1850 he chose his friend Ommanney as second in command. The 'Resolute' and Ommanney's ship, the 'Assistance', each had a steam tender, this being the first occasion on which steam was used for Arctic navigation. This expedition was also the first to organize an extensive system of sledge journeys, by means of which the coast of Prince of Wales Land was surveyed. On 25 August 1850 Ommanney discovered the first traces of the fate of Sir John Franklin; these proved that his ships had wintered at Beechey Island. The expedition returned to England in October 1851. 
In December 1851 Ommanney was appointed deputy controller-general of the coastguard, and held this post until 1854, when, on the outbreak of the Russian war, he commissioned the 'Eurydice' as senior officer of a small squadron for the White Sea, where he blockaded Archangel, stopped the coasting trade, and destroyed government property. His White Sea service culminated in a battle between his squadron and a Russian monastery at Archangel. In 1855 he was appointed to the 'Hawke', blockship for the Baltic, and was employed chiefly as senior officer in the Gulf of Riga, where the service was one of rigid blockade, varied by occasional skirmishes with the Russian gunboats and batteries. Ommanney's period in the Baltic was marked by his aggressive operations against Russian shore positions and gunboats, summoning defenceless towns to surrender, and his exaggerated reports of successes. 
In October 1857 Ommanney was appointed to the 'Brunswick' (80 guns), going out to the West Indies, and was senior officer at Colon when the filibuster William Walker attempted to invade Nicaragua. The 'Brunswick' afterwards joined the Channel Fleet, and she was sent as a reinforcement to the Mediterranean during the Franco-Austrian War of 1859. Ommanney was not again afloat after being paid off in 1860, but was senior officer at Gibraltar from 1862 until he was promoted to flag rank on 12 November 1864. 
In 1862 Ommanney married Mary, daughter of Thomas A. Stone of Curzon Street, London; she died on 1 September 1906, aged eighty-one. In March 1867 he was created CB; on 14 July 1871 he was promoted to vice-admiral, and he accepted retirement on 1 January 1875. He was advanced to admiral on the retired list on 1 August 1877, in which year he was knighted for his scientific work in the Arctic. He had been elected FRS in 1868 for the same reason, and to the end of his life continued to take a great interest in geographical work and service subjects. He attended meetings of the Royal Geographical Society and the Royal United Service Institution (he was for many years a councillor of both bodies) and of the British Association. He was also a JP for Hampshire and a member of the Thames conservancy. In June 1902 he was made KCB. 
An officer of some distinction in Arctic exploration, Ommanney died on 21 December 1904 at his son's home, St Michael's vicarage, St Michael's Road, Southsea, Hampshire, and was buried in Mortlake cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 35315


Ommanney, George Druce Wynne (1819-1902), Church of England clergyman and theologian, born in Norfolk Street, Strand, London, on 12 April 1819, was the eighth and youngest son of Sir Francis Molyneux Ommanney (1774?-1840), naval agent and politician, and his wife, Georgiana Frances Hawkes, and the younger brother of Sir Erasmus Ommanney. After education at Harrow School (1831-8), where in 1838 he won the Robert Peel gold medal and the Lyon scholarship, he matriculated as scholar from Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1838, graduated BA as senior optime and second-class classic in 1842, and proceeded MA in 1845. Taking holy orders in 1842, he was curate of Edwinstone, Nottinghamshire (1843-9), of Cameley, Somerset (1849-52), of Oldbourne, Wiltshire (1852-3), and of Woodborough, Wiltshire (1853-8); vicar of Queen Charlton, near Bristol (1858-62); curate in charge of Whitchurch, Somerset (1862-75); and vicar of Draycot, Somerset (1875-88). He was made prebendary of Whitchurch in Wells Cathedral in 1884. He married Ellen Ricketts of Brislington, Bristol; they had no children. Ommanney died on 20 April 1902 at 29 Beaumont Street, Oxford, where he had lived in retirement since 1888, and was buried at St Sepulchre's cemetery, Oxford. 
Ommanney was a voluminous and lucid writer on the Athanasian creed, to which he devoted a large portion of his later life, studying Arabic and visiting the chief European libraries for purposes of research. He was a vigorous champion of the retention of the creed in the Church of England services. He supported its claims to authenticity against the critics who ascribed its composition to the eighth and ninth centuries. His published works include: 'The Athanasian Creed: Examination of Recent Theories Respecting its Date and Origin' (1875), 'Early History of the Athanasian Creed' (1880), 'The SPCK and the Creed of St Athanasius' (1884), and 'Critical dissertation on the Athanasian creed, its original language, date, authorship, titles, text, reception, and use' (1897). 


@@@@@


doc= 35316


Onions, Charles Talbut (1873-1965), lexicographer and grammarian, was born at 40 Spring Street, Edgbaston, Birmingham, on 10 September 1873, the eldest son of Ralph John Onions and his wife, Harriet, daughter of John Talbut, locksmith. Although the traditional occupation of the family had been bellows making, his father was a designer and embosser in metal; the name is of Welsh origin, being based on the form Einion. Charles Talbut Onions was grounded in grammar, first at a board school and later at the Camp Hill branch of King Edward VI's foundation at Birmingham. There he came under the influence of the Revd A. J. Smith, a headmaster of sterling character and scholarly outlook, to whom he owed the very means of entering academic life as well as his first contact with lexicography: Smith kept Littre's French dictionary in his classroom, together with fascicules of the 'New English Dictionary' as they appeared. At school, too, Onions was much influenced by a Tractarian organist and choirmaster, John Heywood: his religious sympathies and affiliations were thus permanently established. 
With a leaving exhibition Onions entered Mason College, Birmingham, where he studied for the London BA degree, which he gained in 1892 with third-class honours in French, followed in 1895 by his MA degree. Under E. A. Sonnenschein he learned 'inter alia' to scan Plautus and to write Greek prose, and he contributed 'An Advanced English Syntax' (1904; frequently reprinted) to a 'Parallel Grammar Series' published by Sonnenschein. The professor of English at Birmingham at this time was Edward Arber, who introduced Onions to J. A. H. Murray when the latter was examining at Birmingham in the Oxford local examinations. Shortly after, in September 1895, Murray invited Onions to join the small staff of the English dictionary at Oxford, and at Oxford he lived, except for one short interval, for the rest of his life. There he was soon joined by Henry Bradley, who had worked as an editor on the dictionary since 1887; in later years he spoke of passing from Murray to Bradley as a remarkable experience: 'It was to pass from the practical, professional teacher to the philosophical exponent.' On 17 April 1907 he married Angela (1883/4-1941), youngest daughter of the Revd Arthur Blythman, rector of Shenington; they had seven sons and three daughters. 
From 1906 to 1913 Onions was entrusted with the special preparation of various portions of the dictionary under the supervision of Bradley and W. A. Craigie, and then began independent editorial work on the section Su-Sz; he was also responsible for Wh-Worling and the volumes containing X, Y, and Z, and so contributed the very last entry to the whole work in the form of a cross-reference -- 'Zyxt, obs. (Kentish) 2nd sing. ind. pres. of SEE 'v'.' -- which he liked to mention as it was taken, because of its position, as a brand name for a soap. But it was by no means Onions's last word. 
In 1922, after the death of William Little, the Clarendon Press commissioned Onions to revise and complete Little's work on the 'Shorter Oxford English Dictionary'. This appeared in 1933, and was continually revised and augmented by him until 1959: in the twenty pages of addenda in the 1944 edition he dealt with 1500 words, mostly the product of war. Onions shared with Craigie the preparation of the supplement to the main work (1933), which includes a list of books cited therein that constituted the fullest bibliography of English literature yet made. An equally valuable by-product was his 'Shakespeare Glossary' (1911), the introduction to which provides a notable survey of Shakespearian usage; throughout the work he was able to draw on his knowledge of the Warwickshire dialect. On the death of Sir Sidney Lee he completed the editing of 'Shakespeare's England' (1916), contributing to the articles on alchemy and on animals, as well as providing a glossary of musical terms. Henceforth the Clarendon Press constantly called on him for advice and help, and many Oxford books owe improvements to him. For many years he was the only visitor allowed into the Walton Street office at 'the sacred hour of 9.30' when the day's work was being planned. The files of the press are rich in his scholarly jottings. 
In 1918 Onions donned uniform and went to the naval intelligence division of the Admiralty (where his knowledge of German was put to good use) with the rank of honorary captain, Royal Marines. On his return to Oxford he became university lecturer in English (1920) and later reader in English philology (1927-49). In 1922 he revised for the Clarendon Press the 'Anglo-Saxon Reader' originally compiled by Henry Sweet, though 'reverence for the opinion of a great master' restrained the correcting hand. On Bradley's death in 1923 Magdalen elected Onions to fill the vacant fellowship; when the statutes were revised shortly afterwards he chose to remain under the old regulations, and so remained a stipendiary fellow until the day of his death. In 1940-55 he was librarian of the college, and undergraduates and others profited from his constant presence in the dictionary bay of the library; he was equally at home in the senior common room, where his astringent rejoinders to questions on etymology and English usage were much relished. 
Onions was president of the Philological Society from 1929 to 1933, and was elected FBA in 1938. Oxford, Leeds, and Birmingham conferred honorary degrees upon him on the completion of the dictionary, and he was appointed CBE in 1934. In 1945 he succeeded R. W. Chambers as honorary director of the Early English Text Society, and, partly by enlisting the help of several former pupils at Oxford, he did much in the following twelve years to extend its publishing programme. He was editor of 'Medium Aevum', the journal of the Society for the Study of Medieval Languages and Literature, from its inception in 1932 to 1956. But the preoccupation of his last twenty years was the 'Oxford Dictionary of English Etymology' (1966), which went to press before he died. It treats over 38,000 words and is likely to be his enduring monument. 
Onions had an almost personal pride in his mother tongue, which he once described as 'a rum go -- but jolly good'. His lifelong study of it bore fruit in the masterly chapter on the English language which he contributed to 'The Character of England' (1947), edited by Sir Ernest Barker. His training in the scriptorium of the dictionary taught him the art of conciseness, as is demonstrated in his tracts for the Society for Pure English and in his article 'Grammar' in 'Chambers's cyclopaedia'. As a lexicographer his strength lay in etymology: he delighted in teasing out the history of such words as 'syllabus' or 'acne' or Shakespeare's 'dildos and fadings'. His grasp of idiom and his analytical power are well evidenced in the articles in the 'Oxford English Dictionary' on 'set', 'shall', 'will', and the interrogative pronouns. To dialectal usages, medieval and modern, he was particularly sensitive. His approach to linguistic and lexical problems was essentially pragmatic. There was something Johnsonian in his attitudes and character (as well as his early struggles). For much of his life he was handicapped by a stammer and he always had a fellow feeling for other stammerers; but he was undemonstrative in his likings as in his religion. He died at the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, on 8 January 1965, and was buried on 13 January. 
J. A. W. Bennett', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35317


Onslow, William Hillier, fourth earl of Onslow (1853-1911), politician and colonial governor, was born at Alresford, Hampshire, on 7 March 1853, the only child of George Augustus Cranley Onslow (1813-13 April 1855) of Alresford, Hampshire, who was the nephew of Arthur George, third earl, and grandson of Thomas, second earl. The mother of the fourth earl was Mary Harriet Ann, eldest daughter of Lieutenant-General William Fraser Bentinck Loftus of Kilbride, co. Wicklow, Ireland; she died on 7 November 1880. William Hillier Onslow succeeded his great-uncle as fourth earl in October 1870, and thus, at the age of seventeen, inherited an estate of 13,488 acres (worth nearly $11,000 p.a.), chiefly in Surrey and Essex. He was educated at Eton College, and entered Exeter College, Oxford, in 1871 but left after a year without taking a degree. On 3 February 1875 he married the Hon. Florence Coulston Gardner, elder daughter of Alan Legge, third Baron Gardner; she died on 8 August 1934. 
While still in his mid-twenties, Onslow was appointed a lord-in-waiting in February 1880 in Lord Beaconsfield's Conservative administration, holding office until the government was dissolved two months later; he represented the Local Government Board in the House of Lords. He held no office in the brief tory government of 1885-6, but was again appointed a lord-in-waiting after Salisbury's sweeping win at the 1886 election, holding office from 5 August 1886 until 21 February 1887. He then held the positions of parliamentary under-secretary of state for the colonies (from 16 February 1887 until 20 February 1888) and parliamentary secretary to the Board of Trade (from 21 February 1888 until 1 January 1889). While at the former office, in April 1887, Onslow served as vice-president of the first Colonial Conference and was a delegate to the Sugar Bounties Conference in 1887-8. 
In November 1888, at the age of only thirty-five, Onslow was appointed governor of New Zealand, assuming office on 2 May 1889 and holding it until 24 February 1892. Historians concur that he was a successful governor, businesslike and frank in character, who was, nevertheless, unpopular and unhappy in his political dealings. When the government of Sir Harry Atkinson was defeated at the polls in December 1890, it recommended to Onslow that he approve several appointments to the legislative council (the appointed upper house). He refused to make more than six and these only on assurance that they were needed to strengthen the chamber and not to reward party services. His decision did not please the incoming government of John Ballance, who protested to the governor against the appointments on the grounds that they were unconstitutional. Onslow's reply was the brusque one that they had already been made and that he was responsible only to the Colonial Office. He was also instrumental in achieving a clarification, throughout the empire, of the responsibility of the governor and ministers in regard to the exercise of the prerogative of mercy. In a particular case, in February 1891, the New Zealand cabinet had asserted its right to advise the governor upon this subject as upon all others. Onslow accepted this advice, but asked that the matter should be made clear in royal instructions. This received the agreement of all other colonies and it was regularized accordingly. 
In New Zealand, Onslow took a considerable interest in the Maori people, giving his second son, who was born there, the middle name of 'Huia' and presenting him for adoption to the Ngati-Huia tribe in September 1891. He also encouraged acclimatization societies, and established preserves for native New Zealand birds. Nevertheless, he was also regarded as aloof from New Zealand society and became embroiled, at the time of his departure in February 1892, in another quarrel over appointments to the legislative council. On this occasion, in contrast to his previous stance, he refused to sanction the appointment of new nominees to the upper house. 
When the Conservatives returned to power in 1895 Onslow again held office, as under-secretary of state for India (5 July 1895-26 November 1901) and under-secretary of state for the colonies (26 November 1900-20 May 1903). He took part in the Colonial Conference of 1902 and served as acting secretary of state during the visit of Joseph Chamberlain, the colonial secretary, to South Africa. On 20 May 1903 he at last obtained cabinet rank, serving as president of the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries until 14 March 1905. He was well-suited to appointment to this office, for agriculture and farming in Britain were subjects in which he had long taken a great interest. As secretary of state he set up a number of departmental committees, established a national network of correspondents to inform his department on local conditions, and travelled around Britain's agricultural areas taking an interest in the effect of the railway rates question upon farmers. His responsibilities as secretary were also strengthened by the 'Board of Agriculture and Fisheries Act' of 1903, which transferred control of the fishery industry from the Board of Trade to his portfolio. 
While secretary of state, however, Onslow had become convinced that even the Conservative government took no real interest in agriculture, noting that Arthur Balfour, the prime minister, was 'indifferent' to the subject. When the Liberals came to power in December 1905, Onslow became convinced of the extreme 'dangers ahead' to the landed interest from the new radical government. He immediately set out to form an active back-bench organization of Unionist peers, which had never existed before. He hired a barrister as secretary and expert adviser to this group and established sub-committees to consider legislation introduced by the Liberal government. Dubbed the Apaches by Lord Lansdowne, this group had seventy-five members by 1910, eventually becoming the Association of Independent and Unionist Peers. Onslow's organization was thus perhaps the first of the 'die-hard' tory groups which became so notable a part of the right-wing resistance to the advanced legislation of the Edwardian Liberal government. Onslow held a number of other government posts as well: in 1905 he succeeded Albert Edmund Parker, third earl of Morley, as chairman of committees and deputy speaker of the House of Lords, holding this post until the Easter recess of 1911; he was also chairman of the smallholdings committee appointed by the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries in 1905. For many years he was an advocate of the creation of life peerages to enhance the power of the House of Lords, and also wished them to be awarded to notable colonial figures. Outside government, he was president (in 1905-6) of the Royal Statistical Society and chairman of the Central Land Association. 
Onslow also made his mark in local politics, serving as an alderman of the London county council (LCC) (1896) and for a time as leader of the moderate (that is, conservative) party in the LCC. He was also an alderman of the City of Westminster (1900-03). In January 1896, as leader of the LCC's moderates, he led a deputation of vestrymen to see the chancellor of the exchequer to plead for a fairer distribution of exchequer grants -- part of Onslow's long-standing concern for the unfair burden of taxation falling on the landed interest. 
Although Onslow was forced to sell much of his Surrey land in 1905, he was happiest in agricultural pursuits and as a country gentleman at his home at Clandon Park, near Guildford, Surrey. A bearded, balding man in mature life, he served as high steward of Guildford and was a deputy lieutenant of Surrey. Always a keen sportsman, he was a member of the Coaching and Four in Hand Club. He was created a KCMG in 1887, a GCMG in 1889 (on becoming governor of New Zealand), and was sworn of the privy council in 1903. He died on 23 October 1911 at his son's house, Beechworth, Hampstead, and was buried at Merrow near Guildford. He was survived by two sons and two daughters; his eldest son, Richard William Alan, fifth earl of Onslow (1876-1945), held a variety of ministerial offices, including paymaster-general (1928-9), and was chairman of committees in the House of Lords in 1931-44. His elder daughter was MP for Southend under her married name, Gwendolen Guinness, countess of Iveagh. 


@@@@@


doc= 35318


Oppe, Adolph Paul (1878-1957), art historian and art collector, was born at 157 The Grove, Camberwell, London, on 22 September 1878, the third son of Siegmund Armin Oppe, a silk merchant, and his wife, Pauline Jaffe. His birth certificate gives his name as Adolphus Oppe. He was educated at Charterhouse School, at St Andrews University, and at New College, Oxford, where he took first classes in classical moderations (1899) and 'literae humaniores' (1901). In 1902 Oppe was appointed assistant to the professor of Greek and then lecturer at St Andrews, and in 1904 lecturer in ancient history at Edinburgh University. In 1905 he entered the Board of Education. Except for two periods of secondment to the Victoria and Albert Museum (1906-7 and 1910-13) as deputy director, and war service in the Ministry of Munitions, he remained there until his retirement in 1938. He served the board as head of the branch dealing with the training of teachers and was appointed CB in 1937. 
Apart from essays on classical subjects published while he was at St Andrews and Edinburgh, Oppe's first writings were studies in Italian art: 'Raphael' (1909; rev. edn 1970) and 'Botticelli' (1911). After these, he wrote almost entirely on British subjects and helped to establish the study of British drawings on a sound and scholarly basis. He had collected drawings, both British and foreign, since 1904, starting with a beautiful early work by J. S. Cotman, and his interest had soon been caught by the then almost unstudied British watercolours of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. In 1910 he made the most remarkable of his discoveries in this field: he acquired for 25's'. a lot of seventeen drawings by Francis Towne, including the artist's two masterpieces of the 'Source of the Arveyron'. At that time they could be compared only with a practically unseen collection at the British Museum; but some years later a chance remark led Oppe to the Devon home of the Merivales who still owned the mass of Towne's drawings, which the artist himself had left to the family. These and some Merivale papers enabled Oppe in 1920 to establish this forgotten artist's position with an article in a Walpole Society volume. 
In 1919, in the 'Burlington Magazine', Oppe had demolished the legend that Alexander Cozens was the son of Peter the Great. Under his iconoclastic pen many similar legends about British artists were to be shattered. It was typical of his painstaking quest for finality that he did not publish any book on Alexander Cozens until 1952 when his 'Alexander and John Robert Cozens' embodied the researches of over forty years. In this, as in all his books, his criticism was enriched by his extensive knowledge of the art of other countries and by his classical scholarship. In addition to these works, Oppe published 'Rowlandson' (1923), 'Cotman' (1923), 'Turner, Cox and de Wint' (1925), 'The Drawings of Paul and Thomas Sandby at Windsor Castle' (1947), 'Hogarth' (1948), and 'English Drawings at Windsor Castle' (1950). He also wrote the section on art in 'Early Victorian England' (1934), edited by G. M. Young. All these publications exhibited his terse style and exacting and uncompromising scholarship. 
Oppe was a born collector. With a perceptive eye, he bought regardless of fashion at a time when drawings were still relatively cheap. His collection included, besides its British treasures, drawings by such masters as Fra Bartolommeo, Giovanni da Udine, Barocci, Veronese, Poussin, and Claude Lorrain. Over 3000 of the British drawings and watercolours from the collection were acquired by the Tate Gallery, London, in 1996. Oppe's judgement of drawings was widely respected, and for the last twenty years of his life he acted as adviser to the department of drawings of the National Gallery of Canada, Ottawa. 
In appearance, Oppe had a 'slight, rather stooping figure, sallow complexion, black curling hair, almost unsilvered to the end' ('The Times', 1 April 1957, 14). The critical faculties which distinguished him as a scholar were reflected in his temperament: shallow learning and slovenly writing quickly irritated him and provoked displays of caustic wit. It was reserved for his friends to appreciate the humour and humanity which complemented his rigorous intellect and to enjoy his 'curious likes and prejudices: he liked long walks and the picaresque novel; he disliked halfpennies and afternoon tea' ('The Times', 3 April 1957, 13). 
On 23 February 1909 Oppe married Lyonetta Edith Regina Valentine (1886/7-1951), known as Valentine, daughter of the Revd Ralph William Lyonel Tollemache; they had a son and a daughter. Oppe was elected FBA in 1952 and made an honorary LLD of Glasgow in 1953. He died at his home, 17 Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, London, on 29 March 1957. 
Brinsley Ford', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35319


Oppenheim, Edward Phillips (1866-1946), writer, was born in London on 22 October 1866, the son of a leather merchant, Edward John Oppenheim, and his wife, Henrietta Susannah Temperley Budd. His father's business was located in Leicester, where Oppy (as he was always called) attended Wyggeston grammar school, gaining a history prize but no other distinctions. In 1882 he was removed from school by his father, on the claim that the family business was in difficulties. However, that action was probably designed to deter Oppenheim from becoming a full-time writer, as was his desire. In part it succeeded, for he worked in the leather business for almost twenty years, travelling to London, Norwich, and the continent and even, in 1892, to the United States, where he met and married Elsie Clara Hopkins of Easthampton, Massachusetts. Theirs was to be a lifelong partnership, little disturbed by Oppenheim's numerous and notorious affairs with other women. They had one daughter, Geraldine, and lived initially in a house 8 miles from Leicester, Oppenheim playing cricket for the village and serving as sidesman in the local parish church. 
However, Oppenheim had no desire to settle into placid business life. He had visited Monaco and gained what was to be a lifelong fascination with the opulent life of wealthy British expatriates in the Cote d'Azur. Moreover, his writing ambitions had not been deterred by the indifferent reception to his first novel, 'Expiation' (1887), 'a novel of England and Canada'. Instead, after a full day of work, he would spend long evenings in writing. His second novel, 'A Monk of Cruta', did not appear until 1894 but, after that, a growing flood of writings poured from his pen. 
Following his father's death (probably in 1898), Oppenheim was able progressively to sever his connections with the leather trade. In 1905 the family moved to Sheringham in Norfolk, where he followed for a while the comfortable life of a country squire. Even so, he did not cease to write. Quite the contrary; his productivity increased. By the end of 1906 he had published thirty novels, notably 'The World's Great Snare' (1896), 'The Mysterious Mr. Sabin' (1898), 'The Man and his Kingdom' (1899), and 'A Millionaire of Yesterday' (1900). His work during this period established the genre of romantic intrigue in high places that was to please his public so much. 
In several of his early novels, Oppenheim had dealt with the menace of German militarism. When the First World War broke out in 1914, this gained him an appointment with the Ministry of Information in London. A particular responsibility was to take neutral journalists on tours of the front in France -- a task he performed better than the writing of propaganda, even on one occasion unmasking a German spy who was posing as a journalist. 
During the war and afterwards, the Oppenheims lived in rented houses in London, Devon, and Surrey; then there was a return to Norfolk, with the purchase of Reepham House. Yet Oppenheim was not contented; the lure of the French Riviera was too strong, and his income from his writings growing fast. It was boosted especially by two excellent novels of espionage -- 'The Kingdom of the Blind' (1917) and 'The Great Impersonation' (1920). In 1921 Oppenheim abruptly sold Reepham House and transported his family and possessions to France. After renting several furnished villas, he purchased the Villa Deveron, a house standing by a golf course -- golf was a passion -- at Cagnes-sur-Mer, about half-way between Cannes and Nice. In that house they remained for almost thirteen years. Those years brought unbroken literary success, Oppenheim's novels and short stories mostly being sold for large sums to American magazines in advance of book publication. His life was one of writing (or rather, dictating to his secretary, for Oppenheim wrote no synopses, building the plot as his ideas flowed), entertaining, gambling (though never for large sums), and romantic affairs, the latter most often conducted discreetly on his yacht, 'Echo I'. 
In 1934 the Villa Deveron was sold. The Oppenheims moved to Guernsey, buying a house called Le Vauquiedor at St Peter Port. However, this was merely a device to evade French death duties; they continued to spend much time on the Riviera. Oppenheim's writing pace was unabated; his eventual publishing record consisted of 118 novels (five initially under the pseudonym Anthony Partridge), forty-four collections of short stories, four plays, a travel book, and a remarkably uninformative autobiography, 'The Pool of Memory' (1941). He was also a skilled illustrator of his own work. 
Although he had perceived the German threat that caused the First World War, Oppenheim could not believe that there would be another. In 1938 he purchased the Domaine des Rouguets, near Grasse, and after an unwise return from Guernsey in the summer of 1939, he and Elsie found themselves trapped there by the collapse of France, only managing to escape via Spain and Portugal to England in early 1941. Before such an action was officially permitted, they hired a yacht and were landed back on Guernsey in September 1945 -- a brave venture, when Oppenheim was seventy-nine and both he and his wife were in poor health. After further conflicts with the authorities, they succeeded in repossessing Le Vauquiedor, and Oppenheim died there on 3 February 1946, his wife soon following him. 
Between the two world wars, Oppenheim's novels were rivalled in popularity only by those of Edgar Wallace. They are, as Robert Standish notes, the product of an 'unending battle between the hedonist and the Puritan, the playboy libertine and the hard-headed man of affairs' (Standish). Though romance is rife, bedroom scenes do not figure and children scarcely gain mention. The women are always desirable, the men -- though sometimes initially dissolute -- always prove, under test, to be of sterling worth. Such novels furnished an escape for readers from their own drab lives into a dream world of adventure, wealth, and luxury. In his time, Oppenheim was called 'the Prince of Storytellers'. Although some of his writings have dated beyond recall and all are now out of fashion, they remain highly readable. 


@@@@@


doc= 35320


Oppenheim, Lassa Francis Lawrence (1858-1919), jurist, was born in Germany on 30 March 1858 at Windekken, near Frankfurt am Main, the third son of Aaron Oppenheim and his wife, Adelheid ('nee' Nossbaum). He was educated at the Frankfurt Gymnasium and at the universities of Gottingen, Berlin, Heidelberg, and Leipzig, where he studied law, philosophy, medicine, and theology. At Gottingen he studied Roman law under the great Romanist Von Jhering, and it was here that he took his doctorate, having written his thesis on a highly specialized area of German commercial law. 
Having chosen to devote himself to the study and teaching of law, Oppenheim obtained a lectureship in 1885 at the University of Freiburg im Breisgau, where he was appointed extraordinary professor in 1889. Two years later he moved to Basel, again as a professor of law. He lectured on criminal law, philosophy of law, constitutional law, and international law, but throughout his teaching career in mainland Europe he concentrated his area of further study on criminal law. During this time he wrote numerous works on the subject and thereby acquired a considerable academic reputation. 
In 1895, however, Oppenheim moved to England for health reasons. His was not a strong constitution, and he felt that the English climate and mode of life would suit him. It was also convenient in that his brother had been living in London for some time. As a German, Oppenheim had been educated in a civil law system, whereas England was the birthplace of the common law, and since he could not hope to continue his criminal-law studies in a common-law system, he instead turned his attentions to the universal topic of international law, which transcended all common- or civil-law boundaries. It was in this branch of legal study that he was to acquire a much wider reputation. 
In 1898 Oppenheim was appointed to a lectureship at the London School of Economics, where he remained for ten years. In 1902 he married Elizabeth Alexandra, daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Phineas Cowan. She took a strong interest in her husband's work. They had one daughter, Mary. During this time Oppenheim published his 'magnum opus' -- 'International Law: a Treatise'. The first volume, 'Peace', was published in 1905, and the second, 'War and Neutrality', in 1906. This constituted the most complete and systematic account of contemporary public international law yet published, and it placed Oppenheim among the foremost international jurists of his time. Belonging to the positive school of international jurists he derived the rules of legal science from custom and from the quasi-legal international conventions, and he regarded it as the function of the jurist to ascertain and give precision to those rules -- to criticize and suggest improvements, but not to create them, nor to select as valid only those of which he approved. Oppenheim protested against the tendency to deduce the law from phrases, too often uncritically accepted as self-evident truths; and he pleaded for the development among jurists of that wider sympathy with other nations which can only come from a study of their juristic systems and from the cultivation of an international outlook. 
In recognition of his standing as an international lawyer, Oppenheim was subsequently elected a member of the Institut de Droit International, in 1911, and an honorary member of the Royal Academy of Jurisprudence at Madrid. 
In 1908 John Westlake resigned the Whewell chair of international law at Cambridge, and he insisted that a reluctant Oppenheim stand for election as his successor. Oppenheim did so, and was duly appointed to the chair. At Cambridge he continued to add to his considerable list of legal publications, and in joint authorship with Colonel J. E. Edmonds he wrote the official 'Manual of Military Law' (1912). He also made frequent trips to London, to give advice at the Foreign Office and at other public departments on questions of international law. 
Oppenheim had taken British citizenship in 1900, and when the First World War broke out he staunchly supported the British war effort. Being a moderate liberal he had always disliked the prevalence in the recently unified Germany of Prussian militarism and bureaucracy, and he denounced the German attack on Belgium as 'the greatest international crime since Napoleon I' ('The Times', 19 May 1915). 
During the war Oppenheim became a corresponding member of the American Institute of International Law. He also prepared useful manuals on international legal subjects for the Foreign Office, to be used by the British delegates at the Versailles peace conference. It was about this time, too, that Oppenheim played a principal role in establishing the 'British Yearbook of International Law'. Ironically its very first article was to be his obituary. The European situation also led Oppenheim to advocate strongly the foundation of a league of nations. 
The strain of the war overtaxed Oppenheim, and in the summer of 1919 his health declined sharply. He was soon to be awarded an honorary doctorate of letters from the University of Cambridge when, on 7 October 1919, he died at his home, Whewell House, in Cambridge; he was survived by his wife. He was cremated at Golders Green, Middlesex, on 10 October. As an international lawyer Oppenheim had the very highest reputation, while in his private life he was noted for his personal charm and his great enthusiasm in anything he undertook. 


@@@@@


doc= 35321


Oppenheimer, Sir Ernest (1880-1957), diamond merchant and financier, was born in Friedberg, Germany, on 22 May 1880, the fifth son and eighth child of Eduard Oppenheimer (1841-1924), cigar merchant, and his wife, Nanny Hirschhorn (1841-1912). From the age of ten he was educated in French and classics at the Augustinerschule in Friedberg, before following his brothers Bernard and Louis in 1896 into a clerkship with the London diamond merchants A. Dunkelsbuhler & Co. 
Oppenheimer's apprenticeship gave him a detailed insight into the valuation and marketing of diamonds through the London diamond syndicate which handled the bulk of world production, as well as valuable contacts through relatives and friends with many of the leading investors in South African mining. After naturalization as a British subject in 1901, he was sent to Kimberley as Dunkelsbuhlers's representative and served on the De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd diamond committee which negotiated sales and contracts with the London syndicate -- an exceptional position of trust for a young man still in his twenties. His business status was complemented socially by his marriage on 19 June 1906 to Mary Lina (1890-1934), daughter of Joseph Pollack, a wealthy London stockbroker. Her sister married Oppenheimer's brother Louis. From that date Oppenheimer became resident in South Africa on behalf of his firm and immersed himself in Kimberley local government following his election to its town council in 1908 and appointment as mayor (1912-15). 
In 1914, with the manager of De Beers, Oppenheimer made a detailed survey of the diamond mines of South-West Africa. When these assets came under South African control during the military occupation of the German colony, Oppenheimer was well informed on their value and production potential. Despite his own contribution to this campaign by helping to raise the Kimberley regiment and organizing a labour force to construct a strategic railway, he resigned his position as mayor in the face of anti-German demonstrations in South Africa. He returned temporarily to Dunkelsbuhlers in London in 1915 to learn the business of gold-mining finance in his firm's subsidiary Consolidated Mines Selection Company (CMS), directed by his brother Louis and the American mining engineer William Lincoln Honnold. 
By acquiring mining property rights in Far East Rand as a basis for a contract with CMS, Oppenheimer became effectively a co-partner and used this position to found and capitalize a new mining house backed by Honnold and American trusts. With the blessing of General J. C. Smuts, the Anglo American Corporation was registered on 25 September 1917 and Oppenheimer ceded his contract with CMS to the new corporation and became its chairman. From this base Oppenheimer was in a position to organize financial backing for the acquisition of South-West African diamond companies from a Cape Town syndicate which had bought out German owners in early September 1919. The formation of Consolidated Diamond Mines of South West Africa Ltd (CDM) by Anglo satisfied the Smuts-Botha government's concern to keep these assets under South African control and Oppenheimer's personal ambition to secure for Anglo a significant quota of sales through the London diamond syndicate. The coup also boosted Oppenheimer's standing with Smuts, who had come to appreciate his qualities in the south-western mine negotiations and at the Versailles peace conference, at which Oppenheimer was an observer. For his wartime services behind the scenes he was created a knight bachelor on 31 December 1920. Oppenheimer remained a supporter of the South African Party and at Smuts's behest represented Kimberley as a member of the house of assembly from 1924 to 1938 in a safe seat supported by mining interests. 
As relations between diamond producers, the department of mines, and the Nationalist government deteriorated in the 1920s, Oppenheimer exploited CDM's participation in the system of contracts by offering in January 1925 to set up an alternative sales outlet for South-West African production on very favourable terms. This, he intimated, would head off the threat of government legislation for greater state control, assure revenue for South-West Africa, and manage through other contracts production by 'outside' producers in Angola, the Congo, west Africa, and British Guiana. For this initiative Anglo and Dunkelsbuhlers were expelled from the existing syndicate and, with government approval, became the nucleus for a rival purchasing organization which was financially strong enough to guarantee production quotas at a period of falling demand. Oppenheimer's triumph in forcing this reorganization on De Beers and other companies was marked by his chairmanship of the De Beers board from 1929. 
By then, far greater problems of world recession and over-production from uncontrolled claims in South Africa had to be faced in co-operation with government by purchase of alluvial sites to hold in reserve, by deploying funds to buy up diamonds produced by alluvial diggers, by control of production in Nama Land, and, ultimately, by totally restructuring the syndicate to meet its obligations to producers. This was achieved by ensuring high levels of producer investment in the Diamond Corporation which replaced the old syndicate in 1930, and by setting new quotas which guaranteed a share of sales to state alluvial diggings in Nama Land. To further restore confidence, De Beers mines were closed for a period, while 'outside' production in Africa continued. Oppenheimer accepted the creation by government of a statutory body of miners and officials -- the Diamond Producers' Association -- in 1934 to oversee all contracts and quotas. 
As sales of rough diamonds recovered in the late 1930s, Oppenheimer refined the classification and resale mechanisms of the 'central selling organisation' in London and South Africa, invested in the technology and marketing of industrial diamonds, and centralized the joint ownership of the Diamond Corporation and its subsidiaries under Anglo and De Beers who increased their share earnings and reinvested in other areas of South African industry and agriculture. By 1939 Oppenheimer was sufficiently confident of the continued viability of the worldwide diamond cartel to plan for shifting stocks and sales from London to the United States, closer to the main market for cut and industrial stones, a move which was stopped by wartime controls and the British Board of Trade. A further part of his plan to centre classification in Johannesburg and Kimberley was, however, implemented in the 1950s and 1960s, when government and diamond interests co-operated actively for tax advantages and investment in South African industrial expansion. 
The innovative techniques of group organization with common financial and technical services which characterized Oppenheimer's restructuring of diamond mining in South Africa owed much to his experience of gold mining through Anglo's investments in Far East Rand which were developed more profitably after 1932 and expanded into Orange Free State goldfields, as deep-level methods were applied. Less successfully, Anglo acquired interests in the Rhodesian copperbelt in 1924, consolidating them as Rhodesian Anglo American in 1928 and acting as consultants to the British South Africa Company. By co-operation with American financial interests centred on A. Chester Beatty's Selection Trust, Oppenheimer safeguarded Anglo and BSA concessions and weathered the 1930s fall in metal prices into more prosperous expansion and support for Northern Rhodesian power supplies, railways, and mining through Rhodesia Anglo Services Ltd (1952) and the incorporation of Bancroft Mines Ltd in 1953. 
Similarly in post-war South Africa, Oppenheimer worked for industrial and manufacturing investment on the basis of mineral wealth and improved the country's financial services by founding a finance corporation, a merchant bank, and a discount house. By the 1950s, therefore, his contribution to the economic development of South Africa and Rhodesia rested on his restructuring and relocation of the diamond cartel in South African hands, his successful long-term investment in deep-level gold mining, and his spread of holdings in manufacturing and services. His firmly paternalistic view of the social and political advancement of African employees allowed considerable scope for the improvement of workers' housing and training, but little for political representation. 
Like Cecil Rhodes, philanthropy rather than social or political reform provided an outlet for Oppenheimer's keen sense of the innovative power of great wealth. Unlike Rhodes, Oppenheimer's bequests had no commanding focus and included chairs in international affairs, Portuguese studies at the University of the Witwatersrand, a faculty of engineering at Stellenbosch and grants for medical research, Commonwealth studies at Oxford, and a science laboratory at Cambridge. Nevertheless, for his generous bequests and in recognition of his contribution to South African and Rhodesian development he was awarded the honorary degree of DCL at Oxford University in 1952. His benefactions were continued after his death through the Ernest Oppenheimer Memorial Trust. 
With an acerbic and forceful side to his public character, Oppenheimer was most at his ease among family and friends. He handled business rivals and political enemies with subtlety and ruthlessness, but was capable of enduring loyalties. He narrowly escaped death on the 'Galway Castle', sunk by torpedo on 12 September 1918, and he suffered the loss of his first wife, Mary, in 1934, followed by his younger son's death by drowning in 1935. He drew comfort from deep religious convictions, marked by his baptism in the Christian faith on 18 April 1935; and he found personal strength in his second marriage, to Caroline Magdalen ('nee' Harvey), Lady Oppenheimer (1899-1971), the widow of his nephew Sir Michael Oppenheimer, whom he married on 1 June 1935. The future of Oppenheimer's business empire was secured by the ability of his second son, Harry Frederick, to take up the management of his complex estate with its core family company, E. Oppenheimer & Son, created in 1935 to hold a personal fortune and help finance the founder's public companies. 
When Oppenheimer died in Johannesburg on 25 November 1957 there was national mourning and flags were flown at half-mast on all government buildings throughout South Africa. He was buried three days later at St George's Church, Parktown. 


@@@@@


doc= 35322


Orage, Alfred Richard (1873-1934), journal editor and advocate of social credit, was born on 22 January 1873 at Dacre, near Bradford, Yorkshire, the last of four children of William Steverson Orage (died 'c'.1875), farmer and later head teacher at his own school at Dacre, and his wife, Sarah Anne McQuire (died 1895). Soon after his father's death the young Orage and his brother and sisters moved with their mother to Fenstanton, near Huntingdon, where her family lived. Raised in simple circumstances, Orage was educated at the local village school, at Fenstanton, where he later taught as a pupil teacher, before entering a teacher training college at Culham, Oxfordshire. In 1893 he took up a post as a teacher in an elementary school in Leeds, and in 1896 married Jean Walker ('fl'. 1875-1927), a skilled craftswoman in the William Morris tradition, who shared his interest in theosophy and the arts. 
Even as a young man Orage had wide-ranging personal and social concerns, including not only education, but philosophy, painting, public speaking, literature, Fabian socialism, and religious belief. With the journalist Holbrook Jackson, whom he met in 1900, he founded the Leeds Arts Club, a thriving civic organization. His early passion for theosophy and Plato soon gave way to an interest in psychoanalysis and the mystical tradition, and he and his wife decided to live apart. In 1906 he left teaching for journalism and moved to London. 
In 1907, encouraged by George Bernard Shaw, Orage and Jackson bought the 'New Age', a weekly review whose character quickly came to reflect Orage's principles and tastes. Eager to encourage young writers as well as to print established names of the period, Orage became the journal's sole editor in 1909. Helped in his work by a number of friends, Orage was especially close at this time to Beatrice Hastings, his partner from 1907 until 1915, whose angry memoir nevertheless reveals her deep feeling for a man of great energy and generosity. Of middle height, with a prominent nose, full lips, and intense, direct eyes under hair invariably combed boyishly to one side, Orage impressed colleagues and strangers as a personally compelling presence, a vibrant and informed lecturer, and a reflective and perceptive mind. 
Among the contributors to the 'New Age' were such established authors as Shaw and Henry James, yet the journal also included work by new and modernist writers, among them A. E., Richard Aldington, Michael Arlen, Clifford Bax, Hilaire Belloc, G. D. H. Cole, Eric Gill, T. E. Hulme, Storm Jameson, Augustus John, Ezra Pound, Llewellyn Powys, and Herbert Read. In addition to current developments in art and writing, the editor's personal enthusiasms included Russian literature, French philosophy, guild socialism, and English economic theory. Orage printed Paul Selver's translations of Nietzsche's letters to Strindberg; Aldington's translations of selected Latin Renaissance poets; and a translation of Chekhov's 'The chemist's wife'. The 'New Age' also published essays on current medical matters (such as 'The psychical treatment of insanity'), on feminist issues ('The male suffragist'), and on social credit ('The nemesis of capitalist production'). Orage's sense of an intellectual world community was also reflected in the journal's articles on such topics as French literary movements, Polish poetry, and Islam, as well as in regular features on foreign affairs. Orage wrote his own column, 'Readers and writers', signed with a pseudonym like many of the pieces in the journal. A book of his essays appeared under the same title in 1922. 
The 'New Age' had a small but influential circulation, and both before and during the First World War reflected and helped to shape the climate of artistic experimentation in the capital. After the war Orage became interested in Clifford Douglas's economic system of social credit, a theory he advocated in his journal from 1918 onwards. At this time, influenced first by the Serbian mystic Dimiti Mitrinovic and then by the occultist P. D. Ouspensky, he also developed a particular interest in spiritualism, and soon became a disciple of the Russian mystic George Gurdjieff. In October 1922 Orage gave up his editorial position at the 'New Age', and spent a year at Gurdjieff's institute, Le Prieure, at Fontainebleau. There, with a community of followers, he engaged in both manual farm labour and philosophic study. Orage left France in 1923 and spent the next seven years primarily in New York, but travelled and lectured throughout the United States. He had already written extensively on literary and economic subjects, not only in the 'New Age' but in such books as 'Nietzsche in Outline and Aphorism' (1907) and 'An Alphabet of Economics' (1917); now Orage focused his attention on religious and psychological issues. In the course of his tireless lecturing, he formed a relationship with an American woman, Jessie Dwight ('fl'. 1907-1949), who became his secretary. After securing a divorce from his first wife, Orage married Dwight in 1927. With occasional visits to London and to Fontainebleau, Orage remained in America, lecturing primarily on Gurdjieff's philosophy and raising funds for Le Prieure. Orage's love for his new wife and son, however, forced him to re-examine his involvement with Gurdjieff, with whom he finally broke in 1930. Orage decided to come back to England, and settled first near Rye in Sussex, then in Hampstead, London, with his family, which soon included a daughter. 
Returning during the last years of his life to his earlier interests in literature and economics, Orage once more focused his energies on journalism. In 1932, at the depths of the depression, he founded the 'New English Weekly', championing social credit and publishing the work of both established and newly discovered authors, among them the young Dylan Thomas. Ardent, socially committed, and hopeful, Orage remained, in Philip Mairet's words, a lifelong seeker of 'a light that never was on sea or land' (Mairet, v). Orage told Mairet that he found England 'a deadly country: a heaven for the rich, but purgatory for the talented and hell for the poor' (ibid., 116). T. S. Eliot referred to Orage, again according to Mairet, as 'the finest critical intelligence of our days' (ibid., 121). Indeed, Orage worked tirelessly for both the social and the spiritual causes in which he believed, until his sudden death at his home, 4 The Mount, Heath Street, Hampstead, London, in all likelihood from heart disease, on 6 November 1934. His funeral service was conducted by the dean of Canterbury at the Hampstead parish church, after which Orage was buried in the local churchyard under a gravestone carved by Eric Gill. 


@@@@@


doc= 35323


Oram, Sir Henry John (1858-1939), naval officer, was born at Plymouth on 19 June 1858, the eldest son of John Joseph Oram, of Plymouth, and his wife, Jane Hall. He was educated at private schools in Plymouth and went, in 1873, to the Royal Naval Engineering College at Keyham, Devonport, entering the navy in 1879 as assistant engineer. Subsequently, his three years' higher engineering course at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, culminated in his graduating top of his year, with a first, in 1882. He then served as junior engineer in the troopships 'Crocodile' and 'Malabar', becoming engineer in 1884. He returned to London on his appointment as assistant engineer in the department of the engineer-in-chief at the Admiralty, where he was to spend thirty-three years. 
Oram married, on 12 July 1881, Emily Kate (died 1928), only daughter of John Bardens, of Plymouth; they had two sons and two daughters. Promotion came very rapidly to Oram: in 1889 he became chief engineer, in 1893 staff engineer, and in 1897 fleet engineer. In that year he was specially promoted to inspector of machinery. With Richard Sennett he was author of 'The Marine Steam Engine' (1898), long the authorized textbook for naval engineers. Oram became chief inspector in 1901 (the title being changed to engineer rear-admiral in 1903); in 1902 he was made deputy engineer-in-chief, and in 1907 he succeeded Engineer Vice-Admiral Sir Albert John Durston as engineer-in-chief of the fleet, with the rank of engineer vice-admiral. 
There were problems with early water tube boilers and it was largely due to Oram's tenacity and skill that by 1902 the vessels fitted with these boilers had reached a satisfactory standard of performance. He was a member of the technical committee formed in 1903 to report on the designs for the machinery of the subsidized liners 'Mauretania' and 'Lusitania', and he was responsible for the detailed investigations which enabled Durston to recommend the use of steam turbines in 1905 for the 'Dreadnought'. While he was engineer-in-chief he introduced geared drive which enabled the rotational speed of the propeller and turbine each to be optimized, with great improvement in economy. He also served on the royal commission on oil fuel and engines under the chairmanship of Lord Fisher. 
Oram was appointed CB in 1906 and was president of the Junior Institution of Engineers in 1908-9. He was knighted in 1910, and was elected FRS in 1912. He was president of the Institute of Metals, of which he was a founder member, in 1914. For his collaboration with the United States Navy during the First World War he received the American Distinguished Service Medal. He retired as engineer-in-chief of the fleet in June 1917. He died at his home, Kilmory, Cranleigh, Surrey, on 5 May 1939. 


@@@@@


doc= 35324


Orchardson, Sir William Quiller (1832-1910), artist, born in Edinburgh on 27 March 1832, was the only surviving son of Abram Orchardson, a tailor, and his wife, Elizabeth Quiller, whose family was of Austrian origin. His father was descended from a branch of a highland clan or sept named Urquartson, from the Loch Ness region in Inverness-shire. 
Orchardson entered the Trustees' Academy, Edinburgh, on 1 October 1845, aged thirteen. The master of the academy, Alexander Christie ARSA, taught ornament and design, and John Ballantyne RSA, who was a competent teacher, took the antique and life classes. Although the academy's reputation had declined, it produced a number of notable artists around this time, including, among those slightly older than Orchardson, James Archer, Thomas Faed, and Erskine Nicol -- all of whom, like Orchardson and his friends, were to contribute significantly to the genre tradition already established by their great countryman Sir David Wilkie. 
From the start, Orchardson himself showed a remarkable degree of facility. His friends recorded that 'he mastered... in weeks' (Armstrong, 'W. Q. Orchardson', 13) feats possible to them only after months of labour, and he carried off first prizes for all three academic sessions between 1849 and 1852. He was also noted for his independence. Orchardson claimed that on his first day at the academy he refused to draw from the antique, politely insisting that he preferred to work from nature, and the quality of his work was such that he was allowed to have his way. 
In February 1852 the mediocre Christie was replaced by Robert Scott Lauder, a change which persuaded Orchardson, who had completed the course, to return to the academy and remain as a mature student until 1855. Orchardson recalled with approval the system of 'wise neglect' (Gray, 25) which Lauder adopted, allowing students to develop their individual talents unconstrained. Lauder was an inspirational teacher with 'a contagious enthusiasm for all that was beautiful' (Caw, 230), and under his tutelage the school regained its former prestige. Despite the stylistic affinities which would always identify his students, Lauder did not teach a particular method, but in the life classes he communicated his enthusiasm for the great Venetian painters whom he had studied first-hand for many years. His painterly approach, and his emphasis on tonal values and on the unification of the subject through a subtle play of light and atmosphere, provided a welcome alternative to the conventions of traditional academic training. Other younger pupils much influenced by Lauder were William McTaggart, Peter Graham, and two who were to remain Orchardson's lifelong friends, Thomas Alexander Graham and John Pettie. 
In 1848, at the age of sixteen, Orchardson began to exhibit at the Royal Scottish Academy. Of his more ambitious subjects, 'George Wishart's Last Exultation' (1852, exh. 1853; University of St Andrews), a multi-figure scene from the last days in the life of the Scottish martyr, is a most impressive achievement for so young an artist. Painted in only three days, it owes much to Wilkie's 'John Knox', which Orchardson had seen, unfinished, at the Royal Scottish Academy exhibition of 1842. In 1854 the first of a long line of Orchardson's portraits appeared at the academy, and, in the years following, subjects from Dickens, Shakespeare, and Walter Scott -- 'Little Nell' (1855), 'Claudio and Isabel' (1856), 'Jennie Deans and the Laird o' Dumbiedykes' (1860; priv. coll.) -- signified the beginnings of a lifelong interest in literary subjects. 
In 1862 Orchardson, Pettie, and Tom Graham moved to London, initially staying at various addresses in Pimlico before sharing a home together at 37 Fitzroy Square in 1863-5. From 1863 Orchardson exhibited annually at the Royal Academy; in the first five years these were mainly literary subjects, including 'An Old English Song' (1863), 'The Flowers o' the Forest' (1864; Southampton Art Gallery) and two Shakespearian subjects, 'Hamlet and Ophelia' (1865) and 'Talbot and the Countess of Auvergne' (1867). A historical genre scene, 'The Challenge' (1865), showing a confrontation between a cavalier and a puritan, won a prize from the dealer Henry Wallis, and was exhibited in his French Gallery in Pall Mall. It also earned considerable acclaim when it appeared at the Paris Universal Exhibition two years later. By this date Orchardson's reputation was well established, and in 1867 he was elected an associate of the Royal Academy. 
The next decade was to mark a considerable advance in Orchardson's career. In 1870 he made the one extended continental visit of his life, to Venice, and in the years following he exhibited several Venetian figurative subjects and townscapes. It was, however, a literary subject that marked his full maturity as an artist. 'The Queen of the Swords' (exh. RA, 1877; Forbes Magazine collection), was inspired by a description of a Shetland sword dance in Walter Scott's novel 'The Pirate' (1821); but Orchardson's subtle elaboration of the scene, his evident delight in exploiting its formal elements, and his restrained but convincing characterization showed a significant advance in his work and ensured his election as Royal Academician that year. Significantly, this was the last of his Scottish subjects and the last subject from Scott. Orchardson now began to concentrate on the ballroom and drawing-room subjects for which he is best known, and which were suited to the tastes of a great 'metropolitan centre of wealth and fashion' such as London (Errington, 41). 
Like Pettie, Orchardson was especially attracted to the elegant decor and fashions of the later eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. He was an enthusiastic collector of the decorative arts of this period, so that his scenes of high society are authentic as well as glamorous; but what most distinguishes them is their psychological realism. His major exhibit of the following year, 'A Social Eddy; Left by the Tide' (1878; Aberdeen Art Gallery), exemplifies the original touch which he brought to this genre, sympathetically suggesting the anxieties and embarrassments attendant on grand social events. On a similar theme, 'Her First Dance' (1884; Tate collection) convincingly portrays the shyness and timidity of a young girl in contrast to the egotistical self-confidence of her partner; while in 'The Rivals' (1895; NG Scot.), a bored young woman is obliged to suffer the presence of three persistent suitors, each silently angling for her attention. 
Orchardson scored his first real sensation with his portrayal of a historical event based on an eyewitness account: 'Napoleon on Board the 'Bellerophon'' (1880; Tate collection) -- the ship which transported the emperor to his final exile on the island of St Helena. A lone figure, the deposed Napoleon stands brooding on deck, oblivious to the group of officers (all individual portraits) closely observing him as the shores of France recede in the distance. 'The Times' described it as 'by common consent, the cynosure of the exhibition' ('The Times', 3 May 1880, 9), and Walter Armstrong defined it as the occasion when the artist 'first blazed out into popularity' (Armstrong, 'W. Q. Orchardson', 45). Its importance was widely recognized, not least by the trustees of the Chantrey Bequest, who purchased it for $2000. Other French subjects from this later period, both real and imaginary, include 'Voltaire' (1883; Kunsthalle, Hamburg; version NG Scot.); 'The Salon of Mme Recamier' (1885), and 'The Young Duke' (1889; Lady Lever Art Gallery, Port Sunlight), which was rapturously received on its exhibition at the Royal Academy. Orchardson returned to his hero in 'St Helena, 1816; Napoleon Dictating the Account of his Campaigns' (1892; Lady Lever Art Gallery). 
Orchardson's gifts for restrained composition, economical story telling, and subtle characterization found a new outlet in a series of edgy domestic dramas which focused on the emotional tensions between sophisticated married couples. Although few in number, their modern context gives them added significance, and it is these which have secured his reputation as an innovator. 'Mariage de convenance; Before' (1884; Glasgow Art Gallery and Museum) and 'After!' (1886; Aberdeen Art Gallery), portray the predictable consequences of an alliance between a rich, elderly husband and a pretty young wife. In the first, the husband anxiously observes her as she sits, bored and resentful, at the opposite end of a long table. In the second, he sits alone at the fireside, the table set only for one. 'The First Cloud' (1887; replica, Tate collection) depicts signs of growing conflict between another affluent couple; while in 'Trouble' (exh. RA, 1898) some unspecified revelation has evidently initiated a serious rift between husband and wife. 
Orchardson maintained a judicious balance between the demands of narrative on the one hand and aesthetics on the other. He insisted that a worthy subject, and in particular 'the dramatic moment' (Gray, 273) were essential to him; indeed, his generous disposition of elegant figures in space and his exploitation of artificial light invite comparison with the stage, but his scenes are never theatrical in the pejorative sense of the word. The restraint and economy of his work and, in particular, his recognition of the value of empty space and its pictorial function -- the sense of isolation and alienation which it achieves -- won universal favour. Orchardson's respect for the formal elements of painting was such that contemporary critics discussed his work in largely technical terms. Of his 'society' pictures, Gleeson White concluded that it is 'not so much their subject as their 'painting' which entitles [them]... to rank with the most important of our time' (White, 3.20); and James Little perceived Orchardson's compositions as primarily 'decorations... alluring patterns' (Little, 9). It is understandable that Degas, Walter Sickert, and J. A. M. Whistler were among the artists who admired his technique. 
Orchardson married, on 6 April 1873, at St Mary Abbots, Kensington, Ellen, the daughter of the London publisher Charles Moxon, with whom he had four sons and two daughters. His own favourite among his paintings was a double portrait of his wife and his son Gordon, 'Master Baby' (1886; NG Scot.), and this was Sickert's choice also. Orchardson had received portrait commissions from his first years in Edinburgh. In later life the demand was such that, from 1894, portraiture made up the bulk of his work. In 1902 'The Bystander' singled out Orchardson's 'Mrs Mosscockle' as 'the finest portrait in the Academy' and talked of the artist as a 'subtle psychologist. No shade of character', the critic wrote, 'is too fine for his acute analysis' (Gray, 295). Orchardson's sitters included Queen Victoria, Albert Edward, prince of Wales (later Edward VII), and the latter's second son, later George V. He was appointed master of the Society of Portrait Painters in 1897. 
Orchardson's kindness, affability, and sociable disposition won him universal popularity. From his youth he was a keen sportsman; although he gave up hunting on his marriage, he remained a keen angler and tennis player, and he was also adept at billiards. At his house in Westgate-on-Sea, Kent, he had his own tennis court constructed, and in his later years he took up golf. Orchardson's urbanity and success led T. H. Escott to name him -- with Marcus Stone and G. D. Leslie -- as one of the artists who typified this affluent period: 'finished and prosperous men of the world in social request everywhere' (Gillett, 34) -- men who had contributed materially to raising both the status and fortunes of their profession. 
Orchardson was made an honorary member of the Royal Scottish Academy in 1871; a DCL of Oxford in 1890; a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur in 1895; and an honorary member of the Royal Society of Miniature Painters in 1900; he was knighted in 1907. He died at his home, 13 Portland Place, St Marylebone, London, of heart disease on 13 April 1910, only a fortnight after completing, with some difficulty, the portrait of Lord Blyth which was exhibited at the Royal Academy in the same year. A modern ballroom subject, 'The Last Dance', remained unfinished. A retrospective exhibition of sixty-eight of Orchardson's works was held at the Royal Academy in the winter of 1911. His widow was granted a civil-list pension of $80 in 1912. 


@@@@@


doc= 35325


Orczy, Baroness Emma Magdalena Rosalia Maria Josefa Barbara (1865-1947), novelist, was born on 23 September 1865 at Tarnaors, near Jaszbereny, about 75 kilometres west of Budapest in Hungary, the younger of the two daughters of Baron Bodog (translated as Felix) Orczy (1835-1892), landowner, and his wife, Emma, daughter of Count Wass. The Hungarian form of Baroness Orczy's first name, by which she was called and which she preferred, was Emmuska. Her father was a great-grandson of the noted Hungarian poet Lorinc Orczy (1718-1789). Her paternal grandfather lived in considerable state at Tarnaors with his Viennese wife, who never allowed Hungarian to be spoken in her presence. Some time after her birth Emmuska's father was given the estate of Tisza-Abad, to which they moved, and to which he sought to bring modern agricultural machinery and methods, which resulted, when she was about three, in a revolt by the peasants, who burnt the crops and the machinery. Because of this, and because of the agricultural depression and the Viennese banking crisis, her family moved to Budapest; here Felix Orczy, who was deeply interested in music, was 'Intendant' of the national theatres (1870-73), where he championed the music of Richard Wagner against some opposition, and appointed Hans Richter (1843-1916) as 'Kapellmeister'. This again involved him in controversy, and he resigned and moved to Brussels, where he taught music. There the girls spent a year at the convent of the Visitation, and there the elder, Madeleine, died, aged about twelve. Emmuska subsequently went to another convent in Paris. She spoke Hungarian with her father, and French with her mother, but disliked having to speak German to her grandmother. However, she spoke not a word of English when, aged fifteen, she moved with her parents to London, and went for a while to a small day school kept by a German couple near their home, 23 Wimpole Street. In London several of Felix Orczy's compositions were performed, including the operas 'The Renegade' (1881) and 'Sisyphus' (1882) and the family frequented musical circles. 
Emmuska Orczy decided she wanted to be an artist, and went to the West London School of Art and then to Heatherley's. In the latter school she met her future husband, Henry George Montague Maclean Barstow (1862/3-1943), son of the Revd Michael William Barstow (curate of Thornton Watlass, Yorkshire, 'c'.1854-1866); they married in London on 7 November 1894. Their only child, John Montagu Orczy Barstow, who wrote novels under the name John Blakeney, was born in 1899. They set up home in a studio flat in Holland Park Road and earned their living doing book and magazine illustrations. He illustrated and she translated 'Old Hungarian Fairy Tales' (1895). 
Just before the turn of the century, when Orczy was in her mid-thirties, she began a second career as a writer. A series of mystery stories for the 'Royal Magazine' featured the Old Man in the Corner, who solves murders by pure deduction while sitting in an ABC teashop playing with pieces of string; historians of the genre regard him as one of the first armchair detectives. The Barstows wanted to visit the Paris Exhibition of 1900 and arranged journalistic commissions to pay for their trip. Inspired by the visit to Paris, Orczy wrote 'The Scarlet Pimpernel' in five weeks. It was rejected by a dozen publishers, and she nearly accepted $30 for all rights in it. But in 1903 she and her husband succeeded in getting a dramatized version they had written accepted for production by Fred Terry (1863-1933). It was produced that autumn in Nottingham, with no great success, and the Barstows rewrote the last act, so that Terry would not be in a hideous disguise for his final bow. It was finally produced in London in 1905 and after a shaky start became very popular. 
An instant best-seller when published as a novel in 1905, the story also became the subject of several film versions: the earliest, a silent film of 1928, was called 'The Triumph of the Scarlet Pimpernel'; the most famous, 'The Scarlet Pimpernel' (1935), starred Leslie Howard and was directed by Harold Young; a 1982 version starred Anthony Andrews and was directed by Clive Donner. Television adaptations range from the BBC television series of 1950, starring James Carney, to a British-American co-production, starring Richard E. Grant and directed by Patrick Lau, screened in 1999. The plot was a peculiarly potent mixture of the familiar ingredients of historical fiction. During the French Revolution a secret band of daring Englishmen in disguise rescue French aristocrats from the reign of terror. They are led by Sir Percy Blakeney, who appears to the world a fool and a fop, but is in reality a master of disguise and a brilliant leader of men. As Orczy emphasized in later years, he is the typical English gentleman. This symbol of British foreign policy repeatedly outwits the bungling French bureaucrat Chauvelin; like 'The Four Just Men' (1905) by Edgar Wallace, the novel pits a group of self-selected upper-class amateurs against the power of the state. Sir Percy is also the soul of honour; he is temporarily estranged from his beautiful French wife, Marguerite, because she has betrayed an enemy of hers to the revolutionaries, recalling the romantic vision of personal integrity in other novels of the period such as 'The Four Feathers' (1902) by A. E. W. Mason. Much historical fiction expresses nostalgia for aristocratic glamour, but 'The Scarlet Pimpernel' is remarkable in that its plot literally enacts the desire of its readers to snatch the survivors of the 'ancien regime' to safety as they journey towards the guillotine. They are brought to the security of England, which thus figures as a bulwark of conservatism against foreign revolution, and as a model of peaceable class relations in contrast to the class warfare abroad. 
Baroness Orczy published eleven more Scarlet Pimpernel adventures between 1908 and 1940, many other novels, mostly historical fiction, and a biography (1935) of the duchesse de Berri. The most notable of her other volumes of fiction, which had a steady sale without ever achieving the same amazing success as 'The Scarlet Pimpernel', is probably the volume of stories called 'Lady Molly of Scotland Yard' (1910), whose heroine is an early example of a female detective with official status. 
In 1908 the Barstows moved out of London, first to Minster in Thanet and then to Snowfield, at Bearsted, Kent. In 1906 Orczy inherited from an uncle the property of Tarnaors and a private income, which she was later to lose in the crash which followed the First World War. After the war, partly because Barstow had a weak chest, they bought the Villa Bijou at Monte Carlo, Monaco, a place to which they had taken a liking when she had convalesced there after a nervous breakdown in 1915. There they were instrumental in bringing about the construction of an Anglican church. Their decision to move abroad may have been influenced by the xenophobia current in England at the time; Orczy's widowed mother, who had returned to Hungary in the 1890s but escaped during the war to live near them in Kent, returned home (where she became a captive of the Bolsheviks) in 1918 because she thought that her presence as an enemy alien was doing them harm. Like many Hungarians, Orczy resented the partition of her country under the terms of the 1919 treaty of Trianon; her novel 'Pimpernel and Rosemary' (1924) depicts from that point of view the events following the annexation of Transylvania (her mother's home province) by Romania. During the 1920s, as Monte Carlo became built up, the Barstows also bought a house in Italy, La Padula, at Rezzola on the Gulf of Spezia, but, finding life in Mussolini's Italy increasingly disagreeable, they sold it in 1933. 
Orczy spent the duration of the Second World War in Monte Carlo, in circumstances of some difficulty. Barstow died in February 1943 (in Switzerland, according to 'The Times' of 27 February 1943, but this may be an error). After the war she returned to England, where she published her memoirs and died, in Brown's Hotel, Dover Street, Mayfair, London, of kidney failure and senility, on 12 November 1947. 


@@@@@


doc= 35326


Ord, Bernhard (1897-1961), musician, was born on 9 July 1897 at Bristol, the youngest of the five children of Clement Ord, a Quaker and head of the German department at Bristol University, and his wife, Johanna, daughter of Hofprediger G. Anthes, who came of a musical German family. Bernhard was educated from 1907 to 1914 at Clifton College, of which he was a scholar and, later, a governor. He took his ARCO diploma while still at school and won a scholarship to the Royal College of Music, London, where he studied the organ under Sir Walter Parratt and also excelled at the pianoforte. He was already a devotee of opera, and his familiar name Boris, by which he became universally known, arose from his enthusiasm for Mussorgsky's 'Boris Godunov', introduced to London in 1913 by Thomas Beecham. After war service from 1916 to 1918, first with the Artists' Rifles and then as a pilot in the Royal Flying Corps, during which he was twice wounded, he returned to the Royal College of Music, where he took up choir training. 
It was as organ scholar of Corpus Christi College that Ord went to Cambridge, in 1919. The next year he founded the Cambridge University Madrigal Society, later to be known for its May week concerts in massed punts on the river. He became MusB in 1922, and the following year was elected to a fellowship at King's, his father's college, within which as a bachelor he spent the rest of his life. As a freelance musician he was much in demand. Sometimes it was as a continuo player on the piano or harpsichord, as for the staging of works by Purcell and Handel produced by Camille Prior and Cyril Rootham, the organist of St John's College; sometimes as a conductor, as for the Greek play committee's revival in 1921 of Aristophanes' 'The Birds' with the music of Sir (Charles) Hubert Parry and of Aeschylus' 'Oresteia' with Cecil Armstrong Gibbs's music (1924). He also conducted a remarkable performance (1928) of Stravinsky's 'The Soldier's Tale' in which Lydia Lopokova, the wife of the economist J. M. Keynes, was the princess, Michael Redgrave the soldier, and Dennis Arundell the narrator. In 1927 he gained valuable experience by working at Cologne opera house. 
On the death of A. H. Mann in 1929 Ord was appointed organist of King's College and also of the university. At King's he joined forces with the dean, the Revd Eric Milner-White, in his policy of broadening the repertory of the chapel music, especially by strengthening the sixteenth-century element. In 1936 he became a university lecturer in music, and in 1938 he succeeded Rootham as conductor of the Cambridge University Musical Society. His work for the society greatly broadened his scope and also revealed the range of his musical sympathies. Continuing Rootham's tradition, he conducted a highly successful stage performance of Handel's 'Saul' in the Guildhall, with David Franklin in the title role. 
The outbreak of war inevitably reduced the number of chapel services at King's. In 1941 Ord handed them over to Dr Harold Darke for the duration and rejoined the air force as a flight lieutenant; he eventually participated in the Normandy landings and the ensuing campaign. Back at Cambridge, he resumed his duties in 1946. His Cambridge University Musical Society concerts included Beethoven's ninth symphony and Stravinsky's 'Symphony of Psalms'. On the Guildhall stage there were performances of Handel's 'Solomon' and of 'The Pilgrim's Progress' by Vaughan Williams, and at the Arts Theatre of Purcell's 'Dioclesian' and 'King Arthur'. But early in the 1950s Ord's health weakened, and eventually disseminated sclerosis was diagnosed. He retired from the Cambridge University Musical Society in 1954, but for some time continued to conduct concerts at the Festival Hall, including works for varying numbers of harpsichords. It was a great comfort to him that his former organ scholar and assistant David Willcocks returned from Worcester Cathedral to take over from him in 1957-8. He then resigned his university lectureship also. He was created CBE in 1958. His last public appearance, in a wheelchair, was in the Senate House in June 1960, to receive the honorary doctorate of music. He died at Cambridge on 30 December 1961. 
As a musician Ord had exacting professional standards. His score-reading classes were a bracing test. As a choir trainer he inspired a mixture of affection and wholesome fear. Under him the King's choir established, by broadcasting and foreign tours, its international reputation. Durham University made him an honorary MusD in 1955. His abundant geniality was shown in many less serious musical productions, in his generous hospitality, and in his quick sense of humour. 
L. P. Wilkinson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35327


Ord, William Miller (1834-1902), physician and medical administrator, was born on 23 September 1834 at Brixton Hill, Surrey, the elder of two sons of George Ord FRCS and his wife, Harriet, the daughter of Sir James Clark, a London merchant. Educated at King's College School, Ord entered St Thomas's Hospital in 1852 and gained his MB from London University in 1855 and his MD in 1877. Following a brief period in general practice with his father at Streatham Hill, Ord remained associated with St Thomas's for the rest of his career as house surgeon, surgical registrar, demonstrator of anatomy, and, from 1870, assistant physician and joint lecturer in physiology. He was dean of the medical school from 1876 until 1887. Ord was appointed physician in 1877, a post which he held until 1898, when he became consulting physician. 
Ord married on 12 April 1859 Julia, daughter of Joseph Rainbow of Norwood; they had two daughters and a son. It was in the year of his marriage that Ord made his name as an exceptionally youthful member of the pioneering circle of medical men and epidemiologists associated with John Simon at the medical office of the privy council. Simon later recalled that he had looked upon his precocious collaborator as one of his 'brightest and most trustworthy students' (Brockington, 287). In the summer of 1858 the foully polluted River Thames, which had long threatened the environmental stability of the capital, had generated a 'great stink' which closed down the law courts and forced members of parliament to flee, half-nauseous, from the debating chamber. Miasmatic theory predicted that the death-rate would soar as a result of a dramatic increase in gastrointestinal infection and that, intermixed with the prevailing 'epidemic atmosphere', the stench from the river would inevitably precipitate yet another outbreak of cholera -- there had been severe epidemics in 1848-9 and 1853-4. However, Ord's assiduous analysis of the health of boatmen, wharfingers, and dockers cast serious doubt on this hypothesis and revealed that, in itself, the stinking river was unlikely to generate dysenteric or diarrhoeal disease. 
During the next five years Ord undertook investigations into localized outbreaks of typhoid fever on behalf of the medical office of the privy council and produced a classic paper, 'The sanitary circumstances of dressmakers and other needlewomen in London'. This meticulous account of the relationship between the fashionable demands of the London social season and its impact on the lives of 'thousands of women... [who were] pursuing their occupation under conditions which constantly undermine their vital and physical powers, and contract, with fatal certainty... their measure of years' ('Medical officer... sixth report', 28.371) was nevertheless qualified by a cautious conservatism. Eschewing criticism of prevailing economic orthodoxy, Ord remained convinced that market forces would eventually exclude mercilessly exploitative employers and subcontractors. 
Following the tragically premature death of his wife in 1864 Ord gradually withdrew from epidemiological and social investigation and, undertaking detailed observations of cretinoid elderly women on the wards at St Thomas's, began to formulate novel ideas on the origins and nature of what he would later term myxoedema. Endemic cretinism had been observed and described in detail by Paracelsus in the duchy of Salzburg. In its sporadic form, however, it was not recognized until C. H. Fogge's account in the early 1870s. This prepared the way for Sir William Gull's authoritative report on the condition among adults in 1873. Building on this work Ord presented a seminal paper in 1877 in which he claimed the essential cause of the disease to be atrophy or fibrosis of the thyroid gland. In 1888 Ord chaired a special committee for the Clinical Society of London and produced 'a remarkable review of the subjects of cretinism and myxoedema' (Ingbar and Braverman, 4). A decade later this was complemented by the synoptic Bradshaw lecture at the Royal College of Physicians, 'On myxoedema and allied conditions'. 
On his retirement in 1900 Ord moved to the village of Hurstborne Tarrant, near Andover, to 'enjoy the country life for which he yearned' ('BMJ', 1315). However, in 1902 he was stricken with what the journal termed 'brain fever' and was moved to the house of his son, The Hall, New Street, Salisbury, where he died on 14 May 1902. He was buried at London Road cemetery, Salisbury. He was survived by his second wife, Jane, daughter of Sir James Arndell Youl, with whom he had two daughters. Ord was a gregarious and life enhancing man, and his London house in Upper Brook Street reflected the 'cultured tastes of its owner' ('Leading Men of London'). Exceptionally well versed in the classics, Ord 'could read his Ovid with ease [and] put his finger immediately on some quotation from Horace or Virgil which exactly fitted the subject under discussion' ('BMJ', 1316). If he ultimately failed to fulfil his very great potential as a creative medical scientist it was predominantly the result of his dedication to the tasks of teaching and administration at St Thomas's. 


@@@@@


doc= 35328


Orde, Cuthbert Julian (1888-1968), painter, was born in Great Yarmouth, Norfolk, on 18 December 1888, the second son in the family of three sons and two daughters of Sir Julian Walter Orde (1861-1929), secretary for twenty years and galvanizing force of the Royal Automobile Club, and his wife, Alice Georgiana Archdale (1861-1945), daughter of Frederick Archdale of Baldock, Hertfordshire. Educated at Framlingham College, Suffolk, from the 1920s he was a regular exhibitor at the Royal Academy and the Royal Society of Portrait Painters in addition to showing at the Paris Salon and in commercial London galleries. 
Orde served throughout the First World War. Commissioned into the Royal Army Service Corps as a second lieutenant on 15 August 1914, he was sent almost immediately to France and was awarded the 1914 Mons star. He transferred to the Royal Flying Corps in October of the following year, and served as an observer in France and Egypt, and as a test pilot at Martlesham Heath, Suffolk, reaching the war substantive rank of major. He relinquished his commission on 15 January 1919 on the grounds of ill health. One of his brothers was killed in action in the Dardanelles in 1915; a second brother was killed in a flying accident in 1920. 
Between the wars Orde exhibited portraits, landscapes, and flower paintings, but with the outbreak of the Second World War his twin interests in art and the air force found a common focus. He began painting aircraft at RAF stations and four of his drawings, and a painting of a Wellington 'bombing up', were acquired by the War Artists' Advisory Committee and exhibited at the National Gallery in August 1940. The following month he embarked on a project proposed by the director of public relations at the Air Ministry to draw portraits of the pilots of Fighter Command. Beginning at the height of the battle of Britain in September 1940, he visited almost every operational station in the country, in his element as an airman among airmen, drawing the pilots selected for him by the station commanders. Affectionately known as Turps, Uncle Orde, or the Captain, he worked in makeshift studios, generally set up in the ladies' room in the mess, producing in all a series of some 160 drawings. A selection published by Harraps in 1942 remains of documentary interest and, formulaic as they are, these portraits show Orde at his best, conveying a real sympathy for the men and the ethos of Fighter Command. 
A substantial number of these drawings, together with various of Orde's paintings, are in the collections of the Imperial War Museum and the RAF Museum. Others are in the National Portrait Gallery, London. Portraits were also commissioned from him for the Senior United Services Club, the RAF Club, the Royal Aeronautical Society, and the Staff College at Camberley, and among his sitters were Sir Winston Churchill (Royal Airforce College, Cranwell), Air Chief Marshal Sir John Salmond (RAF Club), and Group Captain Sir Douglas Bader (RAF Museum). His modest talent, however, fell far short of securing him a lucrative career. 
Tall, dashing, and seeming youthful even in his later years, Orde was a man of ready friendship and devoted family loyalty. On 11 September 1916 he married Lady Eileen Wellesley (1887-1952), younger daughter of Arthur Charles Wellesley, fourth duke of Wellington. Also a painter, she fell victim to Parkinson's disease not long after the First World War and lived a virtual invalid until her death in 1952. They had two daughters. In 1953 Orde married Alexandra ('nee' Dalziel), former wife of Sir Alexander Davenport Kinloch, twelfth baronet, and daughter of Frederick Dalziel, of New York. She had two daughters from her former marriage. As his friend Group Captain Douglas Bader wrote of him in 'The Times' on 28 December 1968, Orde died at his home, 1 Durham Place, London, 'charmingly and without fuss', a few hours after celebrating his eightieth birthday, on 19 December 1968. His funeral was held at Christ Church, Chelsea, where he was buried on 23 December. His second wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35329


Ormerod, Eleanor Anne (1828-1901), economic entomologist, was born on 11 May 1828 at Sedbury Park, Gloucestershire, the youngest of the ten children of George Ormerod (1785-1873), historian and antiquary, and his wife, Sarah (1784-1860), eldest daughter of John Latham (1761-1843), a president of the Royal College of Physicians. Although he also owned a property, Tyldesley, and its attendant coalmines in Lancashire, George Ormerod's sole residence was Sedbury Park, from 1828, soon after the time of its purchase (1825), until his death in 1873. Consequently, Eleanor Ormerod spent more than half her life on the family's 800 acre estate, between the Severn and Wye rivers, opposite Chepstow. 
Although her brothers received instruction from Thomas Arnold, Eleanor Ormerod was educated at home by her mother. Consisting principally of biblical knowledge, moral precepts, and French, her education equipped her with society skills. These were rounded off with private tuition in music and painting. She received the latter from William Holman Hunt, when the family made their annual pilgrimage to London. In addition, Eleanor and her elder sister Georgiana honed their philanthropic skills through the execution of a book-lending scheme for their deserving fellow parishioners of St Mary the Virgin, Tidenham, Gloucestershire. Throughout her life, Eleanor Ormerod dispensed philanthropy through each of her local Anglican parishes. Despite her education and training, however, she participated little in society before the death of her parents. Although her father attended to his duties as magistrate for the counties of Cheshire, Monmouth, and Gloucester, he did not care for society. An amateur historian, he occupied himself with topographical and literary interests, and led a reclusive life. According to a niece, Diana Latham, George Ormerod was an autocrat, who maintained a strict family discipline. This behaviour bore significant repercussions for his entire family: none of his three daughters and only three of his seven sons married. 
Within the confines of this insular family setting, the children were encouraged to engage in various intellectual pursuits and hobbies. Two of Eleanor's elder brothers, William Piers Ormerod (1818-1860) and Edward Latham Ormerod (1819-1873), who studied medicine, took an interest in botany and entomology. However, the pervasive patriarchy of the family precluded Eleanor from gaining encouragement or approval from her elder male siblings. For this, she drew upon her sister and lifelong companion, Georgiana. 
By her own account, Eleanor began her intensive study of entomology in March 1852, when she assiduously pored over a copy of James F. Stephens's 'Manual of British Coleoptera or Beetles' (1839). Her entomological contributions to a wider audience began after the death of her mother in 1860, and in the final years of her father's protracted illness. In 1868 she responded to a published plea from the Royal Horticultural Society to contribute to a collection illustrative of insects beneficial and baneful to British agriculturists and horticulturists. For slightly less than a decade, she submitted insect specimens, which either she or the estate's agricultural labourers had procured. Her contributions were acknowledged in 1870, when the Royal Horticultural Society awarded her their silver medal. But this was merely a prelude to her future efforts, because her entomological endeavours 'were not approved of nor taken seriously by some of her elders, and could not have been carried out until the break up of the home on the death of Mr. Ormerod' ('Eleanor Ormerod', 19). The death of her father in 1873 released Eleanor Ormerod from the confines of familial privacy. Perhaps unsurprisingly, her first published papers appeared in the 'Linnean Society Journal', the 'Entomologist's Monthly Magazine', and the 'Gardeners' Chronicle' in the same year as her father's death. 
Supported by an inheritance, Eleanor and her sister Georgiana relocated to Torquay to be near an uncle and his family. After three years, the two sisters moved to Dunster Lodge, Spring Grove, Isleworth, where they could be closer to London, and to Joseph D. Hooker, director of Kew Gardens, and his wife. Until she and her sister made their final move to Torrington House, St Albans, Hertfordshire, in September 1887, Eleanor used her intimacy with the Hookers to continue her entomological investigations in the gardens at Kew. These were in addition to her daily recorded observations for the Meteorological Society, to which she was elected a fellow in 1878, the first woman to be so. Two years later, she edited Caroline Molesworth's 'Cobham Journals' of meteorological and phenological observations. Her introductory description of Caroline Molesworth (1794-1872) could easily have been an autobiographical statement of Eleanor Ormerod, economic entomologist. 
In the last quarter of the nineteenth century, there were numerous unheeded calls for the creation of a post of government entomologist in Britain. At the behest of the prominent agriculturists Maxwell Masters and John Chalmers Morton, Eleanor Ormerod responded to these calls and issued a seven-page questionnaire, entitled 'Notes for Observations of Injurious Insects', in early 1877. Later that year she published and distributed a compilation of the information that she had gleaned from various correspondents in the form of her first 'semi-official' annual report. Compiled in the same manner each year, these reports ran continuously until 1901, and established Ormerod as Britain's 'de facto' government entomologist. 
Following in John Curtis's footsteps, Eleanor Ormerod constructed a large portion of her entomological career on an association with the Royal Agricultural Society of England (RASE). In May 1882, she became honorary consulting entomologist to the RASE. This followed her election to the Entomological Society of London in 1878, and the publication of her 'Manual of Injurious Insects, with Methods of Prevention and Remedy' (1881), and a special report on the turnip fly (1882). As honorary consulting entomologist, she prepared annual and periodic monthly reports, and responded to queries from members. She received no remuneration for her efforts. Charles Whitehead, a member of the RASE, recalled that Ormerod: 'frequently produced from the depths of the pocket in her handsome black silk dress 'strange beasts' as a member... termed them... On two occasions some of these escaped from the box and crawled over the table, much to the discomfiture of the aforesaid member. (Whitehead, 47)' While returning home from her first RASE meeting, Ormerod suffered a blow to her knee that resulted in partial lameness and periodic pain in one leg. Fittingly, she used the pretence of her troubled leg to resign from the RASE ten years later. The real reasons for her resignation lay in a dispute with Charles Whitehead that had boiled over in 1891. At issue was the 'unacknowledged' work that she did for the RASE and Whitehead, who took up the salaried position of 'agricultural adviser' when the Board of Agriculture was established in 1889. 
Eleanor Ormerod was largely responsible for promulgation of the discipline of economic entomology in Great Britain. Between October 1881 and June 1884, she delivered six lectures, as special lecturer on economic entomology, at the Royal Agricultural College, Cirencester. In 1883 she spread her message to schoolteachers by delivering ten lectures at South Kensington's Institute of Agriculture. The latter effort resulted in the publication of her 'Guide to the Methods of Insect Life' (1884), which metamorphosed into 'A Text-Book of Agricultural Entomology' (1892). In addition, she contributed 'suggestions and revisions' to the relevant parts of William Fream's enduring 'Elements of Agriculture' (1892). Between 1882 and 1886 she was a member of a committee, which included T. H. Huxley and J. O. Westwood, appointed by the government to advise on the management of collections relating to economic entomology in the South Kensington and Bethnal Green museums. In 1889-90, she successfully introduced agricultural entomology as a voluntary subject for the senior examination of the RASE, and as a compulsory examination subject at the Royal Agricultural College. And from 1896 to 1899 she acted as an examiner in agricultural entomology for the University of Edinburgh. As part of an unsuccessful lobby to have agricultural science established as a degree subject, she offered the University of Oxford $100 in 1897. By the terms of her will, she bequeathed the University of Edinburgh $5000. Through lectures, textbooks, and examinations, Eleanor Ormerod played a pivotal role in the institutionalization of economic entomology. 
As she admitted to one of her numerous foreign correspondents, Eleanor Ormerod stopped 'entirely at home like a limpet on a rock' ('Eleanor Ormerod', 198). Although she entertained James Fletcher, William Saunders, C. V. Riley, John Smith, and Ritzema Bos when they visited Britain, she never left Britain on professional business. Nevertheless, the versatility of her correspondence networks allowed her to engage in colonial entomological research. For instance, she became involved with South African economic entomology when a British emigrant, and former contributor to her annual reports, contacted her to identify the Australian bug (the cottony cushion scale, 'Icerya purchasi') for the Eastern Province Naturalists' Society. This work resulted in the publication of her 'Notes on the Australian Bug (Icerya purchasi) in South Africa' (1887), and her 'Notes and Descriptions of a Few Injurious Farm & Fruit Insects of South Africa' (1887). Similarly, a direct appeal from the government of New Zealand resulted in her publication of a small pamphlet on the Hessian fly. And after the Barbados Agricultural Society requested her services in 1892, she produced a booklet on the sugar-cane shot-borer beetle ('Xyleborus perforans'). 
Eleanor Ormerod spread her entomological word with an evangelical fervour. Three of her campaigns, in particular, reached a broad audience and attracted controversy. In each case producing and distributing special booklets, she offered instruction and guidance on the ox-warble fly ('OEstrus bovis'), Paris-green (an acetoarsenite insecticide), and the extermination of the house sparrow. She was intensely aware that she was addressing 'things that might involve discussion unbecoming of a lady writer' ('Eleanor Ormerod', 272-3). Perhaps perceiving Eleanor Ormerod as the embodiment of her androgynous ideal, Virginia Woolf celebrated her as a 'pioneer of purity even more than of Paris Green' in her short story 'Miss Ormerod' of 1924 (Woolf, 471). Throughout her career, Ormerod remained rather ambivalent about the limitations imposed by her gender. She publicly rebuffed attempts to make her a model for the feminist cause; and she deftly acknowledged the support she received from male colleagues. Often, she used the names of recognized male experts, such as J. O. Westwood, to bolster or legitimate her message. But within the domestic sphere, where she produced all her work, she carefully guarded against any male intrusions. Consequently, she vehemently rejected the suggestion that Professor Allen Harker become her assistant in 1889. After all, she argued, she had her sister and Anne Hartwell, her 'lady amanuensis', who had joined the household in May of the previous year. 
By the turn of the twentieth century, Eleanor Ormerod had achieved a pre-eminent position in her chosen field of economic entomology. The Societe Nationale d'Acclimatation de France awarded her their silver medal in 1899, and the Royal Horticultural Society awarded her their gold medal the following year. On 14 April 1900, however, she received her greatest honour, when she became the first female recipient of an honorary LLD degree from the University of Edinburgh. She deeply regretted that her sister Georgiana, who had died on 19 August 1896, had not lived to witness the event. Unfortunately, Eleanor Ormerod's own physical decline followed rather rapidly. In early 1901, she suffered a combination of rheumatism and a 'painful and exhausting illness', that often left her bedridden. Originally diagnosed as the 'after effects of influenza', the origins of her illness were later suspected to lie in a diseased liver. By May, Eleanor Ormerod admitted: 'I believe myself the end may come any time' ('Eleanor Ormerod', 325). On 19 July 1901, she died of cancer of the liver at Torrington House, St Albans, Hertfordshire. After a small and unostentatious funeral at St Albans cemetery, Eleanor Ormerod was buried in the same grave as Georgiana on 23 July 1901. 


@@@@@


doc= 35330


Gore, William George Arthur Ormsby-, fourth Baron Harlech (1885-1964), politician and banker, was born in Eaton Square, London, on 11 April 1885, the only child of George Ralph Charles Ormsby-Gore (1855-1938) who became in 1904 the third Baron Harlech, and his wife, Lady Margaret Ethel Gordon (died 1950), daughter of the tenth marquess of Huntly. He was educated at Eton College, and New College, Oxford, where he obtained a second class in modern history in 1907. 
Ormsby-Gore was elected in January 1910, by a majority of eight, Unionist MP for Denbigh, moving in 1918 to Stafford, a seat he retained until he succeeded to the peerage on his father's death in 1938. He married on 12 April 1913 Lady Beatrice Edith Mildred Gascoyne-Cecil (died 1980), daughter of the fourth marquess of Salisbury. They had three sons and three daughters. 
Commissioned in the Shropshire yeomanry in 1908, Ormsby-Gore joined up when war broke out in 1914 and was on active service in Egypt when in 1916 he joined the Arab bureau as an intelligence officer attached to the high commissioner, Sir A. Henry McMahon. He was recalled in March 1917 at the instance of Lord Milner to be his parliamentary private secretary and also, a little later, an assistant secretary to the cabinet assisting Sir Mark Sykes. Impressed by Zionism while in Egypt, he established cordial relations with its leader in London, Chaim Weizmann, who took refuge in his office while the cabinet approved, on 31 October 1917, the Balfour declaration, and with whose support he was appointed British liaison officer with the Zionist mission sent to the Holy Land in March 1918. He returned to London in August and was a member of the British delegation to the Paris peace conference in 1919. He attended the meetings of the permanent mandates commission, of which he was the first British member, in October 1921 and August 1922. In the winter of 1921-2 he accompanied the under-secretary for the colonies, E. F. L. Wood, on a mission to the West Indies. 
An unusually appropriate apprenticeship thus preceded Ormsby-Gore's appointment, in October 1922, as parliamentary under-secretary at the Colonial Office. He remained there until 1929 except for the brief interval of the first Labour government in 1924, during which he was appointed by its colonial secretary, J. H. Thomas, as chairman of an all-party commission which visited east and central Africa in the autumn, advised against any immediate federation of these territories, and recommended a loan of $10 million, guaranteed by the Treasury, mainly for the improvement of transport, anticipating much of the thinking behind the 'Colonial Development Act' of 1929. In 1926 he visited west Africa and in 1928 Ceylon, Malaya, and Java. He was made a privy councillor in February 1927 and was in charge of the Colonial Office from July of that year until the following January during the empire tour of the colonial secretary, Leopold Amery. 
Ormsby-Gore's knowledgeable enthusiasm for the arts, well exemplified in his book 'Florentine Sculptors of the Fifteenth Century' (1930), resulted in a long and active association with the work of the major British galleries and museums. He was a trustee of the National Gallery from 1927 to 1934 and again from 1936 to 1941, of the Tate Gallery from 1934 to 1937 and again from 1945 to 1953, a life trustee of the British Museum from 1937, president of the National Museum of Wales from 1937, and was chairman of the Standing Commission on Museums and Galleries in 1949. He inherited a fine family library and although obliged to reduce its size when he ceased to live at Brogyntyn in Shropshire in 1955, he later added many rare books. He was president of the National Library of Wales from 1950 to 1958. 
In the National Government of 1931 Ormsby-Gore was postmaster-general without a cabinet seat, and in November of that year he became first commissioner of works with a seat in the cabinet, an office he retained until his appointment as colonial secretary in May 1936. Under his auspices a determined effort was made to improve the architectural standards of new post offices and labour exchanges. He also wrote four volumes in the series 'Guide to the Ancient Monuments of England' (1935, two in 1936, and 1948). 
During the two years he was colonial secretary, Ormsby-Gore had little opportunity for the constructive work for which he was so well equipped by temperament and experience. (Perhaps no other colonial secretary had as much first-hand knowledge of the colonial empire.) In the month in which he took office, the Arabs demanded that Jewish immigration into Palestine and purchase of land there should be ended and attacked Jewish lives and property. A royal commission, headed by Lord Peel, reported in July 1937 that the mandate was unworkable and recommended partition and the creation of a much truncated but independent Jewish state. The government, on Ormsby-Gore's recommendation, accepted these proposals. He did not, however, succeed in persuading parliament to endorse them but only to agree that the scheme might be put before the League of Nations while making clear that parliament was not committed even to the principle of partition, much less the commission's actual proposals. As the international situation worsened, the British government became increasingly concerned to appease the hostility of the Arab states to any continuing Jewish immigration. Ormsby-Gore considered himself committed to partition. He was also an outspoken critic of Nazi Germany so that it was hardly surprising that when on his succession to the peerage in May 1938 he felt constrained to offer his resignation, the prime minister, Neville Chamberlain, should have accepted it. 
As fourth Baron Harlech he served as commissioner for civil defence in the north-east region from 1939 to 1940 but his keen and active disposition chafed at the restraints still imposed by Whitehall. In 1941 he became British high commissioner in South Africa. He greatly admired the intellectual range of its prime minister, J. C. Smuts, but found little else to admire in the politics and society of that country. The long association between Smuts and Churchill and many other leading British personalities sharply limited the intermediary role of the high commissioner, although his informative reports were appreciated by C. R. Attlee, then secretary of state for the dominions. 
After Harlech's return to London in 1944 he became a director of the Midland Bank, of which he was chairman from 1952 to 1957. It incorporated the London Joint Stock Bank which his great-grandfather had helped to establish in 1836. He was also chairman of the Bank of British West Africa from 1951 to 1961. Under his auspices, staff conditions and training were improved and substantial expansion of commercial business in Africa promoted. 
Appointed GCMG in 1938, Harlech was created KG in 1948. He was constable of Harlech Castle from 1938, of Caernarfon Castle from 1946 to 1963, and lord lieutenant of Merioneth from 1938 to 1957. He received three honorary degrees, and was made an honorary fellow of his former college, New College, Oxford, in 1936. He devoted much time to the University of Wales, of which he was pro-chancellor from 1945 to 1957. 
A convinced Conservative, Harlech was prominent in the tory revolt that ended the coalition in 1922 and remained a firm supporter of Baldwin in the party divisions on Indian reform. He opposed the Hoare-Laval plan to accommodate Italian aggression in Ethiopia (thereby earning from Neville Chamberlain, with Walter E. Elliot and Oliver F. G. Stanley, the contemptuous sobriquet of the Boys' Brigade) and was bitterly hostile to Nazi Germany. Unusually receptive of ideas, he was always outspoken and sometimes impetuous. At the Colonial Office in the twenties he sought to promote scientific research and its application to the medical and agricultural problems of tropical dependencies and took a leading part in the attempt to develop educational policies more consonant with African environments, but constructive development was largely frustrated by financial constraints. His hope in 1918 that Zionist objectives might be attained without political domination soon appeared visionary but his acceptance of partition, if inopportune in the international situation in 1938, was a courageous assessment of realities in Palestine. Perhaps his deepest interests were in the arts, especially architecture, of which his knowledge was extensive. 
Harlech died in Bayswater, London, on 14 February 1964. His wife survived him. A lady of the bedchamber from 1941, she was created DCVO in 1947 and was made an extra lady of the bedchamber to Queen Elizabeth, the queen mother, in 1953. Their eldest son was killed in a motor accident in 1935 and the title passed to their elder surviving son, Sir (William) David Ormsby Gore. 
K. E. Robinson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35331


Orpen, Sir William Newenham Montague (1878-1931), painter, was born on 27 November 1878 at Oriel, Blackrock, co. Dublin, the fifth and youngest child of Arthur Herbert Orpen, a solicitor, and Anne Caulfeild, a member of the earl of Charlemont's family. Orpen's grandfather Sir Richard Orpen had been knighted for services to the legal profession and had established a successful legal practice which became the family firm. The home in Blackrock was comfortable; Orpen's childhood there was happy, and he wrote about it in 'Stories of Old Ireland and Myself' (1924) with warm affection and not without a hint of nostalgia, indicating that subsequently his personal life proved less satisfactory, as was indeed the case. 
Orpen's own interest in painting, demonstrated from an early age, was indulged by his mother, who supported his wish to go to art school against her husband's desire that he should study law and enter the family firm. Orpen entered the Metropolitan School of Art, Dublin, in 1891 at the age of thirteen and showed exceptional talent from the very beginning. Large and well run, the school had benefited from reforms in art teaching in the second half of the nineteenth century, and was linked to the South Kensington schools of art. The headmaster, James Brenan, recognized Orpen's remarkable talent early on, and encouraged him. During his years at the school Orpen won every major prize, gold, silver, and bronze medals, scholarships, and an enduring reputation among his fellow students. In his last year he took the British Isles gold medal for life drawing, and then enrolled at the Slade School of Fine Art, London, in 1897. 
Orpen enjoyed similar success at the Slade, where he was taught by Frederick Brown, Henry Tonks, and Philip Wilson Steer. Among his fellow students were Augustus John, Spencer Gore, Michel Salaman, Edna Waugh, Herbert Everett, the marine artist, and his mother, the eccentric Augusta Everett, and Orpen lived among a bohemian colony in Fitzroy Street which included John, who was probably closer to him than the others. Tonks in particular put his students under considerable pressure, made them look at great draughtsmanship, and master it as the basis for art. Tonks's exceptional talent as a draughtsman impressed Orpen, who with a brilliant student's ability to imitate and learn produced a number of wonderful early drawings (priv. coll.) with echoes in them of the old masters. Tonks encouraged his students to study old masters, including Chardin, Watteau, and Rembrandt, whose works were exhibited at the Royal Academy and elsewhere. Orpen combined his authority, as probably the finest draughtsman of his generation at the Slade, with a wry, mocking sense of humour which he softened by characterizing himself as an outsider. He was physically small and supposed himself ugly but had boundless ambition, almost to the point where it intimidated those closest to him. Orpen won prizes at the Slade, most notably the $40 painting prize for 'The Play Scene from 'Hamlet'' (priv. coll.), and his success led others to turn to him for leadership and example. From his final year, 1899, he exhibited at the New English Art Club (NEAC), which shared the Slade's desire for realism in painting incorporating technical skill in paint, good draughtsmanship, and naturalness of subject. These values gave Orpen a clear sense of purpose and direction to which he applied himself with energy and an enormously rich and varied talent. His earliest oils, notably 'The Mirror' (Tate collection), were acclaimed at the club's twice-yearly exhibitions, and Orpen forged a practice for himself as a portrait painter, earning enough from commissions to maintain himself. He moved in a group which included William and Albert Rothenstein (later Albert Rutherston), and through them he met the Knewstub sisters and their brother Jack. On 8 August 1901 he married Grace Knewstub, whose sister Alice had married William Rothenstein. They settled in a house in Royal Hospital Road, Chelsea. 
Orpen travelled quite widely in the British Isles, fulfilling portrait commissions. Twice yearly from 1902 onwards he spent short periods in Dublin, teaching at the Metropolitan School of Art, and seeing his family and former student friends. He became a friend of Hugh Lane, a distant cousin on his mother's side, who was then an art dealer and the promoter of a modern art gallery for Dublin. The two travelled together in Europe in the summer of 1904, arriving first in Paris, where Orpen witnessed Lane's purchase of several impressionist masterpieces and experienced French art, so different stylistically from the teaching he had received at the Slade. They went on to Madrid, where Orpen 'discovered' Velazquez, visiting again and again the collection of his work in the Prado while Lane went off to buy more works of art. 
The impact of Velazquez was profound. Before the Madrid trip Orpen had displayed enormous versatility. The great Spanish master focused his mind on economy in painting, and on the simple, grand gesture which produces drama from depiction of realistic and everyday subjects. His 'The Wash House' (NG Ire.), 'The Idle Girl' (priv. coll.), and 'Resting' (Ulster Museum, Belfast) from the series of paintings 'Lottie of Paradise Walk' (others in National Gallery of Canada, Ottawa, and Leeds City Art Gallery) and his nudes of 1905-7 attest to the impact of this encounter. So, too, do the portraits which Lane persuaded Orpen to paint of Irish figures from the period for his new modern art gallery in Dublin. These have the same bold simplicity of statement, and reflect a cultural revival in Ireland. They include paintings of the landscape painter Nathaniel Hone (1907) and the politician Timothy Healy (both Hugh Lane Municipal Gallery of Modern Art, Dublin). 
Orpen himself remained detached. While he painted these subjects well, he did not become engaged in the slightly feverish determination to support the nationalist movement. Irish art schools and exhibitions in any case were less committed to the nationalism which inspired writers like W. B. Yeats and Augusta Gregory, another of Orpen's cousins. Orpen could be said to have sided with the more cynical view of events held by George Moore, an expressive, experienced, and caustic critic of cultural revolution. Orpen was more interested in the lighter side of Irish life, in sport and entertainment, gossip and drinking. Occasionally he expressed scepticism, as did Moore, about the very possibility of Ireland as an independent entity, either culturally or politically, and this remained his view. His constant self-examination, represented in a remarkable number of self-portraits -- probably more numerous than those by any other major figure in the British Isles of the last 200 years -- attests to his need to understand himself through the only 'language' which gave him meaning, paint. Nevertheless, in 1906 he began a major work, 'Homage to Manet' (Manchester City Art Gallery), in which he attempted, in a conversation piece, to bring together in a group portrait the significant figures in British art at the time: Steer, Sickert, D. S. McColl, Moore, Lane, and Tonks. A parallel work, 'The Selecting Jury of the N.E.A.C.', known only in the form of a study (NPG) and showing the jury of the NEAC, turned into a caricature. 
Orpen and Grace had a daughter, Mary, in 1902, and a second daughter, Kit, in 1906, and this meant that Grace spent more time at home in London, while Orpen, increasingly successful and gregarious, enjoyed himself away from home. Through his mother's interest in seeing him get on, Orpen was asked to paint a portrait of a wealthy American, Mrs Evelyn St George, who was married to another of Orpen's cousins, a land agent. The commission became a liaison, and Mrs St George an important influence; she encouraged Orpen to see himself as a great artist, and to paint appropriately. This advice resulted in a number of portraits, including the double portrait of his parents (NG Ire.; Arnold, 278), which she thought every great painter should attempt, and portraits of herself, large and dramatic treatments of a larger-than-life woman. (See, for example, 'Mrs St George', priv. coll.; Arnold, facing p. 256, plate 12.) Orpen now moved on from genre scenes, and small, intimate portraits in the Dutch manner, to a cycle of commissions from landowners and titled figures in British society. He first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1904, and regularly from 1908 until his death in 1931, showing over 100 works, mainly portraits. He became an associate of the Royal Academy in 1910, and the following year was a founder member of the National Portrait Society. He became a Royal Academician in 1919. He also exhibited with the Society of Portrait Painters and in a number of international exhibitions, including those which promoted Irish art. 
Orpen's involvement in Irish life was irregular, but through his friendship with Lane he contributed to the collection of portraits commissioned for the new Municipal Gallery of Modern Art, Dublin, painting Anthony McDonald and the provost of Trinity College, J. P. Mahaffy, and remained supportive of Lane's efforts to make the visual arts part of the Irish cultural revival. Even so, he continued to feel ill at ease with the portentousness of much of the activity surrounding W. B. Yeats and Lady Gregory, preferring the irreverence of men like the Dublin throat surgeon Oliver St John Gogarty. Most of all he enjoyed the company of students, notably several future Irish painters of distinction, Sean Keating, Patrick Tuohy, Beatrice Elvery, and James Sleator. Two of these, Sleator and Keating, worked as Orpen's studio assistants as his portrait practice grew. Orpen's increasing unease with his Irishness is reflected in three allegorical works painted in 1913-16, 'Sowing New Seed' (Mildura Art Centre, Victoria, Australia), 'The Western Wedding' (1914; Arnold, 292), and 'The Holy Well' (1915; NG Ire.), which seek to show the country and its people in terms of religious, moral, social, and economic circumstances. Stylistically innovative, and using a tempera technique on large canvases, they failed, however, to capture the developing nationalism in art and culture, and Orpen made no further efforts to contribute to his country's identity, though he painted an outstanding portrait of his closest Irish associate and former student, Sean Keating, depicting him as 'A Man of the West' (priv. coll.; Arnold, 164). 
Orpen was rapidly becoming the most successful artist of his generation, taking the place in English portrait painting of John Singer Sargent, and arguably challenging Walter Sickert in the field of genre painting. His crowded professional life was matched by his vigorous and hedonistic private pursuit of pleasure and entertainment. The combination of the public and private realms of his life is expressed in the periodic interruption of his list of portrait sitters by individual genre works such as 'The Cafe Royal' (1912; Musee d'Orsay, Paris), in which he brought together artists and writers he knew in a composite interior with figures. An inhabitant first of the Edwardian era, and then of the glittering era of power and prestige which preceded the First World War, he epitomized artistic and social success. A brief reconciliation with his wife, Grace, resulted in a third child, a daughter, Diana, born in 1914. 
With the coming of war, Orpen's life changed. He was slow to commit himself, but once the War Artists' Scheme was inaugurated, he saw a role for himself, and he characterized it in terms of repaying England for all it had done for him. He parted company with his Irish studio assistant, Sean Keating, who returned to conscription-free Ireland, and joined up as a war artist, being commissioned as a major. He left for France in April 1917, and for the next four years was totally immersed in the war and its aftermath. His output, and its overall excellence, makes him the outstanding war artist of that period, possibly the greatest war artist produced in Britain. Analysis of his war work, the major part of which is in the Imperial War Museum, London, shows a development in style and understanding, from the idealism which inspired him when he first arrived at the front to the disillusionment with the terrible ending to the war, and then the further dismay he and many felt at the direction taken by the peace deliberations. His paintings of the Somme battlefields are haunting recollections of anguish and chaos, of ruined landscapes baked in the summer sun, the torn ground white and rocky, the debris of the dead scattered and ignored. 
With these works, all large and accomplished landscapes, are naturally grouped fine portraits of fighting men: officers and men in action, wounded figures haunting in their distress, German prisoners who are nevertheless noble in appearance and attitude, at odds with the war propaganda which Orpen was meant to support. His war portraits capture, in numerous variations, the expression of fear, shock, resignation, pride, and courage. In tandem with his work at the front, which had an immediacy reinforced by the artist's skill and his compassion, Orpen engaged in a series of formal portraits of the leaders such as Field Marshal Haig, Air Marshal Trenchard, and General Foch. Like many others, they sat to Orpen in the field of action, often breathless with the demands of their military duties, yet still acknowledging the demands of the military record. 
Orpen's exhibition 'War' at Thomas Agnews in Bond Street, London, in the spring of 1918 was followed by his gift to the British nation of all his war paintings. In that same year he received a knighthood. But public recognition left him increasingly isolated and sad about the tragedy he had witnessed and recorded. His last war paintings, such as 'The Mad Woman of Douai' (IWM), 'Bombfire in Picardy', and 'The Harvest', convey the stress and anguish he certainly felt about the war and its aftermath. With the end of war he was free to leave but instead remained in France, painting portraits and scenes of the peace conference in Paris and Versailles. One, a highly contentious tribute, 'To the Unknown British Soldier in France' (IWM), includes a flag-draped coffin with two shell-shocked soldiers flanking it. Under pressure, he painted out the soldiers, their shadowy forms remaining as ghostly 'pentimento'. 
Orpen wrote vividly of his experiences in 'An Onlooker in France' (1921), an irreverent account of his life at the front that included moving tributes to the British soldiers and airmen who had been his companions and the subjects of his paintings. His outspokenness became controversial. His standing as a painter gave him the ear of many people in power, and he took risks, confronting what he saw as foolishness. This made him unpopular, though he survived it well enough. He also invented the persona of a mysterious and beautiful woman spy, portrayed in a number of paintings he did of the French woman he loved, Yvonne Aubicq. British officialdom took a poor view of this, but Orpen survived on the strength of his contacts. His own personality had developed with the war; his early idealism became a form of sombre realistic recognition of the terrible path of war through the lives of a whole generation. He came to love the fighting man, and to despise the politicians, with their glib words and their self-interested carve-up of Europe which was subsequently to prove so disastrous. 
During the immediate post-war period Orpen had a studio in Paris as well as in London. Through the intervention of her father, Mrs St George ended their relationship during the war; by then, Orpen had met Yvonne Aubicq. He travelled regularly between the two cities, and spent time in coastal resorts like Dieppe, to which he was frequently driven in his chauffeured Rolls-Royce, Yvonne beside him. To some extent he lost his way, and in the early 1920s he drank heavily, but this did not interfere with his portrait-painting practice, which was prodigious in scope and earned him a huge income, often as much as $45,000 a year in the mid-1920s. Some of this work was inevitably superficial; he did not become involved with his sitters, as he had done before the war. He painted two ravishing nudes of Yvonne, 'The Disappointing Letter' (1921; J. B. Speed Art Museum, Kentucky) and 'Early Morning' (priv. coll.; Arnold, facing p. 353, plate 18), and a powerful diploma work for the Royal Academy, 'The chef de l'Hotel Chatham, Paris' (RA). This picture clearly did not qualify (as Orpen initially hoped) for acquisition for the nation under the terms of the Chantrey bequest, which requires that works submitted under the scheme to the Royal Academy have to be painted within Great Britain. Orpen treated quite mischievously the obvious fact that the work was painted largely in Paris, and it led to a rancorous controversy. 
Orpen was the titular editor of 'An Outline of Art' (1923), a large and prodigiously illustrated history of art, and in 1924 published his second book, 'Stories of Old Ireland and Myself'. In this mocking and regretful account he seems to be looking for an alternative to the mixture of success and ill health which shaped his existence in his final years. He had a huge and splendid studio in The Boltons, south-west London, but his friendships were made among drinking companions and the many people who sought to benefit from his wealth. Owing to a sense of shame he felt at his physical decline his children had difficulty in getting to see him. And his peers, some of whom had been envious of his success, were now indifferent towards him. Orpen's death, from liver and heart failure on 29 September 1931 at 2 Clareville Grove, South Kensington, was followed by a small tribute exhibition in the Royal Academy. He was buried at Putney cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 35332


Orr, Alexandra (1828-1903), biographer, was born on 23 December 1828 at St Petersburg, where her grandfather, Sir James Boniface Leighton, was court physician to her godmother, Alexandra empress of Russia. She was the eldest of the three surviving children of Frederic Septimus Leighton (1800-1892), a medical doctor, and his wife, Augusta Susan ('c'.1800-1865), daughter of George Augustus Nash of Edmonton, Middlesex. Frederic Leighton, Lord Leighton (1830-1896), was her only brother. The family travelled extensively in Europe, and Alexandra was educated privately abroad, in Italy, Germany, and Switzerland, and at a girls' boarding-school at Frankfurt am Main. When she was sixteen she had a serious attack of rheumatic fever in Florence which left her partly blind, and she spent more than seven years recovering in Hampstead, Middlesex, with her mother. On account of her near blindness, most of her very considerable knowledge was acquired by listening to books read aloud to her. 
On 7 March 1857 Alexandra Leighton married a widower, Sutherland George Gordon Orr of the Madras service, commandant of the 3rd regiment of cavalry, Hyderabad contingent, and she went with him to India. They arrived during the Indian mutiny, and Alexandra had a narrow escape from Aurangabad, having been saved by the fidelity to the English of Sheikh Baran Bukh. Her husband died there on 19 June 1858, worn out by the war. He was gazetted captain and brevet major and CB on the day of his death. Alexandra then returned to England and rejoined her parents, who were sojourning in Bath and Scarborough. It was about this time, in 1860, that Lord Leighton painted her portrait as a beautiful young widow. It was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1861, and Leighton wrote that it was more admired than anything else. (Previously Alexandra had sat for the figure of the Moor's wife in 'Othello and Desdemona'.) However, she did not settle in London until she moved there with her father in 1869, after her mother's death four years earlier. 
Alexandra Orr's main interests were in art, music, and literature. In the winter of 1855-6 she had met in Paris Robert Browning, with whom her brother was close. Browning renewed his acquaintance with her at intervals until 1869, when, both residing in London, they became good friends. For many years he read books to her twice a week, and they used to meet in her brother's studio. She joined the Browning Society shortly after its formation in 1881, became a member of the committee which wrote notes on various difficult points in Browning's poems, and was generous in financial support. The most important result of this connection was 'A Handbook to the Works of Robert Browning' (1885; 3rd edn, 1887), which she wrote at the request of the society. It contains ample contributions by Browning, who wrote many of the notes and indices himself, and is a kind of descriptive catalogue, based partly on the historical order and partly on the natural classification of the poems, owing something to the suggestions of the painter and author John Trivett Nettleship. The sixth edition, incorporating her final corrections, was often reprinted. 
Alexandra Orr's most important work, however, was her 'Life and Letters of Robert Browning', published in 1891, largely based on material supplied by Browning's sister. Many new letters by the poet have come to light during the twentieth century -- and countless more studies and biographies have been written -- but Orr's retains the value of a book written by a personal friend. Her estimate of Browning's religious opinions, particularly his views on spiritualism and on the Theosophical Society, caused considerable controversy, and she answered her critics in an article in the December 1891 issue of the 'Contemporary Review'. To that and other periodicals she contributed occasional articles on art and literature, as well as on women's suffrage, of which she was a strong opponent. Her last literary efforts were two editions of her brother's 'Addresses Delivered to the Students of the Royal Academy by the Late Lord Leighton' (1896; 1897). All her works were dictated, as her vision was too weak to allow her to write or read. 
After her father's death in 1892, Alexandra Orr continued to live in their mansion at 11 Kensington Park Gardens, London, until her own death, from a lingering pulmonary disease, on 23 August 1903. She was buried on 29 August in Locksbrook cemetery, Bath, alongside her parents. She had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 35333


Orr, William McFadden (1866-1934), mathematician, was born at Ballystockart, Comber, co. Down, on 2 May 1866, the eldest son of Fletcher Blakeley Orr, a farmer who owned corn and flax mills, of Ballystockart, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of David Lowry, farmer, of Ballymachashan, Killinchy, co. Down. He received his early training in mathematics at the local national school. After spending two years at an intermediate school in Newtownards, he entered the Methodist college, Belfast, where he came under the mathematical direction of James Adams McNeill, afterwards headmaster of Campbell College, Belfast. He obtained a scholarship in mathematics at the Royal University of Ireland in 1883, and graduated in 1885 from Queen's College, Belfast, then a constituent college of the Royal University. He then moved to St John's College, Cambridge, in April 1885, was senior wrangler in 1888, and obtained the first place in part two of the mathematical tripos of 1889. In 1891 he was both elected to a fellowship at St John's and appointed professor of applied mathematics at the Royal College of Science for Ireland, Dublin. When in 1926 this institution was absorbed by University College, Dublin, he was offered and accepted an equivalent position in that college as professor of pure and applied mathematics, from which he retired in 1933. In 1909 he was elected FRS, and he received the honorary degree of DSc from Queen's University, Belfast, in 1919. In 1892, shortly after he obtained the post in the Royal College of Science, Orr married Elizabeth Campbell (died 1926), daughter of Samuel Watson Campbell, of Melbourne, Australia, who originally came from co. Down. They had three daughters, the eldest of whom died in Orr's lifetime. 
His contemporaries at the Royal College of Science record that Orr's teaching was characterized by accurate definition, logical rigour, and clear statements of underlying assumptions. The scrupulous style of his teaching is shown in his 'Notes on Thermodynamics for Students' (1909), which is a model of precision in the formulation of principles. He always endeavoured to provide his students with the mathematical tools needed to deal with the physical, chemical, and engineering problems that they met in the laboratories, where he was frequently to be seen modestly deploring his own lack of experimental knowledge. Mathematics under his inspiring influence became, for staff and students alike, an integrating subject in the small college. 
Orr's role model was McNeill, of whom he wrote an appreciation containing an unconscious self-portrait, in which he described the persistence with which his teacher would repeatedly attack a difficult mathematical problem and expressed the view that this trait was a moral one, an attempt to live 'the strenuous life' of which he approved. Combined with this stoical austerity, Orr exercised quick and effective generosity towards students and teachers in difficulties. 
Orr's mathematical outlook was moulded in the Cambridge tradition of Lord Rayleigh, A. E. H. Love, and Sir Joseph Larmor, with whom he carried on an active correspondence. He was best known for his work on the stability of the steady motions of a liquid. He also worked on the problems arising from the whirling of shafts in his 'Note on Mr. Lees' paper on the whirling of an overhung shaft' ('Philosophical Magazine', 45, 1923), which was supplemented by correspondence and discussion with his colleagues, and he wrote papers on several issues in mathematical physics. He felt very strongly that clear thinking in applied science rests upon a solid grasp of fundamental principles. He therefore aimed at the best possible exposition in all his work, and especially in textbooks. The climate of the quantum and relativity physics of the twentieth century was not congenial to him, but he never ceased to take an interest in these developments and to look forward to a reconciling synthesis with classical dynamics. Orr died at Nobles Hospital, Douglas, Isle of Man, on 14 August 1934. 


@@@@@


doc= 35334


Orton, John Kingsley (1933-1967), playwright, was born on 1 January 1933 in the Maternity Hospital, Leicester, the eldest of four children of William Orton (1905-1978), gardener, and his wife, Elsie Mary Bentley (1904-1966), machinist and charwoman. Their seaside-postcard personae of dissatisfied, domineering wife and frail, hen-pecked husband later resurfaced in their son's plays. Orton was educated at Marriots Road primary school and, after failing his eleven-plus, at Clark's College, where his mother enrolled him privately on a secretarial course. He was determined to improve both mind and body: the former with a process of self-education (he had read the whole of Shakespeare by the age of fifteen); the latter with a Charles Atlas chest-expander. He found escape from a series of badly paid, boring office jobs in the world of amateur dramatics. Then, after reading an article by Laurence Olivier on the availability of scholarships, and paying for elocution lessons to eradicate his east midlands vowels, he applied to the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (RADA), and was accepted for 1951. 
Orton was proficient enough to gain his diploma when he graduated from RADA in 1953, but his most dramatic encounter took place off-stage, with his fellow student Kenneth Leith Halliwell (1926-1967). Halliwell was seven years older than Orton and affected an air of superiority in both dress and manner. He had an impressive breadth of knowledge and a disconcerting physical presence. Whereas Orton felt alienated from his family, Halliwell was a genuine orphan. Whereas Orton had a puckish, round face, impeccable skin, and smouldering eyes, Halliwell was prematurely bald, heavy, and clammy. Nevertheless, unlike his fellow students, Orton did not dismiss Halliwell as a misfit. Instead, in his first term, he accepted Halliwell's offer to move into his West Hampstead flat. They lived together for the next sixteen years. 
In the first years of their relationship Orton was happy to defer to the more experienced Halliwell. After a miserable four-month stint as an assistant stage manager at Ipswich Repertory Theatre, he willingly fell in with Halliwell's plan that they should devote their energies to writing. They lived a modest, almost monastic, existence, eking out Halliwell's small inheritance with a variety of odd jobs, rising at dawn and going to bed at dusk to save on electricity. They collaborated on a series of novels: 'The Silver Bucket' (1953), 'Lord Cucumber' (1954), 'The Mechanical Womb' (1955), 'The Last Days of Sodom' (1955), and 'The Boy Hairdresser' (1956). Each also wrote separately, with Halliwell producing 'Priapus in the Shrubbery' (1959), and Orton 'Between Us Girls' (1957) and 'The Vision of Gombold Proval' (1961). 
None of the novels was published in Orton's lifetime, but 'The Vision of Gombold Proval' appeared posthumously as 'Head to Toe' in 1971, and 'The Boy Hairdresser' and 'Lord Cucumber' were published in 1999. While each contains passages of comic invention, the overall effect is laboured, artificial, and monotonous. 'Between Us Girls', however, the diary of would-be actress Susan Hope, published in 1998, constitutes Orton's first exercise in literary ventriloquism which, paradoxically, led to the discovery of his own voice. 
The turning point in the development of that voice took place in 1962, when both Orton and Halliwell received six-month prison sentences for stealing and defacing books from Islington Public Library. Orton later recalled their practice of doctoring covers and authors' photographs: 'I once pasted a picture of a naked tattooed man over the photograph of John Betjeman; I think the book was 'Summoned by Bells'. And another time I pasted a picture of a female nude over a photograph of Lady Lewisham. It was some book on etiquette. (Fox, 72)' With an irony he would have relished, the contentious covers were later exhibited in the very library that originally brought the prosecution.The two men responded to prison very differently: Halliwell attempted suicide, while Orton found it gave him a perspective he had hitherto lacked. 'Being in the nick brought detachment to my writing. I wasn't involved any more and it worked. Before, I had been vaguely conscious of something rotting somewhere: prison crystallised this. The old whore society really lifted up her skirts and the stench was pretty foul. (Fox, 72)' The experience fired him. After two unperformed apprentice plays, 'Fred and Madge' and 'The Visitors', his breakthrough came in 1963 when the BBC Third Programme accepted 'Ruffian on the Stair'. By the time it was broadcast, 'Entertaining Mr Sloane' had been produced at the Arts Theatre (1964), and audiences had been given their first taste of Orton's singular brand of sexual subversion, Oedipal outrage, and epigrammatic wit. Aspects of the plot were derivative of Pinter -- though Orton himself considered the influence to flow in the other direction, claiming that Pinter could never have written 'The Homecoming' without the example of 'Entertaining Mr Sloane'. The language, however, was all Orton's own, a style that John Mortimer neatly dubbed 'South Ruislip Mandarin' (Lahr, 56). 
In order to distinguish himself from John Osborne, John Orton became Joe. And, in the three years before his premature death, Joe Orton enjoyed all the success that John had lacked. Largely because of the enthusiasm and financial support of Terence Rattigan, 'Entertaining Mr Sloane' transferred, first to the West End, where it ran successfully for five months, and then to Broadway, where critical hostility killed it. Its West End run was curtailed by the concerted efforts of ticket-sales chief Peter Cadbury and impresario Emile Littler, who led a backlash against the rash of so-called 'dirty plays'. 
Orton was astute enough to realize that his career would not be harmed by scandal (indeed, he fostered it himself in letters to the press from his female 'alter ego', Edna Welthorpe). He continued his project of comic sedition in 'The Good and Faithful Servant' (1964) and 'Loot' (1966), the latter of which underlined his disdain for taboos, with its farcical antics involving a corrupt police inspector, a murderous nurse, a devout Catholic widower, two sexually ambivalent youths, and a corpse. Many would argue with the attitudes that his drama embodied; few could dispute the force of the laughter it generated. Orton wrote the part of Inspector Truscott for his close friend Kenneth Williams, but Williams's baroque comic style, together with Peter Wood's ornate production, scuppered the play's chances, confirming Orton's instincts that 'unless 'Loot' is directed and acted perfectly seriously, the play will fail' (Lahr, 241). Its London premiere, the following year, fared better, winning Orton the 1966 'Evening Standard' best play award and establishing its enduring place in the repertoire. 

'Loot's' success sparked Orton's creativity. In the ten months between its London opening and his murder, he wrote one one-act play, 'Funeral Games', and revised two others, 'Ruffian on the Stair' and 'The Erpingham Camp', which were presented as the double bill 'Crimes of Passion' (1967). He also completed a film script for the Beatles, 'Up Against It', which was never produced (though his work was later represented on screen by indifferent versions of 'Entertaining Mr Sloane', 1969, and 'Loot', 1970). His final play was the madcap farce 'What the Butler Saw'. Like 'Loot' it received an unsatisfactory premiere, in a star-studded production at the Haymarket (1969), and its rehabilitation had to wait until Lindsay Anderson's 1975 revival at the Royal Court. 

'What the Butler Saw', set in a psychiatric clinic where the doctors are far madder than any of the (unseen) patients, culminates in the descent of a Dionysiac figure, Sergeant Match, drugged and dressed in a woman's gown. In the diary that Orton had begun to keep at the instigation of his agent, Margaret (Peggy) Ramsay, he noted with approval Halliwell's recognition of his classical devices. But the couple's intellectual empathy was no longer mirrored elsewhere, and Halliwell felt increasingly sidelined in Orton's life. While Orton's artistic endeavours triumphed, his own exhibition of collages in a King's Road basement failed. While Orton was socially and sexually desirable (as witnessed by the diary record of his fervidly priapic adventures), Halliwell thought himself unloved. Finally, on 9 August 1967, he battered Orton to death at their home, 25 Noel Road, London, and swallowed a fatal dose of sleeping-pills. Orton was cremated at Golders Green on 18 August. 
Halliwell's hammer-blows ended Orton's life and established his legend. After seeing 'Loot' the critic Ronald Bryden dubbed its author 'the Oscar Wilde of Welfare State gentility' (Lahr, 268). Although, unlike Wilde, Orton would never have claimed to have put his genius into his life and his talent into his works, he has, like Wilde, threatened to become more celebrated for his life (in particular for his sex life) than for his plays. John Lahr's edition of 'The Orton Diaries' (1986) and his earlier biography, 'Prick up your Ears' (1978), which was adapted by Alan Bennett for the screen in 1987, have combined to create an indelible image of the rough-trade playwright whose private life was largely conducted in public lavatories. Nevertheless, it is as a stylist so unique that he furnished a new critical term, Ortonesque, that he will be remembered. The playwright and critic Frank Marcus put it most pertinently when he wrote of 'What the Butler Saw' 'I think it will survive and tell people more about what it felt to be alive in the sixties than anything else of that period' (Fox, 67). 


@@@@@


doc= 35335


Orwin, Charles Stewart (1876-1955), agricultural economist and historian, was born on 26 September 1876 at Horsham, Sussex, the only son of Frederick James Orwin and Elizabeth, daughter of Robert Campbell Stewart, of Blackheath, and niece of George Gawler, governor of South Australia (1838-41). Born into a medical family with a reputation for independent, radical thinking, from his earliest days Orwin wanted to be a farmer and, on leaving Dulwich College, he obtained a county scholarship and entered the South Eastern Agricultural College at Wye. There he established a lasting friendship with the principal, Daniel Hall. He left Wye with a college diploma, and went on to receive another from Cambridge -- there was no degree in agriculture at this time -- and an associateship of the Surveyors' Institution. 
As his family could not afford to establish him in farming, Orwin decided on a career as land agent and joined a house agent in the West End of London; a year later, when the firm opened a country office, he found himself in charge of it. On 18 October 1903 he married Elise Cecile (died 1929), daughter of Edward Renault, of Cognac; they had three sons and three daughters. Also in 1903 Orwin accepted a lectureship at his old college at Wye, of which he later became an honorary fellow. In 1906 he was recommended as agent to Christopher Turnor (1873-1940), who had recently inherited some 24,000 acres in Lincolnshire. Orwin accepted the post, which enabled him to utilize his comprehensive knowledge of the country and to develop his aptitude for far-sighted administration. He was also active in local government and, then and later, in the affairs of the church. This did not prevent him from finding time to work out a system of cost accounting which enabled farmers to exercise the same control over their affairs as industrialists had over their factories, and which would also provide a reliable basis for sound agricultural policy, a contribution soon to be given an added significance by war. 
When Daniel Hall, representing the Development Commission, persuaded the University of Oxford to sponsor a research institute in agricultural economics, Orwin became its first director in 1913. Hitherto the subject had not been recognized as one for academic study. Orwin's appointment enabled him to be the architect in this new field, to introduce the subject to a rather suspicious public, to attract promising young students, and to lead the way with his own pioneering researches. He was the first to use surveys, first by county, then by topic, in the study of agricultural economics. When he retired in 1945 nearly every university in England, Scotland, and Wales had a department of agricultural economics, and the Ministry of Agriculture had an economics branch; most of these departments were led or staffed by men who had had their initial training at the Oxford Institute for Research in Agricultural Economics. Orwin's energy and capacity for original thinking appealed to the young, whom he went out of his way to encourage. 
Early in his career at Oxford Orwin became connected with Balliol College, of which he was a fellow (1922), estates bursar (1926-46), and honorary fellow (1946). In 1939 he became the first DLitt in the Oxford school of social studies. As a research worker in land problems, he did not lose sight of practical issues. He served on the council of the Land Agents' Society and of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors; as editor of the 'Journal of the Royal Agricultural Society' from 1912 to 1927 he was in touch with the more prominent landowners and farmers in England; and he was a member of the first Agricultural Wages Board (1917-21). He was also president of the agricultural section of the British Association (1921) and assessor to the agricultural tribunal of investigation (1922-4). On 3 January 1931, following the death of his first wife two years earlier, he married Christabel Susan, daughter of Charles Lowry, headmaster of Tonbridge School. They wrote a number of books together, but she was also a prolific author in her own right, particularly after Orwin's death. The coincidence that they shared common initials has led to some confusion in this respect. 
Orwin was best known to the general public for his work as an agricultural historian. His first work of this kind was the 'History of Wye Church and College', followed sixteen years later with the 'Reclamation of Exmoor Forest' (1929, 2nd edn revised with additional material by R. J. Sellick, 1970). His outstanding contribution to agricultural history was 'The Open Fields' (1938; 2nd edn, 1954; 3rd edn, 1967 with preface by Joan Thirsk), written in collaboration with his second wife, Christabel. This provided a detailed reappraisal of the conventional view of the egalitarian nature of traditional strip farming. Utilizing the records of the only surviving open-field system, of Laxton in Nottinghamshire, it showed how the traditional system was primarily a pragmatic response to the prevailing agricultural conditions, rather than, as traditionally claimed, a means of catering for the social needs of the community. 
Orwin's other books were aimed at farmers and landowners, and dealt with accounting and legal matters. Orwin also produced articles on farming matters and agricultural policy for the 'Manchester Guardian' and the 'Yorkshire Post'. His contribution to agricultural economics through articles in professional journals was less significant. 
Besides a substantial contribution to teaching and research, as director of the Agricultural Economics Institute, Orwin played a key role in enhancing the role and status of the institute during its difficult embryonic stage. Although the institute was temporarily disbanded during the Second World War, Orwin remained as director until A. W. Ashby was appointed in 1946. 
Orwin was very tall, his appearance most impressive, and his face handsome and leonine. Generous in his affections and opinions, he could be easily hurt, for he was a deeply sensitive man. He gave short shrift to the sillinesses of cleverer men, but to the young he reached out with an especial and characteristic courtesy. Orwin died at his home, the Red House in Blewbury, Berkshire, on 30 June 1955. 


@@@@@


doc= 35336


Osborne, Walter Frederick (1859-1903), painter, was born on 17 June 1859 at 6 Cornish Terrace, Rathmines, Dublin, the second of the three children of William Osborne RHA (1823-1901), an animal painter, and his wife, Anne Jane Woods, of O'Brien's Bridge, co. Clare. He was educated at Rathmines (Benson's) School (1870-75), in the schools of the Royal Hibernian Academy, Dublin (1876-81), and at the Koninklijke Academie voor Schone Kunsten, Antwerp (1881-3). In Antwerp he encountered the realist painting of French and Netherlandish artists, and the teaching of Charles Verlat at the academy introduced him to vigorous brushwork and bold colour. His small sketch 'Moderke verhoft' ('c'.1882, National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin) is a good example of his developing style -- a peasant-genre subject painted from life, boldly executed, and with accents of vivid colour. Among his classmates were a number of English students who were to become part of the British naturalist school to which the first half of his career belongs, and he met others in Brittany in 1883. Like them, he came under the influence of the French naturalist painter Jules Bastien-Lepage and for a time adopted his painting technique and grey-green palette. 
After Brittany Osborne's life followed a pattern of winters spent in Dublin at his parents' house, 5 Castlewood Avenue, Rathmines, and the rest of the year in small villages in England with a few like-minded artists, painting landscape and rural genre scenes. His most characteristic pieces include children and animals and combine careful underlying drawing with painterly surfaces and sensitive colour. 'An October Morning' (1885, corporation of London, Barbican) shows the beach and pier at Walberswick, Suffolk, and 'Cherry Ripe' (exh. Institute of Painters in Oil Colours, London, 1889-90; Ulster Museum, Belfast), carefully put together from preparatory sketches and even a photograph, is set in the High Street at Rye, Sussex. Although he worked in remote rural areas, Osborne did not isolate himself. He made regular visits to the London galleries and sent work to exhibitions in London, Liverpool, and Birmingham. Throughout this time he was also actively involved in Dublin life. From 1877 he exhibited annually with the Royal Hibernian Academy and became an academician in 1886. 
In the early 1890s family circumstances obliged Osborne to spend more time in Ireland. He lived at 5 Castlewood Avenue and, from 1895, had a large studio at 7 St Stephen's Green. He began to paint Dublin street life, especially the area of old Dublin around St Patrick's Cathedral, as in 'Life in the Streets: Musicians' (1893, Hugh Lane Municipal Gallery of Modern Art, Dublin). 'In a Dublin Park: Light and Shade' (exh. RA, 1895; National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin) is confident, broadly painted, and shows a preoccupation with rendering the effects of light which owes something to French impressionism. 'The Lustre Jug' (exh. New English Art Club, 1901; National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin) is even more adventurous, the light from the small window being expressed in vivid touches of iridescent colour. 
During the last ten years of his life Osborne turned increasingly to portrait painting -- responsibility for the support of his parents and niece fell heavily on him, and portraits sold better than genre or landscape. One of his most successful was 'Mrs Noel Guinness and her Daughter Margaret' (1898, priv. coll., Dublin), which won him a bronze medal at the Paris Universal Exhibition in 1900. While he kept up his connections outside Ireland, he was an active member of the lively Dublin cultural life of the period. Most of his friends were artists and writers, but he had a much wider acquaintance, and was a welcome visitor in many houses. Tall and athletic-looking, he bicycled round Dublin and was a keen cricketer. In town he dressed like a lawyer or a doctor, though he allowed himself to look more like an artist in the country. He never married, prevented, apparently, by his family responsibilities and lack of money. Held in great affection by a wide circle of friends and venerated by his students, he was considered to be Ireland's most distinguished artist, with a growing reputation abroad, when he died of pneumonia on 24 April 1903 at 5 Castlewood Avenue. He was buried in Mount Jerome cemetery, Harold's Cross, Dublin. The National Gallery of Ireland and the Hugh Lane Municipal Gallery of Modern Art, both in Dublin, have his paintings and drawings in their collections; the National Gallery of Ireland also holds his annotated sketchbooks. 


@@@@@


doc= 35337


O'Shea, John Augustus (1839-1905), journalist, was born on 24 June 1839 at Nenagh, co. Tipperary. His father was John O'Shea, a well-known journalist, who worked for the 'Clonmel Guardian'. After receiving his elementary education in Nenagh, O'Shea was sent on 31 October 1856 to the Catholic University in Dublin. In 1859 he went to London to work as a journalist. He became a special correspondent to various newspapers. In 1860 he represented an American journal at the siege of Ancona, defended by the papal troops, and he described part of the Austro-Prussian War. Settling in Paris he acted for some time as a correspondent of Richard Pigott's 'Irishman' newspaper. For this paper, and for 'The Shamrock', a magazine also owned by Pigott, O'Shea wrote many of his best stories and sketches, especially the 'Memoirs of a White Cravat' (1868). His usual signature was the Irish Bohemian. In 1869 he joined the London 'Standard', and for twenty-five years was one of its most active special correspondents. He reported the Franco-Prussian War, when he was captured by the French and nearly executed as a spy. He was in the siege of Paris, and in Spain during the Carlist War of 1872, and reported the famine in Bengal in 1877. After leaving 'The Standard' he continued to write occasional articles in various English and Irish papers, including the 'Freeman's Journal' and the Dublin 'Evening Telegraph'. He was a long-standing member of the staff of 'The Universe', a Roman Catholic paper published in London. 
In 1885 he became president of the Southwark Irish Literary Club, an important centre for the Gaelic revival in London. He was injured in a traffic accident, which left him paralysed in his last years. He died in poverty at his home in Jeffreys Road, Clapham, on 13 March 1905, and was buried in Kensal Green Roman Catholic cemetery, on 18 March. He was twice married, his second wife and a daughter surviving him. 
O'Shea's admirable sense of style, and his dash and wit, distinguish his writing. His contemporaries described him as the last of the bohemian journalists. His books are, in the main, made up of articles written during his working life. He was a witty conversationalist and raconteur, and an admirable public speaker. 


@@@@@


doc= 35338


William Henry O'Shea (1840-1905). Then a cornet in the 18th hussars, O'Shea was the son of a Limerick-born solicitor who practised in Dublin, and a Catholic. They were married at Brighton on 23 January 1867. 


@@@@@


doc= 35339


Osler, Abraham Follett (1808-1903), glass manufacturer and meteorologist, was born on 22 March 1808, the eldest son of Thomas Osler, glass manufacturer of Birmingham, and his wife, Fanny Follett. From 1816 to 1824 he was educated at Hazelwood School, near Birmingham, which had been established on progressive lines by Thomas Wright Hill. On leaving school Osler joined his father's firm. In 1831 he took over its management and developed it with energy and ability, especially in the manufacture of fine decorative crystal glass. He married, in 1832, Mary, daughter of Thomas Clark, a Birmingham merchant and manufacturer. Three of their eight children survived him. 
In 1835 the Birmingham Philosophical Institution purchased a set of conventional meteorological instruments which required an observer to take readings at certain times. Osler, recognizing the need for reliable self-recording instruments, designed and constructed an apparatus combining a pressure plate anemometer to register wind speed, a vane to register wind direction, and a siphon gauge to register rainfall. The working parts of each instrument were linked to pencils which traced their records continuously on a sheet of paper moved along by clockwork. Earlier attempts to record the meteorological elements had been ineffective, whereas Osler's apparatus, erected at the institution (where it ran for sixty-five years) and publicized at the British Association meeting of 1837, was recognized to be both cheap and effective, its records of considerable value to meteorology. Examples were installed in the temporary magnetic observatories established in 1840 at St Helena, Toronto, and the Cape of Good Hope. Osler continued to improve it and versions of his anemometer were installed at Greenwich observatory in 1841, at London's Royal Exchange, at Plymouth, Inverness, and Liverpool observatory. When Robinson cup anemometers came into use, after 1846, Osler fitted a self-recording mechanism, thus obtaining mean hourly velocities as well as total mileage of wind. Later, records of pressure, direction, velocity, and rainfall were caused to register on the same timed chart. 
Encouraged and supported by the British Association, Osler developed the way in which the records were drawn, enhancing their characteristic features and pointing up the interaction of the meteorological elements. Thus he was able to show, by a series of monthly, quarterly, annual, and mean diurnal wind records, the average distribution of winds during each part of the day and for the different seasons. He also demonstrated the similar nature of the mean diurnal wind and temperature records, a feature which Sir David Brewster had independently discovered in 1840. Brewster paid tribute to Osler's labours, describing his results concerning anemometry as the most important since meteorology had taken its place among the physical sciences. 
Osler himself urged the establishment of observatories in different latitudes, which he believed would show the importance of the sun in creating atmospheric turbulence. To the British Association meeting in 1865 he showed the interesting and valuable results that could be obtained by close comparisons of air movements recorded at Wrottesley, Liverpool, and Birmingham. On the grand scale, he showed the relation of atmospheric disturbances to the trade wind systems and the effect of the earth's rotation on northerly and southerly wind flows. 
Other interests also occupied Osler: after delivering three lectures on chronometry and its history at the Birmingham Philosophical Institution in January 1842 he collected funds and set up a standard clock for Birmingham in front of the institution, and to regulate it he provided a transit instrument and an astronomical clock for its rooftop observatory. Subsequently, without telling anyone, he altered the clock from Birmingham to Greenwich time, and, though the difference was remarked on, one by one church and private clocks were adjusted to match it, while the rest of the country was keeping local time. Craniometry also attracted him: he devised and constructed an accurate instrument for brain measurements, which gave full-sized diagrams of the exact form of the skull. 
Osler was elected FRS in 1855. He retired from business in 1876, devoting himself thereafter to scientific pursuits. He was elected fellow of the Royal Meteorological Society only in 1882. Osler was a generous benefactor to his native city, to which he presented a clock and bells, matching those on the law courts in London, for the new municipal buildings. His donations of $5000 to the Birmingham and Midland Institute, and a like sum to Mason's College, later Birmingham University, were anonymous. Osler died at his home, South Bank, Harborne Road, Edgbaston, on 26 April 1903, and was buried at Birmingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 35340


Osler, Sir William, baronet (1849-1919), physician, was born on 12 July 1849 at Bond Head, Tecumseh, Ontario, Canada, the sixth son and eighth child of the Revd Featherstone Lake Osler (1805-1895) and Ellen Free Pickton (1806-1906), daughter of a London merchant; both families were of Cornish origin. Featherstone Osler had spent several years in the Royal Navy before deciding to become an Anglican minister; he matriculated in 1833 at St Catharine's College, Cambridge, and following his graduation in 1836 he was ordained a deacon 'for the cure of souls in His Majesty's foreign possessions' and sent with his new bride as a missionary to Upper Canada. Although his initial appointment was for five years, the family stayed and thrived. Featherstone Osler was disappointed that none of his sons followed him into the ministry. However, they included a successful businessman, a lawyer, and a high-court judge. 
William Osler, known as Willie, was originally destined for a career in the church. He was educated at the grammar school in Dundas, Ontario, whence the family had moved in 1857; at nearby Barrie grammar school; and, from January 1866, at Trinity College School, Weston. Although he was always a good student and became a prefect at Trinity, the most distinguishing trait to emerge from his schooldays was a strong proclivity for jokes and pranks which frequently got him into trouble and even led to his expulsion from school in Dundas. The sense of fun and mischief never left him. 
In 1867 Osler entered Trinity College, Toronto, where he came under the influence of two men who awakened his passion for natural history and encouraged his switch from divinity to medicine. The Revd W. A. Johnson (1816-1880), founder and warden of Trinity College, was an ardent field naturalist and microscopist; Dr James Bovell (1817-1880) was a devout medical practitioner and teacher at Trinity College and at the proprietary Toronto school of medicine. Under the guidance of these two local worthies, Osler acquired a taste for science. His early publications were on algae, parasites, and other natural historical topics. He also began acquiring medical skills by assisting Bovell and another local practitioner, and enrolled in the Toronto school of medicine. Bovell gave him free access to his fine personal library and encouraged Osler's fascination with gross and microscopic anatomy. 
In 1870 Bovell returned to the West Indies, where he eventually became ordained, and Osler went to the better medical school at McGill University, Montreal. There he became a favourite of his third formative teacher, Palmer Howard (1823-1889), professor of medicine. Howard fostered Osler's interest in pathology and, like Bovell, shared his private library with his young protege. Osler's thesis, now lost, analysed twenty post-mortem examinations, and included specimens and microscopic slides. It won Osler a prize, though his general academic record at McGill was good but not outstanding. He graduated MD CM from McGill in 1872. 
Encouraged by Howard and the other McGill medical faculty to aspire to a teaching career in Montreal, Osler left in July 1872 for what was to be a two-year postgraduate stay in Europe, financed by his brother. His initial plan was to study ophthalmology and to return as a specialist. He spent his first year in London, attending clinics at University College Hospital and St Thomas's Hospital, and studying physiology and pathology at University College and the Brown Institute with John Scott Burdon-Sanderson, whom he was eventually to succeed as regius professor of medicine at Oxford. His flirtation with ophthalmology ended on learning from Howard that three practitioners intended to set up in the speciality in Montreal. He declined an offer to return to McGill to teach materia medica. Instead he continued his study of pathology in Berlin and Vienna; back in Canada in 1874, he was offered a lectureship in the Institutes of Medicine at McGill. At the age of twenty-five, he was younger than some of his students. 
Osler spent a decade on the faculty of his alma mater. He taught physiology, histology, and pathology at the medical school, and parasitology at a local veterinary college; he attended patients on the smallpox ward at Montreal General Hospital and gradually developed a private practice. He also began to publish widely, mostly case reports, clinical lectures, or pathological observations. He made friends easily, especially with the students, whom he could formally counsel after 1877, when he was made registrar of the medical school. The following year he was elected attending physician at Montreal General; he celebrated his success by spending the summer in London, where he passed his membership of the Royal College of Physicians. He returned to London with Palmer Howard in 1881 for the Seventh International Medical Congress, which attracted most of the medical elites of Europe. In 1884 he went back to Germany, where medical thinking had been transformed by the work of Robert Koch and others on bacteriology. Osler was cautiously receptive of the germ theory, but his own approach to disease continued to be clinical and pathological. 
While in Germany, Osler was invited to apply for the chair of clinical medicine at the University of Pennsylvania in the USA. He was interviewed by the doyen of Philadelphia physicians, Silas Weir Mitchell, who happened to be in Europe also. Mitchell and Osler immediately recognized each other as kindred spirits, and Mitchell's enthusiastic recommendation smoothed the way for Osler's move to the conservative and inbred medical community in Philadelphia. It offered even more outlets than Montreal for a man of Osler's clubbable instincts, and Osler quickly became part of Philadelphia's medical and cultural life. He took an active interest in the fine historical collections in the library of the College of Physicians of Philadelphia, and regularly attended the meetings of several local and national medical societies. He had been elected president of the Canadian Medical Association during his last year in Montreal; his presidential address in 1885, entitled 'The growth of a profession', elaborated themes that were to preoccupy him for the rest of his life. These included the notions that solidarity within the medical profession was an unmitigated good, that patients had nothing to fear from a powerful, well-educated, and self-regulating profession, and that the true future of medicine lay in the wise application of science. Earlier that year Osler delivered the Goulstonian lectures to the Royal College of Physicians in London. He was elected a fellow of the college in 1883, his first eligible year. He chose as his subject malignant endocarditis, a fatal disease that lent itself to close analysis of both its clinical and pathological dimensions. He also worked on diseases of the blood, the nervous system, typhoid fever, and, a recurring topic of interest to him, pneumonia. 
During his Philadelphia years, Osler continued to perform frequent autopsies, but his skills as a clinical teacher also flourished. He was an excellent diagnostician with an admirable bedside manner and an ability to put patients at their ease. Although physically slight and possessed of an unimpressive, high-pitched voice, he nevertheless always commanded centre-stage in the ward or clinic. Medical students adored him, and he always had a few special favourites, whom he called his 'latchkeyers', students to whom he gave the key to his house so that they could use his personal library whenever they wanted. He was one of the founding members, in 1885, of the Association of American Physicians, devoted to improving the standards of medical practice and education. His private practice also grew, his consultations sometimes taking him as far afield as Chicago, Montreal, or Maine. Many of those he treated were doctors or medical students, who seemed to gravitate to him, but his patients included an increasing number of the rich and famous, including Walt Whitman, Sir Charles Tupper, and several occupants of the White House. 
If Osler hesitated before leaving Montreal for Philadelphia, he had no difficulty accepting the call to Johns Hopkins in Baltimore. Johns Hopkins University had been opened in 1876, but the medical school and hospital were delayed as the building plans were complicated and the money from the original bequest of Mr Hopkins began to run short. The medical facilities were eagerly anticipated, expected as they were to incorporate the latest scientific advances in both patient care and student education. Osler agreed in 1888 to let his name be put forward as physician-in-chief at the hospital and professor of medicine at the medical school. The formal offer was made in September 1888, which allowed Osler to wind down his Philadelphia commitments and move to Baltimore in May 1889, in time for the official opening of the hospital. The medical school still required further endowment; this was eventually secured, somewhat controversially, from four wealthy women who attached the condition that the medical school admit women medical students. Osler himself believed that nursing was a more suitable occupation for women, but he was prepared to accept them into the medical profession. One of the benefactors, Mary Garrett, further stipulated the even more daring requirement that the medical school admit no one without an undergraduate degree. Despite fears that few students, male or female, would turn up, the faculty agreed to the conditions, and the school was finally opened in 1893. 
During his first four years in Baltimore, Osler had relatively few duties. The routine work in the hospital being performed by his residents, he was free to devote more time to writing. The principal result was his 'Principles and Practice of Medicine', published to great acclaim in 1892. Dedicated to his early teachers, Johnson, Bovell, and Howard, it was one of the last single-authored textbooks to cover the whole of medicine. Although Osler later complained that effecting the revisions for subsequent editions was a millstone around his neck, it turned a national physician into an international figure. It was eventually translated into French, German, Spanish, and Chinese and went through eight editions during Osler's lifetime, the eighth (1912) with the help of Thomas McCrae, who continued to edit subsequent editions after Osler's death. 

'The Principles' finished, Osler promptly proposed marriage to Grace Linzee Revere Gross (1854-1928), the wealthy widow of a prominent Philadelphia surgeon whom Osler had cared for during his final illness. Their first child, born almost exactly nine months after their marriage on 7 May 1892, died shortly after birth. They doted on their only other child, Edward Revere (1895-1917), and never really recovered from his death in the First World War. Osler himself loved children and always had many young friends, who brought out his natural sense of fun and mischief. Although Revere was never a particularly studious boy, he and his father had a close relationship, cemented by frequent fishing trips together after Revere (dubbed Isaak Walton junior by Osler) developed a passion for angling. 
Osler's years at Johns Hopkins were the busiest of his life. Under his guidance there emerged the first organized clinical unit in the English-speaking world, containing the best features of English schools and German clinics. Osler was the most visible of the four foundation professors at the medical school who were famously commemorated in John Singer Sargent's painting, and the early success of the school owed much to his energy and clinical teaching. He continued to publish clinical papers at an astonishing rate: in 1897, for instance, he wrote articles 'inter alia' on mitral stenosis, gallstones, typhoid fever, tics, tuberculosis, cretinism, leprosy, pneumonia, and malaria. He was a frequent contributor to 'Johns Hopkins Hospital Bulletin' and 'Johns Hopkins Hospital Reports', periodicals with which he was intimately associated during his Hopkins years. At the same time he relied on his associates to keep things running smoothly during his frequent absences from Baltimore. These were occasioned by his extensive consulting practice, his increasing demand as a speaker, his active participation in national and international medical meetings, and his regular trips to Europe. He was an ardent spokesman on behalf of public health, devoting a good deal of time to efforts designed to control tuberculosis. 
As his income from royalties and his practice increased, Osler began to devote more time and money to building his library. He had developed a love for the writings of Sir Thomas Browne as a student, and he always made time each day for non-medical reading. This influenced his own literary style which, especially for his public addresses at commencements, medical gatherings, and the like, was memorably littered with allusions to great authors of the past. His collection of addresses aimed at medical students and young practitioners, 'Aequanimitas' (1904), achieved instant popularity, was twice reprinted with additional speeches, and long served as a formal presentation gift to graduates of many medical schools. Two such public occasions were especially controversial. Osler's Ingersol lecture at Harvard, delivered in May 1904 and entitled 'Science and immortality', argued for the separate realms of faith and science, before an audience which expected him to reveal the depths of his own Christian faith. Although Osler always quoted liberally from the 'Bible' when the situation demanded, he became an infrequent churchgoer in his later years, and carefully hid whatever faith he retained from public view. 
'The fixed period', his farewell address at Johns Hopkins in February 1905, inaccurately described Anthony Trollope's short story of the same name, and argued that men's best work is done before they reach forty and that perhaps it would be better for the world were they chloroformed at sixty. Although he later insisted that he was being light-hearted, the newspapers interpreted his speech as advocating forced euthanasia for the elderly. It was a curious way for a man in his sixth decade to end his American career and head for what he and his wife hoped would be a much quieter life at Oxford. 
As a Canadian, Osler had always felt at least half-English, and he valued his association with the Royal College of Physicians and the Royal Society, to which he was elected a fellow in 1898. He had already turned down an approach to go to the University of Edinburgh, but the regius chair of medicine vacated by J. S. Burdon-Sanderson's retirement was too tempting to a man visibly tired by the hectic pace of his later American years. The chair carried prestige but little else: a modest salary of $400 per annum and few duties, since Oxford did not possess a clinical school. Osler was especially pleased that the regius chair carried a studentship at Christ Church, college of John Locke and Robert Burton, two of his favourite authors. He was already financially secure, and although he could not avoid seeing some private patients he was more in need of leisure than income. 
In fact Osler's English years were busy, though more as a medical statesman and literary figure than an active clinician. He and Grace purchased a big Victorian house at 13 Norham Gardens (which Osler nicknamed the Open Arms, so frequently did they entertain). Books much preoccupied him, not only his own growing library, whose cataloguing he began, but the Bodleian Library of Oxford University, where he became an honorary curator, and the Oxford University Press, which he served as a delegate. He was in constant demand as an eponymous lecturer, delivering the Harveian lecture and Lumleian lectures to the Royal College of Physicians, the Linacre lecture at St John's College, Cambridge, and the Silliman lectures at Yale. The last, entitled 'The Growth of Modern Medicine', delivered in 1913 but not published until after his death, were typical in their historical focus and their concern with assessing the problems and prospects of modern medicine. 
Although he did much, Osler also learned how to say no. He declined the invitation to stand for parliament, to serve on the royal commission on vivisection, or to become president of several medical organizations. His testimony to the Haldane commission on medical education encouraged the eventual establishment of academic medical, surgical, and obstetric units in some British medical schools, and he was instrumental in founding, in 1906, the Association of Physicians of Great Britain and Ireland, modelled on the American group. At the same time he was suspicious of what was called the 'full time' system, whereby academic clinicians would devote themselves entirely to research and teaching. He developed a close relationship with his brother regius at Cambridge, Thomas Clifford Allbutt, and became the figurehead founding editor of the 'Quarterly Journal of Medicine'. He edited (also with the help of Thomas McCrae) a massive, seven-volume 'System of Medicine', and gently encouraged the development of science and medicine teaching at Oxford. No one was surprised when he was created a baronet in 1911. 
The First World War proved cataclysmic to the Oslers. Osler devoted a good deal of time to war work, both as a consultant to military hospitals and as a participant in relief agencies. The influx of friends and old students serving in the Canadian army medical corps kept the Open Arms busy. Osler's former surgical colleague at Johns Hopkins and future biographer, Harvey Cushing, joined an American volunteer medical unit; by coincidence, he was at Revere's bedside when Osler's son died of shrapnel wounds in August 1917. Osler consoled himself increasingly with the planned catalogue of his library, which he bequeathed to McGill. The catalogue was finished long after Osler's own death, by his nephew W. W. Francis, the first Osler librarian. 
Osler's seventieth birthday, in July 1919, was celebrated widely, and included the publication of a two-volume Festschrift and a special issue of 'Johns Hopkins Hospital Bulletin'. 'Pity I had not died -- fine obituary flavor', he remarked. His own health had begun to fail during the latter years of the war, as he became subject to frequent pulmonary infections. One of these later in 1919 turned into a pulmonary abscess, from which he died on 29 December at his home in Norham Gardens, Oxford. 
At the time of his death Osler was without doubt the most famous and revered Anglophone doctor in the world. His reputation persists, despite the fact that he made no fundamental discoveries. He was, in his own terms, a transmitter rather than a transformer. The persistence of the Osler myth may be attributed to at least three factors. 
First, Osler had a remarkably attractive personality. He had an infectious sense of humour, nowhere better seen than in the series of articles, some scurrilous, some semi-serious, which he published under the pseudonym Egerton Yorrick Davis, MD, Late US Army Surgeon. At the same time he could cope brilliantly with death and the dying, even if sometimes, like Uncle Toby, he whistled that he would not weep. Second, he was an outstanding teacher of clinical medicine who trained many of the academic leaders of the next generation. In an age when science increasingly influenced medical thinking and practice, Osler, with his commitment to the humanities, seemed to combine the science and art of medicine in a perfect mix. Third, he developed a graceful prose style which could make the commonplace sound profound, while espousing a vision of the medical profession which resonated with colleagues. Osler's vision of a literate, autonomous profession placing the needs of patients and of society more generally above those of self-interest seems idealistic and naive in the modern world; it still finds a ready audience. 


@@@@@


doc= 35341


O'Sullivan, Cornelius (1841-1907), brewing chemist, was born in Bandon, co. Cork, on 20 December 1841, one of three boys and four girls born to James O'Sullivan, merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth Morgan. His brief primary schooling was at Denny Holland's private school, followed by some years at Tommy Lordan's Cavendish School; he left the latter as a protest over indiscriminate corporal punishment. He attended evening classes of the Department of Science and Art in Bandon in 1861-2. On the strength of four prizes won at examinations in May 1862 he was awarded a scholarship at the Royal School of Mines, London. During his three-year course there he won further prizes, then briefly joined the teaching staff of the Royal College of Chemistry as a student assistant under Professor August Wilhelm von Hofmann. On Hofmann's appointment as professor of chemistry at Berlin University in 1865 O'Sullivan accompanied him as private assistant. 
The following year Hofmann's influence secured O'Sullivan the post of assistant brewer and chemist to Bass, Ratcliff, and Gretton Ltd of Burton upon Trent. He remained with them as head of the scientific and analytical department until his death. In 1875 the company established a laboratory department; O'Sullivan's brother James became his assistant in 1876. O'Sullivan was among the first chemists to apply scientific principles specifically to brewing, and was quick to realize the value of Pasteur's work to the industry. It was particularly his work on the products of the hydrolysis of starch by acids and by diastase to which he owed his reputation. The results of his work on starch were published in numerous papers, chiefly in the 'Journal of the Chemical Society', between 1872 and 1879. His important work included his rediscovery of maltose (following Dubrunfaut in 1847) and the effect of temperature in determining the character of the products of the action of diastase on starch; on the sugars and other carbohydrates of certain cereals and germinated grain (such as his detection and isolation of raffinose in barley); on the chemistry of different gums; and on the enzymes of yeast. 
On 2 February 1870 O'Sullivan married, at St Mary's Church, Derby, Edithe Nadin (died 1904) of Barrow Hall, Barrow upon Trent, near Derby, the daughter of Joseph Nadin, co-proprietor of Stanton colliery. They had three sons, the youngest of whom died in childhood, and a daughter. The family lived at 140 High Street, Burton upon Trent, until 1897 when they moved to number 148 which was built by the company. There O'Sullivan installed a fully equipped chemical laboratory. The family took a holiday in Bandon almost every year for over thirty years. O'Sullivan's interests included music, fishing, and, latterly, motoring. He belonged to and gave several lectures to the Burton Natural History and Archaeological Society. Elected a fellow then vice-president of the Chemical Society in 1876, he served on its council from 1882 to 1885 and was awarded its Longstaff medal in 1884 chiefly for his researches on the chemistry of the carbohydrates. He was an original member of the Institute of Chemistry, the Society of Chemical Industry, on whose publication committee he served for ten years, and the Institute of Brewing, of which he was elected an honorary member in 1893; he served on the council of each. In 1885 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. 
Edithe had long suffered from asthma, then from a weak heart, caused by rheumatic fever, from which she died in July 1904. O'Sullivan, after a bad attack of catarrhal jaundice, died at home on 8 January 1907. He was buried next to his wife and third son in Ballymodan graveyard near Bandon on 13 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 35342


Otte, Elise Charlotte (1818-1903), linguist and historian, was born in Copenhagen on 30 September 1818. Nothing is known of her father beyond his surname and the fact that he was Danish, nor of her mother save that she was English and called Mary Anne. In 1820 Elise's parents went to Santa Cruz in the Danish West Indies, where her father died. Her mother returned to Copenhagen, where she met the English philologist Benjamin Thorpe who was studying in Denmark. She married Thorpe and they set up home with Elise in England. Thorpe taught Elise several modern languages and from a very early age she knew enough Anglo-Saxon and Icelandic to help him in his work. Edmund Gosse paints a particularly unattractive picture of Thorpe, 'a pedant of the narrowest description, and a captious taskmaster' whose 'demands upon his young stepdaughter's time and labour became more than her patience could endure' (Gosse, 15). According to him it was to escape Thorpe's tyranny that Miss Otte in 1840 fled secretly to Boston, Massachusetts. Gosse's picture of Thorpe is qualified by E. S. Day, of whose family Miss Otte was a long-standing friend (Day, 83). Whatever the cause, Miss Otte went to Boston to teach in a family. She became interested in the transcendental movement and was invited to join the Brook Farm experiment, but declined. Instead she turned to science and attended lectures on geology, physiology, and anatomy at Harvard. She then moved to Europe and settled at Frankfurt in the family of a professor for whom she translated English scientific monographs into German. After returning to England she resumed her work with her stepfather, whom she helped to prepare his translation of the elder or poetic 'Edda', 'Edda Saemundar hinns Froda' (1866). According to Gosse she again found 'the bondage intolerable', and in 1849 went to St Andrews, to the family of Professor George Edward Day, for whom she translated scientific works and who helped her with the scientific aspects of her published translations. In 1863 she moved with Day and his wife to Torquay, and she helped to nurse Day during his final illness. 
In 1872, after Day's death, Miss Otte moved to London, where she wrote for scientific periodicals and published literary works. Her 'Scandinavian History' (1874), proved popular and was reprinted many times as 'Norway, Sweden and Denmark' until as late as 1939. It and 'Denmark and Iceland' (1881) show careful scholarship and are based on primary and secondary sources in several languages. Contemporary reviewers, knowing them to be by a woman, felt them too serious, and in 1912 Gosse remarked that she never acquired ease in literary expression ('DNB'). To a later reader, however, her style seems at once authoritative and pleasingly direct. She is entirely at ease with Scandinavian terms and writes with the lucid sparseness characteristic of good Scandinavian prose. Her loyalty to Scandinavia and her refusal to conform to feminine stereotypes come across forcefully in her scathing treatment of Queen Kristina and her meddlesome mother. She compiled grammars of Danish (1884) and of Swedish (1884) and textbooks for students of German (1859) and Danish (1879). In addition she translated from the German works by Alexander von Humboldt ('Views of Nature', 1850, and 'Cosmos', 5 vols., 1849-58), Reinhold Pauli ('Pictures of Old England', 1861), and J. M. Lappenberg ('A History of England under the Anglo-Saxon Kings', 1881); and from the French a work on natural history by Quatrefages de Breau ('The Rambles of a Naturalist on the Coast of Spain, France and Sicily', 1857). The influence of her stepfather was ever present in her work: her translation of Pauli's work was dedicated to him and her edition of Lappenberg's work was a revision of Thorpe's earlier translation. Her translations of complex works in several academic disciplines represent a considerable intellectual achievement. Gosse considered her one of the most learned women of her time, whose erudition showed best in her 'copious and marvellously illuminating' conversation (Gosse, 15). For many years she was incapacitated by pain caused by curvature of the spine. She died unmarried at her home, 160 Sheen Road, Richmond, Surrey, on 20 December 1903. 


@@@@@


doc= 35343


Ottley, Sir Charles Langdale (1858-1932), naval officer, was born at Richmond, Yorkshire, on 8 February 1858, the seventh son of Lawrence Ottley (1808-1861), rector of Richmond and canon of Ripon, and his wife, Elizabeth, the daughter of John Bickersteth, rector of Sapcote, Leicestershire, and the sister of Robert Bickersteth, bishop of Ripon. Robert Lawrence Ottley, canon of Christ Church, Oxford, was his elder brother. He entered the Royal Navy in 1871, and in 1877 was serving as a midshipman in the screw corvette 'Amethyst', when in company with the 'Shah' she engaged the rebel Peruvian warship 'Huascar' off the coast of Peru. He gained accelerated promotion to lieutenant in 1879 by obtaining first-class certificates in all his examinations, and in 1882, as lieutenant of the 'Monarch', under Captain George Tryon, was present at the bombardment of Alexandria. Later in that year he returned home in order to qualify as a torpedo officer, and while serving in the 'Vernon' he displayed marked technical ability by devising a successful automatic mooring gear for submarine mines. In 1884-6 he was torpedo lieutenant of Rear-Admiral Tryon's flagship, the 'Nelson', on the Australia station; he was later appointed torpedo lieutenant of the 'Camperdown' and afterwards of the 'Victoria', flagships of the commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean, Admiral Sir Anthony Hoskins, who was later relieved by Vice-Admiral Tryon. Ottley was promoted commander in June 1892, but remained in the ship in that rank as executive officer until early in 1893, when he returned home to become commander of the 'Vernon' for two and a half years. In 1892 he married Kathleen Margaret, the daughter of Colonel Alexander Stewart, Royal Artillery; their son died of wounds in 1914. He resumed sea service in 1897, in command of the sloop 'Nymphe' in the Mediterranean, and was employed chiefly as senior naval officer at Port Said (1897) and at Constantinople (1898). 
Ottley relinquished command of the 'Nymphe' on his promotion to captain in January 1899, and was then appointed naval attache to various British embassies; he acted in that capacity during the next five years in Washington, Rome, Tokyo, St Petersburg, and Paris, thereby gaining unique knowledge and experience of foreign navies and foreign policy. Towards the end of his service as naval attache he contemplated adopting a political career, and he was chosen in 1903 as prospective Conservative candidate for Pembroke Boroughs. But his special qualifications led to his appointment in 1904 to the staff of the recently established committee of imperial defence, and in 1905 to his selection, although a comparatively junior captain, to succeed Rear-Admiral Prince Louis of Battenberg (afterwards Louis Mountbatten, first marquess of Milford Haven) as director of naval intelligence, then the most important post, other than membership of the board, in the Admiralty; he then abandoned his parliamentary ambitions. This appointment made Ottley a key member of Admiral Sir John Fisher's inner planning elite. As director of naval intelligence he sat on a number of important commissions, notably that of 1906 on war risks to shipping. He favoured an amphibious strategy, and worked to secure the adoption of naval plans by the army. Fisher considered him a genius, but did not take him into his innermost confidence, on account of his well-known loquacity. Ottley opposed Fisher on the key issue of a naval staff, and by 1908 was arguing in private, to Arthur Balfour, that Fisher should be sacrificed to save his naval reforms. 
In 1907 Ottley was the principal naval delegate to the second Peace Conference at The Hague, where he took a leading part in drawing up the convention limiting the use of submarine mines, to the development of which he had devoted so much ingenuity many years earlier. In that same year, when the original secretary of the committee of imperial defence, Sir George Clarke (afterwards Lord Sydenham), relinquished that office, owing chiefly to differences of view which had arisen between him and the first sea lord, Sir John Fisher, Ottley was selected, largely at Fisher's insistence, to relieve him. In 1908 he was a delegate to the International Maritime Conference of London, and accepted the dangerous limits that it placed on the use of Britain's greatest weapon, the economic blockade. He reached the top of the captains' list in that year, but not having served at sea in that rank he was automatically placed on the retired list on promotion to rear-admiral (1908). However, he remained secretary to the committee of imperial defence until February 1912, when he had completed five years in office. Those five years, largely as a result of Ottley's unostentatious but skilful organization and guidance, allied to the efforts of his deputy, and later successor, Captain Maurice Hankey RM, formed the most important period in the development of the committee into a highly efficient instrument for the co-ordination of the nation's resources and forces in the preparation for, and conduct of, a total war. 
Having lost the confidence of Fisher over economic warfare and other issues, Ottley left office in 1912 to take up the post of director of Armstrong, Whitworth & Co., of Newcastle upon Tyne. Their offer was financially very attractive, and, despite the best efforts of the prime minister, Asquith, the Treasury refused to match it. Churchill considered Ottley the best choice as his first chief of naval staff in October 1911, and in August 1912 tried to get the Treasury to meet his terms for leaving Armstrong Whitworth, where he was unhappy and ashamed of himself for having left the public service. Once again, nothing came of this approach, and Ottley remained with Armstrong Whitworth, taking an active part in the superintendence of that company's output of war material, particularly after the outbreak of war in 1914. He worked closely with the Admiralty over the Turkish battleship and dockyard contract of 1913. 
On retirement from office in 1912, Ottley made his home at Coruanan, Fort William, Inverness-shire. He was appointed MVO in 1903, CB in 1911, and KCMG in 1907 for his services at The Hague Peace Conference. He retired from the board of Armstrongs in 1926 on the post-war reconstruction of the company when it amalgamated with Vickers after a financial crisis. A few days before his death he moved from Coruanan to Creag, Tarbert, Argyll, where he died on 24 September 1932. He was a man of much charm and no little literary ability, a good linguist, and a fluent, convincing, and persuasive speaker. Despite his many talents, however, he was not a leader. He made the committee of imperial defence a highly effective secretariat and co-ordinating body, but never achieved the influence or eminence of his successor. He was, like many of his contemporaries, exploited to further the aims of Lord Fisher, and then discarded when he was of no further use. 


@@@@@


doc= 35344


Ouless, Walter William (1848-1933), portrait painter, was born at St Helier, Jersey, on 21 September 1848, the third son of Philip John Ouless (1817-1885), marine painter, and his wife, Caroline Marguette Savage. He was educated at Victoria College, Jersey, and moved to London in 1864, entering the Royal Academy Schools the following year, at sixteen. In 1869, when he was not yet twenty-one, he made his first appearance at a Royal Academy exhibition, with two subject pictures, 'Home Again' and 'A Tender Passage'. He continued to exhibit regularly until 1928, when he was represented by a portrait of Sir Arthur Keith, which is now in the Royal College of Surgeons together with his portrait of Lord Lister, painted in 1897. He was elected ARA in 1877, before he was thirty, and RA in 1881, and in 1924 he became a senior academician. 
At the beginning of his career Ouless painted subject pictures, and it was on the advice of Sir J. E. Millais that he concentrated on portraiture. Ouless was quickly recognized as one of the most trustworthy portrait painters of the day, sure of getting a good and sympathetic likeness with a high degree of technical skill. At the same time his earlier practice in figure composition enabled him to give to his portraits a broadly pictorial effect combined with veracity in detail. In his academy notes of 1875 Ruskin observed: 'Mr Ouless has adopted from Mr Millais what was deserving of imitation, and has used the skill he has learned to better ends. All his portraits here are vigorous and interesting' (Ruskin, 30-31). He proceeded to build an immensely successful career as a society portraitist, though he has been described as a 'competent' artist rather than an 'inspired' one (Wood). 
One of Ouless's earliest portraits was of Charles Darwin, painted for the family in 1875. Other commissions soon followed, notably of Cardinal Newman (1880-81), for the Oratory in Birmingham, and Sir Frederick Roberts (1882), for the mess at Woolwich. He painted both Edward VIII (1900) and George V (1905) as prince of Wales, the latter for Lincoln's Inn. Among the other distinguished people who sat for him was Cardinal Manning (1888), a painting destroyed by enemy action in 1940, but represented by a replica at the Oratory, Birmingham. The portraits by Ouless in the National Portrait Gallery include 'John Bright' (1879), 'John Morley' (1891), and 'Thomas Hardy' (1922). Ouless painted a self-portrait for the Uffizi Gallery, Florence, which was exhibited at the academy in 1918. In his later years he painted a few landscapes, mostly in the county of Dorset. 
Ouless was for a long time active on the council of the Royal Academy. He was a governor of Dulwich College, and occupied himself a good deal with the affairs of the Dulwich Picture Gallery, which he helped to rehang. For many years he devoted much time to the Artists' General Benevolent Institution, both as honorary secretary and vice-president. Personally he was much liked, although during his later years partial deafness kept him from mixing much in general society. 'No man could have had a more loyal and steadfast friend, nor wiser counsellor, while he also possessed the charming courtesy of a great gentleman' ('The Times', 1 Jan 1934). 
Ouless was a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur and a member of the order of Leopold, and during his long life he received gold and silver medals for his work at Berlin, Paris, Munich, and Vienna. On 6 November 1878 he married Lucy Maitland (1847/8-1931), daughter of Thomas King Chambers MD, honorary physician to the prince of Wales, of Shrubs Hill House, Sunningdale. The eldest of their three daughters was Catherine Ouless ('b'. 1879), the landscape and portrait painter. He died after a short illness at his home, 12 Bryanston Square, London, on 25 December 1933. 


@@@@@


doc= 35345


Overton, John Henry (1835-1903), Church of England clergyman and ecclesiastical historian, born at Louth, Lincolnshire, on 4 January 1835, was only son of Francis Overton, surgeon, of Louth, a man of learning and of studious habits, and his wife, Helen Martha, daughter of Major John Booth of Louth. Educated at Louth grammar school (1842-5) and at a private school at Laleham, Middlesex, under the Revd John Buckland, Overton went to Rugby School in February 1849, from where he obtained an open scholarship at Lincoln College, Oxford. He gained a first class in classical moderations in 1855 and a third in the final classical school in 1857 (BA 1858, MA 1860), was captain of his college boat club, rowed stroke of its eight, was a cricketer and throughout his life retained a keen interest in the game, and in his later years was a keen golfer. 
In 1858 Overton was ordained to the curacy of Quedgeley, Gloucestershire, and in 1860 was presented by J. L. Fytche, a friend of his father, to the vicarage of Legbourne, Lincolnshire. While there he took pupils and studied English church history, specially of the eighteenth century. On 17 July 1862 he married Marianne Ludlam, daughter of John Allott of Hague Hall, Yorkshire, and rector of Maltby, Lincolnshire; she survived him with one daughter. 
In 1878, in conjunction with his college friend Charles John Abbey, rector of Checkendon, Oxfordshire, Overton published 'The English Church in the Eighteenth Century' (2 vols.), intended as a review of 'different features in the religion and church history of England' during that period rather than as 'a regular history' ('The English Church in the Eighteenth Century', 2nd edn, 1887). It was well received and ranked high among English church histories; an abridged one-volume edition was published in 1887. 
Overton was collated to a prebend in Lincoln Cathedral by Bishop Christopher Wordsworth in 1879, and in 1883, on Gladstone's recommendation, was presented by the crown to the rectory of Epworth, Lincolnshire, the birthplace of John Wesley, in whose career he took a warm interest. While at Epworth he was rural dean of Axholme. In 1889 he was made honorary DD of Edinburgh University. From 1892 to 1898 he was proctor for the clergy in convocation, and took an active part in its proceedings, speaking with weight and judgement. In 1898 he was presented by the dean and chapter of Lincoln to the rectory of Gumley, near Market Harborough, Leicestershire, and represented the chapter in convocation. He was a frequent and popular speaker at church congresses. In 1901 he was a select preacher at Oxford, and from 1902 Birkbeck lecturer at Trinity College, Cambridge. Early in 1903 Dr Carr Glyn, the bishop of Peterborough, made him a residentiary canon of his cathedral; he was installed on 12 February and, as the canonry was of small value, retained his rectory. He kept one period of residence at Peterborough, but did not live to inhabit his prebendal house. A high-churchman and member of the English Church Union, he appreciated the views of those who differed from him. He was an excellent parish priest, and was courteous, good-tempered, and humorous. 
Overton died at Gumley rectory, Leicestershire on 17 September 1903. He was buried in the churchyard of the parish church of Skidbrook, near Louth, where many of his family had been interred. As memorials, a brass tablet was placed in Epworth parish church by the parishioners, a stained-glass window and a reredos in Skidbrook church, and a window in the chapter house of Lincoln Cathedral. 
As a historian and a biographer Overton specialized in the history of the Church of England from the mid-seventeenth century into the mid-nineteenth century. His most important work was 'The English Church in the Eighteenth Century', which has maintained an important place in the historical literature, and which can be read as an ecclesiastical analogue to the 'History of English Thought in the Eighteenth Century' by Leslie Stephen, which appeared two years earlier in 1876. The pioneering work of Abbey and Overton retains much which is of enduring value to scholars of the eighteenth-century church. 
Much of Overton's work has strong associations with his own Lincolnshire connections, including his membership of Lincoln College, Oxford. This is most apparent in his admiring biography 'John Wesley', which appeared in the 'Leaders of Religion' series in 1891. It is also discernible in his 'Life of Christopher Wordsworth, Bishop of Lincoln' (1888; 2nd rev. edn, 1890), which he was invited to write alongside the bishop's daughter, Elizabeth Wordsworth, principal of Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford. Similarly, 'John Hannah, a Clerical Study' (1890), which he acknowledged to be something of a study in high-church clerical failure, has strong associations with Lincolnshire and Lincoln College. He also wrote a volume entitled 'Biographical Notices of the Bishops of Lincoln, from Remigius to Wordsworth' with another canon of Lincoln, George Cresley Perry, which, although set up by the printer in 1900, did not finally appear in print until 1972. Although Overton does not directly refer to his work, it is interesting that Mark Pattison, a fellow of Lincoln when Overton and Abbey were undergraduates, should have developed his own interests in the eighteenth-century church in his contribution to 'Essays and Reviews' (1860). 
There is certainly an air of apologetic in much of Overton's writing, and his frequently sympathetic understanding of eighteenth-century Anglican theology acted as an implicit antidote to elements of the criticism of the evolving status of revealed religion as discussed in the writings of Pattison and Stephen. His high-churchmanship, which informed much of his work in 'The English Church in the Eighteenth Century' and a great deal of his appreciation of Wesley's career, came to the fore in two of his more openly apologetic studies, 'William Law: Nonjuror and Mystic' (1881) and 'The Nonjurors: their Lives, Principles and Writings' (1902). He also provided a useful edition of Law's devotional classic, 'A Serious Call', for the 'English Theological Library' in 1898. His high-church piety was also reflected in the short character sketches which were posthumously published as 'Some Post-Reformation Saints' (1905). Overton was also sympathetic to the aims and ideals of the earlier generations of evangelicals, and this appreciation informed both the whole of his useful, if too biographical, study 'The Evangelical Revival in the Eighteenth Century' (1886) and his otherwise rather high-church-inclined surveys 'The English Church in the Nineteenth Century' (1894) and 'The Anglican Revival' (1897). Overton saw the high-church and the evangelical movements as complementary wings in the Church of England; his real suspicions were of latitudinarian and liberal churchmanship, as is demonstrated in much of the argument of 'Life in the English Church, 1660-1714' (1885), a work which began life as lectures to his Wednesday evening congregation at Epworth, and which has the directness of approach one would expect of it. His strong sense of the specifically English nature of the Church of England pervades his study 'The Church in England' (2 vols., 1897), which covered the inextricably linked life of the church in national life from its origin in St Augustine's mission to his own time. His strongly Anglican style of churchmanship and ecclesiology was reflected in a sermon repudiating the papal denial of Anglican orders, which was published in Lincoln at the request of his bishop as 'Anglican Orders' (1896). 
At his death Overton left unpublished 'A history of the English church from the accession of George I to the end of the eighteenth century', which was edited and completed by the Revd Frederic Relton in 1906. In his preface to this last work, Relton defined Overton's approach in terms which suggest the central defect of his work for other scholars: 'Canon Overton, moreover, had not, in this instance, departed from his favourite method of writing history, namely, that of dealing with the lives of the great men of the time rather than writing a consecutive narrative of events and tendencies' (F. Relton, 'Preface' to J. H. Overton, 'English Church from George I', 1906, ix-x). At times, Overton's biographical instincts tended towards the hagiographical, especially when he was writing about high-churchmen or pioneering evangelicals. He contributed many memoirs of divines to the 'Dictionary of National Biography', and wrote for the 'Dictionary of Hymnology' and the 'Church Quarterly Review', and other periodicals. 


@@@@@


doc= 35346


Owen, Sir (Arthur) David Kemp (1904-1970), international civil servant, was born at Pontypool, Monmouthshire, on 26 November 1904, the eldest son of the Revd Edward Owen, Baptist minister, of Pontypool, and his wife, Gertrude Louisa, 'nee' Kemp. He was educated at Leeds grammar school and the University of Leeds, from which he received an honours degree in economics (1926) and the master of commerce degree (1929), the latter for a thesis, 'The problem of juvenile unemployment'. Between his first and second degrees he was assistant lecturer in economics at Huddersfield Technical College. He was then director of the Sheffield social survey committee from 1929 to 1933, and was responsible for producing reports on unemployment, the standard of living, and housing in Sheffield. This work was followed by appointments as secretary of the civic research division of political and economic planning (PEP) (1933-6), co-director of the Pilgrim Trust unemployment inquiry (1936-7), and Stevenson lecturer in citizenship at the University of Glasgow (1937-40). In 1940 he published his survey, 'The British Social Services'. Meanwhile, on 11 November 1933 he had married Elizabeth Joyce Morgan, daughter of the Revd E. H. Morgan, Methodist minister. They had one son and one daughter. 
In 1941 Owen relinquished the post of general secretary of PEP, to which he had been appointed in the previous year, to become personal assistant to the lord privy seal, Sir Stafford Cripps, on his mission to India. He remained with Cripps following the latter's transfer to the Ministry of Aircraft Production, but in 1944 was transferred to the reconstruction department of the Foreign Office, where he served as officer in charge of League of Nations affairs. He was a member of the United Kingdom delegation to the conference on international organization at San Francisco in 1945, and when the preparatory commission of the United Nations was being organized in London in the summer of 1945, he joined the United Nations staff as its first recruit, in the capacity of deputy executive secretary of the preparatory commission. 
When the preparatory commission gave way to the United Nations itself and the organization moved to New York in early 1946, Owen was appointed assistant secretary-general in charge of economic affairs, one of the eight top officials of the organization. In the late 1940s the organization became increasingly concerned with economic development, and in August 1951 Owen became the first executive chairman of the Technical Assistance Board, a position which he retained until in January 1966 the Expanded Programme of the Technical Assistance Board merged with the United Nations Development Fund to form the United Nations Development Programme. He became co-administrator of the programme with Paul G. Hoffman, a post which he retained until his retirement from the United Nations service in 1969. Meanwhile, his first marriage having ended in divorce, in 1950 he married Elisabeth Elsa Miller, the adopted daughter of Frieda Segelke Miller, American labour official and director of the women's bureau of the US department of labor (1944-53). They had two sons. 
Throughout his career Owen was essentially a pioneer in new areas of public service, first on the national and later on the international level. He relished new challenges, and his enquiring mind and his skill as a pragmatic and informal administrator admirably equipped him to meet them. He was a non-doctrinaire socialist of the old school with a quiet faith in the capacity of humanity to improve its condition and an ardent desire to help it to do so. His work in social and economic planning in the post-depression years and his service with Sir Stafford Cripps during the war led naturally to strong convictions about the need for international co-operation, convictions upon which he acted in the most challenging circumstances when helping to build and operate the institutional structure of the United Nations. He was one of the younger architects of the new world organization from San Francisco and thenceforth, and had an almost unique record of being associated with the creation of successive new branches on the economic side -- first the economic department itself and its regional economic commissions, then the Technical Assistance Board, and finally the fully fledged United Nations Development Programme, which became by far the largest and most far-flung operation of the United Nations. 
Owen was an idealist and enthusiast of a practical and realistic kind. In the emergent international civil service he found a perfect setting for his convictions. He wrote: 'It is, after all, a fine thing to belong to a service which, whatever its failings and frustrations, is engaged in the practical business of trying to establish more effective forms of international co-operation in the pursuit of peace and human well-being.' His concept of the United Nations was that of an activist, although he was very much aware of the shortcomings and difficulties of the world organization. 'It remains to be seen', he wrote in 1966, 'whether we can rise to the historic occasion or whether we will find ourselves stagnating with modest usefulness in the margin of great events'. 
Owen was modest, unpretentious, quick-witted, and of an enquiring turn of mind. Small in stature, with the humour and a touch of the accent of his native Wales, he was a dominant influence in the formative years of the United Nations. His kindness, consideration, and interest in the careers of his colleagues, especially the young and intelligent, greatly influenced the early stages of organization. Later, when he was responsible for setting up the worldwide network of resident representatives of the technical assistance programme, which became the basis of the development programme, his ability to find new and promising recruits had a major effect on the development of the United Nations. His method of leadership was very personal. He was a voracious reader, which prevented him from becoming stale or bureaucratic. He never lost the simplicity and natural friendliness of his youth and was a much beloved colleague. 
On his retirement from the United Nations service, Owen was appointed secretary-general of the International Planned Parenthood Federation, in succession to Sir Colville Deverell. His tenure was short-lived, as he died at St Thomas's Hospital, London, on 29 June 1970, following a heart attack, very shortly after being appointed KCMG. He had also received honorary doctorates from the universities of Leeds (1954) and Wales (1969). He was survived by his second wife, Elisabeth, and his four children. 
Brian Urquhart', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35347


Owen, John (1854-1926), bishop of St David's, was born at Ysgubor Wen, in the parish of Llanengan, Caernarvonshire, on 24 August 1854. His father, Griffith Owen (died 1893), a weaver who prospered and became a wool merchant, was a Calvinistic Methodist and for many years a deacon of Bwlch chapel at Llanengan. Though he never deviated from his own loyalties, he watched his son's career as an Anglican with great pride. Owen's mother, Ann Jones from Aberdaron, could not easily reconcile herself to her son joining the church, nor could she wholly accept the fact that he married an English wife. Owen and his sister grew up in an intensely religious home; as a boy, he was learned beyond his years, and showed a particular liking for mathematics. His early education at the British School at Llanengan was extended at Botwnnog grammar school (1865-9) under a sympathetic headmaster (known to the boys as Mr Jenkin) who appointed him, when he was only fifteen, as assistant master, largely so that he could prepare for entry to university. In 1872 he was awarded a mathematical scholarship at Jesus College, Oxford, where he read classics and mathematics, gaining a second class in classical moderations (1873) and in mathematical moderations (1874). To his great disappointment, he was again placed in the second class in the final school of mathematics, and he began to read for 'literae humaniores', hoping for a first, but he did not sit the examinations. 
As a pupil at Botwnnog, Owen was impressed by the fact that his headmaster, respecting his family background, did not oblige him to attend the parish church. When he became a teacher there he decided, in gratitude, to go to church regularly with the boys. Local Welsh clerics (notably James Rowland, rector of Botwnnog) fostered his interest, and at Oxford he came under the influence of A. M. W. Christopher (1820-1913), rector of St Aldates. He was drawn towards ordination, but he decided to teach for a few years until he was sure of his vocation. He was assistant master at Appleby grammar school in Westmorland from 1877 to 1879. There he met Amelia ('b'. 1861/2), third daughter of Joseph Longstaff of Appleby; they were married on 4 January 1882. They had four sons and six daughters. 
In 1879 Owen was persuaded to apply for the post of professor of Welsh at St David's College, Lampeter, and he committed himself in two respects: if appointed he 'would of course make a special study of Welsh', and he would hope to be ordained before, or soon after, joining the college. At that stage, much to his regret, Welsh was not included in the degree structure, but Owen combined his chair with some responsibility for teaching classics. He was confirmed and ordained deacon in 1879, and priest in 1880. At Lampeter he began to emerge as a publicist, engaging for the first time in controversy over the vexed question of disestablishment. After a brief tenure he was appointed warden of Llandovery in 1885, where his role was more overtly to encourage the Welsh traditions of that college. It was a comparatively small school with some eighty boys, and he made it his concern to attract more pupils and to recruit new staff on a generous scale. Before his work had had time to mature he was drawn away to new responsibilities. 
In 1889 Alfred Edwards, newly appointed as bishop of St Asaph, invited him to join him as dean -- the 'Controversial Dean of a Militant Bishop', as he was to be described in the 'Liverpool Mercury' (quoted in Owen, 'Early Life', 88). They had to face three major crises: the problem of tithes, the difficulties arising from changes in local government, especially in education, and the threat of disestablishment. Edwards regarded Dean Owen as his indispensable aide in the battle over tithes. As the market price of some cereals fell, the ability of many tenant farmers to pay tithes was reduced; as the value of tithe charges dropped, the clergy grew more impoverished. Resentment among Welsh nonconformists obliged to pay tithes to the church, and Welsh tenant farmers obliged to pay tithes to a church they regarded as English, exacerbated the conflict, especially in north Wales. Legal action taken by individual clerics against individual tenant farmers inflamed local feelings. 
The presentation of a rational case and of statistical material, and the need to conduct the controversy with diplomacy in the current atmosphere of hostility and violence, demanded skills which Owen had in abundance. Through letters to 'The Times' in the summer of 1890 he sought to win over opinion in England. Through public debate with the leader of opposition to tithes, Thomas Gee of Denbigh, conducted in August and September 1890, in Gee's Welsh newspaper, 'Baner ac Amserau Cymru', he sought to divorce the vexed issue of tithes from the major political issue of disestablishment. The remedy was found in the 'Tithe-Rent Charge Recovery Act' of 1891 which removed the necessity for open hostility between cleric and tenant farmer by placing the liability for tithe upon the landlord, not upon the tenant. Bishop Edwards was deeply involved in the political negotiations which produced this act, but he recognized the indispensable help of his dean. 
At St Asaph, Owen became increasingly involved in education. Despite some reservations, he gave a warm welcome to the 'Welsh Intermediate Education Act' of 1889. Bishop Edwards castigated it as 'saturated with rigid undenominationalism' (Edwards, 178), but Owen argued persuasively and urged his fellow Anglicans to accept it. The act established a joint education committee for each Welsh county and a central committee for Wales and Monmouthshire. Owen was appointed to the Flintshire committee and to the central body. There he played a significant part in the development of the Central Welsh Board to supervise inspection and examinations in intermediate schools. His colleagues nominated him to serve on the charter committee of the University of Wales, established in November 1891, and that gave a new emphasis to his interest in higher education, and a new platform from which to press the claims of St David's College. 
In 1892 Owen returned to Lampeter as principal, an office he was to hold until he became bishop of St David's in 1897. There his income was augmented by the rectory of Llangeler, Carmarthenshire, a sinecure in the gift of the college. Bishop Edwards ensured that the close association between himself and the new principal should not be broken by appointing him to a residentiary canonry at St Asaph. In 1893 Owen fought a sustained battle to bring St David's College into the University of Wales. The plans for the creation of that university embraced the colleges at Aberystwyth, Bangor, and Cardiff. He was anxious that Lampeter should be included. It was already a college conferring degrees under royal charter and, for him, it was unthinkable that it should be excluded from the new university. By contrast, the advocates of the university were clear that Bishop Burgess's original plan for Lampeter had been to found a seminary in which young men could be trained for the ministry, and that identified it as a theological college which must stand as any other denominational college in relation to the new university. In January he argued his case strenuously but unsuccessfully in the charter committee. In June he petitioned the privy council, and his petition was rejected. In the autumn his influence lay behind a debate in the House of Lords, where Lampeter's case was upheld. But Gladstone refused to be moved, and the University of Wales was given its royal charter, with St David's firmly excluded. Shrugging off his defeat, Owen secured in 1896 a new charter for Lampeter which established a college council with wide powers, and which re-affirmed that the college had been founded 'to receive and educate any person whatsoever, whether destined for Holy Orders or not'. 
In the last years of the century, two threats to Welsh Anglicans were checked. In 1893 H. H. Asquith introduced a 'Suspensory Bill' which would have prevented the creation of any new vested interests in the Welsh dioceses. In effect, on any future disestablishment, appointments made during the interim would not have counted for any compensation. Owen was responsible for briefing Lord Randolph Churchill who spoke vehemently and effectively against the bill, which failed to secure a second reading. In 1894 Asquith went further and introduced a bill to disestablish the Welsh church. In the ensuing campaign Owen faced some difficult audiences but, as he acknowledged, opposition was always a greater stimulant to him than approval. In the event, Lord Rosebery's unexpected resignation removed the immediate danger. 
In January 1897 William Basil Jones, bishop of St David's, died and within six weeks John Owen had been named as his successor. The death of the dean of St David's and the appointment of a new dean delayed Owen's consecration until May. That was the beginning of a notable episcopate. The sheer size of St David's, the largest diocese in England and Wales, created problems for its diocesan. Bishop Jones, austere and aloof, had administered his diocese efficiently with the help of his suffragan, John Lloyd, consecrated bishop of Swansea in 1890. Lloyd continued to serve under Bishop Owen, who appointed as his successor Edward Latham Bevan of Brecon. From 1915 Bevan was largely responsible as bishop for Brecknockshire and Radnorshire. 
Sir John Llewellyn, one of the most active and forthright laymen in the diocese, welcoming Owen in Swansea, rejoiced that a cold withdrawn scholar should have been replaced by a man of warm sympathy. Free from controversy for a few vital years, Owen could concentrate on his diocese, getting to know his clergy and resolving a number of local problems. He renewed an earlier attempt to deal with clerical poverty, raising large sums of money, and setting (though not achieving) a target of a minimum stipend of $200. 
In April 1903 the bishop's palace at Abergwili was largely destroyed by fire. Bishop Owen and his family escaped, but it was a disaster which overshadowed his later years. The cost of rebuilding left him heavily in debt, and the immediate strain contributed to a marked decline in his health. Even while he was warden of Llandovery, long hours of work and little exercise left him with recurrent nervous exhaustion, but then (as on later occasions) he recovered quickly. Late in 1903 he suffered a breakdown which made work impossible. From 1904 until 1914 a relaxed summer holiday in Switzerland became an essential part of his routine. Ill health remained a problem. He was seriously unwell in 1920, and again in 1924 and 1925. 
Much of Owen's episcopate was marked by controversy. For many years he was involved in conflict over church schools and the place of religious instruction in schools. The 'Education Act' of 1902 gave county councils the responsibility for financing elementary education. Subject to clear conditions, church schools qualified for rate-aided status, but this gave great offence to nonconformists. Lloyd George used this discontent to advantage in Wales where some county councils, including Carmarthenshire, refused to use rates to maintain church schools. A long legal and parliamentary battle ensued before the council was obliged to give way. Between 1907 and 1911 Owen was involved in another long but ultimately successful conflict with the local education authority in Swansea over the funding of church schools in the town. 
From 1902 to the last years of Owen's life the question of religious education in state schools was a recurrent problem. Churchmen defended the need for doctrinal teaching, others insisted on undenominational teaching. From an early date Bishop Edwards had been convinced that a concordat was the most practical solution, and he was concerned to negotiate an agreed compromise. Owen defended a stronger line, seeking to maintain a firm doctrinal approach. He was converted to the value of a concordat in the 1920s, only to find in 1924 that he could not persuade the governing body of the Church in Wales to accept the necessary compromise. 
Confrontations never frightened Owen, and he acquired the reputation of being 'a battling bishop', but he had many gifts as a negotiator. He liked always to work closely with his associates, consulting them at every stage, and adjusting the wording of formal statements and of his own speeches to meet their point of view. In negotiation he looked for common ground and respected the standpoint of his opponents. He liked to have clear in advance what was to be proposed and agreed in formal meetings. He disliked unexpected shifts in policy and the development of new lines of thought in public discussion. He believed firmly in strong political action and knew the value of giving full and accurate briefing to the politicians who were prepared to speak in defence of his case. 
All these qualities were constantly in demand in the long conflict over disestablishment. Pressure on Welsh Anglicans was maintained throughout the 1890s, with Gladstone himself speaking in favour of disestablishment in 1892 and bills introduced in 1894 and 1895. In 1906 a royal commission on the Welsh church began to collect evidence, and Welsh bishops were thrown on the defensive. Owen was a leading figure in collecting material for the church and the evidence he presented to the commission filled seventy pages of the final report (1910). In 1909 government intentions were made clear in a 'Disestablishment Bill' which made little progress, but in 1912 a similar bill passed through the Commons but was rejected in the Lords. It had to wait for the 'Parliament Act' of 1911 to take effect before it was reintroduced to be passed without hindrance in 1914. In this long process, Owen became the leading spokesman for the Welsh church. In the first half of 1912 he spoke at seventy public meetings in England and ten in Wales. He was constantly in demand to consult with and advise leading politicians. 
Once the Welsh church had been disestablished Owen played a leading part in securing the 'Welsh Church Temporalities Act' of 1919 which modified parliament's original financial settlement, and he contributed to dealing with the practical problems of organizing the new Welsh province. In private correspondence there was a suggestion that he should become the first archbishop, but he refused to consider it. In Easter week 1920, he presided over the election of Bishop Edwards as the first archbishop of Wales. 
Owen's last important task was to secure the division of the diocese of St David's. For more than twenty years, schemes for smaller dioceses centred on Brecon, Swansea, and possibly Aberystwyth had been canvassed. After disestablishment they had to be modified, if only because of financial pressure. The influential churchmen of Swansea were reluctant to be severed from St David's. But the plan for a diocese combining Swansea and Brecon offered the best chance of reducing the burden of the bishop's work and of creating a viable new bishopric. In 1923 it was adopted, and the province had to elect a new diocesan. Owen was convinced that his suffragan, Bishop Bevan, should be chosen; he had been an effective suffragan and he knew much of the area well. There was one major difficulty: he could not speak Welsh. For that reason Archbishop Edwards was consistently and implacably opposed to his appointment, and the electoral college was deeply divided. Owen was not to be moved. He continued firm in his support for Bevan, who was elected by the narrowest of margins. 
By that time it was becoming clear that John Owen's strength was failing. He relied more heavily on younger colleagues. As late as 1924 he was asked by the Board of Education to chair a committee to examine the use of Welsh in education, but he did not live to see its report, which was published in 1927. He held his own until the summer of 1926, but in the autumn he confided to a friend 'I am taking off my armour.' He died after a short illness on 4 November in a nursing home at 19 Manchester Street, St Mary, London, and was buried on 9 November at Abergwili, Carmarthen. In his cathedral church at St David's there is a recumbent effigy in the lady chapel. Photographs capture his characteristic stance, but he was essentially a modest man and no portrait of him was painted. 


@@@@@


doc= 35348


Owen, Robert (1820-1902), theologian and antiquary, born at Dolgellau, Merioneth, on 13 May 1820, was the third son of David Owen, surgeon, and Ann, youngest daughter of Hugh Evans of Fronfelen and Esgairgeiliog, near Machynlleth. Educated at Ruthin grammar school, he matriculated from Jesus College, Oxford, on 22 November 1838, graduating BA in 1842 with a third class in classical finals, and proceeding MA in 1845 and BD in 1852. He was fellow of his college from 1845 until 1864, and public examiner in law and modern history in 1859-60. 
Although he was ordained by Christopher Bethell, bishop of Bangor, in 1843, and served a curacy until 1845 at Tremeirchion, Owen held no preferment. Coming under the influence of the Tractarians, he maintained an occasional correspondence with Newman, even after the latter seceded to Rome. In 1847 he edited, for the 'Anglo-Catholic Library', John Johnson's work 'The Unbloody Sacrifice', first published in 1714. He came to believe that establishment and endowment were destructive of the catholic character of the Church of England, and gave his support to Welsh disestablishment. 
Owen has a claim to be considered the most erudite of the nineteenth-century fellows of his college. His principal theological works were 'An Introduction to the Study of Dogmatic Theology' (1858), which displays his patristic learning, and 'Institutes of Canon Law' (1884), written at the instance of Walter Kerr Hamilton, bishop of Salisbury. His 'Sanctorale Catholicum, or, Book of Saints' (1880) is notable for its record of Welsh saints, and was the first such work to include 'just men' of the Anglican church. 'The Kymry: their Origin, History and International Relations' draws on a lifelong study of Welsh philology and ecclesiastical history, while his 'Pilgrimage to Rome' (1883) is a curious annotated record in verse of a long vacation 'voyage litteraire'. 
In 1864, owing to an allegation of immorality, Owen was obliged to resign his fellowship, and shortly afterwards retired to Vron-y-graig, Barmouth, where he owned a small estate. There he died unmarried on 6 April 1902, and was buried at Llanaber. 


@@@@@


doc= 35349


Page, Sir Archibald (1875-1949), engineer and electricity supply manager, was born at Alloa, Scotland, on 5 September 1875, the only son of John Page, wool merchant, and his second wife, Helen Ann McKillop. His general education was gained at Alloa School and Dollar Academy. After two years of technical training at the Heriot-Watt College, Edinburgh, he served a full apprenticeship in mechanical engineering and supplemented it by a period of electrical engineering with Mavor and Coulson, of Glasgow, who were among the British pioneers in the construction of electrical plant. Meanwhile he added to his theoretical knowledge by studies at the Glasgow and West of Scotland (later Royal) Technical College. 
Recognizing the potentialities of electricity supply, he obtained, in 1899, a position as a mechanic in the Port Dundas generating station of the Glasgow corporation electricity department, and ultimately became deputy city electrical engineer. This early progress was due entirely to his sterling qualities as a man and as a practical engineer. He improved the efficiency of the existing generating stations and interconnected them; he installed new plant of, for those times, great capacity; and he planned the first major municipal power station at Dalmarnock. At about this time he became fully imbued with the principles of electricity supply development advocated by C. H. Merz, and he was thereafter invariably guided by them. He examined with meticulous care every plan for which he became responsible, and almost invariably suggested improvements. This faculty for constructive criticism had been developed in his purely engineering days, when he had to discuss details of plant with the most eminent manufacturing designers. In 1906 Page married Anne, daughter of John Forsyth, a merchant, of Clackmannan; they had one son and three daughters. 
In 1917 Page joined the Clyde Valley Electric Power Company as deputy manager. Subsequently he became general manager. In that capacity he continued his policy of development on the basis of interconnection, and acquired a wider experience, in a more difficult territory, of the problems of transmission and distribution. When the 'Electricity (Supply) Act', 1919, was passed, he was an obvious choice as an electricity commissioner, but in 1925 he was called from this administrative appointment to the more specifically constructive post of director and general manager of the County of London Electric Supply Corporation. His period of office was marked by the construction of the Barking generating station (to become one of the largest thermo-electric stations in Europe) and of the associated high-voltage transmission system. 
The formation of the Central Electricity Board in 1927 brought Page the final opportunity of his career. With Sir Andrew Rae Duncan as chairman, Page, as chief engineer and general manager, directed the construction of the 'grid' and the standardization of frequency of the national system. The enterprise was conducted with promptness and efficiency and Spartan economy, both in construction and in operation. The first scheme being that for central Scotland, Page's earlier experience was particularly valuable. The efficiency of the project was largely due to the personal example of Page, who was knighted in 1930 for his share in the work. In 1935 he succeeded Duncan as chairman of the board. 
Page's career was planned from first to last, and he accomplished, so far as any individual can, all that he set out to do. He read omnivorously documents and publications essential to his duties and relating to electrical engineering; but his general reading was largely in the book of life. International and foreign electrical developments interested him to a minor degree, mainly enabling him to assess the relative efficiency of Britain and other countries. He was very British in his outlook, and his main business characteristics were objectivity, reliability, thoroughness, and an untiring energy. He was kind and helpful, and had an ironical sense of humour, which he exercised on rare occasions to great effect. Almost his only recreations were gardening and an occasional visit to a Rugby international. He loved Scotland, and spent each of his annual holidays in the Highlands. 
In 1943 Page was awarded the Faraday medal of the Institution of Electrical Engineers, of which he became a member in 1909, and an honorary member in 1939, serving as president in 1927. He retired from the Central Electricity Board in 1944, although he continued to take a close interest in the industry and its personnel, until he died, worn out by excessive toil, on 7 March 1949, at his home, Haworth, 1 West Hill, Sanderstead, Surrey. His wife survived him. 
C. W. Marshall', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35350


Page, Sir Frederick Handley (1885-1962), aircraft designer and manufacturer, was born on 15 November 1885 at 141 Cranham Villa, Cheltenham, the second child in a family of four sons and one daughter of Frederick Joseph Page, master upholsterer and an active member of the Plymouth Brethren sect, and his wife, Eliza Ann Handley. He was educated at Cheltenham grammar school until 1902 and at Finsbury Technical College for a three-year course in electrical engineering under Professor Silvanus Thompson. In 1906 he was appointed chief electrical designer at the engineering firm of Johnson and Phillips Ltd at Charlton. He joined the Aeronautical Society in 1907, and helped Jose Weiss to construct an automatically stable aeroplane. 
In 1908 Handley Page was dismissed by his employers, who were displeased with his aviation experiments on their premises. He set up in business himself, determined to construct aeroplanes. He was not a wealthy man or a skilful pilot but in 1909 he moved to Barking, where he established Handley Page Ltd, the first British company registered specifically to manufacture aeroplanes. To earn extra money he did some evening teaching at Finsbury Technical College and then, in 1911, joined the Northampton Polytechnic Institute (later Northampton Engineering College and then the City University) at Clerkenwell as lecturer in aeronautics under Dr Mullineux Walmsley. He installed there a wind tunnel, thereby combining practical course work with investigation of design problems at Barking. His first passenger-carrying monoplane flew across London in July 1911, and the following year another two-seater competed in military trials on Salisbury Plain. In 1913 he moved to Cricklewood and his first biplane was demonstrated at Hendon during the following year. When Murray Sueter at the Admiralty demanded a 'bloody paralyser' to halt the German advance into Belgium, Handley Page produced a large twin-engined bomber for the Royal Naval Air Service, followed in 1918 by a still larger four-engined machine to bomb Berlin, one of each type being the first aeroplanes to fly from England to India. By the end of the war the name Handley Page had become identified with big bombers. Handley Page was appointed CBE in 1918, and in May of that year he married Una Helen (died 1957), daughter of John Robert Thynne at St George's, Hanover Square, London; they had three daughters. 
In 1919 Handley Page Transport Ltd was founded to promote a civil air service to the continent. This company, with three others, formed Imperial Airways in 1924. The aircraft manufacturing side of the business incurred massive losses and for a while Handley Page lost control of his company which was run, until 1924, by a chairman appointed by his creditors. From 1924 until rearmament began in 1936 Handley Page Ltd was not very profitable. Graceful airliners were produced for Imperial Airways, but orders were too few to guarantee large profits. It was fortunate that Handley Page had, in 1919, patented the slotted wing which, when fitted to the leading edge of a wing, reduced the danger of stalling. When the patent expired in 1938 the company had earned $750,000 from worldwide sales. Frederick Handley Page himself also gained financially from his invention, receiving $100,000 from the Royal Commission on Awards to Inventors. Handley Page employed an excellent design staff which included George Volkert and Gustav Lachmann, who had independently discovered the slot principle in 1918. Before the war the company moved its headquarters to Radlett, Hertfordshire, where the Halifax bomber was produced. Handley Page was knighted in 1942 for his contribution to the war effort. He produced the first post-war civil airliner, the Hermes, and later the Victor bomber but by the 1950s the viability of the small independent aircraft producer was under serious threat. Handley Page refused to yield to government pressure to merge with other firms in the industry, and at his death in 1962 his company was the only remaining major independent aircraft manufacturer. 
A pioneer of technological education, Handley Page initiated sandwich courses for his apprentices in 1923, in conjunction with Northampton Engineering College. He was elected a fellow of the City and Guilds of London Institute in 1939, and became chairman of its council and executive committee ten years later. In 1946 he was instrumental, with Sir Roy Fedden, in setting up the College of Aeronautics at Cranfield at the behest of Sir Stafford Cripps, and remained chairman of its governing body until his death. An autocrat intolerant of governmental interference, he refused to merge his company with other groups under the plan proposed by the minister of defence, Duncan Sandys, because he insisted on protecting his dedicated team of employees, whose loyalty he had earned and esteemed highly. He was a founding member of the Society of British Aircraft Constructors in 1916, was twice its chairman and, in 1938-9, its first president, and was also vice-chairman of the Air Registration Board, president of the Institute of Transport (1945-6) and of the Royal Aeronautical Society (1945-7), master of the Worshipful Company of Coachmakers and Coach Harness Makers (1943-4), and deputy lieutenant (1954-6) and lieutenant (1956-60) of Middlesex. In debate a master of repartee, well spiced with quotations from the 'Bible' and Gibbon, he was always abreast of current technology and objective in criticism. 
The Royal Aeronautical Society awarded Handley Page its gold medal in 1960, and in the same year he received the Royal Society of Arts Albert gold medal and the German Scientific Society for Aviation's Ludwig Prandtl ring. He was an officer of the Legion d'honneur and of the order of the Crown (Belgium). This latter honour he received personally from King Albert for saving two bathers at Blankenberge from drowning. The annual Handley Page memorial lecture, first given in May 1963 by Prince Philip, duke of Edinburgh, is sponsored jointly by the Cranfield Society and the Royal Aeronautical Society. Handley Page died at his home, 18 Grosvenor Square, London, on 21 April 1962. 


@@@@@


doc= 35351


Page, Sir Leo Francis (1890-1951), magistrate, was born on 2 April 1890 at Hobart, Tasmania, the youngest of six sons, only two of whom survived childhood, of William Humphrey Page, of the Indian Civil Service, and his wife, Alice, daughter of Richard Pope. His father had become a Roman Catholic in early manhood and Leo was educated at Beaumont College, Berkshire. At the wish of his father he entered the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, and after a year transferred to the 16th lancers. But he was not suited to the army and withdrew. He entered University College, Oxford, where he obtained a second in jurisprudence in 1914. On the outbreak of war he joined the Royal Flying Corps, but after a serious accident while bringing home a plane from France he was invalided out in 1916, having attained the rank of flight commander. In that year he married Edith Violet, daughter of Captain Frederick Cleave Loder-Symonds RA, of Hinton Manor, Faringdon, Berkshire, with whom he had two sons and a daughter. 
Page became a member of the Inner Temple and was called to the bar in 1918. He practised for several years and had reason to anticipate success, but he was never robust and tuberculosis developed. Enjoying a secure private income, he abandoned practice and settled with his family at Faringdon. There in 1925 he became a justice of the peace for Berkshire and a member of the bench at Faringdon where his father-in-law had earlier been chairman for many years. In 1946 he himself was elected chairman, an office which he held until his death. He also served as chairman of the local juvenile court and for a period as chairman of the appeals committee at the Berkshire quarter sessions. 
In all this work Page took more than the ordinary interest. While doing his full share of the court work, he made a deep study of the problems of local justice. Not content with his limited experience in a rural court, he visited many other courts in different parts of the country. This qualified him to write several books about the work of magistrates, on which he became a leading authority. The most influential were 'Justice of the Peace' (1936) and 'Crime and the Community' (1937). In court, while always merciful, Page was a realist and more open to appeals to reason than to sentiment. 
Although he was known primarily as a leading justice of the peace, Page also gave much time and enthusiasm to helping prisoners and former prisoners, and prisons and borstals became his main interest in his later years. From 1939 for many years afterwards he was chairman of the visiting magistrates at Oxford prison; he also became chairman of its Discharged Prisoners' Aid Society. He took a keen interest in many individual cases and kept in touch with some of them after their release. No case which Page considered deserving was too much trouble for him, although he had a quick eye for those who sought to impose on him without adequate effort to make good. He favoured probation while also recognizing the need for deterrence. 
From 1940 to 1945 Page served in the Lord Chancellor's Department as secretary of commissions of the peace. He had a freer hand than was usual since Lord Simon was much occupied with wartime problems outside his office. Page was considerably shocked by much of what he saw. Many of those recommended for appointment as justices of the peace in local areas were, in his own words, 'older than was desirable', and selected in recognition of some other form of public service. It was 'rare to find anyone wholly without political connection'. Page did all he could to improve matters. The reforms which took place after the war were not yet being planned, but Page's influence on them was apparent when they came. It was he who influenced the lord chancellor to secure the passing into law of the 'Justices (Supplemental List) Act' in 1941, which empowered the lord chancellor to prevent elderly and infirm lay justices from sitting in court. 
Page was essentially a conservative reformer. Keen and successful though he was in bringing about many reforms within the existing system, he was apparently not aware that demands were being made for radical changes in the system itself. To some extent his mind widened as his experience increased. In 1937 Page was nominated by his bench as its representative on the council of the Magistrates' Association, many of whose members, without being in any way extremists, had ideas for reform beyond what Page then considered reasonable. To such members Page seemed unwilling to pursue his ideas to their logical conclusion. For instance, while he profoundly believed that criminal courts should be better informed about the offenders whom they convicted, he was at first satisfied with the existing method whereby such social inquiries as were made about offenders took place before trial and thus before guilt was established. A substantial majority took the view that most serious cases should be adjourned after conviction for full inquiries to be made before sentence was passed. Page resigned in protest in 1940 and took no further part in the association's work. This was mainly due to the claims of his official work, but when this ceased he did not return to the association, although he later came to accept the idea that serious cases should be adjourned for inquiries only after conviction. 
In 1946 a strong royal commission was set up under Lord du Parcq to inquire into the work of justices of the peace. Page's evidence was printed as an appendix to its minutes of evidence. The report of this commission (1948) greatly influenced the preparation of the post-war reforms and reflected many of the ideas which Page had laid before it. Valuable as the new code was, the reforms were all within the existing system and on some points were less drastic than Page himself had hoped. 
The usefulness of psychiatry was gradually realized by Page, who wrote that 'medical men who have specialised in this branch of research have a very definite and valuable contribution to make to the treatment of delinquency' ('Quarterly Review', April 1940). However, in his view the help of such experts applied only to abnormal cases and should be limited to examining and reporting on offenders. He did not sympathize with the idea that psychiatrists should share the responsibility of selecting appropriate sentences, a task which Page considered only those on the bench were competent to perform, although he urged that they should be better informed about the various methods of dealing with offenders. Thus in 1948 he wrote in his book 'The Sentence of the Court' that all those on the bench, including professional lawyers, should receive instruction which would fit them to pass sentence. But he put forward no plan whereby lawyers appointed in mid-life to the criminal bench could receive such instruction. His last book, 'The Young Lag' (1950), reviewed the treatment of young offenders. 
Page was high sheriff for his county in 1937, and in 1948 he received a knighthood. Although afflicted by severe ill health he continued bravely with as much work as he could undertake. His consistent love, sympathy, and understanding for suffering humanity and his humility were the qualities most valued by his friends; to the end his sense of humour never left him. He died at his home at Faringdon, Berkshire, on 31 August 1951. A contemporary tribute described his life as one 'of service and self-sacrifice. Few men have done more for those who are, by the standard of many, the least hopeful material and the least deserving' ('Justice of the Peace', 559). 


@@@@@


doc= 35352


Page, Thomas Ethelbert (1850-1936), classical scholar and schoolmaster, was born at Lincoln on 27 March 1850, the second son of William Tomlinson Page, general manager of the Lincoln and Lindsey Banking Company, and his wife, Ann Watson. He attended Lincoln grammar school and Shrewsbury School before entering St John's College, Cambridge, in 1869. After a brilliant career as an undergraduate (he was ranked second classic in 1873), he became a sixth-form master at Charterhouse, where he managed a house and participated fully in school life. He held a fellowship of his college which he relinquished on his marriage, on 16 October 1875, to Delamotte Caroline Eugenie, only daughter of Edward Toynbee of Lincoln, a half-brother of Joseph Toynbee. 
Page was the most prominent figure in the Association of Assistant Masters, and worked for fifty years to improve the conditions of teachers. In Godalming he served for thirty years on the town council, brought about the founding of Godalming grammar school, and was made an honorary freeman of the town in 1924. In addition, he edited Horace's 'Odes' (1883), the 'Acts of the Apostles' (1886), and the whole of Virgil (1894). Thanks to their economy, humanity, and good sense, his editions remained in use for almost a hundred years. Page's scholarship was recognized in 1904, when Jebb asked him whether he would be willing to succeed Mayor as professor of Latin at Cambridge (Page had to say no, because his wife refused to leave Godalming), and again in 1913, when he received the degree of LittD from Manchester University. In his time at Charterhouse, Page was offered at least two headships (Harrow and Shrewsbury) on condition that he took holy orders. But although he was a devout Christian who prayed and read a chapter of his 'Greek Testament' every morning, Page objected to this stipulation; hence in spite of his fame as a teacher he was never promoted. 
After his retirement in 1910, Page was appointed first editor of the 'Loeb Classical Library'. He selected (and rejected) translators from both sides of the Atlantic, and corrected their copy with a precision which was not always welcome. By 1935, along with his two colleagues (E. Capps and W. H. D. Rouse), he had supervised the preparation of some 200 volumes. As 'Loeb' editor Page was paid $800 a year in addition to his paltry pension of $150 from Charterhouse. He also received a legacy of $2000 from his father, had shares in Eastman Kodak, was a director of the Brentford Gas Company, and had interests in a hotel at Hindhead. In the end all this amounted to an estate of $68,000 -- a substantial sum in 1936. This financial comfort enabled him in later life to indulge the tastes of a man of the world. He enjoyed good food and drink, he attended race meetings at Ascot and Longchamp, and he was a welcome guest in the country houses and on the yachts of the well-to-do. 
As an independently minded Liberal, who believed in the two great principles of individual freedom and individual responsibility, Page joined the Reform Club in 1890. There he became a familiar figure, with his tall stature (6 foot 2 inches), his deep voice with its short Lincolnshire 'a', his long hair and closely-clipped beard, and his unvarying dress (black boots, off-white trousers of St Kilda tweed, white shirt with navy blue poplin tie, black tailcoat and waistcoat). More important, his combination of knowledge, courtesy, and wit won him respect and affection among all the members. A special seat was reserved for him at luncheon, and his portrait, by Clive Gardiner, was hung there in 1927. Among his friends were Conan Doyle, Hilaire Belloc, Arnold Bennett, and also H. G. Wells, who called him 'King of the Reform Club'. A wider reputation still resulted from his public speeches (especially during the First World War), his reviews in 'The Bookman' and 'The Spectator', and his long series of letters to 'The Times'. In those letters he directed his powerful rhetorical satire against the Headmasters' Conference (for insisting that heads should be in holy orders), bishops (for upholding outmoded doctrines in the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' and the Athanasian creed), and professors (for presuming to pronounce on teaching -- a craft of which they knew nothing). Nevertheless, on his eightieth birthday Page was presented with an amazing tribute, which included over 500 signatures from every part of the establishment -- British and American. In 1931 he became an honorary fellow of his old college; finally, in 1934, he was made a Companion of Honour. Owing to the dominant position of classics before 1918 and to his own outstanding qualities, Page reached an exceptional eminence in his profession. He died at his home at Woodcote, Godalming, Surrey, on 1 April 1936. He had two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 35353


Page, William (1861-1934), historian and antiquary, was born on 4 September 1861 at 26 Norfolk Square, Paddington, London, the third son and fifth and last child of Henry Page (1811-1874), merchant, and his wife, Georgiana (Georgina) Forrester ('b'. 'c'.1823). He was baptized on 16 October 1861 at St James's, Sussex Gardens. After a short time at Dr Westmacott's local private school, and despite his father's death, he attended Westminster School from January to May 1875. After being articled to a civil engineer, and following his brother to Australia, he was assistant executive engineer to the Queensland government from 1880 to 1884. 
In 1885 Page returned to England and joined his brother-in-law William John Hardy, son of Sir William Hardy, the deputy keeper of public records, as partner in the firm of Hardy and Page, record agents. He married on 8 June 1886, apparently at Penzance, Kate Marion 
(Marianne; 1863-1947)
, youngest daughter of Charles William Roe of Chiswick, London; they had a son and daughter. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries before he was twenty-six and his first paper, 'Some remarks on Northumbrian palatinates and regalities', appeared in 'Archaeologia' in 1888. Hardy's residence at St Albans encouraged Page to research Hertfordshire history and archaeology, and to move to St Albans from 1896 to 1902. 
Page's output of articles and editions was already voluminous when he came to the attention of Herbert Arthur Doubleday, co-founder of the 'Victoria History of the Counties of England (VCH)', begun in 1899. Doubleday had realized that the records on which his contributors depended to produce topographical chapters and manorial descents needed centrally organized searching in London by specially trained researchers and writers. For that he turned to Hardy and Page, who in 1902 became joint, and from 1904 to 1934 was sole, editor of the 'History'. 
Page returned to London, living at Battersea from 1904 to 1906 and at Frognal Cottage, Hampstead, from then until 1922. His impact on the 'VCH' was dramatic. By 1902 only one volume had appeared; by the end of 1910 there were forty-six. A 'Guide' published about 1903 was largely Page's work. It underlay 'VCH' practice until 1950 and indirectly later. He was probably responsible for encouraging the marked architectural content of the early 'VCH', served on the Royal Commission on Historical Monuments (England) from 1909 to 1934, and was also an inspector under the Historical Manuscripts Commission. 
Failure of funds and the First World War disrupted the 'VCH'. Page occupied himself with his works 'Commerce and Industry' (1919) and 'London' (1923), on the city's early history. After the war he worked, largely without assistance, to bring to publication twenty-one more volumes. In 1922, despite obtaining an office at the University of London's new Institute of Historical Research, he moved to Middleton-on-Sea, Sussex, taking all the 'VCH''s materials with him, and became its proprietor in 1928. In 1932 Oxford University awarded him the honorary degree of DLitt, the sole recognition of his service to local history. In order to ensure the 'VCH''s continuance he conveyed all the rights in 1933 to the University of London, which set up a management committee of which he remained chairman until he died at Middleton on 3 February 1934. 
Page's last edited work, 'VCH Rutland', volume 2, appeared posthumously in 1935 prefaced by a full bibliography of his publications, which combined archaeological investigation with a deep knowledge of historical sources and an interest in innovative methodology. His editorial work for the 'VCH' displays both immense energy and productivity and great tact in dealing with contributors. 


@@@@@


doc= 35354


Paget, Sir Bernard Charles Tolver (1887-1961), army officer, was born on 15 September 1887 at Oxford, the third son and fourth of the six children of Francis Paget (1851-1911), regius professor of pastoral theology and canon of Christ Church, Oxford, 1885-92, and bishop of Oxford from 1901, and his wife, Helen Beatrice (died 1900), daughter of Richard William Church (1815-1890), dean of St Paul's. He was educated at Shrewsbury School, and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst (1905-7), and was commissioned into the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire light infantry on 13 November 1907. 
After a winter with the 2nd battalion at Tidworth, Paget joined the 1st battalion in India in February 1908, and was promoted lieutenant in 1910. He returned to England on leave in 1914, and on the outbreak of war was appointed adjutant of the new 5th (service) battalion, which he helped form, and with which he went to France in May 1915 and remained until November 1915 when he became brigade major 42nd infantry brigade, 14th light division (MC November 1915.) In October 1917 he was employed as a general staff officer, grade 2 (GSO 2), first with the 62nd division, and then on the general headquarters staff of Sir Douglas Haig. 
During the German advance in March 1918 Paget was wounded for the third time, severely in the elbow, which rendered his left arm virtually useless for the rest of his life. He had been appointed DSO in January 1918 and was four times mentioned in dispatches. 
There followed a series of staff appointments, graduation at the Staff College, Camberley, in 1920, and promotion to major in 1924 and brevet lieutenant-colonel in 1925. In April 1925 he rejoined the 1st battalion of his regiment as a company commander in Cologne; he left in January 1926 to become an instructor at the Staff College, and in January 1929 he became a student at the Imperial Defence College. He was promoted colonel in 1929. Paget's last regimental appointment was commander of the depot at Cowley barracks, Oxford, in 1930, where he instituted many improvements. One achievement then, which he always recalled with pride, was the dedication of the regimental chapel in Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford. 
The normal three-year tenure of his command was reduced to two, with Paget's return to India as chief instructor (GSO 1) at the Staff College, Quetta (1932-4); he won distinction for his role following a disastrous earthquake. At the War Office, 1934-6, he commanded the 4th Quetta infantry brigade, was promoted major-general in December 1937, and returned to England to become commandant of the Staff College, Camberley (1938-9). 
In November 1939 he took over command of the 18th division, then in East Anglia, from which he was summoned 'literally at a moment's notice' in April 1940 to take part in the ill-fated Norwegian campaign. German superiority, both on the ground and in the air, was overwhelming, the ship carrying the British troops' artillery and transport had been sunk, and the prospects were hopeless. When the cabinet, unwilling to face further losses of ships, and unable to provide the reinforcements for which Paget asked, decided on evacuation, he fought a series of skilful rearguard actions, worthy of his distinguished predecessor, Sir John Moore, and succeeded not only in extricating his troops but also in inflicting heavy losses on the enemy. His achievement brought not only the public praise of the prime minister, but also promotion, though he never again had a fighting command. 
After Dunkirk, Paget was for a short time chief of staff, home forces (1940), and when a German invasion seemed imminent, would never permit the airing of pessimistic views or contemplate the possibility of defeat. 
When south-eastern command was formed in 1941 Paget was appointed general officer commanding-in-chief and promoted lieutenant-general. At the end of 1941 he succeeded Sir Alan Brooke as commander-in-chief, home forces, a command he held until July 1943, when, having been promoted general, he was assigned to form the twenty-first army group of fifteen divisions, in preparation for the Normandy invasion. However, he never commanded in the field the force he trained; the appointment went to General Sir Bernard Montgomery, fresh from his campaigns in north Africa and Italy. Montgomery, who had been at Sandhurst with Paget and become his friend, had a high regard for Paget and praised his training of the force. 
Paget was very disappointed but he may go down in history as the greatest trainer of British soldiers since Sir John Moore, teaching them how to overcome the difficulties of attacking against modern firepower -- 'to bridge', as he described it, 'the gap between the barrage and the bayonet'. To further this he established a school of infantry, with divisional battle schools, in which he aimed at creating 'a true offensive spirit, combined with the will-power which will not recognize defeat', as well as battle inoculation using live ammunition. 
Shortly after Paget's death, papers which he had refused to allow to be published disclosed details of operation 'skyscraper', prepared by him in the spring of 1943 as a detailed study of the proposed invasion of north-western Europe. It was described as 'a blueprint for the D-day operations of 1944; there were the same beaches, and the same objectives, while the problems of an opposed landing had all been fully assessed... the first key plan of the invasion'. 
In January 1944 Paget became general officer commanding-in-chief Middle East forces in succession to Sir Henry Wilson, where he remained until October 1946, when he retired from the army at his own request. During this command, while no active service was involved, there were many difficulties, and in dealing with these he enhanced his reputation. Again he was successful in a tough assignment, and few could have handled so adroitly such varied problems as the administration of the Polish base and the April 1944 Greek mutiny in Egypt. He was 'the only man who really understood the problem', observed a prominent Greek official afterwards. Paget was appointed CB in 1940, KCB in 1942, and GCB in 1946. In the Second World War he received honours from Greece, Belgium, the United States of America, Czechoslovakia, and Norway -- the last the grand cross of the order of St Olaf. He was also an honorary MA (Oxon), Christ Church, Oxford. 
Paget married, on 7 February 1918, Winifred Nora ('b'. 13 Aug 1896), his cousin, daughter of Sir John Rahere Paget, second baronet, and they had two sons, both of whom served with distinction in the Second World War. The younger, Lieutenant Anthony Francis Macleod Paget ('b'. 5 Nov 1924), Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire light infantry, died on 5 March 1945 of wounds received in a gallant action in the Reichswald, Germany, for which he was awarded a posthumous DSO and recommended for the VC. 
Paget's retirement was far from idle. Already colonel commandant of the Reconnaissance Corps and the intelligence corps (1943-52), he became in October 1946 colonel of his regiment (1946-55), which gave him pride and pleasure. He was principal of Ashridge College (1946-9), then devoted to adult education in citizenship, until he became, to his delight, governor of the Royal Hospital, Chelsea (October 1949-1957). 
There were other activities as well, all of which reflected his care for the soldier, to whom, despite crippling arthritis, the legacy of his wounds, he devoted his last years. Among these were his work for the Forces Help Society, of which he was national chairman, the Lord Roberts Workshops, and not least the Royal Commonwealth Society for the Blind, his efforts for which raised nearly $400,000. He was also governor of the corps of commissionaires. 
Shortly before going into complete retirement, in 1956, he took his last parade, a passing out of national servicemen at Cowley barracks, to whom he paid a moving tribute. Afterwards, to the officers in the mess, he said retirement would mean that, for the first time in his life, he would be living in his own house and have to clean his own shoes; nevertheless, he was looking forward to it. 
To those who served with him in the regiment, he was its greatest soldier of the century. To many, especially the junior officers, he was rather a frightening person to meet: 'his eyes seemed to bore holes in you' and he made no secret of his dislike of things which he considered to be 'sloppy'. Innately shy, and so apparently not entirely at his ease when talking to men, he was a champion of private soldiers, and, if their conditions were not as good as he thought they should be, 'the fur flew'. He was reportedly without fear, either physical or moral, deeply religious, selfless, and devoted to his country. 
Paget died suddenly at his home, the Old Orchard, Heath Road, Petersfield, Hampshire, on 16 February 1961. 
Roger Owen', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35355


Paget, Francis (1851-1911), bishop of Oxford, second son of Sir James Paget, first baronet (1814-1899), surgeon, was born on 20 March 1851 at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, in his father's official residence as warden. His mother was Lydia (1815-1895), youngest daughter of the Revd Henry North, and his brothers were Sir John Rahere Paget KC, Dr Henry Luke Paget, bishop-suffragan of Stepney, and Stephen Paget FRCS. He was educated first at a private day school near Regent's Park, and then (1864-9) at Shrewsbury School under Benjamin Hall Kennedy and Henry Whitehead Moss. He was elected to a junior studentship at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1869. In 1871 he won the Hertford scholarship, the chancellor's prize for Latin verse, and a first class in classical moderations. He graduated BA with a first class in the final classical school in 1873, proceeding MA in 1876 and DD in 1885. He was elected senior student in 1873, tutor in 1876, and honorary student in 1901. Ordained deacon in 1875 and priest in 1877, he became a devoted follower of the great tractarian Edward Bouverie Pusey, who allowed him to read in the university pulpit a sermon of his which ill health prevented him from delivering himself. Other tractarian mentors included Henry Parry Liddon, Richard William Church, dean of St Paul's, and James Russell Woodford, bishop of Ely, whom Paget served as examining chaplain (1878-85). Paget married Helen Beatrice Church (1858-1900), Church's daughter, on 28 March 1883 at St Paul's Cathedral; Liddon officiated. Paget's eulogy of Pusey in his Bodleian Oration of 1882 earned him the foolish description of a 'round-collared idiot' from Mark Pattison, the rector of Lincoln College. Being a witty and stimulating companion, Paget established warm friendships with younger and less conservative men of the same school, particularly during reading parties at home and abroad. Paget enjoyed his years as a tutor, and his influence over undergraduates grew as they became accustomed to a certain reserve in his manner for which he had been notable even at Shrewsbury. In 1881 Paget was appointed Oxford preacher at the Chapel Royal, Whitehall. His tutorial career ended in inauspicious circumstances. In a division in the Christ Church governing body on 15 June 1882 he voted in the majority with Pusey (who was making his last appearance in that forum) and others against the re-election of R. W. Macan, tutor in ancient history, whose views in 'The Resurrection of Jesus Christ' (a publication sponsored by the nonconformist Hibbert Trust, 1877) had caused grave disquiet. There might have been dissension as to whether Paget should be elected junior censor at the last governing body of Michaelmas term, but an offer of the living of Bromsgrove (a nail making town) arrived apropos, and Paget accepted it. 
Paget returned to Oxford in 1885, having been nominated by Gladstone to succeed Edward King, bishop of Lincoln, as regius professor of pastoral theology and canon of Christ Church. Bromsgrove had given Paget a brief insight into parochial activities and had considerably widened the range of his sympathy. Liddon's influence was counteracted by close association with younger men, and in the autumn of 1889 Paget joined Charles Gore, his successor in the see of Oxford, Henry Scott Holland, and others, in publishing the volume of essays 'Lux mundi'. The authors had a common programme, to make clear that high Anglicanism was open to new knowledge ['see also 'Lux mundi essayists]. Paget, as on other issues during his life, sought to avoid open dissension: Liddon discussed Gore's own essay (by which Liddon was deeply distressed) with Paget in Christ Church, and asked Paget not to communicate on the matter with Gore. But he did, and exchanges ensued. However, Liddon regarded Paget's own essay 'Sacraments' as 'a real contribution to Christian Theology' (Johnston, 362, 367). 
In 1892, on the resignation of Henry George Liddell, Paget was promoted by Lord Salisbury to the deanery of Christ Church. His task was difficult not least because of Liddell's success, and a certain tendency to extravagant rowdiness among the undergraduates had to be dealt with firmly. In his sixth term as dean Paget was faced by a notorious case of indiscipline: in 1893 the censors (E. F. Sampson and T. B. Strong) refused permission for undergraduates to attend a ball in November at Blenheim Palace. On the night the rope of Great Tom was cut, the dean's door painted red, and opprobrious legends ('Damn Sampson', 'Damn the Dons') marked in the snow. One man was sent down, the 'funeral' for his departure and other incidents being shown in a series of prints. Some acrimonious correspondence ensued in 'The Times'. But Paget was not to blame for the Blenheim row, and ultimately suffered little harm from it. Estimates of his popularity vary, for 'he could only open out to a few', and his 'elaborate courtesy' was apt 'to keep people back behind barriers of civility' (Holland, 277). But he was an anxious and capable administrator (cf. letter from 'Ex Aede Christi', 'The Times', 7 Aug 1911). The deanery was more accessible than heretofore. 
As a tutor Paget was among the early supporters of Lady Margaret Hall. As dean he took a great interest in the foundation of Reading University College, which he formally opened in 1892 and of which he was appointed visitor; Christ Church made a considerable gift of books to the new college's library and its influence was important in the early days of the new foundation. Paget was chaplain to William Stubbs, bishop of Oxford, from 1889 until the bishop's death. Thus in 1901 the cathedral and the diocese were drawn closely together, and Paget learned much of local episcopal problems. Paget's career was permanently saddened by his wife's death from meningitis at the deanery on 22 November 1900, aged forty-two. 
In 1901, on the death of Stubbs, Dean Paget was promoted by Lord Salisbury to the bishopric of Oxford, and was consecrated on 29 June following. To the bishopric is attached the chancellorship of the Order of the Garter; Paget's most notable function in that capacity was the admission of Edward, prince of Wales, to the order at Windsor on 10 June 1911. He was also chosen as 'supporter' bishop at their coronations by both Queen Alexandra in 1902 and Queen Mary in 1911. His administration of the diocese of Oxford was marked by the same anxious care which he had devoted to his college. He was eager to do everything himself; much of the episcopal correspondence was written in his own clear but characteristic handwriting. It took some time for the people to feel that they knew him intimately, although his pastoral earnestness was keenly appreciated by the inhabitants of the rural villages, which, from 1907, he was able to visit in the episcopal automobile. Early in 1903 he declined Arthur Balfour's offer of the see of Winchester. In April 1904 he became a member of the royal commission on ecclesiastical discipline, and signed its report on 21 June 1906. He was one of the three out of fourteen members who attended each of the 118 sittings, and he exhibited 'a genius for fairness towards hostile witnesses' ('The Times', 3 July 1906) and a remarkable gift for fusing opinions in the drafting of the report; Archbishop Davidson thought he was 'at his best' on this commission. His attitude to prevailing excesses in ritual was shown in the charge which he began to deliver to his diocese on 8 October 1906, and by the action which he took against the Revd Oliver Partridge Henly, vicar of Wolverton St Mary, in respect of 'reservation' and 'benediction'. The case was taken to the court of arches ('The Times', 20 and 21 July 1909); the vicar, who was deprived, obtained employment in another diocese, and afterwards joined the Roman Catholic church. 
Paget sought to provide for a subdivision of the diocese, a difficult objective not achieved nearly a century later. For this purpose he made a vain endeavour to dispose of Cuddesdon Palace. In July 1910 he showed his active zeal for the wider work of the church by becoming chairman of the Archbishops' Western Canada Fund. He was the author of the prayer 'That in tranquillity Thy kingdom may go forward', which found a place in the 1928 prayer book. 
During the first half of Paget's episcopate a group in north Oxford, under the formidable leadership of a South African War veteran, Colonel Le Mesurier, pressed him to allow the establishment of an evangelical church there. Paget was uncertain, again anxious to avoid open dissension, and laid himself open to charges of evasion and indecision, but eventually he came out in favour, and in 1906 attended the laying of the foundation stone of St Andrew's, Linton Road. 
As a theological scholar Paget is remembered chiefly for his 'Introduction to the Fifth Book of Hooker's Treatise of the Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity' (1899; 2nd edn 1907), for his 'Lux mundi' essay already mentioned, and for a masterly essay on 'acedia', or accidie, written at Christ Church in 1890 (reprinted separately in 1912), and published with a collection of sermons entitled 'The Spirit of Discipline' in 1891 (7th edn 1896); the undergraduates called accidie 'the Dean's new sin'. He also published 'Faculties and Difficulties for Belief and Disbelief' (1887; 3rd edn 1894) and two other collections of sermons entitled respectively 'Studies in Christian Character' (1895) and 'The Redemption of War' (1900). Some sermons were published separately, including 'The Virtue of Simplicity', a gift surely erroneously applied to C. L. Dodgson (Lewis Carroll) and H. G. Liddell, whom it fell to Paget to commemorate together in March 1898. 
To his intimate friends, and in particular to Archbishop Davidson, Paget was not only a wise counsellor but a delightful companion. He had a cultivated sense of beauty in nature, in music, and in words; he had been head of the new choir at Shrewsbury, and Dante and Ruskin were among his interests. His tall, willowy figure and impressive, courtly bearing made him a notable figure in any assembly. Paget was attacked by a serious illness (volvulus) in the summer of 1910, and seemed to recover, but he died of a sudden recurrence of the malady, in a London nursing home at Welbeck House, Welbeck Street, on 2 August 1911. He was interred three days later in his wife's grave in the little burying-ground to the south of Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford. 
The Pagets' four sons all at some time held commissions in the army; they included Archbishop Edward Francis Paget (1886-1971) and General Sir Bernard Paget (1887-1961). The Pagets' two daughters both married clergymen; the younger predeceased her father. Her husband jointly with her uncle, Stephen Paget, wrote a biography of the bishop (1912) which contains much detail on the Pagets' domestic life. 


@@@@@


doc= 35356


Paget, Dame (Mary) Rosalind (1855-1948), nurse and midwife, was born on 4 January 1855 at Greenbank, Liverpool, in the home of her grandfather, William Rathbone (1787-1868) ['see under 'Rathbone, William (1757-1809)], whose daughter Elizabeth married John Paget (1811-1898), a London police magistrate, author, and an ardent whig, who had joined the Reform Club on its foundation. On her maternal side she came from a long line of social reformers, including her uncle William Rathbone (1819-1902), MP for Liverpool, who had a lifelong interest in nursing reform and played a leading role in the formation of the Queen Victoria's Jubilee Institute for Nurses (QVJIN). His daughter Eleanor Rathbone, who maintained close contact with her cousin Rosalind, took an interest in social questions and women's suffrage. 
As a young woman Rosalind Paget was influenced by this family commitment to social reform and public service and, like many educated, middle-class women of her day, she sought to lead a 'purposeful' life. When her desire to study as an artist was opposed by her family, she entered the Westminster Hospital at the age of twenty, to train as a nurse, and there, under the Nightingale disciple Miss Luckes, she obtained her nursing certificate. She went later to the London Hospital (1882-4), before training as a midwife at Endell Street Lying-in Hospital, gaining the diploma of the London Obstetrical Society in January 1885. Although Rosalind Paget returned to the London Hospital, where she worked for some years, her main interest lay in the reform of midwifery. In 1886 she was taken by Miss Freeman, matron at the British Lying-in Hospital, to her first meeting of the Matron's Aid Society, soon to be renamed the Midwives' Institute (later the Royal College of Midwives). She recalled that 'There were only about ten persons present and it was very dull'. She agreed to join only if there was a 'Midwives Club and lectures and a library... Next day I was asked to help them organise one' (Cowell and Wainwright, 17). 
From then on Rosalind Paget's energetic leadership helped to turn a small society with limited aims into a centre of midwifery reform. At that time the word midwife was hardly mentioned in polite society and the majority of midwives received little or no training. Rosalind, and the other middle-class leaders of the institute, helped to give respectability to midwifery and sought to obtain better education and training for midwives. They hoped to raise the status of midwifery as an area of women's work, to instil a sense of professionalism and public service into midwives, and at the same time to improve the conditions under which working-class women gave birth. Rosalind Paget held the post of treasurer from 1890 to 1930 and used her wide circle of social and professional connections to push forward the cause of midwifery reform and to give financial support to the institute. She also took rooms so that the institute would have a permanent headquarters for meetings, a club, and a library, and she organized lectures on midwifery by some of the most prestigious medical names of the day. In 1887 she founded the institute's journal, 'Nursing Notes' (later 'Midwives' Chronicle'), and, with Emma Brierly, edited it for many decades. She was also one of the founders of what later became the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy. 
During the 1890s Rosalind Paget played an active role in the campaign for midwife registration, giving evidence in 1892 to the select committee on midwifery. A bill for the registration of midwives was introduced into the House of Commons in 1890, but although England in this respect lagged behind most other European countries, the measure was continually rejected, mainly because it was considered an unnecessary restriction of individual liberty. In some quarters the advent of trained midwives was felt to be an encroachment not only upon the friendly services of neighbours but also upon the medical profession. Rosalind Paget knew that poor women could not in any case afford medical attention and insisted that it was wholly advantageous for the midwife to be trained and supervised. Finally in 1902 the 'Midwives Act' provided for the registration of midwives, made it an offence for anyone not properly certificated to describe herself, or practise, as a midwife, and established the Central Midwives' Board. Rosalind Paget was a member of the board from 1902 to 1924 as a representative of the QVJIN, which had been established to promote district nursing and midwifery services throughout the country. She had a long association with the QVJIN; in 1890 she was appointed as its first chief officer and, although she resigned from this position in 1891, she continued as a member of the council, with special responsibility for midwifery. 
The 'Midwives Act', coupled with a growing interest by policy makers in the health and welfare of babies, meant an increased workload for Rosalind Paget. She frequently represented the institute at official enquiries and conferences and acted as an effective lobbyist on behalf of midwives whenever proposals for legislation -- such as the 1911 'National Insurance Act' -- appeared to affect their position. She also sought to maintain the importance of the independent midwife, although this became increasingly difficult in the inter-war years, when midwives' earnings were too low to attract well-qualified recruits. 
Rosalind Paget always had a close personal and intellectual relationship with the contemporary women's movement and helped to maintain links between the institute and groups such as the Women's Liberal Federation and the National Union of Women Workers, often giving papers at their conferences. She was a strong supporter of women's suffrage and urged all members of the institute to take part in suffrage demonstrations; in July 1908 she led twenty members in a suffrage procession under the banner of Florence Nightingale. Rosalind Paget believed that women's lack of a vote meant that they were unable to influence policy making and saw the suffrage as the first step in enabling women to 'help forward social, moral and economic reforms', in particular those relating to 'the healthy upbringing and proper education of the children whose care is admittedly their special sphere' ('Nursing Notes', July 1908). 
Rosalind Paget's effectiveness in a variety of activities, and the respect that she gained from members of the institute, was not simply the result of her political acumen, it was also helped by her wit and sense of humour; she even managed to present the annual budget in a lively and humorous way. 
Rosalind Paget never married and throughout her professional life she devoted herself entirely to the work she took in hand; no detail of a midwife's life or work was too trivial for her interest and she was seen as the friend of all. She refused all recognition of her services until in 1935 she was appointed DBE. She found relaxation in music and art, tastes inherited from her father, and died at the age of ninety-three, on 19 August 1948, at her home, Colwood Park, Bolney, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 35357


Paget, Lady Muriel Evelyn Vernon (1876-1938), humanitarian relief worker, was born in London on 19 August 1876, the only daughter and elder child of Murray Edward Gordon Finch-Hatton, twelfth earl of Winchilsea and seventh earl of Nottingham (1851-1898), and his wife, Edith (1855-1944), only daughter of Edward William Harcourt, of Stanton Harcourt and Nuneham Park, Oxfordshire. She was educated at home. On 31 May 1897 she married the inventor Sir Richard Arthur Surtees Paget, second baronet (1869-1955), of Cranmore Hall, Shepton Mallet. They had five children. 
Muriel Paget's only brother had died in March 1892, when she was fifteen, and her own eldest child, born in March 1898, died in the following October, when she was just twenty-two. She collapsed into invalidism. But in 1905 she rallied to respond to the wretchedness of others when her aunt, Lady Templetown, suggested she become honorary secretary of a charity organizing soup kitchens in Southwark. Very soon Muriel Paget discovered that all the poor districts of London housed hungry people needing soup kitchens, and she founded a new association, the Invalid Kitchens of London, for which she remained honorary secretary until her death. By 1913 there were soup kitchens for mothers, children, and old people in Stepney, Victoria Docks, and St Pancras as well as in Southwark -- for which Muriel Paget had raised immense sums, principally via charity balls in high society. 
Although pregnant with her fifth child in August 1914, Muriel Paget extended her invalid kitchens to help the Belgian refugees evacuated to London after the German invasion. In November 1914 her baby, John Starr Paget ['see under 'Paget, Sir Richard Arthur Surtees], was born, but 1915 found her organizing the funding and staffing of an Anglo-Russian base hospital in Petrograd -- she having been deeply moved by the account by her friend Bernard Pares of the suffering of the Russian army. In 1916 she left her family to begin a life of almost continuous humanitarian intervention abroad, returning home only for Christmas, Easter, and birthdays. She had no doubt that her own privileged children needed her less than did the millions of people in remediable pain. First she organized field hospitals, including 100 British-funded ambulances, in Galician Ukraine in 1916, for the thousands of untended Russian casualties who lay bleeding, unbandaged, and without morphine among the flyblown corpses on the battlefield. When, in 1917, the first Russian Revolution hit Petrograd, she found herself 'looking into the mouth of a revolver with a fierce Russian behind it. I pushed the revolver away and laughed at the soldier, who let me pass' (Blunt, 109). The British and French authorities then asked her to organize civil relief in the south that had not yet fallen to the Bolsheviks, so she went to Odessa. On learning that the situation in Kiev was still worse, she left for Kiev to find her food kitchens for 6000 people there under bombardment. The Bolshevik siege was victorious, and she and other British subjects had to be evacuated from Russia in February 1918, via Siberia, Japan, and America. 
'[Lady Muriel] never distinguished... between Imperial and Socialist Russia' (R. Byron, 'The Times', 21 June 1938). Being politically colour-blind, she was immune to the twentieth century's terrible selective indignation and selective compassion. In December 1919 she founded a Women and Children of Russia Relief Fund to support a hospital in the Crimea -- until Wrangel's White Russian campaign was defeated in November 1920. Then, during the Russian famine, she was permitted to return to the Soviet Union to try to set up child welfare centres and a training school for Russian nurses. That project was less successful than was her amazing relief work elsewhere in eastern Europe -- in Slovakia, the Baltic states, Romania, and Poland, often in conjunction with the recently established Save the Children Fund. As Harold Nicolson had reported during the Versailles conference of 1919: ''Her energy is terrifying. She sends Prime Ministers scuttling at her behests'... [and] 'Protegez-moi, protegez-moi de cette dame!' cried Benes, the Czechoslovak foreign minister' (Blunt, 136-7). For while the male leaders were debating the political frontiers of Europe, Muriel Paget was travelling indefatigably, telephoning, writing letters, and lobbying day and night for Europe's sick, starving children. 'Collect all the milk you can up to 60 tons or more. Clear all the stores and get permission for export... Try to get 'fats' at all price' (Blunt, 137). And her relief train duly left Paris for Prague. One very important part of the Paget Mission was the training of local paediatric nurses in Czechoslovakia and elsewhere so that sanitation, isolation, and inoculation procedures could be carried out in the war against typhus and tuberculosis. 
In the new Baltic states of Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia the chaotic civil wars of revolution and counter-revolution continued into the 1920s. When Muriel Paget found herself on one of these battlefields she tied a white jersey to a stick and was waved through. The people of Riga, Taunus, Vilna, and Dvinsk owed their earliest food kitchens, feeding centres, infant clinics, and travelling first aid units to the Paget Mission nurses and volunteer social workers she had recruited on one of her lightning fund-raising visits to London. By 1922 all these countries' governments had taken over the work she had inaugurated. Nevertheless she had been subjected to criticism at home in 'John Bull' and the Northcliffe press for not putting British needs first. 
In 1924 Muriel Paget began work on her last rescue operation, on behalf of the destitute, stranded Britons in Russia -- elderly governesses, nurses, former employees of former British firms. Her organization on their behalf became known as the British Subjects in Russia Relief Association. At first she sent them money and food parcels, but by 1930 she realized she had to intervene in person and, accompanied by a social worker Dorothea Daunt, made frequent visits to Leningrad to keep up morale. 'When someone tried to dissuade her, saying that her proteges were 'mere riff-raff', she said, 'I know. That's why I want to save them. No one else will.'' (Blunt, 243). Despite the bogus charge of espionage rustled up against her in the Rakovsky show trial, she succeeded in evacuating 'her' stranded Britons to Estonia in 1938 -- so they escaped being deported to the gulag. 
Lady Muriel's work brought her into frequent contact with the British consul-general in Moscow and then Leningrad, Reader Bullard, whose diaries, in which she is variously described as 'mad' and a 'kind of steam-roller', record his reactions to her interventions, and leave the impression that she was 'a classic do-gooding pest' (Pryce-Jones). 'When Lady M. is about all you can do is walk about and wait until she has gone', he wrote of one meeting with her ('Stalin's Russia', 19-20). Yet he acknowledged that 'when one is exasperated by her incompetence and dishonesty one forgets her courage' (ibid., 174). Those whom she saved between 1905 and 1938 would have more than reinforced this verdict. She died at her London home, 1 Devonshire Terrace, of cancer and exhaustion on 16 June 1938, having been appointed OBE in 1918 and CBE in 1938 as well as having received decorations from Belgium, Japan, imperial Russia, Romania, Czechoslovakia, Lithuania, and Latvia. The hundreds of condolence letters came from people of every social class from all over the world. She was buried at Cranmore, Shepton Mallet, Somerset. 


@@@@@


doc= 35358


Paget, Sir Richard Arthur Surtees, second baronet (1869-1955), barrister and scientific investigator, was born at Cranmore Hall, Somerset, on 13 January 1869, the eldest son of Sir Richard Horner Paget, first baronet (1832-1908), of Cranmore, MP, and his wife, Caroline Isabel (died 1946), daughter of Henry Edward Surtees, of Redworth Hall, co. Durham. He was educated at Eton College and at Magdalen College, Oxford, where he obtained a third class in chemistry in 1891; he was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1895, and succeeded his father in 1908. 
Paget's legal and scientific background, together with his engaging personal qualities, fitted him admirably for such tasks as secretary to several boards and committees, including the patent law committee (1900) and the submarine and electrical section of the Admiralty board of invention and research (1915-18). He contributed to both scientific and artistic departments of knowledge, such as acoustics, music, architecture, town planning, agriculture, anthropology, and human speech, besides cultivating practical music and artistic crafts such as pottery and drawing. His penetrating foresight made him appear ahead of his time. This was certainly true with regard to the streamlined car he designed in 1910, and to some aspects of speech: his book, 'Human Speech', first published in 1930, was reissued in 1964 because of its connection with developments in communication engineering. 
Paget's most important original investigations were those connected with language, not only in regard to phonetics and the technique of vocalization, or linguistics and vocabulary -- to all of which he added new conceptions -- but in the most fundamental processes and means through which individuals can transfer ideas from one to another. His famous theory of pantomimic action of the tongue and lips explained lucidly how language arises at all and related it directly to the senses and affections. From this followed naturally his special interest in the communication problems of deaf mute people. He laid down the principles for an entirely new approach in communication with deaf and deaf mute people by means of a systematic sign language, the further development of which was continued after his death. 
Paget was well equipped for work in language and speech as he possessed a remarkable musical aural sensitivity which enabled him to give widely known improvisatory musical performances; he was also genial, deeply sympathetic, and capable of great affection for young and old alike -- hence his efforts on behalf of those deprived of the powers of speech and hearing. From 1953 he was president of the British Deaf and Dumb Association. Esteemed as a lecturer and research worker, Paget was an active member of several learned societies: fellow of the Institute of Physics, the Physical Society, and the Royal Anthropological Institute, honorary associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects, honorary associate member of the Town Planning Institute, and member and sometime manager of the Royal Institution. 
Paget married, on 31 May 1897, Lady Muriel Evelyn Vernon Finch-Hatton (1876-1938) ['see 'Paget, Lady Muriel Evelyn Vernon], only daughter of the twelfth earl of Winchilsea; they had two sons (one of whom died in infancy) and three daughters. His second wife, whom he married on 22 July 1939, was Grace Hartley Glover, only daughter of Walter Herbert Glover, of Birkdale and Grasmere. Paget died at his home, 9 Alexandra Court, Queen's Gate, London, on 23 October 1955. He was survived by his second wife and four children. 
Paget's youngest child and only surviving son, 


@@@@@


doc= 35359


Paget, Sidney Edward (1860-1908), painter and illustrator, was born on 4 October 1860 at 60 Pentonville Road, London, the fourth son of Robert Paget, a vestry clerk from 1856 to 1892 of Clerkenwell and his wife, Martha Clarke. He received his early education at the Cowper Street School in London and afterwards attended the Heatherley School of Fine Art. In 1881 he entered the Royal Academy Schools, where he was preceded by his brothers Henry Marriott and Walter Stanley, both well-known artists and illustrators. At the Academy Schools he won, among other prizes, second place in 1885 in the Armitage competition and first place and medal in 1886 for his 'Balaam Blessing the Children of Israel'. Between 1879 and 1905 Paget contributed to the Royal Academy exhibitions eighteen miscellaneous paintings, of which nine were portraits. The best known of his pictures, 'Lancelot and Elaine', exhibited in 1891, was presented to the Bristol Art Gallery by Lord Winterstoke. Among the portraits painted by Paget were 'Dr Weymouth' (exh. RA, 1887), headmaster of Mill Hill School, depicted in a three-quarter-length painting dressed in scarlet robes as DLitt; his father, and his brother Robert Ernest (his father's successor as vestry clerk), both displayed in the town hall, Finsbury; Sir John Aird, as mayor, which hung in Paddington town hall; and the journalist Sir William Henry Wills (exh. RA, 1901). 
It was as an illustrator that Paget won a wide reputation. His vigorous work as a black and white artist became well known not only in the United Kingdom but also in America and the colonies through his drawings for the 'Pictorial World' (1882), for 'The Sphere', and for many of Cassell's publications. He also drew occasionally for 'The Graphic', the 'Illustrated London News', and the 'Pall Mall Magazine'. Paget's spirited illustrations for Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's 'Sherlock Holmes' and 'Rodney Stone' in the 'Strand Magazine' greatly assisted in popularizing those stories. The assertion that the artist's brother Walter, or any other person, served as model for the portrait of Sherlock Holmes is incorrect. 
On 1 June 1893 Paget married Edith ('b'. 1865/6), daughter of William Hounsfield, a farmer; they had six children. During the last few years of his life he suffered from a painful chest complaint, to which he succumbed at 16 Surrey Road, Margate, on 28 January 1908. He was buried at Marylebone cemetery, Finchley. 


@@@@@


doc= 35360


Paget, Stephen (1855-1926), writer and pro-vivisection campaigner, was born on 17 July 1855 at 24 Henrietta Street, Cavendish Square, London, the fifth child and fourth son of Sir James Paget, first baronet (1814-1899), surgeon, and his wife, Lydia (1815-1895), daughter of the Revd Henry North, domestic chaplain to the duke of Kent. He attended Marylebone and All Souls' Grammar School, Regent's Park, London, before enrolling at Shrewsbury School, where his paternal uncle Alfred had been mathematics master. Paget remained there from 1870 to 1874. He entered Christ Church, Oxford, on 16 October 1874: he was Fell exhibitioner from 1876 to 1880, and in 1878 took second-class honours in classical moderations and Greats. While in Oxford he studied basic medical sciences, but did not seek a university medical degree. On 1 October 1878 he entered St Bartholomew's Hospital medical school (where his father was no longer on the active staff). He served as house surgeon to Thomas Smith, once a student, now a friend of his father. He qualified FRCS in 1885 and took up medical practice. 
Paget married, on 17 September 1885, Eleanor Mary (Nell) Burd (1853/4-1933), second daughter of Edward Burd, a Shrewsbury physician. A talented painter, she studied at the Slade School before their marriage, and Paget had a studio built for her at their home, 57 Wimpole Street. The couple had two daughters, Eleanor ('b'. 1888) and Dorothea ('b'. 1890). 
Paget's medical career did not prove to be as successful as his father's. He had a brief sojourn at the Western General Dispensary, gained full surgical appointments at the Metropolitan and West London hospitals, and served as assistant in the surgical out-patients' department at the children's hospital, Great Ormond Street. However, to his great disappointment, in seven years there he failed to win a post on the surgical staff. Furthermore, none of these institutions had the prestige of the teaching hospitals. His only appointment of this sort came late; in 1897 he was named aural surgeon to the Middlesex Hospital, becoming consulting surgeon in 1917. Paget abandoned general surgery in 1897 at the age of forty-two, and in 1910 he ceased practising medicine until 1917, during the First World War. 
Contemporaries said he was unsuited to a surgical career. He himself later recalled that he never made an adequate living from his practice, earning 'only a few hundred pounds a year' ('Oct 5th, 1925, etc.', 10, in S. Paget, 'Memoir'). His medical career was always carried out in the shadow of his father's success. In 'Confessio medici' (1908) Paget warned young men of the dangers of following in a distinguished father's profession. He likened the outcome to that of Icarus trying to fly on wings his father had made, and falling instead into the sea. Two decades later he expressed this view more personally: 'I know that I achieved some good... saved some lives.... But the cloud of regrets and mistakes is over the whole thing, and if I could start again, I could not be a surgeon' ('Memoir', 117). 
While his surgical career disappointed him, Paget found gratification in other spheres: particularly in the arena of medical politics and propaganda and in the world of letters. His activities as a propagandist resulted from his commitment to vivisection for medical research. The 1877 legislation to prevent cruelty to animals had led to the creation of the Association for the Advancement of Medical Research (AAMR), and Paget was named its secretary in 1888. By 1908 the AAMR was defunct, and Paget took the leadership in establishing a new body, the Research Defence Society (RDS), to support vivisection in medical research. He became honorary secretary, and served as editor of the society's journal, 'The Fight Against Disease'. Between 1891 and his death Paget published a number of reports and essays on vivisection. He organized, lectured, and campaigned endlessly in support of the benefits that could come from the use of animals in medical research. 
Paget's third (and perhaps most successful) career was that of biographer and essayist. Between 1897 and 1919 he published biographies of Ambroise Pare, John Hunter, Louis Pasteur, his father James, his brother-in-law H. L. Thompson (with his sister Catharine Paget Thompson), his brother Francis Paget (with J. M. C. Crum), his friend Henry Scott Holland, and the surgeon Sir Victor Horsley. Beginning with 'The Young People' 'by one of the old people' (1906), he established himself as an eloquent and accessible writer for young people (and often the elders as well). His self-deprecating humour, his classical learning, and his lack of self-righteousness made him a popular writer in his generation. His prose had a delicacy of touch that allowed him to take up potentially controversial subjects such as sex education and venereal disease without giving offence. Perhaps because he was the father of daughters, his writings always reflected his recognition that young people were both 'he' and 'she'. 
With the outbreak of war in 1914 Paget gave of his expertise and time to the health of soldiers. He lectured at military camps on hygiene and vaccination, and in 1916-17 went to Russia, where he served on the staff of the Anglo-Russian Hospital in Petrograd. His health, never robust, deteriorated during his stay there, and he returned to England. 
To some, Stephen Paget seemed shy, even diffident. Others found in him a warm friend. One contemporary said he was 'a delightful and lovable companion, one who drank the wine of life as a gentleman, thankful if the vintage were sound, tolerant of other men's tastes, and holding to conviction without intruding a strong religious feeling' ('The Times', 20 May 1926). He retired, in ill health, in 1917, and died at his home, Furzedown, in Limpsfield, Surrey, on 8 May 1926. 


@@@@@


doc= 35361


Paget, Violet (1856-1935), art historian and writer, was born on 14 October 1856 at Chateau St Leonard, near Boulogne, France. Her mother, Matilda (1815-1896), was the daughter of Edward Hamlin Adams (1777-1842), who came from a wealthy planter's family in Kingston, Jamaica, but made his own fortune from a variety of West Indies business ventures, some of a questionable nature, and eventually purchased Middleton Hall, Carmarthenshire. Despite his strongly voiced opinions against conventional religion and education, he became a member for the county in the reform parliament of 1832. On his death, his sons carried on only their father's contentiousness, not his ability in business, with one brother challenging the legitimacy of the other's children; the resulting litigation blocked all of Edward's children from their inheritance for several years. 
Vernon Lee's father, Henry Ferguson Paget (1820-1894), was reputedly the son of a French emigre nobleman who, after settling his family in Warsaw, founded a college for the nobility. Henry, after attending his father's college, undertook various soldiering missions until his involvement in the Warsaw uprising of 1848 forced him to flee to Paris. Meanwhile, Matilda Adams, facing limited financial resources on the death of her first husband, a Captain Lee-Hamilton, also moved to Paris in 1852 with her son from that marriage, Eugene Lee-Hamilton (1845-1907). At that time, Henry Paget was engaged as Eugene's tutor, a position he held until 1855, when he and Matilda were married. Vernon Lee was the much beloved only child of their marriage. 
The Paget household moved at least twice yearly from one place on the continent to another, through France, Germany, Switzerland, and Italy, with the result that Vernon Lee gained fluency in four languages as well as an instinctive internationalist perspective. While she was still very young, both her mother and her half-brother, Eugene, determined that she was to be another Madame de Stael, so that Vernon Lee was raised 'in an atmosphere of fantastic prodigy-worship', as Ethel Smyth later described it (Smyth, 51). In a portrait of her mother in 'The Handling of Words' Vernon Lee commented that her mother had taught her to write with 'common sense and good manners' ('The Handling of Words', 1923, repr. 1968, 297). While Eugene was studying at Oxford and later serving at a Foreign Office post in Paris, his letters to his mother and sister make clear his preoccupation with 'Baby's intellectual development'. In return, Vernon Lee would dutifully send him essay-like letters in her most careful French, which he would then correct. As a writer, Vernon Lee would pay tribute to Eugene's role in her education when she took on part of his surname as hers in her pseudonym. She also acknowledged his influence in her writings in her dedication to him of 'Baldwin: being Dialogues on Views and Aspirations' (1886). From 1875 until 1894 an almost complete paralysis confined Eugene to an invalid's existence at home, but Vernon Lee became her half-brother's representative to the London literary establishment and sought to interest publishers in his poetry. 
Another important influence on Vernon Lee's intellectual development was her childhood friend the American painter John Singer Sargent, whom she first met in Nice when they were ten. During the winter of 1868-9, when they were with their families in Rome, their shared interests, especially in music, and their similar precocity led them to spend so much time together that when John later wrote to Vernon Lee, he described himself as her twin. At this time too, the young friends determined that in their future lives he was to be a painter, she a writer. John's mother, Mary Newbold Sargent, was also an early muse for the young writer. It was during her frequent excursions with the Sargent family in Rome that Vernon Lee acquired from Mrs Sargent what was to be a lifelong appreciation of antiquities and of the true spirit of place. In 1881, on meeting Vernon Lee after a separation of many years, John Singer Sargent painted the portrait of his childhood friend now in the Tate collection. It was clear from the result that he had not forgotten his knowledge of her. Vernon Lee would write to her mother that everyone thought the portrait characteristic of her, and she agreed with them, describing herself in it as appropriately 'fierce and cantankerous' ('Vernon Lee's Letters', 65). 
As her literary mentor during the earliest stages of her career and as her guide to the London literary establishment, Vernon Lee was to choose Camilla Jenkin, a successful popular novelist and family friend. Vernon Lee's letters to her from 1871 to 1878 are a detailed record of the emotional and intellectual development of a gifted young woman of letters. In one of the most memorable of these, dated 28 June 1871, the fifteen-year-old Vernon Lee describes her visit to Rome's Bosco Parrasio on the Janiculum, the site of the long-forgotten eighteenth-century Arcadian Academy and the meeting-place of the leading Italian men of letters. Together with her special attachment to the music of this period, this visit was to confirm eighteenth-century Italy as the focus of her scholarship. She tells Mrs Jenkin how, having recently read Metastasio's works and now having recognized his portrait as a member of the Arcadian Academy, she has decided on her first major literary project: 'I now think that Metastasio having lived from one end of his century to the other, having known all the celebrated writers of the 18th century, amongst whom indeed he is perhaps the most admirable and at the same time the most vilified by the modern Italian school, he might with propriety be taken as a specimen of Italian thought of that period, and his life, his friends, his works and his times form an interesting work. ('Vernon Lee's Letters', 26)' In addition, she writes, the current custodian of the academy, impressed by Vernon Lee's knowledge, has offered to lend her all the volumes from the archives that she might require for her work. This letter to Mrs Jenkin records a highlight of Vernon Lee's research into the culture of the Italian eighteenth century, begun at the age of thirteen, when, as she described it, she had done so still under the inspiration of 'an unconscious play instinct', but it was Mrs Jenkin who would give Vernon Lee the practical guidance she needed to transform into the pioneering scholarship of her first book, 'Studies of the Eighteenth Century in Italy' (1880), her 'lumber room full of discarded mysteries and of lurking ghosts' ('Studies', 2nd edn, 1907, xvi). Published when she was twenty-four, it was the culmination of ten years of arduous study, much of it of manuscripts of original materials. Often cited as responsible for reviving interest in eighteenth-century Italian drama and music, 'Studies of the Eighteenth Century in Italy' in addition pays special attention in individual chapters to the comedy of masks, the work of Goldoni, and 'Carlo Gozzi and the Venetian fairy comedy'. It was greeted with critical and scholarly acclaim and was to remain a classic reference work for scholars until the early 1960s. Above all, it demonstrates the young Vernon Lee beginning to carve out a unique domain for herself as a woman writer, as she defines herself as 'neither a literary historian nor a musical critic, but an aesthetician' whose role encompasses both fields ('Studies', 1880, 1). 
In 1881, on the first of her almost annual visits to England from her family's new permanent residence in Florence, Vernon Lee found that her literary success brought her numerous invitations to the most notable literary and artistic circles of the time. Robert Browning and Walter Pater, it was said, were among her admirers. She soon became known for her tailored dress, with high Gladstone collar and starched shirtfront, her clever conversation, and her piercingly intelligent eyes behind her spectacles. From this first visit until 1894 Vernon Lee recorded all that she observed and all that she experienced of literary London in detailed 'letters home', intended to entertain her family in Florence. 
Throughout the 1880s and the 1890s Vernon Lee's reputation was enhanced, as she published supernatural and historical short fiction, travel impressions, and personal recollections, as well as essays on religious belief, aesthetics, and literary criticism. In 1884 alone she published three books: 'Euphorion, being Studies of the Antique and the Mediaeval in the Renaissance'; 'The Countess of Albany', a biography of the Princess Louise of Stolberg; and 'Miss Brown', a three-decker novel about a beautiful servant-governess who is 'discovered' and subsequently educated by a wealthy aesthetic painter-poet. While the first two works were well received in literary circles, and are still considered among Vernon Lee's finest, 'Miss Brown' was 'a deplorable mistake' (Gunn, 104) in the words of Henry James, to whom it was dedicated 'for good luck'. She had seriously misjudged the response of those she had come to know among London's writers and artists. She had intended her first novel to be a thought-provoking satire of a 'fleshly school' of poetry and painting resembling the Pre-Raphaelites. Instead, many readers were shocked by her impropriety in presenting what appeared to be only thinly disguised caricatures of well-known people in an embarrassingly over-written novel. From the 'succes de scandale' of 'Miss Brown', Vernon Lee's reputation was never fully to recover. 
Vernon Lee would also misjudge the popular response to her pioneering work in the field of psychological aesthetics, a development of the new 'scientific' school that had begun to dominate German aesthetic thought in the late 1870s. Her interest in the field grew out of the most significant love relationship of her life, her romantic friendship with Clementina (Kit) Anstruther-Thomson, a painter who was concerned with 'what art 'does with us'', that is, with exploring the connection between the perception of artistic form and the human response. Beginning in the early 1890s, the two women, living together at least six months of every year in Florence and working as collaborators, undertook practical experiments to document physiological responses to art and studied psychology and physiology in order to learn the new methodology of experimentation and analysis. Their work would eventually lead them to discover 'in an entirely empirical way... the general principle of an aesthetics of 'empathy'' (Wellek, 169). Through their major publication together, 'Beauty and Ugliness and other Studies in Psychological Aesthetics' (1912), they were to introduce this new aesthetics into an English aesthetic tradition that had long been dominated by Walter Pater's theories. But it is 'The Beautiful: an Introduction to Psychological Aesthetics' (1913), commissioned as part of the 'Cambridge Manuals of Science and Literature' series and written by Vernon Lee alone, that represents a more significant contribution to the advance of English aesthetics. It offers a brilliant synthesis of Vernon Lee's and Kit Anstruther-Thomson's principles of empathy with the latest theories of the German aestheticians. Yet this contribution has never been fully appreciated, except in histories of modern aesthetics, because its serious consideration demanded a difficult technical presentation. Even close friends such as Ethel Smyth and Irene Cooper Willis doubted the seriousness of the two collaborators' intentions and in later recollections of the two women's aesthetic experiments ridiculed them. Vernon Lee's immersion in psychological aesthetics would influence two other works by her -- 'The Handling of Words and other Studies in Literary Psychology' (1923), which, in adapting her methodology in the study of artistic form to the analysis of literary texts looks ahead to 'new criticism', and 'Music and its Lovers: an Empirical Study of Emotional and Imaginative Responses to Music' (1932), which introduced terminology and perspectives from the aesthetics of artistic form into the aesthetics of music. 
While originally defining herself as a cross between the bluestocking and the nineteenth-century man of letters, Vernon Lee's broadening interests in contemporary literary and social theory and in international politics gave her a new role as a twentieth-century intellectual. Her curiosity had led to her fascination with new developments in psychology, which, in turn, not only enriched her fiction but deepened her analysis of social and moral issues as her collections of essays, 'Gospels of Anarchy and other Contemporary Studies' (1908) and 'Proteus, or, The Future of Intelligence' (1925), demonstrate. To the role of woman of letters she added the dimension of travel writer, becoming one of the finest, most original of all time. She published seven collections of travel essays in her lifetime, from 'Limbo and other Essays' in 1897 to 'The Golden Keys and other Essays on the Genius Loci' in 1925. In each she transforms the conventional 'genius loci' genre of travel writing through a unique sensitivity to place and a particularly graceful style. Vernon Lee's gift in these essays for easily combining imagination with great learning would later be admired by Aldous Huxley and Desmond MacCarthy, while Edith Wharton would pay tribute to what she had learned from her in her dedication of 'Italian Villas and their Gardens' to 'Vernon Lee, who, better than any one else, has understood and interpreted the garden-magic of Italy' (1904, v). It is also significant that Irene Cooper Willis, one of Lee's closest friends, would recall Vernon Lee most clearly in the light of this special gift: 'I see her best in my mind's eye, standing by some old building, wrapped in her homespun cloak... waiting, entranced, for the spirit of place to take possession of her' ('Vernon Lee', 'Colby Library Quarterly', June 1960, 115-16). 
In the years just before the First World War, Vernon Lee added a political dimension to the role of woman of letters. Closely observing the death of Liberal England and the rise of the labour and suffrage movements, she used her pen in defence of women's equality, economic justice, international co-operation, and anti-militarism in a wide range of publications. During the war, she became a member of the anti-war Union of Democratic Control and a supporter of the women's peace crusade that would culminate in an International Congress of Women at The Hague. In 1915 she would write one of her most moving works, the anti-war morality play 'The Ballet of the Nations', and in 1920, setting it within a philosophical commentary, she republished it as 'Satan the Waster'. In 'Out of the limelight' (1941), Desmond MacCarthy wrote of the work that it is 'an anti-war classic', 'the most thorough literary analysis of war neurosis' ('Humanities', 1853, 192). Yet appearing when it did, so soon after the war, when few people were ready for self-examination, it fell into literary oblivion. 
Throughout the 1920s and early 1930s, Vernon Lee was painfully aware of her isolation and lack of power as a writer. She died on 13 February 1935 at her home, Villa Il Palmerino, Maiano, San Gervasio, Florence; after cremation her ashes were buried in the Allori cemetery in Florence in the grave of her half-brother, Eugene. Her rich and complex legacy still remains largely untouched. Desmond MacCarthy gives the best sense of it: 'Mr Birrell once said that a man could live like a gentleman for a year on the ideas that he would find in Hazlitt; and the remark applies also to her. Her essays swarm with ideas' ('Out of the limelight', 189). Still to be rediscovered are her individual masterly achievements such as the play 'Ariadne in Mantua' and 'The Handling of Words', and the full range of her influence on other writers and artists is, as yet, unappreciated. Vernon Lee deserves to be recognized for the exceptional life she led as a woman of letters. 


@@@@@


doc= 35362


Pain, Barry Eric Odell (1864-1928), writer, was born at 3 Sidney Street, Cambridge, on 28 September 1864, one of the four children of John Odell Pain, linen draper of Cambridge, and his wife, Maria, 'nee' Pain. After attending Sedbergh School from 1879 to 1883, he went up to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. Awarded a scholarship in 1884, he graduated in 1886, obtaining a third class in part one of the classical tripos. He then spent four years as an army coach at Guildford before moving to London in 1890 to devote himself to writing. 
Pain had contributed to 'Granta' at Cambridge with much success and soon obtained regular work from the 'Daily Chronicle' and 'Black and White'. In 1891 he published his first book, 'In a Canadian Canoe', compiled from his 'Granta' pieces. Shortly afterwards he was invited by James Payn, editor of the 'Cornhill Magazine', to become a contributor. He soon made his name as a novelist and writer of short stories, mainly of a humorous nature, publishing books at yearly intervals. 
Pain's dislike of banality led him to satirize the stock characters and accepted formulas of Victorian fiction. His parodies of the best-selling novels of the time displayed an iconoclastic approach to well-worn literary conventions, and made him and other apostles of the 'new humour' popular, although in their day they aroused as much criticism as they did enthusiasm. 
On 2 June 1892 at Emmanuel Church, Maida Vale, London, Pain married Amelia Nina Anna (1865/6-1920), daughter of the portrait painter Rudolf Lehmann (1819-1905) and sister of Liza Lehmann, the composer. They had two daughters. A burly, bearded figure who enjoyed family life and foreign travel, Pain was a man of many interests including Georgian literature, occult lore, and precious stones. It is typical that he gave up writing for a year to learn to draw. 
In 1897 Pain succeeded Jerome K. Jerome as editor of 'To-Day' and, three years later, published the first of the Eliza books for which he is now best remembered. Although 'Eliza' (1900) was rejected by many publishers including those who were publishing his other books, it proved to be an instant success. A series of domestic sketches narrated by a despotic and fussy London clerk, it reflected an aspect of the everyday life of his readers. Pain had success with other sketches of working-class life -- the charwoman Mrs Murphy and the scrounging gardener Edwards are good examples -- but his public wanted more of Eliza, and he produced four sequels in the next twelve years. 
At the outbreak of the First World War, Pain was touring the United States. Although well over age, he returned to join the anti-aircraft section of the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve in April 1915. Posted to a searchlight station on Parliament Hill, north London, he attained the rank of chief petty officer but the eye-strain caused by this work eventually forced him to abandon it. In 1917 he became a member of the London Appeal Tribunal, adjudicating on claims for exemption from military service. 
Although Pain is best-known today for his humorous working-class sketches, it was his serious writing that earned critical acclaim during his lifetime. He was admired for his narrative ability and economy in a range of books that included novels, fantasies, a theological study, a detective story, and a series of parodies that were widely admired. In all, he wrote over sixty books and a mass of uncollected articles and short stories in every conceivable vein, and it is possible that the diversity of his writing meant that he never developed the reputation he deserved. If it is ironic that Pain is now best remembered for 'Eliza' and the sequels he produced in response to popular demand, it is also true that their wit and detailed description of suburban life and snobbery stand up very well today and led to a television series and reissue of the stories in the 1980s. Barry Pain died of heart disease on 5 May 1928 at his home, 69 Bushey Grove Road, Bushey, Watford, Hertfordshire, and was buried in the Bushey parish churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 35363


Pakenham, Sir Francis John (1832-1905), diplomatist, born on 29 February 1832 in London, was the fourth son of Thomas Pakenham, second earl of Longford, and his wife, Emma Charlotte, daughter of William Lygon, first Earl Beauchamp ['see under 'Lygon, Frederick (1830-1891)]. After private education he matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 17 October 1849. On leaving the university he was appointed attache at Lisbon in 1852, and was promoted paid attache at Mexico two years later. He was transferred in 1858 to Copenhagen, and in 1863 to Vienna. In June 1864 he was promoted to secretary of legation at Buenos Aires. During April, May, and June of the following year he was employed on special service in Paraguay on board HMS 'Dotterel', which had been sent up the River Plate and its tributaries for the protection of British subjects during the war between Paraguay, Argentina, and Brazil. He acquitted himself of this duty to the entire satisfaction of his superiors. In August 1865 he was transferred to Rio de Janeiro, but remained in charge of the legation at Buenos Aires until December. In December 1866 he was employed on special service at Rio Grande do Sul in connection with an attempt that had been made on the life of the British consul, R. de Courcy Perry, from motives of personal revenge. 
Pakenham was transferred to Stockholm in March 1868, and later in the same year to Brussels. From there he went to Washington, DC, in 1870, and to Copenhagen in 1874. In March 1878 he was promoted to minister-resident and consul-general at Santiago, where he remained until 1885, serving in 1883 as British commissioner for claims arising out of the war between Chile and Bolivia and Peru. In February 1885 he was appointed British envoy at Buenos Aires, with the additional office of minister-plenipotentiary to Paraguay. In February 1896 he was transferred to Stockholm, where he remained until his retirement from the service in 1902. He was made KCMG in 1898. In retirement he lived at Bernhurst House, Hurst Green, Sussex, which he inherited in 1858 by the will of Count Pierre Coquet de Tresseilles. Pakenham married on 29 July 1879 Caroline Matilda (died 25 June 1938), seventh daughter of Henry Ward, rector of Killinchy, co. Down. They had no children. Travelling for reasons of health, Pakenham died in Alameda, California, on 26 January 1905. 


@@@@@


doc= 35364


Pakenham, Sir William Christopher (1861-1933), naval officer, was born in London on 10 July 1861, the second son of Rear-Admiral Thomas Alexander Pakenham (1820-1889), the third son of the second earl of Longford, and his wife, Sophia Frances (died 1898), the third daughter of Sir Tatton Sykes, fourth baronet, of Sledmere. He entered the training ship HMS 'Britannia' as a naval cadet in 1874 and, having passed out two years later, went to sea in the 'Monarch' in the Mediterranean, being promoted midshipman in 1876. The following year he was transferred to the frigate 'Raleigh'. Together with an able seaman he was highly commended for gallantry in plunging into the sea and rescuing a coxswain who had fallen overboard as the ship was leaving Larnaka, Cyprus, in August 1878. In September 1879 he joined the 'Alexandra', the flagship of Sir Geoffrey Hornby, and remained in her when Sir F. B. P. Seymour succeeded to the command until he was promoted sub-lieutenant in October 1880. Having undergone the usual gunnery course in the 'Excellent' at Portsmouth he was in December 1882 again appointed to the 'Alexandra' (still the flagship of Lord Alcester); but soon after Lord John Hay had assumed the command he was transferred in April 1883 to the corvette 'Canada', destined to join the North America squadron. In this ship he was a strict though benevolent autocrat of the gun-room mess in which Prince George (afterwards George V) was serving as midshipman. He was promoted lieutenant in October 1883, and was soon brought home again, having been chosen as flag-lieutenant by Rear-Admiral George Tryon (flag in the 'Nelson') during the three years (1884-7) of his command of the new Australia station. 
Pakenham's remaining nine years as lieutenant were spent mainly as gunnery officer of the small cruisers 'Calypso', 'Garnet', and 'Sybille' in the training squadron, and on the Pacific and Mediterranean stations. While in the 'Calypso' he again distinguished himself by a brave attempt to save the life of a petty officer who had fallen into the sea from the foreyard during drill in Kiel harbour. 
After being promoted commander in June 1896, Pakenham served for nine months in the old 'Galatea' (a coastguard ship at Hull) and for eighteen months in the 'Venus' under Sir Berkeley Milne in the Mediterranean. He had qualified as an interpreter in French while on half pay in 1884, and was selected for duty in the naval intelligence department from August 1899 until March 1901. He then commanded the sloop 'Daphne' on the China station, and, after being lent to Rear-Admiral Harry Tremenheere Grenfell's flagship 'Albion' as acting captain early in 1902, returned home in June of that year. He was promoted captain in June 1903. 
The outbreak of war between Russia and Japan was imminent, and Pakenham's experience in intelligence work and his linguistic abilities (although he never learned the difficult Japanese language) marked him out as the officer to succeed Captain Troubridge, who was due for relief in 1904 as naval attache in Japan. War broke out on 6 February 1904 and Pakenham relieved Troubridge in March, taking his place on board the battleship 'Asahi', in which he remained continuously until after the final Japanese victory at Tsushima on 27 May 1905. His reports to the Admiralty throughout the war were brilliantly written and revealed a thorough appreciation of the strategic, tactical, and technical implications of the events and situations which he described. His cool daring in exposing himself to danger in order more completely to observe the proceedings of the great battle much impressed the Japanese, and led the emperor of Japan, on Admiral Togo's recommendation, to confer on him the second class of the order of the Rising Sun. He was specially appointed CB (military division) soon after the battle. 
After returning to England in 1906 Pakenham commanded the cruiser 'Antrim' for two years in the Atlantic Fleet, and then the 'Glory' and the 'Triumph' (a battleship bought from Chile in 1904) in the Mediterranean until January 1910, when he came home to take command of the new battleship 'Collingwood' in the Home Fleet, until December 1911. Winston Churchill, in reconstituting his board soon after taking office as first lord of the Admiralty, selected Pakenham to be fourth sea lord, being impressed by his reputation as an officer of strong character and his unique experience of modern naval warfare. Before Pakenham left the board two years later he had in June 1913 reached flag rank, and in December he took command of the 3rd cruiser squadron of the Home Fleet, with his flag in his old ship 'Antrim'. In March 1915, with his flag in the 'Australia', he took charge of one of the two battle-cruiser squadrons which belonged to the Australian commonwealth and had been willingly lent for service in the Grand Fleet after the victory of the Falkland Islands (8 December 1914) had disposed of German danger in the Pacific. He thus had the titular appointment of rear-admiral commanding the Australian fleet. In the battle of Jutland (31 May 1916) Pakenham's flag was flown in the 'New Zealand', the 'Australia' being under repair at Devonport after a collision with the 'New Zealand' in fog on 22 April. His remaining ship, the 'Indefatigable', was blown up and lost early in the battle. Pakenham distinguished himself by able support of Vice-Admiral Sir David Beatty and was rewarded by appointment as KCB (1916); he was personally decorated with that order and also as KCVO by the king on the occasion of his visit to the fleet at Rosyth in 1917. In November 1916 Beatty became commander-in-chief in succession to Sir John Jellicoe, and on his insistent recommendation Pakenham was appointed to succeed him in the command of the battle-cruiser force (there were many officers with strong claims senior to him but who had seen less service with battle cruisers). He transferred his flag from the 'Australia' to the 'Lion' in January 1917 and retained the command until April 1919, having been promoted acting vice-admiral in June 1917 and been confirmed in that rank in September 1918, and having been present at the surrender of the German fleet in the Forth at the end of the war. 
After a well-deserved rest on half pay Pakenham was appointed president of the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, in August 1919, but at his own request was given another command afloat as commander-in-chief of the North America and West Indies station in October 1920. After two and a half years he returned home. He had been promoted admiral in April 1922 and retired at his own request in March 1926. He long maintained correspondence with his Japanese friends and made a great impression at Geneva in 1927 by travelling from England for the sole purpose of calling upon Admiral Viscount Saito, who had been minister of marine in 1905. He was appointed GCB in 1925 and succeeded Sir C. C. Monro as Bath king of arms in 1930. He resigned from this post only a few days before his death, which took place at San Sebastian, Spain, on 28 July 1933. He was unmarried. 
Pakenham was appointed KCMG (1919), made chevalier of the Legion d'honneur, and given the Croix de Guerre (bronze palms), the first class of the Japanese order of the Rising Sun, the grand cordon of the Chinese order of the Excellent Crop, and the DSM of the United States of America in the post-war award of honours. 
Pakenham was a strong-minded, somewhat austere, able, and well-read officer, wholeheartedly devoted to the service. He was also something of a character, with his faultless care of his personal appearance and dress, his quiet sense of caustic humour, and his studiously polite, if somewhat elaborate, manners. Churchill paid him a notable tribute in 'The World Crisis' (1923). 
Numerous stories are told of Pakenham, as that during the battle of Tsushima the casemate on which he was stationed was struck by a shell, with resulting casualties, and his white uniform was splashed with blood. He quietly left the deck and returned in a few minutes with spotless attire and resumed his notes of the battle. It is also related that while in the Grand Fleet he always slept fully dressed as in daytime, and that he had all the furniture of the admiral's quarters burnt, together with all inflammable articles in the ship, including the deck corticine and the companion ladder, in order to minimize the danger of fire during an action; and he kept only a chair in his bridge cabin. 
V. W. Baddeley', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35365


Palairet, Sir (Charles) Michael (1882-1956), diplomatist, was born on 29 September 1882 at Berkeley, Gloucestershire, the second of three sons of Charles Harvey Palairet, army officer, of Westhill, Ledbury, Herefordshire, and his wife, Emily, 'nee' Henry. He was descended from a French family called Palayret who had fled initially to the Netherlands when Louis XIV revoked the edict of Nantes in 1689. Subsequently the family lived in England. In Palairet's lifetime the family name was best known for the cricketing ability of his older cousins, L. C. H. and R. C. N. Palairet. On his mother's side he was a great-grandson of Thomas Allan, the mineralogist. 
Palairet was educated at Eton College, and then went to Touraine to improve his French and to Weimar to improve his German. He joined the diplomatic service in 1905, and after serving the usual probationary period in the Foreign Office was posted to Rome in 1906. In 1907 he was promoted from attache to third secretary, and in 1908 he was transferred to Vienna, a posting which provided useful experience for his later time there. On 29 June 1915 he married Mary de Vere, daughter of Brigadier-General Herbert William Studd, commanding officer of the Coldstream Guards. They had one son and one daughter. In 1916, while posted to Paris, Palairet and his wife were received into the Roman Catholic church. They were to remain staunch Catholics for the rest of their lives. 
Soon after arriving in Paris in 1913 Palairet had been promoted to second secretary, and in 1917 he was sent to Athens (where he was later to be ambassador). A second period in Paris followed during the peace conference (1918-19), and later in the embassy, after which Palairet was briefly transferred to the Foreign Office, which in those days was quite distinct from the diplomatic service. Palairet's progression through the ranks of the diplomatic service resumed with his posting to Paris as first secretary, as a replacement for Nevile Henderson. He then served variously in Tokyo, during the catastrophic earthquake of 1923 which destroyed the embassy, and in Peking (Beijing) and Rome. As an experienced middle-rank diplomatist, Palairet then became minister to Romania in December 1929. Here their charm and hospitality and keen interest in Romanian culture won the Palairets a wide circle of friends. Prince Carol, who returned from exile and became king in 1930, showed no grudge at having been requested to leave England in 1928 because of his alleged involvement in a plot to place him on the Romanian throne. Good Anglo-Romanian relations, both political and commercial, were established, but German economic and political penetration had become menacing before Palairet left for Stockholm in 1935. 
All this was preparation for the most important posting of Palairet's career, which was to Vienna in December 1937. He spent only a few months there, but this period coincided with the overthrow of the independent Austrian republic in March 1938. Palairet's reporting to the Foreign Office was robust. He told of how Hitler had 'raved like a madman' at the unfortunate Chancellor Schuschnigg in their notorious interview in February 1938 ('Documents on British Foreign Policy', 2/19, no. 50), and admired the chancellor's courage in calling a plebiscite over the issue of Austrian independence. He advised the foreign secretary, Lord Halifax, that it was pointless to send a message to Schuschnigg disclaiming any British responsibility for encouraging a plebiscite. In Palairet's opinion it would 'not have done any good', even though he was sympathetic to the plight of the Austrian government, because Austria was doomed (Palairet to Halifax, 11 March 1938, TNA: PRO, R2478/137/3-22315). Palairet reported that Austrians constantly told him that Britain was their last hope, but there was never any possibility of British intervention to prevent the 'Anschluss'. Subsequently, however, he believed that Schuschnigg's decision to hold the plebiscite was mistaken. Following the 'Anschluss' the British legation in Vienna was closed, and Palairet was recalled to London. In June 1938 Palairet's work in Vienna was recognized by his appointment as KCMG and in September-December he took charge of the British legation in Bucharest during the illness of Sir Reginald Hoare. 
In June 1939 Palairet went as minister to Athens, a welcome appointment. Yet again his period of service was to coincide with a Nazi invasion, in April 1941, following the unsuccessful Italian attack in October 1940. But his diplomacy did not impress his American colleague MacVeagh, who found him intellectually limited, lackadaisical, and in comparison with his predecessor Sir Sydney Waterlow 'as a.22 calibre target pistol to a bell-mouthed blunderbuss' ('Ambassador MacVeagh Reports', 163). The Foreign Office did not share this perception of Palairet, and he retained his accreditation to the Greek government in exile, being promoted ambassador in 1942. He retired in April 1943, but returned to the Foreign Office as a temporary assistant under-secretary, dealing with matters concerning prisoners of war. He remained in this post until July 1948. 
Palairet never secured an embassy in the diplomatic 'magic circle' of Paris, Berlin, Washington, and Moscow. In his retirement he indulged an interest in the translation of German religious books. He died at his home, Lynch Mead, Allerford, Minehead, Somerset, on 5 August 1956. 
Palairet's only daughter, 


@@@@@


doc= 35366


Palgrave, Sir Reginald Francis Douce (1829-1904), clerk of the House of Commons, was born at 26 Duke Street, Westminster, on 28 June 1829, the fourth son of the historian Sir Francis Palgrave (1788-1861) and his wife, Elizabeth Turner (1799-1852). William Gifford Palgrave and Francis Turner Palgrave were his elder brothers. He entered Charterhouse School in 1841 and left in 1845. He was articled to Messrs Bailey, Janson and Richardson, solicitors, of Basinghall Street, London, was admitted solicitor in May 1851, and entered the office of Messrs Sharpe and Field. On 1 August 1857 he married Grace (1832-1905), daughter of Richard Battley, the apothecary. They had a son and five daughters, including Lucy Grace (1861-1960), who married the architect Paul Waterhouse. 
Through the influence of Sir Robert Harry Inglis and other friends of his father Palgrave was appointed to a clerkship in the House of Commons in 1853. From 1866 to 1868 he was examiner of petitions for private bills; he became second clerk assistant in 1868, clerk assistant in 1870, and from 1886 until his retirement in 1900 was clerk of the House of Commons. In 1887 he was made CB, and in 1892 KCB. 
Palgrave's appointment as clerk of the house represented a further advance in the professional status of the clerkship, the foundations for which had been laid by his predecessor Sir Thomas Erskine May, Lord Farnborough. Even in 1886, however, it was still possible to contemplate the appointment to the most senior official post in the Commons of men with no professional experience there. Palgrave became clerk only after the post had been declined by Sir Henry Maine and Charles Lennox Peel. Though personally a strong Conservative, he did not simply reverse his predecessor's notorious readiness to give junior clerkships to the sons of Liberal fathers. Limited competition for posts was introduced, giving for the first time a preference to ability over connection. 
In some respects Palgrave's clerkship was overshadowed by that of his remarkable predecessor. Yet although he lacked May's instinct for procedural development, there is no doubt of the sureness of his grasp of the practice of the house, particularly in the development of questions to ministers. The breadth of his capability was fully displayed in his editorial work (with Alfred Bonham Carter) on the tenth (1893) edition of May's 'Parliamentary Practice', when he undertook structural revision and expansion as well as updating of much of the text, both of which May in his later years had lacked the energy to tackle. 
Most of Palgrave's other published works -- apart from a little guidebook to Reigate (1860; repr. in facsimile, 1973), where he lived until 1870 -- had a parliamentary or historical connection. There were two editions (1869 and 1873) of illustrations of the history and practice of the house, and no fewer than thirteen of 'The Chairman's Handbook' (1877), a guide to the conduct of public meetings. Palgrave was a particular admirer of Cromwell, whose life he wrote (1890; new edn, 1900). He contributed to 'The Athenaeum', the 'Edinburgh Review', 'Macmillan's Magazine', the 'North American Review', and the 'Quarterly Review' on historical subjects. 
From 1870 to 1900 Palgrave lived at an official residence in the Palace of Westminster. For many years after 1870 he spent his summer vacations at a house built for him at Swanage, Dorset. He had much artistic taste, inherited probably from his maternal grandfather, Dawson Turner, and to the end of his life practised watercolour sketching, at which he was fairly proficient, and he was for an amateur an exceptionally skilful modeller in low relief. He was a high-churchman and was churchwarden of St Martin's, Salisbury, where he lived in retirement. Palgrave died at his home East Mount, Milford Without, Salisbury, on 13 July 1904, and was buried in the cemetery there. A village cross at Swanage was erected to the memory of Sir Reginald and Lady Palgrave by members of their family. 


@@@@@


doc= 35367


Palles, Christopher (1831-1920), judge, was born at 5 Lower Gardiner Street, Dublin, on 25 December 1831, the third son of Andrew Christopher Palles, a Dublin solicitor, and his wife, Eleanor Plunkett. Both were members of Roman Catholic families which had adhered to that religion throughout the period of the penal laws. Those laws, which imposed severe disabilities on Catholics, had been significantly relaxed by the time Palles was born. He was educated at Clongowes Wood College, near Dublin, which had been founded by the Jesuits for the education of Catholic boys in 1814. From there he went to Trinity College, Dublin, from which he graduated in 1851 as a senior moderator in mathematics. The school of mathematics in Trinity at that time had a considerable reputation: one of its most famous graduates, Sir William Rowan Hamilton, was internationally known for his work on quaternions. Palles might well have chosen to pursue an academic career in mathematics or philosophy, but at this point, not for the only time, his career was affected by the state of Irish university education, which was to be a controversial political and religious issue until the early years of the twentieth century. Fellowships in Trinity were not open to Catholics, and Palles, who had been admitted as a student in the King's Inns in Dublin in 1849 and had in 1851 started to keep terms in Gray's Inn, London, decided to make the law, rather than mathematics, his career. 
The relaxation of the penal laws had enabled Catholics to be called to the Irish bar since 1793, among them such celebrated advocates as Daniel O'Connell. The King's Inns in Dublin began to provide a course of education for prospective barristers for the first time in 1851, and Palles was among the first Irish barristers to sit the new examinations as a preliminary to being called to the bar in the Hilary term of 1853. He rapidly built up a good practice on the old home circuit, in the counties near Dublin, and he took silk in 1865 at the unusually early age of thirty-three, specializing in chancery law. He was highly regarded by his peers at the bar and played a part in the reforms of the King's Inns which were implemented by the benchers towards the end of the 1860s. He also at this stage became increasingly involved in politics. 
Palles was a Liberal but had no sympathy with the developing movement for Irish home rule led by his great contemporary at the bar, Isaac Butt, and later by Charles Stewart Parnell. The Liberal administration led by W. E. Gladstone, who had yet to declare his support for home rule, appointed him to the post of solicitor-general for Ireland in 1872. A few months later he was promoted to the office of attorney-general for Ireland and almost immediately contested a by-election in Londonderry on behalf of the Liberals. He was opposed, not only by a Conservative, but by a home-rule candidate. 
It was not only his opposition to home rule which involved the Catholic Palles in controversy during the by-election; he was also noticeably reluctant to express support for the Liberal administration's proposals for the establishment of non-denominational university colleges in Ireland. That scheme, which was designed to placate Irish Catholic opinion by providing alternatives to Trinity College, was strenuously opposed by Cardinal Cullen and other members of the Irish hierarchy, who wanted a professedly Catholic university to be established. Palles's views on religion tended to be of the ultramontane variety, supporting as he did the Vatican in its struggle with the new Italian monarchy and, in private at least, he espoused Cardinal Cullen's opposition to the government's university proposals. But his unwillingness to make his views publicly known during the campaign drew down on him the wrath of many of his co-religionists, and the supporters of the home-rule candidate were also unsparing in their invective. One poster read: 'Who is likely to attain the judgeship which will probably be vacant in four months? Palles, of course, for defeating the cause of Ireland in Derry!' 
As a result of the split in the Catholic vote, the Conservative candidate was elected. Palles's defeat in the by-election was a critical event in his career; had he been elected, he would probably have spent the rest of his life involved in politics at Westminster. As it was, just over a year later, in February 1874, at the age of forty-two, he was appointed the chief baron of the Exchequer Division, one of the senior judicial posts in Ireland. He was the youngest Irish judge to be appointed since Tudor times. The vacancy arose just in time for Palles, before Gladstone made way for Disraeli. The story, long current at the Irish bar, that he was appointed by the outgoing prime minister on the platform at Paddington Station as he was about to board the train for Windsor to tender his resignation, is undoubtedly apocryphal (Gladstone does not record a conversation with him that day). 
Palles's brief excursion into politics was darkened by the ferocity of the attacks on him as an unscrupulous careerist. In contrast, his reputation as a judge has always been remarkably high. Several factors contributed to this, one of them undoubtedly being the length of his tenure: his forty-two years on the bench is without parallel in Irish judicial history. He had thus ample time to develop the qualities which equipped him to be an outstanding judge: a powerful intellect, a deep and comprehensive knowledge of the law, and a strong and independent personality. Nor does he seem to have suffered from the mental infirmity, deafness, remoteness from ordinary life, and increasing rigidity of views which marred other lengthy judicial careers. In his case, there were only harmless eccentricities, such as his habit of kicking the bench and twisting his head around as though he were trying to bite his ear off, when he was carried away by the intellectual excitement of a complex legal debate. 
Palles's experience at the Chancery bar was reflected in his judgments in that area of the law, but he was also acknowledged to be a master of the common law. His decisions in both branches of jurisprudence demonstrated his reverence for precedent: he was a passionate believer in the virtues of the system of common law and equity which had developed in Ireland since the twelfth century, but he was also well known for his open-minded approach to novel arguments. His insistence on going out on assize regularly every year almost until his retirement ensured that his knowledge of Irish conditions was not confined to Dublin. 
The reputation of Irish judges in the nineteenth century was not uniformly high. They were seen in some instances as being unduly eager to win favour with the executive. Palles was one of a generation in the later part of the century which did much to redeem the reputation of the judiciary: his robust assertion of the independence of the judges in a 'cause celebre' with a strongly political background at the Connaught winter assizes of 1886 was characteristic. A riot broke out during the course of an eviction and there was evidence that the police had not intervened, apparently on instructions from the executive. Palles caustically observed that the execution of the decrees of the court in a civilized country did not depend on the will of the executive which happened to be in office. 
Two of Palles's reported judgments illustrate his qualities as a judge. In 'Ussher v. Ussher' (1912), his lucid and magisterial survey of the English and Irish law of marriage demonstrated his erudition, his understanding of legal principle, and his capacity for closely knit reasoning. The same qualities were evident in 'O'Hanlon v. Logue' (1906), in which Irish law diverged sharply from English in treating bequests for the celebration of masses, even when said in private, as valid charitable gifts. A remarkable feature of that case is that Palles, having carefully weighed the arguments, had no compunction in reversing a decision he had arrived at to contrary effect at the outset of his judicial career some thirty years earlier. 
In 1877 a unified Irish High Court and Court of Appeal was established for the first time and this involved the abolition of the old Exchequer Division over which Palles presided. That change was not fully implemented, however, until 1897, and it was agreed that even thereafter Palles should retain his title of lord chief baron, which he did until his retirement. It is a measure of the esteem in which he was held that long after his death Irish lawyers continued to refer to him simply by his title: 'I believe there is a decision of the chief baron on the point.' 
Towards the end of his career Palles was again concerned with the contentious topic of Irish university education. He was largely responsible for the drafting of the instrument which led to the establishment of the National University of Ireland, including the new Dublin college, in 1909, thus ending the virtual monopoly of Trinity College in higher education in the capital, which had lasted since the sixteenth century. 
Palles's private life was clouded by tragedy. He married Ellen, the only daughter of Denis Doyle of Dublin, in 1862, while he was still a junior. She was frequently ill and died in 1885. Their only child was mentally handicapped. Palles retired from the bench in June 1916 in his eighty-fifth year, after suffering a slight stroke; he died at his home, Mount Anville House, Dundrum, co. Dublin, on 14 February 1920, and was buried in Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin. He remained a devout Roman Catholic throughout his life. His son, Christopher, died without issue at the age of ninety. 


@@@@@


doc= 35368


Palmer, Sir Arthur Power (1840-1904), army officer, was born on 25 June 1840 at Kurubul, India, the son of Captain Nicholas Power Palmer of the 54th Bengal native infantry, and his wife, Rebecca Carter, daughter of Charles Barrett of Dungarvan, co. Waterford. His father was killed on the retreat from Kabul in 1841, and in 1849 his mother married as her second husband Morgan Crofton, son of Captain Morgan Crofton RN, of co. Roscommon. Educated at Cheltenham College (1852-6), Palmer entered the Indian army on 20 February 1857 as ensign in the 5th Bengal native infantry. He served throughout the uprisings of 1857-9, raising a regiment of Sikhs 600 strong for service in Oudh in March 1858. He received his commission as lieutenant on 30 April 1858, and joined Hodson's horse at Lucknow in the following June. At the actions of Nawabganj and Bara Banki his horse was killed under him, and he was present at minor actions (during one of which he was wounded) in the Oudh campaign until its conclusion on the Nepal frontier, and was mentioned in dispatches. 
In 1861 Palmer was transferred to the Bengal staff corps, and served in the campaign on the north-west frontier in 1863-4, being present in the action with the Mohmands near Shabkadar. He served as adjutant to the 10th Bengal lancers in the Abyssinian expedition of 1868, and his services were favourably noticed by Napier. He had married, in 1867, Helen Aylmer (died 1896), daughter of Aylmer Harris; his second wife, whom he married in 1898, was Constance Gabrielle Richardson (died 1912), daughter of Godfrey Shaw and widow of Walter Milton Roberts. 
Palmer acted as aide-de-camp to General Stafford in the Duffla expedition of 1874-5, and was mentioned in dispatches. In 1876-7 he was on special duty with the Dutch troops in Achin, and fought in several actions in the Dutch war against native forces. He was mentioned in dispatches and received the Dutch cross with two clasps from the Netherlands government. He had been promoted captain in 1869, and served in the Second Anglo-Afghan War (1878-80), when he acted as assistant adjutant and quartermaster-general to the Kurram field force. In the attack on the Paiwar Pass (2 December 1878) Palmer rendered good service by making a feint on the right of the Afghan position, and in January 1879 he accompanied the expedition into the Khost valley. He was mentioned in dispatches, and was given the brevet of lieutenant-colonel on 12 November 1879. From 1880 to 1885 he was assistant adjutant-general in Bengal, becoming colonel in 1883. Two years later he took part as commander of the 9th Bengal cavalry in the expedition to Suakin, and showed great dash and energy throughout the campaign. For his share in the raid on Thakul (6 May 1885) he was mentioned in dispatches. He was made a CB on 25 August 1885. 
During the campaign in Burma in 1892-3 Palmer commanded the force operating in the northern Chin hills. He received the thanks of the government of India, was mentioned in dispatches and government orders, and on 8 May 1894 was made KCB. He became major-general in 1893 and lieutenant-general in 1897. In 1897-8 he served in the Tirah campaign as general officer on the line of communications, and subsequently commanded the 2nd division at the action of Chagru Kotal. He commanded the Punjab frontier force from 1898 to 1900, being promoted general in 1899. On the death of Sir William Lockhart, he was appointed provisional commander-in-chief in India, and member of the executive council (19 March 1900). 
In selecting regiments and commanders for service in South Africa and China in 1900 Palmer showed high administrative capacity, but the provisional nature of his appointment, and a somewhat accommodating character, hardly equipped him to deal with as masterful a viceroy as Curzon. According to his adjutant-general, Smith-Dorrien, Curzon 'snubbed him on every possible occasion', and 'the tone of the minutes on his recommendations was hurtful and trying' (Mason, 395). Palmer was succeeded by Kitchener in 1902. He was made GCIE in 1901, and GCB in 1903. He died at his home, 15 Buckingham Palace Gardens, Westminster, on 28 February 1904, after an operation for appendicitis, and was buried in Brompton cemetery. He was survived by his second wife and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 35369


Palmer, Sir Charles Mark, first baronet (1822-1907), coal-owner, ironmaster and shipbuilder, was born on 3 November 1822 at King Street, South Shields, the fourth child of seven sons and one daughter of George Palmer (1789-1866), a Tyneside merchant and shipowner, and his wife, Maria, daughter of Thomas Taylor of Hill House, Monkwearmouth. Palmer was educated first in South Shields, then at the renowned Bruce's academy in Percy Street, where Robert Stephenson, railway engineer, was formerly a pupil, and at Dr Lockart's, both in Newcastle upon Tyne. A commercial training with Newcastle shipbrokers, followed by a period in a merchant house in Marseilles, prepared Palmer to join his father's business, but instead, aged twenty-two, and regarded as 'an exceedingly active and pushing young man' (Hardy, 76), he became a partner with John Bowes and others in the newly formed Marley Hill Coking Company. 
Bowes, and his partners in the 1839 Marley Hill Coal Company, had secured excellent coking coals at Marley Hill, but the concern languished as none of the partners was willing to dedicate himself to it; taking Palmer into the concerns in 1844-5 proved an astute move. Palmer was managing partner of the two businesses by 1846, rapidly increasing outputs and finding sales in Britain and France, where his earlier contacts helped greatly. In the same year he married Jane Robson (died 1865), daughter of a Newcastle draper, and the couple had four sons. Re-named John Bowes & Partners in 1847, the concern owned fourteen collieries by the 1850s, producing about 1 million tons of coal each year, a twenty-fold increase on the outputs of the early 1840s. 
This astonishing performance was achieved by the purchase of neighbouring collieries, and the rationalization of their railways to provide a direct link to staiths at Jarrow-on-Tyne. But Palmer did not stop there, and seeking to control the company's coal, and coke, shipments, he and his brother, George, leased a shipyard near the staiths in 1851. In 1852 they launched the 'John Bowes', the first successful iron-built, steam-powered, screw-propelled, water-ballasted collier. A revolutionary vessel, it could carry 650 tons of coal to London, and return, inside five days. On the stocks at its launch was the 'James Dixon', capable of carrying 1200 tons and crewed by twenty-one men; it could perform the work of sixteen collier brigs with a combined crew of 144 men. Palmer's yard soon produced 'colliers by the mile', and the coastal coal trade could now compete with the rail-hauled coal suppliers to London, who had threatened it. 
In 1856, Palmer branched into warship-building with the 'Terror', and soon the Jarrow yard was supplying vessels to navies across the world, while another yard, acquired in 1860 at Howden-on-Tyne, built cargo vessels, oil tankers (probably the first yard to do so), and passenger ships. Palmer further diversified into shipping lines, to secure orders for his yards, and became first chairman of the Tyne Shipping Company, established in 1864 by an amalgamation of Tyneside lines. 
Leases on ironstone mines in north Yorkshire, purchases of limestone quarries, and the establishment of iron, boiler, and engine works at Jarrow, gave Palmer total industrial integration, manufacturing ships from their basic raw materials; later, haematite ores were shipped from Spain for steel manufacture. In 1865, perhaps to gain additional capital for further expansion, the Jarrow works was re-formed as Palmer's Iron and Shipbuilding Company Ltd, and although now largely owned by Manchester interests, Palmer remained as its head. By the 1880s it was the largest such concern in the country. When Palmer finally relinquished his position with the company in 1893, the works occupied some three-quarters of a mile of river frontage, had fifteen building slips, and employed 7600 hands; Jarrow's population had increased from 3835 in 1851 to 35,000 in 1891. 
Palmer's industrial success story was somewhat marred by an unfortunate speculation in plate glass manufacture, a venture which caused considerable difficulties for John Bowes & Partners, but his standing as a great Victorian industrialist, a pillar of Tyneside commerce, a benefactor to his adopted town of Jarrow, and a thoughtful and responsible employer, remained assured. He became chairman or president of a number of local, and national, institutions and trade associations; he supported the mechanics' institute, schools, churches, chapels, and hospitals in Jarrow. Through his works' building society nearly half the town's houses came to be owner-occupied; he was the first mayor of Jarrow, and an alderman of the town until his death. 
Palmer's first wife died in 1865 and in 1867 he married Augusta Mary (1844-1875), daughter of Albert Lambert of Paris; they had two sons. Two years after Augusta died he married Gertrude (1845-1918), daughter of James Montgomery of Cranford, Middlesex, and they had a son and daughter. 
After losing as a Liberal at the 1868 election, Palmer became Liberal MP for North Durham in 1874, and then for Jarrow in 1885, holding that seat until his death. He spoke in the House of Commons with authority on matters of shipping and labour, and was a member of the 1884-6 royal commission on the depression of trade and industry. He purchased the Grinkle estate, North Riding of Yorkshire, in 1876, was created baronet in 1886, and finally withdrew from involvement in the Bowes Company in 1895. Ten years earlier, Noble had described him as an 'earnest, clear-headed, practical, and decided' man (Noble, 51); and his achievements were truly formidable. He died on 4 June 1907 at his London home, 37 Curzon Street, Mayfair. He was buried at Easington church, Loftus, North Riding of Yorkshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 35370


Palmer, Sir Elwin Mitford (1852-1906), colonial official, was born in London on 3 March 1852, the second son of Edward Palmer and Caroline, daughter of Colonel Gunthorpe. After education at Lancing College, he entered the finance department of the government of India in 1870, becoming assistant comptroller-general in November 1871. In 1881 he married Mary Augusta Lynch, daughter of Major Herbert Clogstoun VC, with whom he had a son and two daughters. Palmer was seconded briefly to Egypt between 31 December 1878 and 30 April 1879, during the period when the Egyptian khedive sought to reassure the European powers that he would carry through an extensive programme of financial reconstruction. Subsequently, on 16 August 1885, three years after the British occupation, Palmer succeeded Sir Gerald Fitzgerald as director-general of accounts in Egypt. Fitzgerald and Palmer were largely responsible for creating a modern system of public accounts in Egypt. Palmer was created CMG in 1888. In the following year he succeeded Sir Edgar Vincent as financial adviser to the Egyptian government, a key position in the 'veiled protectorate' which Evelyn Baring had created after 1883. As financial adviser, Palmer played a major role in the conversion of parts of Egypt's public debt (the Daira and domains loans) and was closely concerned with the contract for the construction of the Aswan Reservoir. When the National Bank of Egypt was set up in 1898, Palmer resigned as financial adviser to become its first governor. In the same year he became the chairman of the Cairo committee of the Daira Sanieh Company, which had taken over from the government the management of the 'daira' or private estates of Isma'il Pasha. In 1902, he was appointed president of the Agricultural Bank of Egypt, an offshoot of the National Bank. 
Palmer was a shrewd, hard-working man, with long financial training and wide knowledge of accounts; his expertise lay more in public finance than in general administration. The later part of his career was occupied in the commercial development stimulated by Egypt's return to solvency, its buoyant cotton exports and the irrigation and drainage works promoted by British officials. Palmer was made KCMG in 1892, KCB in 1897, and held the grand cordons of the orders of Osmanieh and Mejidiye (conferred formally by the Ottoman sultan). He died in Cairo on 28 January 1906. 


@@@@@


doc= 35371


Palmer, George Herbert (1846-1926), church musician and music scholar, was born at Grantchester on 9 August 1846, the eldest son of Jonathan Palmer, a master printer, of Cambridge, and his wife, Elizabeth, the daughter of Thomas Stevenson, of Rainton, Yorkshire. He was a cousin of the printer and bibliographer William Blades and also of the music critic and historian George Grove. 
Brought up in Cambridge, Palmer was greatly influenced by a friend of his father, the liturgiologist John Mason Neale, and after graduating BA at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1869 was ordained deacon in 1869 and priest in 1871 at Chester. His first curacy was at St Margaret's, Toxteth Park, Liverpool, where he also played the organ and attracted the attention of William Thomas Best, one of the greatest organ virtuosos of the nineteenth century. 
As priest and organist at St Barnabas's Church, Pimlico, from 1876 to 1883, Palmer made the acquaintance of Thomas Helmore, precentor of St Mark's College, Chelsea (1846-77), and one of the pioneers of the revival of Gregorian chant. With G. R. Woodward, the curate of St Barnabas, he began his work on the rediscovery of the authentic plainchant tradition and the adaptation of the chants to English texts. Despite his adaptations being somewhat free, his work in this area was valuable and he was able to keep in touch with the researches of the Benedictine community at Solesmes, near Le Mans, where his music scholarship was greatly respected. Several examples, including 'Sarum Hymn Melodies' and 'Plain Song Manes', were published in the early 1880s by the London Gregorian Choral Association. 
In 1888 Palmer co-operated in the foundation of the Plainsong and Medieval Music Society, to which he later made several contributions. He also actively promoted the training of English religious communities in the liturgical music of the church. He produced 'The Antiphoner and Grail' (1881) and 'Harmonies to the Office Hymn Book' (1891), and issued, through St Mary's Press, Wantage, 'The Sarum Psalter' (1894; 6th edn 1920), 'The Order of Vespers from the Sarum Breviary' (1899), 'The Offices, or Introits' (1904; 3rd edn 1927), and 'A Selection of Grails, Alleluyas and Tracts... from the Sarum Gradale' (1908), as well as many other adaptations of the music of the mass and divine office. 
In 1917 the archbishop of Canterbury, Randall Davidson, acting on a petition from a number of influential musicians, conferred on Palmer a Lambeth degree of Doctor of Music. He was presented for the degree by Richard Runciman Terry, organist and director of music at Westminster Cathedral, demonstrating further the esteem with which Palmer's learning was held outside the Anglican communion. During the same year he went to Oxford, and took over for a time the direction of the music at the church of the Society of St John the Evangelist, Cowley, where he had founded a plainchant tradition many years before. He now had the opportunity to concentrate on perhaps his most important work, 'The Diurnal Noted', the text of which appeared in 1921 under the title 'The Diurnal after the Use of the Illustrious Church of Salisbury'. The manuscript of the music was completed just before his death, part 1 being published in 1926 and part 2 in 1929. 
An apparently single-minded but generous man, Palmer died at his home, 18 Fairacres Road, Oxford, on 20 June 1926, and was buried in the churchyard of St Mary and St John. 


@@@@@


doc= 35372


Palmer, George William (1851-1913), biscuit manufacturer and benefactor, was born in Reading on 23 May 1851, the eldest of the six sons and four daughters of George Palmer (1818-1897), co-founder of Huntley and Palmers of Reading, and his wife, Elizabeth Sarah (1825-1894), daughter of Robert Meteyard, Quaker druggist of Basingstoke. He was educated at the Quaker school of Grove House, Tottenham, and joined his father's firm in 1867, becoming a partner seven years later. He specialized in the production side, two of his brothers and four sons of George Palmer's brother Samuel in due course respectively managing the firm's two departments. In 1879 he married Eleanor, the eldest daughter of Henry Barrett, of Surbiton. They had no children. Soon after their marriage, they ceased to be Quakers and joined the Church of England. 
Despite being a full-time partner in Huntley and Palmers, George William Palmer devoted much time to public affairs. In 1882 he was elected to Reading borough council, serving as mayor in 1888-9 and later becoming alderman. He was Liberal member of parliament for Reading from 1892 to 1895, and again from 1898 to 1904, espousing Gladstonian free-trade views that were at variance with those of his conservatively minded brothers. He believed in the payment of MPs, a step not taken until 1912, and pressed for the Church of England to be freed from all state patronage and control. In addition, he served as justice of the peace both for Reading and for Berkshire. In 1902 he was made freeman of the borough of Reading, his father having been the only other person so honoured. 
In 1898, after the death of George Palmer senior, Huntley and Palmers became a private limited company. There was no chairman until 1904, when George William Palmer was appointed after resigning his parliamentary seat owing to deafness. For the same reason he resigned the company chairmanship in 1906, the year in which he was given the rare honour, as a former back-bencher, of appointment to the privy council. Often absent on lengthy trips abroad, he scarcely provided the lead to the company that might have been expected of its senior family member. Huntley and Palmers' national and international supremacy in biscuit manufacture was being eroded at this time by Peek Frean, and a number of Scottish biscuit makers, some of which, during Palmer's lifetime, established manufacturing plants in England. Huntley and Palmers only reluctantly began heavy advertising in the popular press, and, although turnover in 1912/13 exceeded $1.5 million for the first time, compared with $1.25 million in 1897/8, net profit had increased only from $165,000 to $193,000. 
Palmer's reputation is therefore likely to rest on his benefactions, most notably to Reading University College, on whose council he served from 1902 onwards; he was vice-president from 1905 until his death. He gave $50,000 in memory of his father in 1905, and a recreation ground in 1909. Two years later he and his wife subscribed $100,000 towards an endowment fund of $200,000, intended to enable the college to achieve university status, which it did, in 1926. He founded a scholarship to allow former pupils of Reading School to attend the college. In his will he bequeathed to the college a further $10,000. Over and above 'ad hoc' gifts for building, and other funds of the college, he anonymously contributed large sums in order to wipe out its accumulated debt. 
Like many other sons of formidable entrepreneurial pioneers, he was highly strung, peppery, and obstinate when he judged himself to be in the right. Yet he exercised a strong unifying influence throughout the extended Palmer family. A childless couple, he and his wife loved to entertain children, their parents, and other relatives and friends in the over-large mansion into which he had converted his father's modest Newbury residence of Marlston House. Since he detested the new-fangled motor car, he drove himself regularly in his carriage with a fine pair of horses to Newbury Station 'en route' for Reading or London. His recreations included hunting and shooting. He adopted as his heir a nephew, Ronald, younger son of Sir Edward Bagnall Poulton, and a celebrated rugby football blue and international. Ronald Poulton-Palmer, as he became, was killed in 1915 during the First World War. George William Palmer did not live to see that distressing conflict, dying suddenly of a heart attack at Marlston House, on 8 October 1913. He was buried at Marlston, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35373


Palmer, William Waldegrave, second earl of Selborne (1859-1942), politician, was born at 30 Portland Place, London, on 17 October 1859, the only son and the youngest of five children of Roundell Palmer (1812-1895), politician, who was created earl of Selborne in 1882, and his wife, Lady Laura Waldegrave (died 1885), second daughter of the eighth Earl Waldegrave. He was educated at Temple Grove, East Sheen, and at Winchester College and he entered University College, Oxford, in 1878, graduating with a first in modern history in 1881. When he was only ten his mother urged him not to forget the family motto 'to do my duty in that state of life into which it shall please God to call me', but although he performed ably enough at school and university, he himself recollected that, while at Oxford, 'I hunted and played cards and cricket and tennis and ragged -- I took no part in politics'. He was a JP in Hampshire and joined the county militia. He considered a career in the army, but was persuaded by his father to enter politics, gaining administrative experience as private secretary to his father in the Lord Chancellor's Office, and then to H. C. E. Childers, first at the War Office and then at the exchequer, between 1882 and 1884. On 27 October 1883 he married Lady (Beatrix) Maud Cecil ['see 'Palmer, (Beatrix) Maud (1858-1950)], eldest daughter of Robert Arthur Talbot Gascoyne-Cecil, the third marquess of Salisbury; at the wedding, Salisbury gave the bride away, and Gladstone proposed the toast to the bride and groom. 
When his father was made an earl in 1882 Palmer gained the courtesy title of Viscount Wolmer. He began his political career as a Liberal, standing for the second seat at Coventry and then, in December 1885, winning the Eastern or Petersfield division of Hampshire. Gladstone's conversion to Irish home rule was made public in January 1886, and Wolmer followed his father in opposing it, though not without some misgivings. He decided to vote for the motion by Jesse Collings which turned out Lord Salisbury's administration on 27 January 1886, because in his election speeches he had called on the Liberals to take steps to 'multiply the owners of the land'. When he stood as a Liberal Unionist in June 1886 he was supported by Gladstonian Liberals and opposed by Conservatives. 
Wolmer joined the newly organized Liberal Unionist Party which sought to play an independent political role. The union was the main issue; but Wolmer warned that it would 'rest with the Government [the Salisbury administration] whether we should continue to support them. We cannot entirely abandon our Liberal principles, and support them in reactionary legislation.' From 1886 until his father's death in 1895, Wolmer sat in the Commons. He served as chief whip for the Liberal Unionists, predicting exactly the home-rule majority of forty in 1892. He contested that election in the Edinburgh constituency, mainly because he did not like to compete for his Hampshire seat against Gladstonian Liberals who had been loyal to him in 1885 and 1886. His father's death in 1895 provoked a constitutional issue of whether or not the succession to the peerage necessarily involved forfeiting a seat in the Commons. Selborne and his close friend Lord Midleton had agreed that whoever lost his father first would fight a test case -- a select committee found against him. On 3 June 1895 Lord Rosebery's Liberal government fell and the Liberal Unionists ended their independence, taking office in Lord Salisbury's administration. Selborne was offered the post of under-secretary of state for the colonies under Joseph Chamberlain. 
For the next fifteen years Selborne's career centred on imperial and international affairs: five years in the Colonial Office were followed by a decade divided equally between the Admiralty and the post of governor of the Transvaal and the Orange River Colony, and high commissioner for South Africa. He held these key positions at a time when the British empire confronted some of its most dangerous crises: the South African War, the naval race with Germany and other great powers, the making of the South African Union. This was a period whose mood was fairly caught by Rudyard Kipling's poem, 'Recessional'; and no one was more aware of the vulnerability of the empire than Selborne. His years at the Colonial Office witnessed a series of vexatious disputes, with the United States of America over Venezuela, Portugal over her African possessions, France over Siam and the upper Nile, and the war with the Boer republics in 1899. This assisted Selborne's rise, for the Colonial Office, formerly a backwater, became central to the assertion of British power. He played a difficult role in the Colonial Office, acting as an intermediary between Lord Milner (who became high commissioner in 1897) and the cabinet, supporting Milner in his defence of British interests, but moderating his impatient desire to bring matters to a head. When war broke out, Selborne was appalled at the catalogue of British military disasters, but he took comfort in the reflection that 'we were getting a bit too self-exalted and self-reliant, and therefore... in this temporary anxiety and humiliation is a merciful discipline'. He prepared a memorandum in November 1899, elaborating his views on the future of South Africa; but his attention was soon focused on another, even more important aspect of Britain's international role. On 27 October 1900 he was offered the post of first lord of the Admiralty, which he described as 'the most delectable... for a British subject after that of prime minister'. 
The choice of Selborne as first lord aroused suspicions of nepotism, since he was Lord Salisbury's son-in-law; but he had the administrative and personal gifts essential for the post ['see 'Hotel Cecil]. He was methodical, and possessed great powers of concentration -- indispensable qualities for the large administrative burden. He had the capacity to get the best out of those responsible to him. He overcame the caution of his first sea lord, Lord Walter Kerr, controlled the exuberance of his House of Commons spokesman, H. O. Arnold-Forster, and released, yet disciplined, the ferocious reforming zeal of Sir John Fisher, who became his second sea lord in 1902 and first sea lord in 1904, reflecting that it was 'wholesome for services like the Navy and Army to have occasionally Radicals among their senior officers'. 
Selborne first met Fisher in April 1901, when on a trip to the Mediterranean. He was impressed by Fisher's intelligence and quickness of mind, and believed that with careful management he would 'run straight'. Under Selborne's supervision, Fisher pushed through the great naval reforms: the planning of the 'dreadnought' battleship, the scrapping of obsolete warships, the redistribution of the fleet. Selborne also recognized the need to improve the quality of officer training, and to reduce the social distinction between executive and engineer officers (though this was a less successful reform). He set up a committee on naval reserves, and modernized the navy's technological equipment. The burden of defending the empire was great; and it was increasing at a time, Selborne noted, when Britain's 'two-power standard' -- committing her to maintain a navy the equal to beating the combined strength of the next two strongest naval powers -- was under strain. After 1900 the naval race was joined by Japan and Germany, and this placed an intolerable pressure on British resources. Selborne was among those who believed that the United Kingdom must seek an ally, and, after considering Germany, he supported an agreement with Japan. 
Selborne's initial consideration of Germany appears at odds with one of his major policy decisions -- the redistribution of the fleet, and its concentration against a potential threat in the North Sea. But as early as 1902 he admitted to A. J. Balfour that he had not realized 'the intensity of the hatred of the German nation to this country'. If Britain was to retain her naval pre-eminence, then she must deploy her resources according to the German threat. Moreover, she must not remain a great power, but become a greater one: this meant placing the empire at the centre of her foreign policy, seeking to strengthen its bonds, perhaps even moving towards imperial federation. 
In February 1905 Selborne was finally persuaded to leave the Admiralty and replace Lord Milner in South Africa. He went out of a sense of duty, for the Unionist government was moving towards its inglorious close, and defeat in the next general election was anticipated. Balfour resigned in December 1905, and Selborne found himself serving under Lord Elgin and then Lord Crewe, Liberal colonial secretaries who were not always in sympathy with his aims. He was obliged to defend Lord Milner's policy of employing Chinese labour in the Transvaal, and he opposed the government's decision to grant full responsible government to the former Boer republics, seeking to mitigate the impact of this (as he saw it) rash policy by influencing the West Ridgeway committee's decision on the distribution of seats. This earned him the cabinet's censure, and he considered resigning; but Selborne's greatest quality was his resilience. No sooner did the Transvaal and Orange River Colony gain responsible government than he was planning his next move, which was to lend his carefully concealed support to a group of young imperialists, led by Lionel Curtis, who were planning to federate all the South African states. This, they believed, would attract enough British immigration to secure South Africa for the British empire. Selborne presided over the production of 'the egg': the 'Selborne memorandum', which was published in July 1907 ostensibly as a result of an initiative from South African politicians. In October 1908 a National Convention assembled to settle the economic and political future of South Africa. 
Selborne intervened on several key issues: the future of the protectorates of Bechuanaland, Basutoland, and Swaziland; the native franchise; and the voting formula for the new state. His overriding concern was to reconcile the first two of these interests with the need for South African unity; and to ensure that a united South Africa would be dominated by the British. He hoped to place the protectorates under the new state, but with trusted administrators appointed to run them, thus eliminating the British House of Commons from interference. He struggled to keep an 'open door' for a native franchise; but neither he, nor the Liberal government, was prepared to jeopardize union on this question. Selborne 'was' prepared to jeopardize union on the question of the white franchise, defending a voting system based on each MP representing roughly the same number of voters (which gave the British the advantage) rather than the same number of people (which worked to the advantage of the Afrikaners). Eventually a compromise was reached, by which proportional representation (which Selborne favoured) was abandoned, but the voters' basis retained, and the constitution amended to require that all bills intended to change the electoral system should be submitted to the crown for approval. 
Selborne left South Africa in April 1910, convinced that he had saved it for the empire. But he and his young federalists, and indeed the Liberal government, hardly realized the deeper levels of the politics of that country. The union was agreed because each side thought they would gain the upper hand. The Afrikaners saw it as the chance to work for a position of domination, albeit most of them accepted that this domination could be reconciled with membership of the British empire. 
When Selborne returned to England in 1910 he did so convinced that the House of Commons was no fit body to run a great empire. He saw all domestic questions from an imperialist perspective. This explains his apparently contradictory behaviour between 1910 and 1914, when he fought bitterly to defend the House of Lords against the Liberal government's determination to remove its veto, while advocating the use of the referendum on constitutional matters, and a federal Ireland to reconcile the competing claims of Ulster Unionists, Irish nationalists, and the British empire. Overall, an imperial government was needed 'responsible to all the electors of the Empire and with power to act directly on individual citizens'. This would help maintain Britain as an imperial nation for it would, combined with Joseph Chamberlain's policy of imperial preference, pay for social reform, which Selborne acknowledged was naturally a priority for the working man. 
Selborne's cordial relations with certain Liberals were strained to breaking point before 1914. He greeted the declaration of war in August 1914 with grim resignation; but his mood soon turned to further disillusionment with Asquith's government over its conduct of the war. In May 1915 the Liberals offered a coalition which the Unionists, whatever their misgivings, could hardly refuse. Selborne became president of the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries. He displayed his usual vigour and organizational skills, and within a few months of his appointment he had persuaded Lord Milner to chair a subcommittee to examine the possibility of stimulating an increase of foodstuffs. By July 1915 an interim report (recommending a guaranteed minimum price for wheat) was ready, but was shelved. Selborne's concern over the failure to establish an effective co-ordinating body to wage war increased his frustration; in October 1915 he nearly resigned. In June 1916 he finally left the cabinet over Lloyd George's conduct of negotiations between Sir Edward Carson and John Redmond following the Easter rising in Dublin in April 1916. But, again, Selborne's position was more complex than it first appeared. He was concerned that any Irish settlement should only be made in the context of the future constitution of the United Kingdom and the empire. To this end he co-operated with F. S. Oliver in advocating a federal solution, seeking to achieve for Ireland what he believed he had given to South Africa, and using similar methods of persuasion. Selborne and Oliver worked hard to influence the Irish Convention of 1917-18, but this came to nothing because of poor chairmanship by Sir Horace Plunkett, the stern opposition of the Ulster Unionists, and the indifference of the British government, especially of Lloyd George. 
Selborne's administrative gifts were given further scope, however, on his appointment as chairman of the agricultural policy subcommittee of the reconstruction committee which in 1917 supported his advocacy of state interventionist policies, including a minimum wage for farm labourers, guaranteed wheat prices, and powers to enforce good cultivation -- measures embodied in the 'Corn Production Act' of 1917. In 1919 he was elected chairman of the joint committee of both houses of parliament on the bill to carry out the recommendations of the Montagu-Chelmsford report on the government of India, but he entertained grave doubts about the efficacy of seeking to impose Western style government on an Asian nation. His deep interest in ecclesiastical matters was given scope in a report by the archbishops' committee on church-state relations which Selborne chaired from 1913, and which in 1917 recommended the introduction of what became the church assembly. The 'Enabling Act' of 1919, based on this report, still left final power in the hands of the crown and parliament. But Selborne's dislike of a political world dominated by Lloyd George was increasing. He refused the offer of the viceroyalty of India, and of Ireland, and the offer of a marquessate. He watched with growing concern the rise of trade union power, and he was appalled at the Anglo-Irish treaty of 1921. In 1924 he caused a sensation when he broke his silence on the question of what had been promised to the Ulster Unionists when the Lloyd George cabinet was drawing up the 'Government of Ireland Act' of 1920, revealing that Walter Long had pledged that the boundaries of Northern Ireland would remain inviolate, except for very slight adjustments which might prove desirable. Selborne wrote frequently to the press on public issues. He advocated women's suffrage, which he had supported since 1910, and reform of the House of Lords. 
In these years also Selborne filled a number of congenial posts, including the office of lord high steward of Winchester from 1929 until his death, and warden of Winchester College from 1920 to 1925. He was chairman of the house of laity in the church assembly from 1924. In 1905 he was made a GCMG, and he was given the Order of the Garter in July 1909 in recognition of his South African work. He was an elder brother of Trinity House from 1904. He received the honorary degree of LLD from Cambridge in 1910 and DCL from Oxford in 1911. 
Selborne's home life was a particularly happy one. He relied heavily on the support of his wife, corresponding freely with her on important issues in South African politics between 1905 and 1910. They had three sons and one daughter; their second son, Robert, was killed in action in Mesopotamia in 1916. Selborne died at his home, 14 Buckingham Palace Gardens, London, on 26 February 1942, and was buried in the family grave at Blackmoor churchyard, near Liss, in Hampshire. He was succeeded by his son, Roundell Cecil Palmer (1887-1971), who had just been appointed minister of economic warfare in Winston Churchill's government. 


@@@@@


doc= 35374


Paneth, Friedrich Adolf (1887-1958), chemist, was born on 31 August 1887 in Vienna, the second of the three sons of Joseph Paneth, a distinguished physiologist, and his wife, Sophie Schwab, the daughter of a leading industrialist. His mother was unusually well educated, and had a strong interest in the natural sciences and philosophy. Both his parents were of Jewish descent but he and his two brothers were brought up as protestants. He was educated at the Schotten Gymnasium and the University of Vienna. He then studied for a year under Adolph von Baeyer (1835-1917) in Munich before returning to Vienna to obtain his PhD in 1910. 
As a research student Paneth worked on organic chemistry, but his interests changed when in 1912 he became assistant to Stefan Meyer in the recently established Radium Research Institute attached to the Vienna Academy of Science. The institute rapidly became a leading international centre for the study of radioactivity; after his five years there Paneth remained an inorganic chemist for the rest of his life. On 6 December 1913 he married Else Hartmann, daughter of the distinguished medieval historian Ludo Moritz Hartmann (1865-1924), who served as Austrian ambassador in Berlin after the First World War. She was a doctor of medicine and practised in Vienna and later in Edinburgh. They had two children, Eva and Heinrich Rudolf, the latter of whom, known generally under the name Heinz Post, became a distinguished philosopher of science. In 1917 Paneth joined the Deutsche Technische Hochschule at Prague, and two years later he went as assistant professor to the University of Hamburg. In 1922 he became head of the inorganic department of the Chemical Institute of the University of Berlin. In 1929 he received a call to become a full professor at the University of Konigsberg and was also made head of the chemical institute there, an unusual distinction for an inorganic chemist. 
When Hitler came to power in 1933 Paneth was on a lecture tour in Britain and decided to remain as a guest lecturer at the Imperial College of Science and Technology. In 1938 he was appointed reader in atomic chemistry at the University of London. In 1939 he was invited to the chair of chemistry at Durham. In 1943-5 he was in charge of the chemistry division of the joint British-Canadian atomic energy team in Montreal. In addition to his long experience in radioactivity studies, staff at Montreal also appreciated his efforts to inject 'an element of old world courtesy and culture' (Emeleus, 229) into the often tense atmosphere of wartime research. After the war he returned to Durham where he established the Londonderry Laboratory for Radiochemistry and resumed his former researches. When he reached the age of retirement in 1953 he accepted an invitation to become director of the Max Planck Institute of Chemistry in Mainz where the last five years of his life were spent in building up an active research school. 
One of Paneth's first pieces of research was an unsuccessful attempt to separate radium 'D' from radiolead. George Hevesy was engaged in a similar attempt in Manchester and the results of their investigations, which proved negative, were published in a joint paper in 1913. The consequent probability that radium 'D' was inseparable from lead was immediately put to use. Early in January 1913 the first joint investigation with radioactive tracers was carried out in the study of the solubility of lead sulphide and lead chromate; labelled lead and bismuth were also used in electrochemical studies. In the ensuing years Paneth carried out several important studies applying radium 'D' and 'E' and thorium 'B' as tracers. One of these was the study of adsorption of Th'B', Th'C', and Ra on such compounds as titanium, chromium and manganese oxides, barium sulphate and chromate, and the silver halides. Adsorption was strong when the radioelements formed an insoluble compound with the electronegative component of the adsorbing material. This work was embodied in 'Radioelements as Indicators and other Selected Topics in Inorganic Chemistry' (1928). 
Before he left the Radium Research Institute Paneth discovered the existence of a volatile polonium hydride, which led to the discovery of volatile bismuth and lead hydrides. After he left Vienna he discovered a volatile hydride of tin and much enlarged the knowledge of an already known germanium hydride. These studies led to the recognition that all elements with atomic numbers which have one to four units less than a rare gas are capable of forming gaseous hydrides. Through these investigations Paneth became the greatest authority of his time on volatile hydrides. 
At Hamburg Paneth continued his important studies on surface adsorption and worked out a method which enabled him to determine the surface area of powders by using radioactive indicators. 
Possibly Paneth's most important work, the demonstration of the existence of free radicals, was to a large extent carried out while he was at Konigsberg. The preparation of free methyl had been attempted by Kolbe in 1849 and the concept of an organic radical had since been prominent in many theories of organic reactions, although direct proof was lacking. Paneth and his co-workers succeeded in showing that free methyl radicals produced in the gas phase could persist for a small but measurable time before recombining to form methane. Free ethyl was similarly produced from lead tetraethyl and shown to react with zinc, cadmium, antimony, and lead. He also succeeded in estimating the mean half-life of radicals. 
In the spring of 1913 Paneth spent a few months with Frederick Soddy at Glasgow where he became interested in gas analytical methods which he later developed extensively and applied to the study of the isolation and measurement of minute amounts of helium and other atmospheric gases. He then applied these methods of helium analysis to the determination of the age of meteorites, and published 'The Origin of Meteorites' (1940). He arrived at very high values for the age of some meteorites but the discovery of the production of helium by cosmic rays led him in 1952 to re-examine some of his conclusions. He arrived at the result that a substantial part of the helium present in iron meteorites was composed of 3He and the age of the meteorites was correspondingly less. According to his paper published in 1954 the age of most meteorites is between 100 and 200 million years and some very much less. He investigated numerous meteorites and bequeathed to the Radium Research Institute in Vienna his collection of over a hundred specimens together with literature on the subject. His studies of meteorites led him on to the problem of the formation of the elements and the universe. He also made numerous contributions to the study of the stratosphere. Always a most fascinating lecturer, he was especially stimulating on these topics. 
The methods of separating and measuring very small quantities of helium and other rare gases were used in other ways by Paneth. The first recorded measurement of a microscopic product in a nuclear reaction involving neutrons was made by him when he succeeded in measuring the helium formed in the neutron irradiation of methyl borate. Excited by this result, he presented it with characteristic flair. Describing the experiment to produce helium from methyl borate in such a way as to echo the alchemical pursuit of transmutation, he called it the 'Chemical detection of artificial transmutation of elements', and announced: 'for the first time, so far as we are aware -- an artificially produced element has been separated, spectroscopically observed, and measured. We presume that the old alchemistical goal can be achieved today in other cases too' ('Nature', 136, July-Dec 1935, 950). 
An urbane man, Paneth -- in his various posts in Britain, Germany, and Canada -- was skilled in establishing an academic climate in which national differences among his staff were irrelevant, and in which values and opinions were freely exchanged. He encouraged chemistry students to take an interest in the history of science, a subject on which he lectured periodically from his earliest days as a university teacher, and on which he wrote many papers for journals such as 'Nature', 'Discovery', and 'Endeavour'. These interests were reflected in his own way of life as a scientist. In a tribute to Frederick Soddy ('Nature', 180, July-Dec 1957, 1086) he attributed Soddy's 'tragic isolation' in part to his inability as a chemist to come to terms with the increasing influence of physicists on the study of radioactivity. Paneth, for his part, while expressing understanding of Soddy's predicament, promoted a historical understanding of the nature of chemistry as the antidote to such disciplinary resentments. Specifically, in an article entitled 'The role of chemistry in the study of atomic transmutation' ('Nature', 137, Jan-June 1936, 560-62), he urged that his parallel between the alchemical pursuit of transmutation and the modern field of radioactivity provided the kind of historical context that could assist chemists to carve out a specifically chemical role for themselves at the same time as working co-operatively with physicists. 
Some of Paneth's general writings were published posthumously in 1964 under the title 'Chemistry and beyond', edited by H. Dingle and G. R. Martin. At Durham he energetically championed the reputation of the forgotten Durham cosmologist Thomas Wright (1711-1786), whose work had influenced Immanuel Kant. Few knew that the round stone tower at Westerton near Durham had been Wright's observatory. Paneth succeeded in arousing public interest with the result that a memorial plaque was affixed to the tower and the two hundredth anniversary of the publication of Wright's 'Original Theory' duly celebrated in 1950. Paneth was naturalized in 1939. He was a member of the Athenaeum and was elected FRS in 1947. He died at 78 Billrothstrasse, Vienna, on 17 September 1958 and was buried in the suburban churchyard of Dobling, where by his wish the inscription on his grave bears no more than his name followed by the letters FRS. 


@@@@@


doc= 35375


Pankhurst, Dame Christabel Harriette (1880-1958), suffragette, was born on 22 September 1880 at 1 Drayton Terrace, Old Trafford, Manchester, the daughter of Richard Marsden Pankhurst (1835/6-1898), a radical barrister, and his wife, Emmeline Goulden (1858-1928) ['see 'Pankhurst, Emmeline]. The eldest of their five children, Christabel was her mother's favourite. In 1886 the family moved to London where their home in Russell Square became a centre for gatherings of socialists, leading reformers, Fabians, suffragists, and freethinkers. The young Pankhursts were encouraged at an early age to attend such meetings and to make themselves useful by arranging chairs, giving out leaflets, and collecting contributions. Dr Pankhurst, an ardent campaigner for the advanced cause of women's suffrage, would often exclaim, 'Why are women so patient? Why don't you force us to give you the vote?' (E. S. Pankhurst, 97). Such experiences had a decisive effect on Christabel. Nothing she learned from the inadequate education offered by governesses or, when the family moved back to the north in 1893, at the high schools she attended -- first in Southport and then in Manchester -- compared with the political education she received at home. One day, when the family were discussing women's suffrage, Christabel startled her mother with the remark, 'How long you women have been trying for the vote. For my part, I mean to get it' (E. Pankhurst, 35-6). 
In summer 1898, accompanied by her mother, Christabel went to Geneva to perfect her French; while she was there, news arrived unexpectedly of her father's death. Since Dr Pankhurst left nothing but debts, his wife had to sell their home and move to a humbler residence at 62 Nelson Street, Manchester. She gratefully accepted the post of registrar of births and deaths and also opened a shop in the hope that it might provide some income as well as employment for Christabel, who intensely disliked the work. Seeing her unhappiness, Emmeline suggested that her eldest daughter attend some classes at Manchester University, and it was there that Christabel met Esther Roper, who, with Eva Gore-Booth, was active in encouraging working women to campaign for the parliamentary vote. By the end of 1902 Christabel, who, like her mother, was already a member of the Independent Labour Party (ILP), was lecturing in Cheshire, Lancashire, Yorkshire, and Scotland for the North of England Society for Women's Suffrage, of which Esther Roper was secretary. Becoming increasingly critical of the ILP's lukewarm attitude on the women question, Christabel warned that working men could be as unjust to women as men of other classes. On 10 October 1903 Emmeline and a few other socialist women founded the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU) to campaign for votes for women on the same terms as they were, or might be, granted to men. Taking the motto 'Deeds, not words', the WSPU restricted its membership to women only, and aimed to be free of class and party political affiliation. That same autumn, Christabel enrolled for a law degree at Manchester University. 
Despite the demands of her university studies, Christabel became an energetic speaker in the early years of peaceful campaigning, but soon decided that a more confrontational approach was necessary if women's suffrage was to be won. Furthermore, she believed that government support was essential if women's enfranchisement was to be granted. Thus on 13 October 1905 she and Annie Kenney, a working-class factory worker recently recruited to the WSPU, attended a Liberal Party meeting in the Free Trade Hall, Manchester, where at question time Annie asked, 'Will the Liberal government give votes to women?' When no answer was given, Christabel repeated the question. The meeting broke into uproar as the women were dragged outside where Christabel deliberately committed the technical offence of spitting at a policeman in order to court arrest. Charged with causing an obstruction, both chose prison rather than pay a fine, an action that brought the desired effect of media attention to the women's cause. From now on, heckling politicians became a key WSPU tactic, along with other minor acts of civil disobedience, including demonstrations to parliament. 
In July 1906 Christabel graduated with a first-class honours degree in law and then moved to WSPU headquarters, now in London, where she became chief organizer on a salary of $2 10's'. per week. Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence, married to a wealthy barrister, Frederick, was treasurer of the WSPU and, inspired by Christabel's faith in militant tactics as well as enchanted by her personality, the Pethick-Lawrences took her into their own home where she lived for the next six years. Surveying the London scene, Christabel decided that it was too dependent for its demonstrations on ILP women from the East End, and reaffirmed the policy of no affiliation to any political grouping or any particular class. At the Cockermouth by-election the following month, she announced that in the future the WSPU would oppose all Labour parliamentary candidates in addition to Liberals and Conservatives, a move strongly supported by her mother but not by her sisters (Estelle) Sylvia Pankhurst and Adela ['see 'Walsh, Adela]. In September 1907 both Christabel and Emmeline resigned their membership of the ILP, since the Labour Party, fearing that votes for women on the same terms as men would only enfranchise middle-class women who would vote Conservative, now opposed the extension of the franchise on a property qualification to a section of the population. Through all the long years of campaigning ahead, the uncompromising and determined Christabel never wavered in her conviction that the breaking of the sex barrier against women was the key barrier to be broken, a view that had been undoubtedly strengthened by the fact that she had been refused admission to the bar because of her sex. 
Christabel's insistence on an independent policy for the WSPU and her increasingly autocratic style of leadership caused tensions among the membership, so that by the autumn of 1907 a splinter group had left to form another militant organization later called the Women's Freedom League. As Emmeline Pankhurst, the leader of the WSPU, spent most of her time speaking in the provinces, the daily administration of business fell to Christabel and the Pethick-Lawrences. Although Emmeline was consulted on major issues, she had the greatest faith in the political flair of her eldest daughter. It was Christabel who played the key role in policy making, emerging as a confident, fearless, and imaginative strategist. 
Christabel helped to plan spectacular events that attracted widespread attention, such as the 'Trojan horse' raid on the House of Commons in February 1908 when between twenty and thirty women jumped out of a pantechnicon van in an attempt to gain entrance. When Emmeline, Christabel, and Flora Drummond appeared at Bow Street court in October 1908, charged with conduct likely to provoke a breach of the peace, she acted as lawyer for the trio and, in a brilliant move, subpoenaed as witnesses two cabinet ministers, Herbert Gladstone and Lloyd George. Called 'Suffragette Portia' by the press, Christabel's name became a household word. Her youth, charm, vitality, accomplished oratory, and wit as a speaker captivated her audiences. Furthermore, she outlined WSPU policy in regular articles published in 'Votes for Women', edited by the Pethick-Lawrences, and in a series of pamphlets. 
In July 1909, the imprisoned suffragette Marion Wallace Dunlop refused to eat food until her demand to be treated as a political prisoner and placed in the privileged first division was granted. After fasting for ninety-one hours, she was released. The hunger strike was soon adopted by other imprisoned suffragettes, but two months later the government responded not by releasing the women but by forcible feeding, an act that was condemned with burning indignation by Christabel and the other WSPU leaders. 
When the Liberals were returned to government but with no overall majority in the general election of January 1910, Christabel attributed their declining electoral fortunes to WSPU tactics. Realizing that a political situation where the government depended on the support of Labour and Irish nationalists could be helpful to the women's cause, Henry Brailsford, a journalist, formed a Conciliation Committee for Women's Suffrage which the WSPU leaders ultimately supported. Christabel, although full of doubts that Prime Minister Asquith would ever grant votes to women, nevertheless hoped that a settlement could be reached by peaceful means, since she believed that 'mild' militancy was played out. The suspension of militancy, announced at the end of January, remained in force until 21 November 1911, apart from one week during 1910. When Asquith stated on 7 November 1911 that the government would introduce next session a 'Manhood Suffrage Bill' that could be amended to include women, Christabel denounced his scheme as disreputable, and appealed for one thousand women to march to Westminster two weeks later. While the demonstration was taking place, however, a smaller group armed with bags of stones and hammers broke windows of government offices and businesses. Convinced that the government would not concede women's suffrage until they were forced to do so, the WSPU engaged in further window breaking, this time on a mass scale, in early March 1912; the policy had been jointly agreed by Christabel, her mother, and Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence. On 5 March, the police rushed to Clement's Inn with a warrant for the arrest of the leaders. Christabel, however, now lived in a flat nearby. Warned of what was happening, and fearful that the movement would collapse if all the leaders were in prison, she fled to France where a political offender was not liable to extradition. 
Emmeline urged WSPU members to trust Christabel and those she put in command under her at Clement's Inn and, between imprisonments, travelled regularly between England and France to consult her daughter, as did the trusted couriers Annie and Jessie Kenney. At one such meeting, in the summer of 1912, Christabel and Emmeline decided that a more aggressive militant campaign should be conducted, involving widespread attacks on public and private property, a direction with which the Pethick-Lawrences disagreed. In October, Christabel risked detection and arrest by travelling in disguise to London, in order to tell the Pethick-Lawrences that she was in complete agreement with her mother that their connection with the WSPU should be severed and that, contrary to their wishes, she would not return to England but continue to direct affairs from Paris. Such plans must have been well prepared, since on 17 October a new official WSPU newspaper appeared, 'The Suffragette', of which Christabel was editor. From now on, militancy was driven further underground as widespread destruction of letters in mailboxes became common as well as arson, window breaking, and other acts of vandalism. The government responded by prohibiting WSPU meetings and raiding its central offices. 
From April 1913 Christabel published a series of articles in 'The Suffragette' on the double sexual standard, prostitution, and venereal disease, probably with the aim of heightening consciousness among her followers that they were fighting a just sex war. She outlined how, in a male-dominated society, where women were kept in a state of subservience and economic dependence, the social evil of prostitution was the fruit of women's slavery. The cure for the social evil, she explained, was to have stronger women and purer men, a situation that would come with and through the vote. By the end of the year, when the series was published collectively as 'The Great Scourge and How to End It', subscriptions to the WSPU had declined dramatically. 
Despite criticisms of her policy and residence in Paris, Christabel remained convinced that escalating violence would eventually win the parliamentary vote for women since it would create, she believed, an intolerable situation for politicians. Furthermore, she would brook no opposition to the WSPU's independent political stance, even by a member of her family. Thus in early January 1914, she asked Sylvia to travel to Paris where she told her, in Emmeline's presence, that her East London Federation must be separate from the WSPU since it was allied to the socialist movement. Her distrust of socialism deepened when the Labour Party supported the government's 'Plural Voting Bill' in the belief that it would bring in some electoral advantage, despite the fact that the sex disqualification against women would not be removed. Indeed, she warned: 'For Suffragists to put their faith in any men's party, whatever it may call itself, is recklessly to disregard the lessons of the past forty years... The truth is that women must work out their own salvation. Men will not do it for them. ('The Suffragette', 17 April 1914, 10)' 

On the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914, all suffragette prisoners were released unconditionally, and on 12 August Emmeline Pankhurst sent a circular to all WSPU members announcing a temporary suspension of activities. The following month Christabel returned to London and at a meeting at the London Opera House announced that the WSPU would abandon the votes for women campaign and support the government in its hour of need. In October she began a six-month tour of the USA, with financial backing from Mrs Belmont, a wealthy American suffragist, and the blessing of the British government, her role being primarily to persuade the Americans to support the allies by entering the war. In 'Britannia' (the new name for 'The Suffragette', with 'For King, For Country, For Freedom' as its motto) she expounded her views, including attacks on the war policy of Asquith. The offices of the WSPU were again raided, and 'Britannia' was forced to be produced wherever it was considered safe. However, the government decided to utilize the skills of the WSPU leaders in a women's 'Right to Serve' demonstration, to help overcome trade union opposition to widespread use of women's labour, and a successful march, financed by the government, took place in July 1915. Further verbal attacks by Christabel on government figures led to further raids and increasing difficulties for WSPU office staff. When Annie Kenney wrote to her in early 1917 explaining the problems, Christabel returned immediately from France to England. 
Initially, Christabel stayed with her mother at 50 Clarendon Road, Holland Park, the new home that Emmeline had created for her four adopted war babies -- Kathleen, Mary, Joan, and Elizabeth (Betty). Then she moved to a flat on the top floor of the new WSPU headquarters at 4 William Street. Since it was becoming clear that, in the near future, women would be granted the parliamentary vote, a decision was made to remould the WSPU into a different organization that could serve the interests of women voters. Thus later that year the WSPU became the Women's Party, whose policies included a mixture of feminist concerns -- equal opportunity of employment, equal pay, equal marriage laws, and equality of parental rights -- as well as some anti-socialist measures such as the abolition of trade unions. Emmeline Pankhurst was the honorary treasurer, Annie Kenney the honorary secretary, Flora Drummond chief organizer, while Christabel continued as editor of 'Britannia', its official newspaper. The four women campaigned throughout the country, especially in industrial areas, warning against Bolshevism and arguing for industrial peace. 
Neither Christabel nor Emmeline took an extensive part in the negotiations that granted a partial enfranchisement to women in 1918 if they were over thirty years of age and householders or wives of householders, occupiers of property with an annual rent of $5 or more, or graduates of British universities. Instead they concentrated on a scheme dear to Emmeline's heart, that Christabel should be the first woman MP. In the general election of December 1918 she stood as a Women's Party candidate for the constituency of Smethwick, with the support of the coalition government, but lost by 775 votes. In early 1919, she announced her intention of standing again as a Women's Party candidate, this time for the Westminster Abbey division. However, the plan did not materialize since there was lack of support for the Women's Party, which ceased to exist by the autumn. 
For some years Christabel had been drawn to Christianity and she now became a Second Adventist. In 1921 she joined her mother in Canada and then went to California, preaching the second coming. She became both a popular speaker and author, publishing books such as ''The Lord Cometh', the World Crisis Explained' (1923) and 'Pressing Problems of the Closing Age' (1924). In 1925 Emmeline decided that the running of a tea-shop in the French riviera could provide a home, an income, and also an answer to her failing health in the cold Canadian winters. Christabel accompanied her mother and Mabel Tuke, a former WSPU colleague, to France, but the venture was unsuccessful and she returned to England in the spring of 1926. When the unmarried Sylvia Pankhurst became pregnant the following year and gave birth to a son in December 1927, Christabel was among those who kept the news hidden from Emmeline, who discovered the truth only the following April when reading an article written by Sylvia in the 'News of the World'. The old rivalries between the two sisters hardened as Christabel refused her sister's requests to see their ailing mother who was deeply distressed by the news. Both sisters, however, attended their mother's funeral, witnessed by huge crowds, on 17 June 1928, just a few weeks before women over the age of twenty-one were granted the vote on equal terms with men. 
During the years immediately following Emmeline's death, Christabel thought about rewriting her mother's autobiography 'My Own Story' but eventually decided against it. She did, however, have a contract to publish her own memoirs but, after the manuscript had been delivered to the publisher, decided it should be withdrawn since she did not want to engage in a family literary duel with Sylvia, whose book 'The Suffragette Movement' appeared in 1931; neither did she want to provide for the enemies of Britain a picture of the brutal way the British government had treated WSPU campaigners. She did, however, launch a new adventist monthly journal, 'Present and Future', but it ran only from May to November 1934. Christabel then spent all her free time ministering to the sick and the dying. Recognition of her services to the enfranchisement of women was not forgotten, however, and in the 1936 new year honours list she was created DBE. 
In 1939 Christabel returned to the USA where she continued her career as an author and lecturer on religion. She was followed there by her adopted daughter, Aurea Elizabeth Clifford, but the relationship between the two, always strained, ended well before Aurea's early death, at a date unknown. On 5 May 1953, Sylvia's birthday, Christabel renewed contact with her sister, writing her a warm letter and wishing her well after her recent heart attack. The correspondence between the two sisters continued intermittently until Christabel's death at her home, 943 Ocean Avenue, Santa Monica, California, on 13 February 1958 from a heart attack. She was buried at Woodlawn cemetery, Los Angeles, on 17 February. At a memorial service held in March at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Frederick Pethick-Lawrence spoke of how Christabel had changed the course of history by undertaking the formidable task of rousing women to a sense of their own worth and dignity in order to break down the walls of prejudice and opposition. The following year the manuscript of her memoirs, discovered by Grace Roe, was published as 'Unshackled: the Story of how we Won the Vote'. On 13 July 1959 a bronze medallion of Christabel was added to a low circular wall at the base of her mother's statue in Victoria Tower Gardens. It was a fitting tribute to the close relationship between daughter and mother who jointly had fought courageously for women's right to the parliamentary vote. 
Historiographical interpretations of Christabel Pankhurst's life have changed over time, from the 'great woman' style, through David Mitchell's critical approach, to more sympathetic interpretations by those who see her emphasis on male power and the sisterhood of women as anticipating many of the separatist concerns of radical feminism in western Europe in the 1970s and 1980s. 


@@@@@


doc= 35376


Pankhurst, Emmeline (1858-1928), suffragette leader, was born on 15 July 1858 in Sloan Street, Moss Side, Hulme, Lancashire, to Robert Goulden ('b'. 1830), a cashier (later the owner of a calico printing and bleach works), and his Manx-born wife, Sophia Jane Craine ('b'. 1833). 
The eldest daughter in a family of ten children, Emmeline had maturity forced upon her early as she looked after her younger brothers and sisters. A precocious child, she learned to read at an early age and was set the task of reading the daily newspaper to her father as he breakfasted, an activity that led to the development of an interest in politics. Although her brothers called her 'the dictionary' (E. S. Pankhurst, 7) for her command of language and accurate spelling, she soon learned that the education of girls was considered of less importance than that of the boys when she and her sister were sent to a middle-class girls' school where the prime aim was learning how to make a home comfortable for men, a situation Emmeline found difficult to understand. One evening, feigning sleep in her bed, she heard her father say 'What a pity she wasn't born a lad' (E. Pankhurst, 6). Although her first impulse was to protest that she did not want to be a boy, she lay still, pondering on the remark for many days to come. 'It was made quite clear', she later recollected in her ghost-written autobiography, 'My Own Story' (1914), 'that men considered themselves superior to women, and that women apparently acquiesced in that belief' (ibid.). The rebellious streak in her nature was further enhanced by stories about how her paternal grandfather had narrowly escaped death at the Peterloo franchise demonstration in Manchester in 1819 and, with his wife, had taken part in demonstrations in the 1840s against the corn laws which imposed duties on imported foodstuffs to protect producers. 
Reform was a frequent topic of conversation in the Goulden household. Indeed, one of Emmeline's earliest memories related to when she was about five years old and entrusted to collect pennies in a 'lucky bag' for the newly emancipated slaves in the United States. 'Young as I was', she remembered, 'I knew perfectly well the meaning of the words slavery and emancipation' (E. Pankhurst, 1). Both parents too were advocates of equal suffrage for men and women, her mother taking the monthly 'Woman's Suffrage Journal' edited by Lydia Becker, a Manchester woman who was a well-known figure in the women's rights movement in England. When fourteen years old, Emmeline begged her mother to be allowed to accompany her to a woman suffrage meeting where Miss Becker was speaking. 'I left the meeting', she later recorded, 'a conscious and confirmed suffragist' (ibid., 9). Later in 1872 she attended an academic girls' school in Paris, a city that was still bearing the scars of the recently ended Franco-Prussian War. From this time onwards, Emmeline developed a deep affection for all things French and a lifelong prejudice against Germany. Released from her lessons on the grounds of ill health, Emmeline explored Paris with a motherless schoolfriend, Noemie, whose father was the famous republican Henri Rochefort, imprisoned in New Caledonia for the part he had played in the Paris commune. Noemie's stories of her father's duels, imprisonments, and escapes fired the imagination of the adolescent Emmeline who at the age of nine had read Carlyle's 'French Revolution', a book which she claimed remained all her life a source of inspiration (ibid., 3). On her return home between the age of eighteen and nineteen, Emmeline was expected to take her place as a young lady and was frequently in conflict with her mother. On one occasion when Mrs Goulden ordered her daughter to fetch her brothers' slippers, the spirited Emmeline replied that if she was in favour of women's rights, she did not show it at home. Eager to be useful in the world, she began to work for the woman suffrage movement and met Dr Richard Marsden Pankhurst (1835/6-1898), a well-known radical lawyer and advocate for the women's cause. Despite the fact that he was more than twenty years her senior, they fell in love and married on 18 December 1879. 
The birth of four children in the first six years of her marriage -- Christabel Harriette Pankhurst in 1880, Sylvia Pankhurst in 1882, Henry Francis Robert (Frank) in 1884, and Adela Constantia in 1885 ['see 'Walsh, Adela Pankhurst] -- restricted but did not stop Emmeline's involvement in public affairs. In 1880 she was elected onto the executive committee of the influential Manchester National Society for Women's Suffrage of which Richard had been an elected member for a number of years. She was also co-opted onto the married women's property committee. She campaigned on her husband's behalf in 1883 when, unsuccessfully, he stood as an independent parliamentary candidate advocating, among other things, the abolition of the House of Lords and the monarchy, adult suffrage on equal terms for both sexes, the disestablishment of the Church of England, nationalization of the land, and home rule for Ireland, an issue on which no other contender had yet made a stand. In the general election of 1885 Emmeline Pankhurst again campaigned unsuccessfully on her husband's behalf when, at the invitation of the local Liberal and Radical Association, he was asked to contest Rotherhithe. His defeat was mainly attributed to the opposition of the Irish vote, Charles Parnell, leader of the Irish nationalists, having instructed his followers to vote against all government candidates, irrespective of whether they supported home rule or not. Although Emmeline felt indignant about the way her husband had been treated, he defended Parnell's policy, pointing out that tactics of constant obstruction could eventually wring from a hostile Liberal government surrender on the home rule issue. 'That was a valuable political lesson', Emmeline recalled, 'one that years later I was destined to put into practice' (E. Pankhurst, 18). 
The following year the Pankhurst family moved to a new home in Hampstead Road, London. Emmeline, eager for financial independence and keen to make enough money so that her husband could concentrate on his political work, opened a fancy goods shop. She often accompanied Richard on his frequent trips to Manchester and during one such absence, their four-year-old son Frank became ill. Emmeline returned home to find the boy in a critical condition. Diphtheria was wrongly diagnosed as croup, and he died in September 1888. Distraught in her grief, Emmeline took little comfort in the knowledge that defective drainage was found at the rear of the house. The shop was closed and her family hurried away to a new rented home, at 8 Russell Square. It was there that her fifth and last child was born in 1889, another son, also called Henry Francis (Harry) as a reminder of little Frank. Her involvement in political life continued through membership of the Fabian Society, the Women's Liberal Association, and the Women's Franchise League, and 8 Russell Square became a centre for political gatherings, especially of socialists, Fabians, anarchists, suffragists, freethinkers, and radicals. In particular, a warm friendship developed between the Pankhursts and Keir Hardie, who was elected as a Labour MP in 1892. The following year the family returned to Manchester, to 4 Buckingham Crescent, where Emmeline resigned from the Women's Liberal Association and joined the Independent Labour Party (ILP). In 1894 she was elected as an ILP candidate for the Chorlton board of guardians. The conditions she found in the workhouses, and especially those for girls and single mothers with babies, appalled her. A compassionate and fearless reformer, with a passion for the oppressed, she helped to introduce many improvements. 
Both Emmeline and her husband now became dedicated to socialism. When members of the ILP were sent to prison in May 1896 for speaking in the open space of Boggart Hole Clough, recently acquired by Manchester city council, the Pankhursts and their children were actively involved in defending the right of free speech. Emmeline, in her pink straw bonnet, became a familiar figure in the Clough, declaring she would rather go to prison than pay a fine. Although she did appear in the dock, the case against her was dismissed. The following year she was elected to the national administrative council (NAC) of the ILP. 
The unexpected death of her beloved husband on 5 July 1898 was a devastating blow. Richard had championed unprofitable causes and the close connection with the ILP had lost him many legal clients so that he had little money to leave. Robert Blatchford appealed to 'Clarion' readers for subscriptions to help the struggling family but Emmeline replied firmly that she did not wish working people to contribute towards the education of her children when they could not provide for their own; instead she suggested that money be collected to build a hall in her husband's memory. In straitened circumstances, the family moved to 62 Nelson Street, Manchester, where Emmeline opened another shop which eventually had to be abandoned too. She also accepted the salaried post of registrar of births and deaths for the district of Chorlton. In this work she heard many sad stories from the working-class women who came to register the birth of their babies, some of them young girls who had been seduced by male relatives. Her conviction grew that if society was to progress, then women must lift themselves out of their subordinate position and campaign for the parliamentary vote. When the hall in memory of Dr Pankhurst was eventually opened in Salford, five years after his death, his family were astonished to hear that women were not permitted to join the branch of the ILP that would use it as its headquarters. Emmeline declared that her time in the socialist movement had been wasted and decided to form a new women's organization that would run in parallel to the ILP. Thus on 10 October 1903 she called to her home some wives of ILP men and formed the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU), an organization that was to campaign for votes for women on the same terms they were, or might be, granted to men. Membership was to be limited to women only, and free from affiliation to any particular social class. 'Deeds, not words' was the WSPU's motto. 
During its early years the WSPU engaged in a range of peaceful activities such as campaigning at trade union meetings, parks, and fairgrounds, as well as street demonstrations and petitions to parliament. Emmeline threw herself with zeal into this work, believing that the vote would soon be won. In the autumn of 1905, on the eve of a general election, when it looked as though the Liberal Party would form the new government, a new strategy was decided on. Christabel Pankhurst and Annie Kenney, a working-class woman recently recruited to the WSPU, interrupted a Liberal Party meeting in Manchester on 13 October by asking the question 'Will the Liberal Government, if returned, give votes to women?' When the question was not answered and repeated, the two women were roughly ejected from the hall. Both were charged with obstruction and sentenced to pay fines or face imprisonment. An anxious Emmeline offered to pay the fines, a gesture that was refused by Christabel. Extensive newspaper coverage of the event made women's suffrage a live issue in an unprecedented way and increased Emmeline's admiration for her brilliant daughter. Under Emmeline's leadership, the policy of heckling politicians became a strategy in which innumerable suffragettes engaged. 
The following year, the WSPU moved its headquarters to London and in March 1907 Emmeline resigned her post as registrar of births and deaths, thus forfeiting a government pension. The Manchester home was given up and Emmeline's sister Mary, who had stayed there and acted as deputy registrar while Emmeline was away, became a WSPU organizer. From now on, until the end of the militant campaign, Emmeline had no settled home but stayed in a number of rented flats, hotels, or homes of friends. Her main source of income was her $200 fee per annum as a union speaker which came out of WSPU funds, which were managed by Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence, who was appointed treasurer in February 1906. Together with her husband, Frederick, the wealthy Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence brought organizational and business skills to the WSPU, occasionally donating money for particular events. Funds were raised too at the meetings where Emmeline Pankhurst spoke; indeed, sometimes as much as $14,000 would be collected in one evening as money, jewels, and other valuables were thrown onto the platform where the beloved leader was speaking. 
During 1907 differences of view between Emmeline and her daughters began to widen over the WSPU's links with the Labour Party. Christabel, the organizing secretary of the WSPU, its key strategist, and main policy maker, had already declared that in future the WSPU would oppose not only all Liberal and tory parliamentary candidates, but also be independent of Labour men. While Emmeline shared this view, her two youngest daughters, Sylvia and Adela, did not. The disillusionment that Emmeline and Christabel felt about the lukewarm attitude of socialists towards women's suffrage came to a head in April 1907 when both resigned from the ILP: the Labour Party now opposed extending the franchise to women if the ownership of property remained a qualification for voting. Although links between the WSPU and the socialist movement were never completely severed, especially at the individual level, the independent policy plus an autocratic style of leadership caused tensions within the union so that rumours of a coup surfaced during the summer of 1907. Emmeline, who had been travelling in the provinces, returned to headquarters, and at the request of the Pethick-Lawrences declared the democratic constitution of the union abolished, the annual conference cancelled, and invited members to support her; the majority agreed. A group of dissenters, including Teresa Billington Greig and Charlotte Despard, formed another militant organization, later called the Women's Freedom League. Although Emmeline Pankhurst was now regarded as the autocrat of the WSPU, its leader and inspirational figurehead, in the years immediately following this split she chose to travel up and down the country speaking for the cause, rather than exercise direct personal control over the organization. Although she was consulted on major developments and, when in London, led various demonstrations, the day-to-day running of the union was left to Christabel and the Pethick-Lawrences -- the latter also being joint editors of the WSPU's paper, 'Votes for Women', founded in October 1907. 
A charismatic person, whose personal qualities drew people to her, Emmeline Pankhurst was a gifted speaker whose power of oratory could sway an audience. She spoke from the heart, without notes and with few gestures, drawing on her own experience of life as she used clear arguments of persuasion to convert her listeners. The important part she took in the non-militant side of the campaign must not be forgotten. However, it is chiefly in connection with her defiance of the law and her participation in militancy, which she readily embraced, that she will be remembered. 
Mrs Pankhurst's first imprisonment occurred on 13 February 1908 when, still lame from an injury to her ankle, she had led a deputation to the House of Commons and was arrested, along with her companions, for obstruction. She served a month in the second division, alongside common criminal offenders, and not in the first division where political offenders were placed. On 14 October in the same year she stood in the dock at Bow Street, together with Flora Drummond and Christabel, charged with incitement to disorder, based on a handbill that had been published encouraging the public to 'rush' the House of Commons. The three accused did not employ counsel, but spoke for themselves. In a poignant speech that moved many to tears Emmeline spoke of her life experiences and of her conviction of the burning necessity for making women self-governing citizens. No mercy was shown, however, and she was sentenced to three months' imprisonment. 
Events took a different turn from July to the end of September 1909 when WSPU members, on their own initiative, began to hunger strike in a bid to be granted political offender status, and the government responded with forcible feeding. Fiercely protective of her followers, Emmeline responded with disbelief and anger, condemning the government for violating and torturing the exhausted and starved bodies of women. In addition to such public worries, private troubles also weighed heavily on her since her surviving son, Harry, had developed inflammation of the spinal cord and was paralysed from the waist down. Needing money for his medical treatment, she felt she could not cancel her already planned American and Canadian tour and so set sail on 13 October. Wherever she went, enthusiastic crowds greeted her, especially at New York's Carnegie Hall; a hush fell when the small, well-dressed leader rose to spoke, but at her first words, 'I am what you call a hooligan' (E. Pankhurst, 160), a wave of laughter erupted. On arrival back in England, she found that Harry's condition had worsened. When he died in January 1910 Sylvia commented that their mother was broken as she had never seen her (E. S. Pankhurst, 'The Suffragette Movement', 1931, 324). Work ever being her refuge in times of sorrow, she threw herself into election campaigning, since a general election had been called, and followed the WSPU policy of opposing all Liberal candidates, whether or not they were pledged, if elected, to support women's enfranchisement. 
To what extent the heavy losses sustained by the Liberals were due to WSPU policy is debatable, but they were returned with no overall majority in the Commons holding only 275 seats while the Conservatives held 273, the Irish nationalists 82, and Labour 40. Believing that a women's suffrage measure might have more chance of success under such conditions, Henry Brailsford, a journalist, formed a Conciliation Committee for Women's Suffrage which had the support of fifty-four MPs across the political spectrum. After some initial reluctance, the WSPU leaders supported the initiative and on 31 January Emmeline declared a truce on militancy. 
The conciliation committee's 'Women's Franchise Bill' was drafted along narrow lines, in order to win the support of the Conservatives. It sought to extend the vote to independent women occupiers but not to enfranchise married women whose husbands met the property qualifications. Since relatively few women (especially working-class women) would be enfranchised under these terms, Emmeline was among its critics, although she voiced her concerns only in private. The bill passed its second reading on 12 July; however, the home secretary, Lloyd George, declared that it was anti-democratic while Prime Minister Asquith claimed that it was better to maintain the distinction of sex. Warning that if the bill was killed by the government the truce was at an end, Emmeline decided to lead a deputation on 18 November. When parliament reassembled and no reference was made to the bill, the women's deputation set forth and was treated with exceptional brutality by the police who, rather than arrest them prolonged the struggle in the streets by trying to force them to move away from the houses of parliament. Four days after 'black Friday', as it became known, Emmeline led another deputation to Downing Street. This time she was among the 156 arrested but was discharged since no evidence was offered against her. Also arrested was her sister Mary Clark, who died that Christmas as a result of the injuries she suffered. As before, the leader of the WSPU attempted to cope with another personal tragedy by channelling her efforts into the cause so dear to her heart. 
A second 1910 election saw Asquith returned to power with the distribution of seats in the Commons being little changed. The WSPU renewed their truce in the hope that the revised 'Conciliation Bill' (now titled 'A Bill to confer the parliamentary franchise on women') would win greater support since it now included all women householders. In high hopes, Emmeline marched in the women's coronation procession on 17 June 1911, a spectacular event in which at least twenty-eight other women's suffrage organizations accepted the WSPU's invitation to participate. In poor health and in need of a rest, she decided later that year to undertake another tour in the USA and Canada. On 7 November she was cabled the news that Asquith had announced that a manhood suffrage bill would be introduced next session which would allow amendment for the enfranchisement of women. Knowing that such an amendment would be doomed, since it could not be carried without government support, she cabled back to Christabel that protest was imperative. She returned to England on 18 January 1912 with the words 'Sedition!' and 'The Women's Revolution' on her lips (E. S. Pankhurst, 103). 
At a meeting the following month to welcome released prisoners, Emmeline announced that the weapon and argument they were going to use at the next demonstration would be the stone, a policy which was jointly agreed with Christabel and the Pethick-Lawrences. Although Emmeline expected to be arrested after this speech, she was not, and shortly afterwards spent some time being taught how to throw stones by Ethel Smyth, the composer and recent union recruit. On 1 March, for the first time, the WSPU struck without warning, smashing shop windows in London's West End. Late in the afternoon, Emmeline and two other women broke four of the prime minister's windows. In court the next day, where she was sentenced to two months' imprisonment, she reminded the magistrate that women had failed to get the vote because they had failed to use the methods of agitation used by men. After two more days of window smashing, the police swooped on WSPU headquarters with a warrant for the arrest of Christabel Pankhurst, who was in hiding and later escaped to Paris, and the Pethick-Lawrences. Emmeline was now released from prison in order to attend a new trial at which she and the Pethick-Lawrences were charged with conspiracy. 
At the conspiracy trial, which began on 15 May, Emmeline made another poignant speech, explaining how women had been driven to greater militancy by the stubborn opposition of the government. When all three defendants were found guilty and sentenced to nine months in the second division, they threatened to hunger strike unless given political status and placed in the first division. Although the plea was granted, it was not extended to other suffrage prisoners and so the three leaders joined their members in a mass hunger strike that began on 19 June. Three days later forcible feeding began. When the doctors and wardresses came to Emmeline's cell, she picked up a heavy earthenware jug and warned that if any of them dared to come near her, she would defend herself. They retreated. Two days later, she was released on medical grounds and no attempt was ever made to force feed her again. 
Travelling under the name of Mrs Richards, she made the first of many visits to Christabel in France. Emmeline now spent less time as an itinerant speaker and more time at the London headquarters. Differences of view in regard to the form and direction of militancy had already begun to emerge between the union leader and the Pethick-Lawrences. Shortly after the Pethick-Lawrences returned from Canada in early October, Emmeline and Christabel told them that their connection to the WSPU was severed. Most WSPU members seem to have been shocked by this action; while some of Emmeline Pankhurst's followers accepted the situation, agreeing with their leader that it was the cause rather than the individual that was important, the WSPU lost many of its most influential supporters. The task of fund-raising now fell on Emmeline's shoulders as she replaced Mrs Pethick-Lawrence as treasurer of the union. At a Royal Albert Hall meeting on 17 October she reiterated the policy of opposition to all political parties and outlined a new policy of attacks on public and private property but never on human life. 
When Asquith announced early in 1913 that the 'Manhood Suffrage Bill' was dropped for that session, Emmeline immediately declared war on the government. Over the next eighteen months, the WSPU was increasingly driven underground as it engaged in destruction of property, including setting fire to pillar boxes, raising false fire alarms, arson and bombing, attacking art treasures, large-scale window smashing campaigns, the cutting of telegraph and telephone wires, and damaging golf courses. At a meeting in late January 1913 Emmeline emphasized that she took full responsibility for all acts of militancy, a theme that was to recur in many subsequent speeches. Now regarded as a dangerous subversive, she was watched by the police who appeared in plain clothes at her meetings and transcribed her speeches. On 24 February she was arrested for procuring and inciting persons to commit offences contrary to the 'Malicious Injuries to Property Act' 1861, and on 2 April was sentenced to three years' penal servitude. However, she served less than six weeks of her sentence between the time of her conviction and August 1914 when militancy ended. Exploiting the 'Prisoners (Temporary Discharge for Ill-Health) Act', known as the 'Cat and Mouse Act', passed in April 1913, which allowed prisoners who had damaged their health to be released on licence in order to recover so that they would be fit enough to be readmitted, she was repeatedly in and out of prison. On many occasions she engaged in hunger, thirst, and sleep strikes and was released in a state of physical collapse but never once did she hesitate to share with her followers that which they too experienced. Always in the thick of the action, her defiance, determination, and courage won her admiration, even from many who considered WSPU tactics ill-conceived. In the autumn of 1913, while still under sentence, Emmeline paid another trip to the USA where she was detained as an undesirable alien, a ruling that was overturned by President Wilson. 'Nothing ever has been got out of the British Parliament without something very nearly approaching a revolution', she told an enthusiastic audience in New York. On arrival back in England she was re-arrested, released after a hunger strike, and then travelled openly to Paris where she spent all of January 1914. 
Family concerns which had been pressing for some time were now confronted when Sylvia and Adela visited their mother in Paris. Sylvia was told by Christabel, with her mother's support, that her East London Federation must be separate from the WSPU since it was allied with the Labour Party, contrary to union policy. Adela, who had suffered a breakdown in 1912 and then not found a steady job when she graduated from Studley Horticultural College, had been a worry to her mother for some time. Anxious that her youngest daughter should have a new start in life, Emmeline gave Adela the fare to Australia, a letter to Australian suffragist Vida Goldstein, and $20. Adela never saw her mother or England again. 
Still subject to her three-year sentence, Emmeline managed to evade detectives and travel back to England where her recently formed bodyguard was waiting to protect her, not always successfully, from re-arrest. When she spoke at St Andrew's Hall, Glasgow, on 9 March 1914, she looked pale and fragile, her hair now a silvery white. The day after her arrest in Glasgow, Mary Richardson slashed Velazquez's 'Rokeby Venus' in the National Gallery in protest at the treatment of the union leader. On 21 May Emmeline led the last major WSPU deputation, this time to the king. She was among those arrested as Inspector Rolfe, crushing her in his arms, lifted her to a car waiting behind police lines, an incident captured in a famous photograph. Further raids by the police took place on WSPU headquarters and private dwellings in an attempt to crush the militant suffrage movement and to prevent the printing and sale of 'The Suffragette', a newspaper edited by Christabel and founded in October 1912, after the ousting of the Pethick-Lawrences. 
With the outbreak of the First World War in early August 1914 all the imprisoned suffragettes were released unconditionally. Emmeline called a temporary suspension of militant activities and asked her followers to support the war effort, arguing that it would be pointless to fight for the vote without a country to vote in. 'The Suffragette' was renamed 'Britannia' with 'For King, For Country, For Freedom' as its motto. Emmeline supported conscription and campaigned for the opening of women's war work. In 1915 she and others involved in the WSPU, such as Annie Kenney and Flora Drummond, accepted the request of Lloyd George, minister of munitions, to organize a Women's Right to Serve demonstration to help overcome trade union opposition to the employment of female labour. In 1916 she travelled to the USA to help raise money for Serbia and in 1917 visited Russia where she advised Kerensky, the head of the provisional government, to be firm with the Bolsheviks. In 1918 she again toured the USA and Canada, supporting women's war work and condemning Bolshevism. 
During these years, the distance between Emmeline and her two youngest daughters, Sylvia and Adela, widened as she denounced their anti-war views. Although she still remained close to Christabel, Emmeline now acquired a second family. In the summer of 1915 she announced that the WSPU would help the 'war babies' problem by adopting fifty baby girls and appealed for financial support from WSPU members. The response was lukewarm. Nevertheless, she herself adopted four babies (Betty, Kathleen, Mary, and Joan) and had the worry of finding enough money to support them, as well as raising enough funds to support the union of which she was still honorary treasurer. In the autumn of 1916 she made a home for herself, her second family, and the faithful Nurse Pine, who had cared for her after so many hunger strikes, at 50 Clarendon Road, Holland Park, London. She managed to maintain this home for about three years. 
Emmeline was now becoming increasingly preoccupied with what women should do when granted the vote since it was becoming clear that this would happen in the near future. In November 1917, in preparation for the event, the WSPU was renamed the Women's Party. Emmeline became the new party's treasurer, Annie Kenney the secretary, and Flora Drummond the chief organizer; 'Britannia' became its official newspaper and continued to be edited by Christabel. On 6 February 1918 royal assent was given to the 'Representation of the People Act' which gave women over thirty years of age the vote if they were householders, the wives of householders, occupiers of property with an annual rent of $5 or more, or graduates of British universities. Although this bill enfranchised only about eight and a half million women, Emmeline Pankhurst, like all the women's suffrage campaigners, knew that at last the sex barrier had been broken and that full citizenship for all women could not be delayed indefinitely. 
Emmeline greatly desired that Christabel, rather than she, should be the first woman member of parliament. Christabel fought the Smethwick constituency on a Women's Party ticket in the autumn general election and narrowly lost. Emmeline was bitterly disappointed. Seeking a steady income, she accepted the Canadian government's offer to lecture on social hygiene, such was the concern about the spread of venereal disease among the returning soldiers, and settled in Toronto. The following year some former suffragettes raised about $3000 in a testimonial fund for her and spent more than half of this amount on a country house which she could not afford to maintain and which was eventually sold. The strain of her life now began to tell on Emmeline and in the spring of 1924, when she was almost sixty-six years old, her health began to fail. She took her second family and Christabel to Bermuda, for a six months' rest. As money was scarce, she reluctantly agreed for two of the young girls to be sent to England and adopted by more prosperous people. Christabel had already adopted her favourite child, Betty, while Mary stayed with Emmeline. 
The following year Emmeline decided to escape the Canadian winters by settling in the French Riviera and running a tea-shop, with the help of Christabel and a trusted old WSPU friend, Mabel Tuke. But the venture was not a success and before Christmas 1925 she had returned to London. She was invited to become a parliamentary candidate for the Conservative Party and, as was typical of her, accepted the offer of a socialist working-class district, Whitechapel and St George's, that she could not win. While campaigning in the spring of 1928, she was deeply shocked and distressed to read in the 'News of the World', a newspaper not then read in respectable homes, that Sylvia had given birth to a son, out of wedlock, some four months previously. Forewarned that she would be heckled about this during her election campaign, she curtly replied that she would not discuss private matters in public (Smyth, 266). Feeling that the Pankhurst name had been disgraced, Emmeline was never reconciled with her daughter. 
Emmeline resolved to live in her constituency, a move that necessitated parting with Mary. Once settled in her new lodgings, she became ill again and worried about her finances. In late May she was taken by her sister Mrs Goulden Bach and Christabel to a nursing home at 43 Wimpole Street, where she died on 14 June 1928 from septicaemia due to influenza, a month before her seventieth birthday. She was buried in Brompton cemetery, London. Although a second 'Representation of the People Act', which would give women voting rights over the age of twenty-one on equal terms with men, had passed all its stages, the new bill did not become law until 2 July 1928. On 6 March 1930 the prime minister, Stanley Baldwin, unveiled a bronze statue of Emmeline Pankhurst in Victoria Tower Gardens, close to the houses of parliament, the opening of which to women she had fought for so bravely all her life. 


@@@@@


doc= 35377


Pantin, Carl Frederick Abel (1899-1967), zoologist, was born on 30 March 1899 at Blackheath, London, the second child and elder son of Herbert Pantin, head of a family manufacturing company, and his wife, Emilie Juanita Abel. She was a descendant of the distinguished Abel family which included Pantin's great-uncle, Sir Frederick A. Abel (1827-1902), the inventor of cordite, and Karl Friedrich Abel (1723-1787), the celebrated viola da gamba player. Pantin's brother W. A. Pantin FBA became keeper of the university archives at Oxford. 
From childhood Pantin was fascinated by natural history; at Tonbridge School, Kent (1913-17) he was recognized as having outstanding scientific ability, and in the words of his headmaster, a 'nobility of character'. After brief service with the Royal Engineers he went up in 1919 to Christ's College, Cambridge, as a scholar. He graduated with distinction, obtaining first classes in parts one (1921) and two (1922, zoology and comparative anatomy) of the natural sciences tripos, and was awarded the Frank Smart prize in 1922. 
Later that year Pantin joined the staff of the Marine Biological Laboratory at Plymouth, embarking on a series of elegant and fundamental investigations into the functioning of the lower animals. His work on amoeboid movement contained the elements of the later biophysical approach to the structure of cytoplasm; he investigated the effect of ions on and in tissues and made similarly fundamental discoveries about osmoregulation in flatworms. Pantin believed that physiological mechanism is only meaningful when understood in the context of the biology of the animal in nature; he was one of the first zoologists to employ an ecological, rather than morphological, approach. To this end he would call on his encyclopaedic knowledge of the animal kingdom, backed by a sound knowledge of palaeontology and geology. 
While working at the Marine Biological Laboratory Pantin married in 1923 Amy, second daughter of Dr James Cruickshank Smith CBE LittD LLD, a senior chief inspector of schools in Scotland. She was also a zoologist, who qualified in medicine. They had two sons. 
In 1929 Pantin became a fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, directing studies and lecturing in the department of zoology of the university, but returning regularly to Plymouth to research and run the renowned 'Easter' courses, where his colleagues and pupils included many distinguished zoologists. Pantin took his Cambridge ScD in 1933. 
Following a period at the Stazione Zoologica in Naples in 1933, Pantin published a series of papers on the functioning of the nervous system of the sea anemone: this was his most influential work. He demonstrated how the organization of the nerve net, and its very low frequency impulses, could produce the response of different muscles each to its appropriate range of impulse rate, and also create integrated movement and behaviour of a comparatively complex kind in seemingly the simplest of nervous organizations. His work formed a foundation from which much of later neurophysiology and the interpretation of behaviour in neural terms originated. Despite contracting tuberculosis, Pantin continued his work, and was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1937, the year in which he organized the now classic discussion of that body on the transmission of excitation in living material. 
Pantin researched the lower animals for the rest of his life, especially the coelenterates and nemertine worms, though with his increasing involvement with the national bodies of his science, this research was increasingly done through associates and assistants. Yet for thirty-five years his lectures to undergraduates communicated an enthusiasm and excitement of a remarkable kind. He became reader in invertebrate zoology in 1937 and succeeded Sir James Gray as professor in 1959. Despite failing health, as head of the zoology department Pantin succeeded in obtaining new buildings for the Museum of Zoology, and a modern research wing which today bears his name. In 1964 he was diagnosed as having leukaemia and he died in the Hope Nursing Home, Cambridge, on 14 January 1967, only a few months after he retired. 
Pantin was president of the Linnean Society of London from 1958 to 1960, president of the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom (1960-66), and from 1963 until his death, chairman of the board of trustees of the Natural History Museum. He received the royal medal of the Royal Society in 1950, and the gold medal of the Linnean Society in 1964. He became an honorary member of the Royal Society of New Zealand in 1955 and was given honorary doctorates of the universities of Sao Paulo and Durham. He became an honorary fellow of his old Cambridge college, Christ's. Despite this, those closest to him felt that he did not receive the public recognition he deserved, for he lacked any vestige of ruthlessness or selfishness; he was a man of transparent sincerity and personal charm, who communicated a radiant enjoyment of life and its study. 
James Beament', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35378


Pares, Sir Bernard (1867-1949), historian, was born at Albury, Surrey, on 1 March 1867, the third son and seventh child of John Pares (1833-1915), of independent means, and Katharine ('nee' Back). From Harrow School -- to which he remained devoted throughout his life (along with cricket) -- Pares took a foundation scholarship at Trinity College, Cambridge (1885), where he read classics, which never held his interest: as a consequence he was placed in the second class of part one of the tripos (1887) and in the third class of part two in 1889. After graduating he spent some years as a schoolmaster. His first visit to Russia was undertaken in 1898, after studying on his private income in France, Italy, and Germany, apparently in rapt pursuit of Napoleon's fields of battle. Finally his interest was sparked by the exotic that Russia represented in contrast to Britain; the challenge presented itself of reconciling two societies that had, for the better part of the previous century, found themselves in contention. 
After marriage on 27 August 1901 to Margaret Ellis, daughter of Edward Austin Dixon, dental surgeon, of Colchester, Pares became a university extension lecturer at Cambridge. In 1906 he moved to firmer ground as reader in Russian history at Liverpool. Always very young for his age, at Liverpool he made his mark with his youthful exuberance, including composition of the university song book; he also unselfishly held open house, now graced with a growing family, to the undergraduates. It was typical of his impish humour that the first initials of his children spelt the family name: Peter (who became a diplomatist), Andrew (the army), Richard Pares (a historian), and two daughters: Elizabeth and Susan. 
The year 1906 also saw the formation of the first Russian parliament -- the Duma -- albeit on a highly restricted franchise. Pares visited St Petersburg, rapidly befriended the more liberal representatives, wrote about it all for the British press, and came away utterly convinced that the constitutional experiment would succeed. This resulted in his first work, 'Russia and Reform', published in 1907, and in active work as secretary for the Anglo-Russian Committee in London, which arranged parliamentary exchanges between the two capitals. The strength of the book derived from his personal contacts; the weakness, here as elsewhere in his historiography, was the almost complete neglect of the economic and social undercurrents ultimately determining events. But Russian studies was still in its infancy and Pares its most dynamic pioneer. He was promoted to a chair in Russian history, language, and literature in the following year, a post he formally held until 1917. He also edited the 'Russian Review' from 1912 to 1914. Meanwhile he spent as much time as practicable in Russia, and when war broke out in 1914 he was a natural choice as official observer to the Russian army. This too resulted in a publication -- 'Day by Day with the Russian Army' (1915) -- and decorations: the Russian red cross, the soldier's cross, and the medal of St George, of which he was indubitably proud. 
Early in 1917, as the old regime tottered into collapse, Pares was seconded to the staff of Sir George Buchanan, British ambassador in Petrograd. On Pares's view, as later published, 'the dynasty fell by its own insufficiency' (B. Pares, 'History of Russia', 1926, 471). He 'knew all the Ministers' of the provisional government. Exciting possibilities thus opened up for realizing the dreams of 1906. However, as he later confessed: 'It was the most absurd time, for a country inexperienced in liberty, to make its first attempt at democratic government while the world war was still in progress, that is, while the world was ruled by force' (B. Pares, 'The New Russia', 1931, 38-9). The seizure of power by the Bolsheviks and their dismissal of the constitutional assembly early in 1918 (after they lost the elections to that body) spelt disaster for Pares's dreams for the triumph of liberalism in Russia. At the request of the diplomatist Robert Hodgson, Pares went to Siberia, which was dominated by the less-than-liberal Admiral Kolchak, whom the British were backing blindly in a fruitless war against the Bolsheviks. Here Pares entertained the counter-revolutionary forces to lectures twice a week on the duty of Russia to others and the duty of others to Russia. As Hodgson recalled, even though the former was less popular than the latter, Pares none the less held his audience. 
Russia, though a cruel disappointment, was, however, too much a part of Pares to be forsaken. In 1919 he was appointed KBE for his service, and from then until 1936 he held the key chair in Russian language, literature, and history at London University. His boundless energies and enthusiasm for things Russian saw him become editor of the 'Slavonic Review' and simultaneously director of the fledgeling School of Slavonic and East European Studies at King's College, London, a position which he held until his retirement in 1939. Such distractions, not yet relieved by the emergence of the omnicompetent Dorothy Galton as his indispensable assistant, and the trauma of the changes in Russia inevitably slowed publication. But the stream of thought and work was blocked only briefly: in 1924 he issued an English translation of 'Letters of the Tsaritsa to the Tsar', followed in 1925 by a translation of Griboedov's 'Gore ot uma' ('The misfortune of being clever'), and in 1926 by a delightful rendition into English of Krylov's political 'Fables'. Although 'The Fall of the Russian Monarchy' (1939) was well regarded, his most significant work was the popular 'History of Russia' (1926). For all its neglect of diplomacy and economic change, it ran through several editions, and changes from one to the other edition illustrated Pares's shifting state of mind about the country, which for long he was prohibited from visiting, at least until 1935. Having abandoned the expectation that the regime would soon collapse, he resembled many Russians in exile and not a few British liberals in hoping very much that Stalin represented a return to old Russia in its symbolic reacquisition of the title Motherland in 1934, and in its new focus on industrialization -- though he was consistently firm in condemning the use of terror by the Bolsheviks. As with others of the left and centre, his concern at the rise of Hitler's Germany helped to divert criticism from the Soviet Union while Litvinov was charting the 'indivisibility of peace' at the League of Nations in Geneva. 
The revised edition of Pares's 'History of Russia' (1937) thus naively saw something positive in the new constitution and in the execution of Zinoviev and Kamenev as spelling an end to advocates of world revolution. The edition of 1944 (which found him lecturing in the United States on behalf of the Ministry of Information) now acknowledged the Webbs' 'fundamental misapprehensions' in lauding the Stalinist regime as a new civilization, but it also evinced signs of Pares's irrepressible Romanticism -- for example, in his passing comment: 'to know and love the people of Russia -- the two go together almost automatically for an Anglo-Saxon' ('History of Russia', 4th edn, 1944, 11). The hopes that accompanied these sentiments reawakened by the common struggle against fascism had by no means been extinguished three years later, as the world drifted into the cold war. 
The title of Pares's final and autobiographical work, entitled 'A Wandering Student' (1948), inadvertently captures two significant features evident throughout his long life: a rootlessness and a youthful spirit which both, perhaps, explained an unhappy emotional life but which also account for the bursts of creativity from which many greatly benefited. Pares died of pneumonia at the Midtown Hospital on East 49th Street in New York on 17 April 1949, having lived in the United States for the previous seven years. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35379


Paris, Sir Archibald (1861-1937), Royal Marine officer, was born at Lansdown, Bath, on 9 November 1861, the youngest son of the Revd Archibald Paris (1816-1861), of Ludgvan, Cornwall, and his wife, Caroline, second daughter of the Revd Sir Henry Delves Broughton, eighth baronet. Having been educated at Eton College and the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, he joined the Royal Marine Artillery in 1879. On 3 September 1885 he married Lilian Jean ('b'. 1861/2), youngest daughter of Colonel Henry Melvill of the 7th Bengal cavalry. 
Paris graduated from the Staff College, Camberley, in 1888, and, after a period afloat and five years as adjutant of the 1st Antrim artillery militia (1894-9), he was appointed to serve in the South African War in South Africa in 1900. Initially he was employed in training field batteries in Rhodesia, and he finally commanded, under Lord Methuen, the 'Kimberley column', a mixed force, mostly mounted irregulars, which was attacked and forced to surrender near Tweebosch in March 1902 owing to the flight of most of the mounted troops. Paris was exonerated from blame and later commended for organizing the gallant resistance. Thrice mentioned in dispatches, he was promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel in June 1902 for distinguished service in the field. From 1903 to 1906 he was chief instructor in military history and tactics at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich. 
In September 1914 Paris relieved Sir G. G. Aston in command of the Royal Marine brigade, and in October he was promoted temporary major-general and appointed to command the Royal Naval division, which he led with distinction at Antwerp, throughout the Gallipoli campaign, and in France. Paris had limited opportunities to display his abilities as a divisional commander in action: at Antwerp his forces were dispersed and communications with them were difficult, in many cases non-existent; on Gallipoli the Royal Naval division only came together as an entity under his command three weeks after the initial landings. Further severe casualties in their early actions and lack of reinforcements so depleted the division that, for the latter stages of the campaign, they were used primarily for trench-holding duties. He was severely wounded in October 1916, with the eventual loss of a leg, shortly before his division took part in its first major action in France. His greatest contribution to the RND was in establishing the organization and 'esprit de corps' to enable it to develop into an efficient fighting formation -- one which eventually came to be regarded as an elite unit of the British expeditionary force. In addition Paris was instrumental in ensuring the continued existence of the division and the retention of its peculiarly naval identity, in particular after the Dardanelles campaign, when it looked certain that the RND would be disbanded or converted into a 'normal' army unit. In June 1917 he was placed on the retired list as 'unfit for further service owing to wounds'. 
Paris was five times mentioned in dispatches, and promoted major-general in 1915. He was appointed CB in 1907 and KCB in 1916. He also received many foreign decorations. He was honorary colonel commandant of the Portsmouth division, Royal Marines (1923-33), and was awarded a good-service pension in 1925. 
Tall and spare, with a cast in one eye caused by an accident, Paris had a thorough grasp of his profession; he was popular with his men, and a highly regarded commander. His only son, Brigadier Archibald Charles Melvill, was killed on active service in Malaya in 1942. Archibald Paris died at Chatelard, Montreux, Switzerland, on 30 October 1937, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35380


Parish, William Douglas (1833-1904), writer on dialect, was born on 16 December 1833 at 5 Gloucester Place, Portman Square, St Marylebone, London, the fifth son of Sir Woodbine Parish (1796-1882), diplomatist, and his first wife, Amelia Jane (died 1835), daughter of Leonard Becher Morse. Of his seven brothers and five sisters, the eldest, Major-General Henry Woodbine Parish CB (1821-1890), served with distinction in South Africa under Sir Harry Smith, and later in Abyssinia; the second, John Edward (1822-1894), became an admiral; and the third, Francis (1824-1906), was sometime consul at Buenos Aires, and later consul-general and state commissioner at Havana. His half-sister, Blanche Marion Parish, married in 1871 Ughtred James Kay-Shuttleworth, first Baron Shuttleworth (the biography of Sir Woodbine is by their daughter). 
William Douglas Parish was at Charterhouse School from 1848 to 1853. He matriculated at Trinity College, Oxford, in the latter year, and graduated BCL in 1858. In 1859 he was ordained to the curacy of Firle and Beddingham in Sussex, and in 1863 became vicar of the adjoining parishes of Selmeston and Alciston, a benefice he held until his death. He was for a time diocesan inspector of schools. He endeared himself not only to his parishioners but also to Gypsies and vagrants, and his sense of humour was proverbial. From 1877 to 1900 he was chancellor of Chichester Cathedral. 
Parish's principal work, 'A Dictionary of the Sussex Dialect and Collection of Provincialisms in use in the County of Sussex' (1875, 2 editions), is both a contribution to etymology and a classic example of what a country parson with antiquarian tastes, a sense of humour, and a sympathetic affection for his rural parishioners could do to record for posterity the dialect and the domestic habits of the people of his time and place. He also produced, with the Revd W. F. Shaw, 'A Dictionary of the Kentish Dialect' (1887). 
Parish's other publications included 'The Telegraphist's Easy Guide' (1874), an explanation of the Morse system written primarily for the boys of his parish, to whom he taught signalling as a pastime. He also produced an educational work, 'School Attendance Secured without Compulsion' (1875, 5 editions), a pamphlet describing his successful system of giving back to parents their children's school payments as a reward for good attendances. His 'Domesday Book in Relation to the County of Sussex' (1886, fol.) was written for the Sussex Archaeological Society, on the council of which Parish served for many years, and he edited a useful alphabetical 'List of Carthusians [Charterhouse schoolboys], 1800-79' (1879). 
Parish died unmarried in Selmeston vicarage on 23 September 1904, and was buried in Selmeston churchyard. A window and two brasses were erected to his memory in the church. 


@@@@@


doc= 35381


Parker, Albert Edmund, third earl of Morley (1843-1905), politician, was born at Kent House, Knightsbridge, London, on 11 June 1843. He was the only son of Edmund Parker, second earl of Morley (1810-1864) ['see under 'Parker, John, first earl of Morley (1772-1840)], and his wife, Harriet Sophia (died 1897), the only daughter of Montagu Edmund Parker of Whiteway, Devon, and Harriet Newcombe of Starcross, and the widow of William Coryton of Pentillie Castle, Cornwall; Prince Albert was his godfather. He was educated at Eton College, where he subsequently became a fellow and governor, and at Balliol College, Oxford, where he took a first class in 'literae humaniores' and graduated BA in 1865. He succeeded his father in the peerage in 1864 and in 1876 married Margaret (died 1908), daughter of Robert Stayner Holford of Westonbirt and his wife, Mary Anne, 'nee' Lindsay. They had a daughter and three sons, the eldest, Edmund Robert, succeeding to the title. 
In the House of Lords, Morley figured as a polished speaker of Liberal principles. From 1868 to 1874 he was a lord-in-waiting to Queen Victoria during Gladstone's first administration. When Gladstone returned to office in 1880 he became under-secretary for war, serving first under H. C. E. Childers and then under Lord Hartington. He proved an efficient minister, notably in speeches on recruiting and army organization, and he displayed a grasp of affairs during the debates on the occupation of Egypt and the expedition to Khartoum. He left office in 1885. 
When the home-rule question arose to divide the Liberal Party, Morley at first followed Gladstone, and from February to April 1886 was first commissioner of public works in Gladstone's third government. On 12 April he resigned, together with Edward Heneage, chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, after Gladstone had divulged the scope of his measure. He was elected chairman of committees and deputy speaker of the Lords on 4 April 1889, defeating Balfour of Burleigh, the tory candidate. Morley's pronounced unionism meant this was no real defeat for Salisbury. 'My majority', Morley noted, 'was made up of 20 Gladstonians, 44 Liberal Unionists, 30 Conservatives and one bishop.' Morley considerably extended the powers of the chairman, exercising an often decisive influence on the success or failure of private members' legislation. For the guidance of promoters, 'a model bill' was annually devised by his standing counsel and himself, and by the beginning of every session the proposed measures, however numerous, had been passed under thorough review. As ''Lord Chairman'', 'The Times' concluded, 'Lord Morley was an autocrat.' 
Attacked by a lingering illness, Morley sent in his temporary resignation in February 1904; his departure was generally regretted. Lord Balfour of Burleigh took his place. On 12 February 1905 he finally resigned and he died fourteen days later, on 26 February 1905, at his home, Saltram, Plympton St Mary; he was buried on 2 March in the parish churchyard. 
Morley took an active interest in Devon affairs. He was a chairman of quarter sessions, and vice-chairman of the Devon county council from 1889 to 1901, then chairman from 1901 to 1904. His speeches displayed a wide knowledge of local finance and requirements. In succession to his father and grandfather he involved himself in the Plymouth chamber of commerce, became its president in 1864, and made its annual dinner the occasion for a speech on public affairs. He took pride in the fine collection of pictures at Saltram, and was an enthusiastic gardener. 


@@@@@


doc= 35382


Parker, Charles Stuart (1829-1910), politician and biographer, born at Aigburth, Liverpool, on 1 June 1829, was the eldest son of Charles Stewart Parker of Fairlie, Ayrshire, a partner in the prosperous Liverpool firm of Sandbach, Tinne & Co., merchants for the West Indies. His mother was Anne, eldest daughter of Samuel Sandbach of Hafodunnos, Denbighshire. Thomas Chalmers, a friend of his paternal grandparents, was one of Parker's godfathers, and he was throughout life influenced by the evangelical temper of his home training. On 13 August 1838 his father's sister Annie married Edward (afterwards Viscount) Cardwell, whose political views he came to share. Parker was at Eton College from 1842 to 1847, and in 1846 won the prince consort's prize for German. On 10 June 1847 he matriculated from Brasenose College, Oxford, but the next year migrated to University College where he had won a scholarship. There he began a long and close association with the college and formed friendships with A. P. Stanley, Goldwin Smith, John Conington, Arthur Gray Butler, William Bright, and T. W. Jex-Blake. Friends at other colleges included A. W. Peel (afterwards speaker of the House of Commons), G. C. Brodrick, T. H. Green, G. J. Goschen, W. H. Fremantle, Frederic Harrison, and Grant Duff. In 1852 he joined Goschen, Brodrick, and others in starting the Oxford Essay Club, and he frequently attended the club dinners in later life, at Goschen's house and elsewhere. 
In Easter term 1852 Parker was placed in the first class in 'literae humaniores', and in the second class of the mathematical school, graduating BA and proceeding to MA in 1855. He was a fellow of his college from 1854 until 1868, and lived in Oxford until 1864, throwing himself with vigour into the work of both college and university. He was college tutor from 1858 to 1865, and was one of the first lecturers in modern history. He was examiner in 'literae humaniores' in 1859, 1860, 1863, and 1868. He won the confidence of undergraduates, and introduced them to men of note from the outer world, whom from an early date he entertained at Oxford. He organized the university volunteer corps and did much while major of the battalion (1865-8) to improve its efficiency, especially in shooting. The main recreation of his university days was mountaineering. He preferred climbing without guides, and it was without guides that he, with his brothers Sandbach and Alfred, made the second and fourth attempts on the Matterhorn in 1860 and 1861 respectively. Subsequently Parker's climbing companions included W. H. Gladstone and Stephen Gladstone, sons of the statesman, who was a friend of Parker and his family. 
Like Brodrick, Goldwin Smith, and other Oxford men, Parker was a contributor to the early issues of the 'Saturday Review' in 1855, but he soon withdrew owing to his dislike of the cynical tone of the paper, and a characteristic impatience of its partisan, tory spirit. He gradually concentrated his interest on liberal reform of the university. He especially urged a prudent recognition of the claims of science, modern history, and modern languages in the academic curriculum, and the throwing open of scholarships to competition. He was an early supporter of a national system of elementary education which should be efficient and compulsory, rather than voluntary. In 1867 he published two essays, one on 'Popular education', in 'Questions for a Reformed Parliament', arguing that only a reformed parliament would pass an adequate elementary education measure, and the other on 'Classical education', in F. W. Farrar's 'Essays on a Liberal Education'. 
In 1864 Parker, who inherited ample means, diversified his academic duties by becoming private secretary to his uncle, Edward Cardwell, who was then colonial secretary, working for him until he went out of office in 1866. At the wish of Gladstone, with whom his relations steadily became closer, Parker stood for Perthshire in 1868 as a Liberal. He gained a startling victory over the former Conservative member, Sir William Stirling Maxwell, who regained the seat from him at the general election of 1874. Parker was however elected for the city of Perth in 1878, and retained the seat until 1892, when he was defeated in a three-cornered contest. He failed to win a seat in West Perthshire in 1900. He was a competent back-bencher but a poor speaker. He never held ministerial office, nor appears to have been offered it. But he was quite close to the Peelites among the Liberal leadership, and prepared for publication Gladstone's Midlothian speeches of 1879-80. 
It was on educational policy that Parker exerted his chief influence. Joining the public schools commission (1868-74), he proved one of its most active members, urging that the public school curriculum should be modernized in sympathy with a progressive policy at the universities. He also sat on the commission for military education in 1869, and advocated the linking up of the public schools with Sandhurst and Woolwich, so as to ensure a broad general culture before technical and professional training. Again, as a member of the Scottish educational endowments commission in 1872, he argued persistently that the benefits of endowments should go 'not to the most necessitous of those fairly fitted intellectually, but to the most fit among those who were fairly necessitous'. His views greatly stimulated the development of secondary education in Scotland: he wished the Scottish elementary schools to form a 'ladder' to the university, and he sought to protect them from the evil system of 'payment by results'. He was in 1887 chairman of a departmental committee on higher education in the elementary schools of Scotland, and wrote its report with Sir Henry Craik. 
Parker, whose wide interests embraced a precise study of scientific hypotheses, in his later years became an important historian of the Peelites. His 'Sir Robert Peel from his Private Papers' (3 vols., 1891-9), for which he was given special access by Gladstone and others, remains an important source, as does his 'Life and Letters of Sir James Graham' (2 vols., 1907). He was elected honorary fellow of University College in 1899, and was made honorary LLD of Glasgow and honorary DCL of Oxford in 1908. In 1907 he was sworn of the privy council. 
Parker died unmarried at his London house, 32 Old Queen Street, Westminster, on 18 June 1910, and was buried at Fairlie. He bequeathed $5000 to University College, Oxford, where two Parker scholarships for modern history were established but later discontinued. 


@@@@@


doc= 35383


Parker, Frederick Moore Searle (1870-1955), author and journalist, was born at The Grange, East Barnet, Hertfordshire, on 9 October 1870, the eldest son of Frederick Searle Parker, a solicitor of Bedford Row, and his wife, Elisabeth, daughter of William Wilkieson, of Woodbury Hall, Bedfordshire. As a King's scholar at Eton College, fishing was already his passion and, with no encouragement, he was a keen naturalist. He went as a postmaster to Merton College, Oxford, where he obtained a second class in classical moderations (1891) and a fourth in 'literae humaniores' (1893). Then came a few years of schoolmastering until in 1900, at the age of thirty, he entered journalism as a junior assistant editor on the 'St James's Gazette', under Theodore Cook. He soon started to write also for St Loe Strachey in 'The Spectator', to which he was a regular contributor for twelve years. In 1902 Strachey bought the 'County Gentleman', a sporting weekly devoted mainly to horses, and, with Parker as editor, set about widening its appeal. 
Meanwhile 'Macmillan's Magazine' had serialized Parker's first novel, 'The Sinner and the Problem', published as a book in October 1901 and twice reprinted within three months. Parker married in 1902 Ruth Margaret (died 1933), daughter of Ludwig Messel, of Nymans, Handcross, Sussex. They had four sons, two of whom were killed in the Second World War, and two daughters. 
When Strachey's ownership and his editorship of the 'County Gentleman' came to an end in 1907, Parker devoted himself with his customary thoroughness to the Surrey volume (1908) in Macmillan's 'Highways and Byways' series, exploring on foot every nook and cranny of the county where much of his life was to be spent; few came to know it better or loved it more. For two years (1908-10) he edited the monthly 'Gamekeeper'; it was then, in 'A Book of the Zoo' (1909), that he foresaw that the grey squirrel might 'become a country problem', a couple of decades before it was officially recognized as such. In 1910 Parker was in the running for the post of editor-in-chief of 'The Field'; but the trustees regarded him as 'too much of a poet' and appointed the same Theodore Cook with whom he had started his journalistic career. Cook invited Parker to help him and a year later appointed him shooting editor, a post he was to fill with distinction for over twenty years (1911-32). At this time he was writing regularly for 'The Field', 'The Spectator', and 'Cornhill Magazine', but he found time to finish a novel of child life, 'Promise of Arden' (1912), to prepare with William Hyde 'A West Surrey Sketch-Book' (1913), and to undertake at the request of Reginald J. Smith a book of reminiscences, 'Eton in the 'Eighties' (1914). 
In November 1914 Parker was gazetted to a captaincy in the 5th battalion of the Queen's Royal West Surrey regiment, in which he served until June 1918, when he was attached to the intelligence department at the War Office. During the war years, which he spent in England, he wrote 'Shooting Days' (1918) and began 'Playing Fields' (1922), the story of life at a preparatory school and at Eton as seen through the eyes of a schoolboy; it has been described as the best school story ever written. Between the wars not a year passed without the appearance of at least one book written, compiled, or edited by him. A selection of titles indicates their range: 'Elements of Shooting' (1924), 'Between the Wickets' (1926), 'Field, River and Hill' (1927), 'English Wild Life' (1929), 'Ethics of Egg-Collecting' (1935), 'The Gardener's England' (1936), and the autobiographical 'Memory Looks Forward' (1937). 
In 1927 Parker gave the first in what became a series of talks to schools for the BBC. In the following year he became editor of the 'Lonsdale Library of Sports, Games and Pastimes'. Then, in December 1929, came Sir Leicester Harmsworth's offer of the post of editor-in-chief of 'The Field'. In the eight years that followed Parker put new life into the weekly, widening its interest and appeal. His most noteworthy achievement was the devastating exposure of the trapping and caging of linnets, goldfinches, and other small birds, which was largely responsible for the passage of the 'Protection of Birds Act', 1933. Parker also gave a talk on the subject for the BBC. The broadcasting of 'Birds in Paper Bags' did much to alert public opinion to the cruel conditions in which wild birds were kept and sold at London markets. He also campaigned in 'The Field' against the docking of horses, which was later made illegal. At the end of 1937 Parker gave up his post with the journal so that he might have more time for writing and broadcasting, and accepted a seat on the board. His literary output was maintained, although with less emphasis on field sports and more on cricket, dogs, natural history, and gardens. He contributed the volume on Surrey (1947) to Hale's 'County Books' series and added to the 'Lonsdale Library' 'The History of Cricket' (1950). The last of his fifty-odd books, 'Surrey Gardens' (1954), was published shortly before his death at his home, Feathercombe, Hambledon, Surrey, on 13 February 1955. 
In his bearing, talk, kindness, honesty of mind and purpose, outlook on life, and general character Parker was outstandingly an English country gentleman. He had a fund of humour, was a keen observer, and wrote with ease and sureness. He enabled readers to see about them things which they had not noticed before, and shared with them delightfully his appreciation of beauty in the countryside. 


@@@@@


doc= 35384


Parker, Sir (Horatio) Gilbert George, baronet (1860-1932), novelist and politician, was born on 23 November 1860 at Camden East, Addington, Ontario, Canada, the fourth surviving child and eldest son of Joseph Parker (1807-1900), former soldier, justice of the peace, militiaman, and shopkeeper, and his second wife, Samantha Jane (1834?-1908), daughter of George and Mary ('nee' Gardineer) Simmons, a family of United Empire loyalist extraction. His father emigrated to Canada from Ireland about 1834 and pursued a variety of occupations before settling as a shopkeeper. Parker attended various schools, including one in Frankford when the family moved there in 1877. He spent six weeks at Belleville model school training as a teacher and started his teaching career at Marsh Hill, near Frankford, where he stayed for three years until 1880. He continued his teacher training at Ottawa normal school from late 1880 to early 1881. He then taught at Bayside School before teaching at the Ontario Institute for the Deaf at Belleville in January 1882. In April 1881 he was ordained an Anglican deacon and a curate at St George's Church, Trenton. In 1883 Parker began a divinity course at Trinity College, Toronto, where he was also professor of elocution. In 1884 he became lecturer in elocution at Queen's College, Kingston, and he finally abandoned any thoughts of the ministry. Early in 1886 Parker left on a trip to Australia where he joined the staff of the 'Sydney Morning Herald', eventually becoming associate editor. While in Australia, Parker began his literary career by publishing stories and articles in the newspapers and he wrote the plays 'Faust' (1888) and 'The Vendetta' (1889), both of which were failures. 
Parker left Australia in 1889 and settled in Britain as his home for the rest of his life. He contributed to some of the major journals and papers and began his stories of the Canadian north. His first book, 'Pierre and his People: Tales of the Far North' (1892), was well received in Britain but not in Canada, where it was felt that it lacked realism, a criticism that was applied to many of his later works. Throughout the 1890s he was a prolific writer in both article and novel form. He published his first full-length novel, 'The Chief Factor', in 1892 and then followed with his first modern novel, 'Mrs Falchion' (1893), which received mixed reviews, and 'The Trespasser' (1893). The year 1894 saw his first historical romance, 'The Trail of the Sword', his only novel to be translated into French. His greatest success was 'The Seats of the Mighty' (1896), a story based on the British capture of Quebec, which Beerbohm Tree persuaded him to adapt for the stage, though without much success. 
On 5 December 1895 Parker married Amy Eliza Vantine (died 1925), a wealthy young New York heiress, and they settled into a fairly hectic social life where he endeavoured to seek influence both literary and political. Parker's love for Canada and his belief in the imperial destiny led him to have political ambitions both in Canada and Britain, and in 1900 he was elected Conservative MP for Gravesend, a seat he held until ill health forced him to resign in 1918. 
After a stay in the Channel Islands, Parker wrote 'The Battle of the Strong' (1898), a story of the French Revolution, and this was followed by 'The Right of Way' (1901), a psychological study of mental illness and marital disharmony which became a best-seller in the USA. Despite his parliamentary work, he still managed to write both fiction and non-fiction, and in 1902 he published 'Donovan Pasha', a story set in Egypt. He used his vast experience of travels abroad in his novels and this is a mark of his style and art. However, a criticism often made was that his characters were too extreme in their make-up and actions to be believable. Despite this, Parker was recognized as a major Canadian writer with the award of a knighthood in 1902. His literary position was recognized in 1912 with the start of the publication of the 'Imperial' edition of his works, a rare honour for a living novelist. 
Parker's staunch support of the empire led him to organize the first colonial universities' conference in 1903 and in the following year he became chairman of the Imperial South African Association. In parliament he promoted colonial interests, a concern reflected in his novels and contributions to periodicals. His ambitions for high political office were slow to be fulfilled (he failed to become high commissioner for Canada) until the First World War provided an opening for his talents. From November 1914 to late 1916 he was in charge of British propaganda in the USA and he 'built up an organisation of 13,000 influential people in the USA who were distributing British propaganda' (Buitenhuis, 17-18). He published 'The World in a Crucible: an Account of the Origins and Conduct of the Great War' in 1915, and in the same year was rewarded for his political and war work with a baronetcy and the following year was sworn of the privy council. His contribution to the war effort was recognized with the offer of an earldom in 1921, but it was refused as being too late to be of value (Adams, 186). His wife died in 1925 and Parker never recovered from the loss. His novels no longer satisfied the public, though sixteen of them were filmed. 
Photographs show Parker as of medium height, bearded, and with rather intense eyes. He was somewhat of a dandy in his dress. He died of a heart attack on 6 September 1932 at his home, 2 Whitehall Court, Westminster, London, and was buried in Belleville, Ontario, on 27 September; his title became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 35385


Parker, John (1875-1952), theatre historian, was born Jacob Solomons in New York on 28 July 1875, the only child of David Solomons and his wife, Florence Joel. His father was a native of Warsaw, but all family links with Poland were lost after his death by drowning in 1881; some sources described him as a sailor, though for his marriage certificate his son recorded his occupation as cashier in an insurance office. The widow, who had been born in Cardiff, decided to return to the United Kingdom where some of her family still lived; choosing to keep both her son and her independence, she took the post of caretaker at Clarence Chambers, King William Street, in the City of London, and enrolled her son at the Whitechapel foundation school, where he was a fellow pupil of Herman Finck. 
After a short period as an office boy Jacob Solomons accepted the offer of a commercial acquaintance to return to the United States to improve his prospects, but within a few months he found himself stranded and obliged to work his passage back to England. It was about this time that he decided, on the advice of his mother, to adopt the name John Parker, which he legalized in 1917. While working as a commercial clerk he married, on 8 February 1899, Edith Maud Pizey (1875/6-1942), daughter of Montague Belfield Pizey, schoolmaster. They had a daughter and a son. 
There is evidence that between the years 1892 and 1903, while employed in various capacities, Parker had made a start in journalism; he soon became sufficiently well informed on theatrical matters to be able to write to the eminent critic Clement Scott of the 'Daily Telegraph' and point out errors of fact where they occurred in his columns. This enthusiasm and passion for accuracy appealed to Scott, who allowed the boy the pleasure of carrying his copy to the newspaper office, encouraged his talent for research, and from 1900 published regular contributions from him in his weekly paper the 'Free Lance'. In 1903 Parker was appointed London manager, critic, and correspondent of the 'New York Dramatic News', a post which he held for seventeen years, and in the same year he was made the London correspondent of the 'New York Dramatic Mirror'. From 1901 until his death, Parker managed to divide his time between his business as a shipping agent and his work for the theatre which was his first love. 
During the nineteenth century several reference works of dramatic biography appeared, but none of these was to reach more than two issues. For the 1907 edition of the 'Green Room Book' Parker was invited to provide additional information for the biographies and to contribute the entire section on the American theatre. He then succeeded as editor but was able to bring out only two more editions (1908 and 1909) before it came to an end with the death of the publisher. 
Parker's reputation as a theatre historian had by this time become well established, and in 1912 Sir Isaac Pitman & Sons published his new venture, 'Who's Who in the Theatre'. The success of the very first edition brought from Sir Herbert Beerbohm Tree the commendation 'As a monument of industry, 'Who's Who in the Theatre' seems to me to be absolutely pyramidal.... It is a work which assuredly deserves the gratitude of everyone connected with the theatre'. Over a period of forty years, until his death, and surviving the publishing hazards of two world wars, Parker compiled eleven editions of his 'Who's Who' almost single-handed, an astonishing achievement in view of the ever-expanding spheres of the theatre with the growth of the cinema and television. His success as an editor lay in the accuracy and balance of his records. The motto which headed his editorial stationery, 'Sine timore, aut favore', indicated his inflexible rule, a rule which made him a number of enemies in the profession, principally by his refusal to allow his subjects to falsify their ages. It is conceivable that the unsolved mystery of the burglary of his study in September 1928 was the work of some aggrieved actor. All Parker's notes and all the copy for his sixth edition, then ready for press, were stolen. After his first shock had subsided, he rewrote in his own hand all the new material, including more than 450 new biographies. 
Parker also found time to give active support to the Critics' Circle, of which he was a founder member, honorary secretary (1924-52), and in one year president. In 1937 he represented the Critics' Circle as British delegate at the International Congress of Critics in Paris. He was also the honorary editor of the 'Critics' Circular'. 
With little time to spare for the more conventional recreations, Parker had one passing hobby and one sport, albeit as a spectator. He was an accomplished illuminator, and spent many a Sunday morning, during 1905 and 1906, in nightshirt, silk dressing gown, and smoking cap, designing and carrying out, in all their elaborate colour and gold leaf, two 'vellums' for presentation to Lionel Brough and Ellen Terry, respectively, on the celebration of their stage jubilees. His enthusiasm for cricket -- he was a member of the Surrey County Cricket Club -- was lifelong, but chiefly as a spectator. 
Parker was fastidious in both dress and speech. At one time he took lessons in elocution and delighted in imparting what he had learned to his family. His son by his first marriage produced a twelfth edition of 'Who's Who in the Theatre' in 1957. In 1944 Parker married, second, Doris Mary, daughter of George Sinclair. He died in a nursing home, 9 Westbourne House, Richmond Road, Twickenham, Middlesex, on 18 November 1952, and was cremated at Mortlake crematorium in London on 24 November. 
Freda Gaye', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35386


Parker, Joseph (1830-1902), Congregational minister, was born on 9 April 1830 in the Market Place, Hexham, Northumberland, the only child of Teasdale Parker, stonemason, and Elizabeth Dodd, his wife. He was educated at local schools. At fourteen years of age he was set to learn his father's craft, but soon tired of it and was sent back to school. Until he was twenty-one years old he devoted himself, as he said, to 'self-culture'. The Congregational church where his father was a deacon was divided over the introduction of evangelical Arminian ideas by the new minister, James Frame, and the stricter Calvinists, including Teasdale Parker, withdrew and (somewhat incongruously) joined the Methodist church. 
During his youth Joseph Parker was fascinated by the ideas and speeches of such radical reformers as Edward Miall (1809-1881) and Joseph Cowen (1800-1873). From the age of fourteen Parker had participated in local debates and boys' meetings, but it was as a supporter of the temperance movement that he was given his first opportunity to exercise his gifts in public. In June 1848 he preached his first sermon on the village green and was enrolled as a lay preacher in the Methodist circuit. The family returned to the Congregational church and Parker felt that he was called into the Christian ministry. He wrote for guidance to Dr John Campbell (1794-1867) of Whitefield's Tabernacle, Moorfields, and in his reply Campbell invited him to preach at his church for three Sundays. He left home for London on 8 April 1852. Such was the impression that he made that he was appointed assistant minister. 
After Parker had spent nine months in London, where he attended lectures at University College, he accepted a call to the Congregational church at Banbury, where he was ordained minister on 8 November 1853. The congregation, initially of fifty members, soon became too large for the building and a new church had to be built. Parker also caused some consternation and some physical danger to himself by initiating open-air services on the cricket ground. He drew wider attention by challenging the formidable secularist George Jacob Holyoake (1817-1906), and holding his own against him in public debate. It was at Banbury, too, that he began to publish books and articles, an activity that he was to continue vigorously throughout his career. 
Among the numerous churches that now sought his services it was the prestigious Cavendish Street Congregational Church, Manchester, that persuaded Parker to become its minister. He accepted its call on 10 June 1858 and began his ministry at the end of the following month. Success attended him again and by 1863 there were over 1000 members in the church, including many wealthy leaders of commerce and industry. All 1700 seats in the church were occupied at the Sunday services. 
On 1 October 1860 courses began at Cavendish College (later the Nottingham Congregational Institute), founded by Parker to provide basic training for men who had been deprived of educational opportunities. He shared the teaching with J. B. Paton and J. Radford Thomson of Heywood. After a clash over the expulsion of a student, Parker withdrew from teaching before the end of the first session and resigned from the board of management in 1862. 
On 19 September 1869 Parker began his ministry at the oldest nonconformist church in London, the Poultry Chapel, Cheapside. It was not in a flourishing condition but was soon filled with eager congregations. On 23 September he began to hold a lunchtime service for city workers on Thursdays. Average attendance exceeded one thousand, and it attracted people of all denominations and made a significant contribution to ecumenical understanding, despite the fact that prominent Anglicans were officially inhibited from accepting his invitations to address the congregations. It continued for thirty-two years. From 1871 until 1874 he conducted an institute of homiletics to improve the standard of preaching. Parker's success made a new building necessary. The Poultry Chapel was sold for $50,000 and the last service was held there on 16 June 1872. Services continued in temporary accommodation until the new church, erected at Holborn Viaduct and known, significantly, as the City Temple, was dedicated on 19 May 1876. Its marble pulpit was the gift of the corporation of the City of London. Here Parker ministered for the remainder of his life. The City Temple became the most powerful centre of nonconformist influence in the city and indeed far beyond, not least in the United States, a country which Parker visited five times. It was this transatlantic influence that prompted Dr T. L. Cuyler's dictum that 'the back galleries of the City Temple were in the Rocky Mountains' (Adamson, 126). 
In 1867 Parker was chair of the Lancashire Congregational Union and was twice elected chair of the Congregational Union of England and Wales, in 1884 and 1901. Between 5 and 8 February 1887 he was in Edinburgh where he lectured and preached at several venues, including the church of St Giles, and he was in Scotland again from 30 July to 16 August 1888 conducting a preaching mission. Then in May 1894 he addressed the general assembly of the Free Church of Scotland and spoke to the thousand ministers who were present on his objections to the higher criticism of the 'Bible'. By these visits he became a familiar name to the Scots. In 1862 he was granted an honorary DD from the University of Chicago. On 4 October 1887, while on a visit to the United States, he delivered at the Brooklyn Academy of Music the eulogy on his friend Henry Ward Beecher, who had died on 8 March 1887, and that event, he confessed, 'was the most memorable public occasion in which I have taken part' (Adamson, 192). His enthusiastic reception on his various visits to the United States sparked off rumours that he would be invited to succeed Beecher. But Parker had no thought of emigrating. 
Parker's consistent interest in contemporary politics led him to publish a manifesto as a parliamentary candidate for the City of London in the general election of March 1880. In it he supported disestablishment of the Church of England, abolition of the traffic in liquor, and an extension of peasant proprietorship of land. Although 1200 electors had promised their support, Samuel Morley MP (1809-1886) and others persuaded him to withdraw his name, which he did. 
Parker was twice married. On 15 November 1851, at Hexham Congregational Church, he married Ann, the daughter of William Nesbitt, farmer, of Horsley. She died in 1863. A stained-glass window was erected in her memory at Horsley Congregational Church in 1899. On 22 December 1864 Parker married Emma Jane, daughter of Andrew Common JP, banker, of Sunderland. She died on 26 January 1899 and was buried at Hampstead cemetery. In her memory stained-glass windows were installed at City Temple and Union Congregational Church, Sunderland. At Sunderland, too, Parker founded in her memory the Parker Memorial Home for Girls. He never recovered from this bereavement and confessed that he did not find it unfitting to pray to her. There were no children. Parker died at his home at 14 Lyndhurst Gardens, Hampstead, on 28 November 1902 after a debilitating illness and was buried at Hampstead cemetery. 
Parker was a prolific author and his published books amount to more than sixty titles. He also wrote a large number of articles and edited journals. His attempt to launch a daily newspaper, 'The Dial' (1860-64), failed. His most ambitious publication was 'The People's Bible' (1885-95), which ran to twenty-five volumes and consists of the material used in his sermons over a period of years. 'Ecce Deus' (1867) was a reply to J. R. Seeley's 'Ecce homo' (1865). His 'Six Chapters on Secularism' (1854) represents his polemics against the kind of views espoused by Holyoake. His interest in improving the standard of preaching is demonstrated in 'Ad clerum: Advices to a Young Preacher' (1870). 'Bible' exposition was a passionate interest of his and permeates most of his writing. 'Tyne Chylde: my Life and Teaching' (1883) and 'A Preacher's Life' (1899) are autobiographical. His ineffectual attempts at fiction are seen in 'Springdale Abbey' (1868) and 'Weaver Stephen' (1886). Most of what he published soon sank into oblivion. His verbose and over-heated prose proved not to be to the taste of a later generation, while his biblical studies, although often perceptive and moving, suffered from the lack of a firm basis in scholarly precision. Even so, his 'Pulpit Bible' (1901) found a welcome in many churches. 
Parker was a communicator of genius. The huge congregations that he attracted in England, Scotland, and the United States testified to a rare ability to make the Christian message relevant to his own generation. It put him in the front rank of English preachers. It is not easy for a later generation to account for his influence. In theology he was an evangelical, but not of a dogmatic kind. When C. H. Spurgeon initiated the 'downgrade controversy', Parker commented that Spurgeon's hostility to theological change showed lack of trust in God's providence, and to believe that the age was in decline was to be an atheist ('The Freeman', Aug 1887). He combined his fairly conservative theological emphasis with a passionate Liberalism in politics. His leonine head and bold stance gave him an imperious presence in the pulpit. Most of his preaching was extemporary, and that enticed him to make unexpected outbursts that both astonished and attracted his congregations, as in his imprecation, 'I say, God damn the Sultan', delivered in his address on the tercentenary of the birth of Oliver Cromwell, 25 April 1899, or his assertion that 'the Stock Exchange is the bottomless pit of London', which came in his tirade against gambling in 1900. His sonorous voice, with its surprising modulations, as well as his dramatic delivery, his humour, his use of dialect, and his freshness, combined to make his oratory unique in the London of his day. Added to this were the puzzling contradictions in his personality. He could be brusque and gentle, sarcastic and mellifluous, full of self-esteem and yet dependent on the kindness and even flattery of those about him. 
Parker's career illustrates powerful tendencies in Victorian nonconformity. He began as a radical and republican, but as he came more into contact with rich and influential people he developed into a defender of the social and economic establishment as well as the monarchy. Although claiming to be a defender of Congregationalism in its stricter Independent form, in his speeches from the chair of the Congregational Union in 1901 he advocated a centralized form of Congregationalism. The plans he advocated aroused controversy, but he seems to have been intent on creating a united nonconformist church that would eventually embrace all denominations and be able to compete for social and religious pre-eminence with the Church of England. In his development he embodies the ambition to transform dissent into a powerful movement that would be socially respectable, morally influential, spiritually prophetic, and politically powerful. It was to be an unfulfilled hope. 


@@@@@


doc= 35387


Parker, Louis Napoleon (1852-1944), musician and playwright, was born at Luc-sur-Mer in Calvados, France, on 21 October 1852, the only son of an American, Charles Albert Parker, and his wife, Elizabeth Moray, an Englishwoman. His grandfather, Isaac Parker (1768-1830), had been chief justice of the supreme judicial court of Massachusetts; his father was a lawyer too, but in 1840, at the age of thirty-nine, he abandoned his profession and began a wandering life in Europe, seldom caring to remain more than a year in any one place. He was temporarily absent when his son was born, and as the child was thought to be dying and the mother could then speak no French, the Frenchman who baptized him named him after the then ruler of France, Louis Napoleon. In his eventual English career these names, together with the dark hair and skin which he inherited from his mother, gave him an exotic stamp, despite his intense pro-English feeling. 
Parker's first fourteen years were spent with his parents, wandering in Italy, Germany, Switzerland, Belgium, and France -- though chiefly the first two. His autobiography, 'Several of my Lives' (1928), contains vivid descriptions of those countries before 1866. The boy's first language was Italian, to which he soon added German and French; English was a later acquisition. His regular education was inevitably haphazard, but from his earliest years he was taken constantly to operas and plays, and so obtained an intimate sense of the stage and an everyday familiarity with music. In 1866 his parents took him to England, but still kept wandering, and his first settled education began when he was seventeen, when he was sent to the Royal Academy of Music, of which the principal was then William Sterndale Bennett. In 1898, after retiring from his musical career, Parker became a fellow of the Royal Academy. 
At the academy Parker quickly came to the fore, as singer, pianist, and organist. In 1873 Sterndale Bennett, whose son James was director of music at Sherborne School in Dorset, asked Parker to go there for six weeks as locum tenens for the piano master. He went, and stayed there for nineteen years, succeeding James Bennett as organist and director of music in 1877. On 7 August 1878 he married Georgiana Bessie Calder ('c'.1853-1919), the eldest daughter of Charles Calder, a merchant, in Sherborne Abbey church. They had two daughters, Elsa and Dorothy, of whom the latter attained some distinction on the stage. Parker spent many eventful years in Sherborne, for he not only raised the school's music to a higher level than any public school had until then attained, he also made the town a musical centre whose influence radiated far over Somerset and Dorset. He was one of the first English Wagnerians, an early member of the original Wagner Society and, after it ended, president of its successor. He was also a composer with a distinct vein of his own: he equipped Sherborne School with a remarkable set of school songs; of his three cantatas, two, 'Silvia' (published 1880) and 'Young Tamlane', best display his gift for melody. But two things ended this career -- a temporary but disastrous decline of Sherborne School and, more serious, the onset of deafness. The latter left him no future in teaching, conducting, or choir-training. 
Fortunately another occupation lay ready for Parker. For some years his dramatic bent had impelled him to attempt plays and, before he left Sherborne for London in 1892, he had had three successes with short pieces and two long ones accepted. Yet his new career was very uphill. Only dauntless tenacity and fertility carried him through. In November 1893, with 'Gudgeons' (in collaboration with Murray Carson), he attained big box-office success both in London and in America, which he first visited in 1897. In 1896 'Rosemary' (again with Carson) became equally popular, and for the next twenty years Parker was one of the best-known playwrights in both countries. His most famous plays were 'The Cardinal' (1903), 'Disraeli' (1911), 'Drake' (1912), 'Joseph and his Brethren' (1913), and (with W. W. Jacobs) 'Beauty and the Barge' (1904); to which may be added 'Pomander Walk' (1910), which for years broke records in America, though (through bad casting) it failed in London. Parker was also an admirable translator, as demonstrated by 'L'Aiglon' and 'Rosmersholm', and adaptor, as seen in 'David Copperfield', 'Cyrano de Bergerac', and 'The Monkey's Paw' by Jacobs. Many of his London triumphs were obtained at His Majesty's Theatre under Sir Herbert Tree, but they were often preceded by great successes in America. 
Parker's third career -- pageant-making -- overlapped with the second. It began in 1905 with the pageant at Sherborne. Parker had never ceased to love the town, and the precincts of its ruined Norman castle gave him a perfect arena. The success of this pageant -- which with 900 participants achieved seven performances -- was quite outstanding; and requests poured in from elsewhere. By 1909 he had organized five more pageants on a great scale -- at Warwick, Bury St Edmunds, Colchester, York, and Dover -- besides a few smaller ones. His pageants essentially expressed the settled, prosperous life of England as it was before the world wars. He himself became a British subject two months before the outbreak of war in 1914. From 1907 until then he organized and greatly improved the historical section of the lord mayor's show. 
The last two decades of Parker's very long life were spent chiefly at Bishopsteignton in Devon. In 1936, when he was eighty-four, two things pleased him very much -- the very successful filming of his play 'Disraeli', written for George Arliss, and the choice of his 'Lily of France' (Joan of Arc) by the city of Nancy for its annual production, which, though interrupted by the Second World War, was afterwards resumed. His last published work was a poem, 'Fathers and Sons', in 'The Times' of 21 September 1939. He died at Inverteign, Bishopsteignton, on 21 September 1944. 


@@@@@


doc= 35388


Parker, Robert John, Baron Parker of Waddington (1857-1918), judge, was born on 25 February 1857 at Claxby rectory, Lincolnshire, the second son of the Revd Richard Parker, incumbent of Claxby, and his wife, Elizabeth Coffin. His sister Ellen ['see 'Pinsent, Dame Ellen Frances] became a leading promoter of mental health services. He was educated at Westminster School and Eton College, where he was Newcastle medallist, before matriculating on 13 October 1876 at King's College, Cambridge. There he became a scholar in 1876 and a fellow in 1881 at an unusually young age. He won the Browne's medal for the Greek ode in 1878 and in 1880 was bracketed fifth in the first class of the classical tripos; he obtained his BA in the same year and his MA in 1888. 
Parker was admitted as a student to Lincoln's Inn on 3 November 1883 and was called to the bar on 17 November in the same year. He first read under and later worked with Ingle Joyce. He soon developed a thriving practice, was esteemed for his pleadings and later had many pupils of his own. He never took silk, preferring to remain as junior counsel to the Treasury, a position he held from 1900, when Joyce was made a judge. On 9 September 1884 he married Constance (died 1937), only child of John Trevor Barkley, civil engineer; they had three sons, Trevor, John, and Hubert Lister Parker, a future lord chief justice, and two daughters, Vivien and Gwendoline. 
Parker remained relatively obscure until 1906 when he was made a Chancery judge. He began to make his mark in trying patent cases and in settling the practice under the 'Patents and Designs Act' (1907). Having delivered a judgment in a case relating to Marconi's 'wireless telegraphy' patents in 1913, he was appointed chairman of a technical committee to advise the postmaster-general as to the choice to be made among the five then competing systems. On 1 May 1913 the committee reported in favour of Marconi's. 
The death of Lord Macnaghten on 17 February 1913 had made a vacancy for a lord of appeal, for which a leading equity lawyer was required. As a Chancery judge Parker had often sat as an additional member of the Court of Appeal, and on 4 March was promoted to the House of Lords. He was duly sworn of the privy council and took the title of Baron Parker of Waddington in Yorkshire, from the younger branch of the Parkers of Browsholme, to which his family belonged. It was most unusual for a junior barrister to be promoted so rapidly to the House of Lords. Even Lord Blackburn, who was similarly promoted, had sat on the bench for many years. From the outset the profession recognized Parker as a great addition of legal strength to the House of Lords and he gained an authoritative position as a judge of final appeal during the years in which he sat there. His ability to assimilate new law and make it his own was very clear, especially in relation to the prize appeals heard during the First World War. Although the subject was novel to a Chancery lawyer and would have tested the best Admiralty practitioner, Parker was quick to familiarize himself with the decisions and to grasp the intricate practice which prevailed at that time under Lord Stowell. Parker remained on the board of appeal until shortly before his death, taking over as president after Lord Mersey. His ability to harmonize the precedents of past wars with the exigencies of the First World War was obvious, especially in the 'Roumanian' and 'Zamore' cases. 
Parker acted as deputy high steward of Cambridge University between 1915 and 1918, a time when he also sat as the president of the judicial committee and the privy council (appointed to succeed Lord Mersey in 1916). Examples of his characteristic methods of proceeding, both as an ordinary judge and as a lord of appeal, as well as of his remarkable range, can be found in his verdicts on 'Johnson v. Clark' (a local custom of Kendal); 'Fitzhardinge v. Purcell' (sporting rights on the foreshore of the Severn); 'Jones v. Pritchard' (rights and obligations as to party-walls); 'Monks v. Whiteley' (equitable doctrine of merger); 'Barry v. Minturn' (an early House of Lords judgment which Parker's colleagues were satisfied to adopt without additions); 'Attorney-General for the Commonwealth v. Adelaide Steamship Company' (combinations in restraint of trade); 'Kreglinger v. New Patagonian Company' (clogging the equity of redemption); 'Trim School v. Kelly' (murder as an accident arising out of and in the course of a schoolmaster's employment); 'Stickney v. Keeble' (of what contracts time is of the essence); 'Tamplin Steamship Company v. Anglo-Mexican Company' (frustration of a commercial adventure); 'Continental Tyre Company v. Daimler Company' (the doctrine of enemy character as applied to British incorporated companies during war); 'Admiralty Commissioners v. SS America' (the right to sue in respect of another person's loss of life); 'Bowman v. Secular Society' (illegality of anti-Christian associations); and 'Banbury v. Bank of Montreal' (authority of agents to bind principals by representations to third parties). 
The most striking characteristic of Parker's judgments was their intellectual compactness. He was always more interested in substance than in form and his method was to state a legal principle and to bring the case within it. He was concerned not only with the correctness of a decision but also with the reputation and independence of the tribunal. For example, in a case which concerned the interests of working men, the house was divided as four to three (the four being of one political party and the three of the other). Parker, who was in the minority, thought that the result would cast the judiciary into disrepute, and so suggested to one of his colleagues on the other side that they should read one another's judgments, an offer which was declined. 
When the First World War broke out, Parker was one of the first to see the danger of allowing prices and the cost of living to increase rapidly and unreasonably; and, at the time of the 'business as usual' cry, he took steps to urge his views on ministers privately. He met with no success. During 1915 he gave much thought to the problems of post-war reconstruction and brought the subject before the House of Lords in an elaborate and characteristically condensed address on 14 December 1915. During the passage of the 'Representation of the People Bill' of 1918 he took up the cause of those women who had passed university examinations but been denied the right to take up their degrees, and, speaking both as an alumnus and deputy high steward of Cambridge University, pressed on the House of Lords the right of women to vote for the representation of their university in parliament. In this he was successful. 
Parker's most noteworthy contribution to debate on public affairs was made in 1918, shortly before he died. On the occasion of a motion by Lord Parmoor on 19 March 1918 in favour of a league of nations, Parker brought before the house a detailed scheme, which went far beyond mere utopian sentiment to suggest practical details of how such a league might be formed; his plan contained twenty articles by which a league could be refined. 
Parker's health at this stage, however, was already beginning to fail. He continued to work until the summer of 1918 but died, after a short illness, on 12 July at Aldworth, the first Lord Tennyson's old home near Lurgashall in Sussex, where he had lived since 1914. As well as maintaining Browsholme Lodge in Haslemere, Surrey, he and Constance had lived at 3 Buckingham Gate in London. Constance and his three sons and two daughters survived him. Lord Parker was one of the most esteemed judges of the early twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 35389


Parkin, Sir George Robert (1846-1922), educationist and imperialist, was born on 8 February 1846 on a farm near Salisbury, New Brunswick, Canada, the youngest of the thirteen children of John Parkin, a Yorkshire farmer who emigrated in 1817, and his wife, Elizabeth McLean, a Nova Scotia-born loyalist. 
Parkin recalled his parents' 'hand to hand struggle with the forest and soil' -- a life striking for its 'bareness', with 'little music, few books, [and] not much polished society'. His mother gave him a love of literature, however, and young George attended school whenever time could be 'snatched from the hoeing of potatoes, making hay, [or] chopping wood'. These early glimmers of a distant world of learning awakened 'a burning desire to 'know' and a longing to see with my own eyes the places one read about, to meet men who wrote books or did things, to get in touch with the world of which the faint echoes only came to one's country life. (National Archives of Canada, George R. Parkin and Annie Parkin MSS, 'Social problems', 24597; autobiographical fragment, 37594)' Parkin followed this desire first to the normal school at Saint John, New Brunswick (1862-3), where he received rudimentary training as a teacher, and then to positions in rural primary schools at Buctouche and Campobello Island. He attended the University of New Brunswick in Fredericton (1864-7), where he imbibed the liberal gospel of mid-Victorian progress and optimism from Macaulay and through the direction of his professors. He was accepted into Fredericton society, thereby acquiring the social skills he would need in later life. After graduating 'magna cum laude' and gold medallist, he taught at the Gloucester county grammar school in Bathurst (1867-71) before his appointment as principal/headmaster of the Fredericton Collegiate (1872-89). 
Parkin formed in these years his lifelong conviction, expressed in his normal school notebook, that 'the degree of civilization attained by any nation' is a direct result of its standard of education, and that the teacher has enormous power by forming 'the morals and manners of those... whose influence for good or bad will be extensively felt' (Parkin MSS, 25619-25620). This belief underpinned his later work not only in education, but also in his public campaigns for imperial unity, social regeneration, and Christian responsibility. He honed his effective public-speaking techniques in a series of local lectures on temperance, education, democracy, history, and imperial unity. Yet these were troubled years for Parkin. His careful reading of Carlyle challenged the liberal notions of his university days, and his close friendship with John Medley, the high-church Anglican bishop of Fredericton, undermined the individualistic evangelical Baptist faith of his youth for a more learned, collective approach to religion. Not knowing which way to turn to reconcile his conflicting liberalism and conservatism, or his evangelicalism and high Anglicanism, he suffered a severe identity crisis and nervous breakdown. Medley stepped into the breach and sponsored Parkin for a year at Oxford University in 1873-4. 
This year set the direction for Parkin's life. As an older student with considerable experience in public speaking he was a great success at the Oxford Union, and was accorded the unusual honour for a non-degree freshman of being elected its secretary. In a famous debate he defeated H. H. Asquith over the issue of imperial unity, when he affirmed its desirability against the then widespread prevalence of Little Englandism. The resultant acclaim solidified his earlier belief in a united British empire as a force for good in the world. During his Oxford year he was also deeply impressed by Edward Thring, headmaster of Uppingham, and saw in Thring's ideals for the English public school a necessary corrective to the lower standards of pioneer schools in Canada. Thring was equally charmed, and after many years of friendship assigned Parkin the task of writing his biography (published in 1898). 
Parkin was attracted to the idealism that animated much late nineteenth-century British and Canadian life. He absorbed this from Thring as well as from personal contacts with the brilliant circle at Balliol College, including Benjamin Jowett, T. H. Green, and Lewis Nettleship, and from John Ruskin, who gave influential lectures that year. Parkin accepted idealism, as did many of his fellow students, as a practical creed rather than a philosophical system, a belief that a moral community in the world would result from the ethical character of citizens moved by a sense of selfless public service rather than by a desire for material gain or demagogic approval. In idealism (and in the related National Church movement to which he was also drawn), Parkin found a resolution of his identity crisis. His evangelical energy was rechannelled into a lifelong mission to promote the central tenets of Christian idealism in the empire, school, church, and society. 
Parkin spent the next fifteen years teaching in Fredericton. He tried in his own school, and in a connected residential establishment he founded, to implement Thring's concept of building citizenship through the regimen of residential school life and a classical education under a committed headmaster. These initial experiments were not successful. While disappointed, Parkin remained a master teacher. He has been credited, for example, through his imaginative classroom methods, with nurturing the Fredericton school of poets led by Bliss Carman and Charles G. D. Roberts. On 9 July 1878 he married Annie Connell Fisher (1858-1931), his former student at the Fredericton Collegiate, an accomplished classical scholar, and the daughter of William Fisher, a leading civil servant, loyalist, and Anglican. Theirs remained a love match, and Annie was a vital practical and emotional support in all Parkin's work. Together they had six daughters (four survived infancy) and one son. 
After leaving Fredericton for the more opportune position of headmaster of Toronto's Upper Canada College (1895-1902), Parkin took a moribund institution and, explicitly following Thring's methods, succeeded in making it the premier private school in Canada. While he ably raised money, added buildings, engaged better masters, and reformed the curriculum, his core aim at the college remained the production of Christian gentlemen. He poured his energy into his own Sunday evening addresses to the boys and into his overall direction of the masters and work. He remained convinced that 'nothing stamps a school as really great save the power of turning out men of high and noble character' ('Upper Canada College Times', Christmas 1902, 12). 
Parkin's main avenue for the realization of Christian idealism was not the school, however, but the British empire. Throughout his life, but especially during the years 1889-95, he was the leading advocate of imperial unity. His campaigns through thousands of speeches, hundreds of articles, and several books were wide-ranging. In the employ of the Imperial Federation League, he left Fredericton to stump across New Zealand and Australia throughout 1889. Based on the reputation he gained there, he was able to settle with his family in England and undertake five steady years of freelance lecturing and writing for the imperial cause all across Britain, sometimes sponsored by friends, the league, or other organizations, often working from personal contacts. His principal manifesto appeared as 'Imperial Federation: the Problem of National Unity' (1892), and a school textbook, 'Round the Empire' (1892), sold 200,000 copies and went through four editions up to 1919. He published a large wall map that effectively illustrated the unity of Britain's oceanic empire. He also lectured extensively across Canada, and began then his long affiliation with 'The Times', for which he wrote a series of extensive letters on Canadian history and geography (published as 'The Great Dominion', 1895). These were often difficult campaigns for Parkin -- quite aside from the dire personal financial circumstances from which he operated. Many Canadian imperialists were wary of being too closely tied to a formally federated British empire where Britain by force of numbers would have the controlling hand. Yet many British imperialists felt that the colonies were not paying their fair share of imperial defence and other burdens. Parkin had to bridge these two positions. Controversy arose: there were celebrated disputes with the veteran Canadian politician and high commissioner Charles Tupper, which forced the dissolution of the Imperial Federation League in 1893, and a series of attacks on Goldwin Smith's anti-imperialism and North American continentalism. 
Despite the spiritual motivation of Parkin's imperialism, he did not ignore the practical arguments favouring imperial unity. Influenced by J. R. Seeley and A. T. Mahan, Parkin pointed out to the British that, as an oceanic empire, their world influence rested on sea power. Given the realities of steamship distances, and the resultant dependencies on coal supplies and coaling bases, the empire desperately needed to retain, for commerce or defence, the quadrilateral of Australasia, South Africa, Canada, and the United Kingdom, and all the connecting islands and waterways. Trade, communications, military power, and cultural and religious influence depended on this geopolitical configuration. Without it, Britain would sink within fifty years, he presciently remarked, into the ranks of the second-class powers before the rising land-based empires of Russia and the United States; the fates of Spain and Portugal were suggestive. Similarly, Parkin pointed out to Canadians and Australians that, without the empire, the individual dominions would be battered about the world stage by aggressive superpowers; the recent experiences of Venezuela and Cuba were instructive. Self-interest, then, combined with the communications revolution of fast steamships, the telegraph, undersea cables, and connecting railways and canals across an 'all-red' route ably defended, combined with common language, literature, and culture, made a united empire possible. 
Parkin naturally articulated Canada's position in a united empire. He sought to consolidate his native country's imperial place, especially in the face of a then hostile and continentalist United States. For Parkin imperial unity was never a subsuming of Canada's interests to British colonial administration, but rather a chance for Canada's fledgeling national ambitions to have reasonable scope on the world stage. Indeed, as the oldest and senior dominion, as the geopolitical linchpin in the all-red route, as a nation built on loyalty to the empire, with open spaces for immigrants, bountiful natural resources, and the wellspring of racial vigour engendered by northern climate, Canada was the 'keystone' of empire. He urged Canada, based on these Canadian traditions and characteristics, to accept its destiny and mature from weak colony to strong imperial partner. In Canada he effectively lobbied for practical measures to unite the empire: all-red-route telegraph cables, imperial penny postage, more effective colonial conferences, trade preferences, and, following especially vocal public pressure on his part in 1899-1902, sending Canadian contingents to fight in the South African War. 
The pan-Britannic union was not an end in itself, however, or a means for jingoism, militarism, or financial profiteering. Rather, Parkin saw a stronger empire, much as he viewed education, as a vehicle for the realization of idealist principles. With imperial power came moral responsibility. In an entirely characteristic speech, he noted in 1894 that the Anglo-Saxon race 'has temptations of an exceptional kind to yield itself to mere materialism, to forget that the things of the spirit are what endure and conquer in the end'. Anglo-Saxons must not 'lose the great moral purposes of life in the race for gain'. They must view the empire as a means of spiritual regeneration: 'The more clearly we realize the growing power, the ever widening influence, the increasing prestige of the empire, the more surely will the thought turn us to self-examination and self-improvement.... Once realize what the expansion of our race in new lands means, and we cannot but turn with new earnestness to grapple with the moral and social problems which lie all around us. (Parkin MSS, 'The Christian responsibilities of empire', 22987-22990, 22970)' A strong, united empire would be a vehicle for pan-Britannic idealism, leading to the moral reform especially of the imperialists at home threatened by growing materialism and social declension, as well as to the uplift of subject peoples abroad. In a telling phrase, he saw himself as 'a wandering Evangelist of Empire'. He was also labelled an 'apostle', 'missionary', or 'lay preacher' of empire. 
Parkin's imperial campaigns eventually won his family moderate prosperity and social respectability. He became the confidant of prime ministers, leading educators, governors-general, and world-class thinkers. He personally influenced the imperial ideas of Asquith, Rosebery, Milner, Churchill, and Amery, and moved tens of thousands of others to cheering support. His name was coupled by contemporaries with those of Seeley, Kipling, and Rhodes as the leading advocates of the 'new imperialism', and his personal papers contain scores of newspaper clippings and private letters assigning to him the key role in swaying public opinion to the imperial cause. 
Because of his long educational and imperial experience, Parkin was invited in 1902 to be the first organizing secretary of the Rhodes Scholarship Trust. He travelled all over the empire and the United States several times before his retirement in 1920, and established the scholarships on a permanent and prestigious basis. His home at Goring-on-Thames became a meeting place for current and former Rhodes scholars as well as for a host of empire-wide visitors. From this position he continued his imperial speaking and writing, publishing biographies of John A. Macdonald, the first prime minister of Canada (1908), and -- within a larger account of the scholarships -- Cecil Rhodes (1912) which emphasized their subjects' imperial virtues. He campaigned vigorously during the First World War to keep idealism's lessons front and centre and to build on the imperial unity being concretely demonstrated by the dominions on the battlefields. In 1917-18 the British government asked Parkin to use his Rhodes scholarship contacts to lecture all over the United States to counter anti-British or neutralist sentiment there. After the war he readily accepted the new definitions of dominion autonomy which evolved from the peace conference, for his imperialism had always favoured the moral and spiritual unity of empire, displayed so clearly in the war, over any formal, constitutional arrangement. At the end of his life he devoted ever more time to reform of the Church of England, in which he was a prominent lay leader, to meet its National Church and imperial potential. Many honours came his way -- honorary doctorates from several universities, including his beloved Oxford, a CMG in 1898, and a KCMG in 1920. 
Parkin was a tall man, with a thin, somewhat tired-looking face. Sporting a moustache, narrow side whiskers, and shaggy brown hair, he had piercing, grey-blue eyes that suggested his enormous physical energy and moral earnestness. His remarkably deep and reasonant voice easily filled a hall of ten thousand people before the age of microphones, and the torrential rate of his delivery, often for two hours, held his audiences transfixed. Intense in public life, he exhibited a private sense of humour, with a great capacity for personal friendship and small kindnesses, and took much solace in quiet family times. Parkin died at his home, 7 Chelsea Court, London, of influenza on 25 June 1922, and was buried at Goring-on-Thames in the old churchyard overlooking the garden of his former house. 


@@@@@


doc= 35390


Parkinson, Sir (Arthur Charles) Cosmo (1884-1967), civil servant, was born on 18 November 1884 at Wimborne Minster, Dorset, the only son and younger child of Sidney George Parkinson, a surgeon, and his wife, Elizabeth Trench. He went to Epsom College, which he left as head prefect, having won a number of prizes; he then went up to Magdalen College, Oxford, as a demy and obtained first-class honours in classical moderations (1905) and 'literae humaniores' (1907). In 1908 he entered the civil service and was posted to the Admiralty. The next year he transferred to the Colonial Office where his first assignment was as secretary to the tropical African entomological research committee, and later to a committee investigating the relationship between wild animals and trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness). This experience gave him an interest in tropical medicine which lasted all his life. 
In 1914 Parkinson was appointed assistant private secretary to the secretary of state, but in May 1915 he was released for military service and commissioned as a second lieutenant in the Inns of Court Officers' Training Corps. He served with the King's African rifles in east Africa from 1917, becoming deputy assistant adjutant-general and temporary major. He was appointed OBE in 1919. 
On reverting to the Colonial Office in 1920 Parkinson was promoted principal in the east African department, but later that year he was appointed private secretary to the secretary of state. In 1924 he was moved to the dominions division of the Colonial Office and, when the two departments were separated in 1925, he was promoted assistant secretary in the Dominions Office. In 1928 he returned to the Colonial Office as head of the east African department; in 1929 he was awarded the brilliant star of Zanzibar, third class. His promotion to assistant under-secretary of state, supervising the Middle East, Cyprus, and Aden departments, and his CMG came in 1931. He was advanced to KCMG in 1935, and in 1937 was appointed permanent under-secretary of state, with a KCB in 1938. 
Parkinson was cast in a scholar's mould, with a keen sense of history and pride in tradition. Himself a perfectionist he expected perfection in others. He was a bachelor and lived for the office. But a consequent concern, perhaps over-fastidious, with the niceties of procedure and style was combined with a wide-ranging ability and insistence on upholding Britain's obligations to the colonial peoples. This, together with his invariable personal kindness and humanity, held the admiration and affection of his colleagues. Nevertheless, with war approaching, ministers evidently felt that a more dynamic leadership was needed. A change had been planned for the autumn of 1939 but was deferred because of the outbreak of war until February 1940. Parkinson was then appointed permanent under-secretary of state for the Dominions Office and Sir George Gater took his place at the Colonial Office. The staff were frankly sceptical about the substitution of an officer from outside who, whatever his personal abilities, had little experience of central government and none of colonial affairs. 
In May 1940 Gater was released on loan to the Ministry of Supply and Parkinson resumed, on an acting basis, the post to which he had been substantively appointed in 1937. It was therefore Parkinson who piloted the Colonial Office through the dark days of 1940-42, covering the spread of the war to Africa and the loss of British Somaliland, and the loss of Hong Kong, Malaya, Singapore, and the Borneo Territories -- military defeats which, however, the contemporary press widely attributed to deficiencies in colonial administration. Parkinson's calmness and comradeship did much to sustain morale during this difficult period of blitz at home and losses abroad. 
In 1942 Gater returned to the Colonial Office and Parkinson was seconded for special duties, being 'made available to visit colonies from time to time as opportunity offers, to discuss local problems with Governors as the Secretary of State's personal representative'. There was admittedly a case for such an appointment, since personal contacts had perforce been disrupted by the war. But many people felt that others could have filled it equally well, and questioned the wisdom and equity of again displacing such a wise and experienced administrator. 
Parkinson himself accepted his new duties with dignity and threw himself into them wholeheartedly. He visited the Caribbean and Bermuda in 1942-3; the Gambia, Nigeria, Kenya, Northern Rhodesia, Nyasaland, Mauritius, Seychelles, Aden, and British Somaliland in 1943; and Ceylon and Gibraltar in 1944. He retired at the end of 1944, but was re-employed during 1945 as adviser on the post-war reorganization of the colonial service. In that capacity he visited Fiji and the other Pacific colonies. He had been promoted GCMG in 1942. 
Parkinson remained active after his retirement, publishing 'The Colonial Office from within' in 1947. He served on the Epsom College council from 1932 to 1965, being chairman of the executive committee from 1947 to 1961. He was a member of the governing body of University College Hospital, Birkbeck College, and the Old Vic; and as a crown trustee of the City Parochial Foundation from 1951 never missed a meeting until failing eyesight compelled him to resign in 1966. From 1948 to 1966 he served on the delegacy of King's College, London, being a member of the finance committee from 1950 to 1963. From 1956 to 1964 he chaired the court of governors of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. He received an honorary LLD from St Andrews. 
After his retirement Parkinson moved to Bournemouth to be near his sister. Although he became totally blind in one eye his mind and memory remained fresh to the last. He died suddenly and peacefully in Bournemouth on 16 August 1967. According to an obituary in 'The Times', although 'one of the most efficient of civil servants, he never lost sight of the fact that public affairs were concerned with human beings' ('The Times', 17 Aug 1967). 
Hilton Poynton', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35391


Parr, Louisa Sarah Ann (1848?-1903), novelist, was born in London, the only child of Matthew Taylor, a naval officer. She spent her early years at Plymouth, where she was educated. Her writing career began in 1868, when she published a story, 'How it all happened', under the pseudonym of Mrs Olinthus Lobb, in 'Good Words'. It proved popular, appearing in a French version as a 'feuilleton' in the 'Journal des Debats', the editor apologizing for departing from his rule of never printing translations. At the request of the queen of Wurttemberg it was translated into German, and it was issued in the United States in pamphlet form. On 16 November 1869 she married George Parr, a surgeon and collector of china, prints, fans, and early editions, and the couple settled down to a comfortable life in Kensington, London. 
In 1870 Louisa Parr published 'Dorothy Fox', a novel of Quaker life, which created such a frenzy in the United States that one publisher paid $300 for the advance sheets of her next novel, 'The Prescotts of Pamphillon' (1874). But neither 'The Prescotts' nor its successor, 'The Gosau Smithy' (1875), compared with what is generally recognized as her 'tour de force', 'Adam and Eve', published in 1880. A story of Cornish smuggling life about the roguish Adam, and Eve, his London cousin, Parr's plot is founded on incidents related in Jonathan Couch's 'History of Polperro' (1871), and it was written on location in Cornwall after extensive trips through Italy, Algeria, and France. She followed this success with four more novels -- 'Robin' (1882), 'Loyalty George' (1888), 'Dumps and I' (1891), and 'The Squire' (1892) -- before writing her last, 'Can this be Love?' (1893), the story of a young woman persecuted by her snobbish lover and his vulgar relatives. Parr also contributed stories to magazines -- most notably 'The Neap Reef' to 'Good Words' in 1871 -- and she composed a short life of her fellow novelist Dinah Mulock Craik, which appeared in 'Women Novelists of Queen Victoria's Reign' (1897). The main characteristics of her work are a sense of humour and a pleasing style, though she could write pointedly about women's oppression. However, she was always at her best in dealing with the sea. 
Louisa Parr died, after a week's illness, from bronchitis on 2 November 1903 at her home at 18 Upper Phillimore Place, Kensington, London. Her husband had predeceased her; they had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 35392


Parratt, Sir Walter (1841-1924), organist, was born on 10 February 1841 at 6 South Parade, Huddersfield, the second son and fifth child of Thomas Parratt (1793-1862), organist of Huddersfield parish church from 1812 to his death, and his wife, Sarah Elizabeth (1807-1891), daughter of William Perkins. Parratt was educated principally by his parents, though he spent a brief period at Huddersfield collegiate school. From an early age he showed evidence of a prodigious musical memory and at the age of ten played the whole of J. S. Bach's 'Das wohltemperirte Clavier' by heart in two sittings. In 1852 he was appointed organist at Armitage Bridge, near Huddersfield, at a salary of $10 per annum. Later the same year he attended the choir school of St Peter's Chapel, Charlotte Street (now Palace Street), London, where he acted as organist, at the same time taking lessons from George Cooper at St Sepulchre's, Holborn. In 1854 he succeeded his brother Henry as organist of St Paul's Church, Huddersfield. 
At the instigation of Sir Frederick Gore Ouseley, in 1861 Parratt became private organist to the earl of Dudley and organist of Great Witley church, Worcestershire, at a salary of $100 per annum. During his seven years at Great Witley, he spent much time at St Michael's College, Tenbury, in Ouseley's company. On 1 June 1864 he married Emma Gledhill (1842/3-1931), the daughter of Luke Gledhill, a Huddersfield merchant. From 1868 to 1872 Parratt was organist and choirmaster of Wigan parish church, and during this time the first of five children (one son and four daughters) was born to him and his wife. In 1872, aged thirty-one, he succeeded John Stainer as organist of Magdalen College, Oxford, a position he held until 1882. At Oxford, where he lived at 17 St Giles', he conducted the choirs of Jesus and Trinity colleges, the musical societies of Exeter, Jesus, and Pembroke colleges, the Oxford Choral Society, and the Trinity College Glee Club. On 15 May 1873 he graduated as bachelor of music. From this time he became known increasingly as a recitalist: he gave a series of recitals in the Albert Hall, London, in 1873 and took part with S. S. Wesley in the opening of the Victoria Rooms, Bristol, in 1874. 
Parratt's first significant composition was his incidental music to Aeschylus' 'Agamemnon', produced for two performances at Balliol College in 1880. The following year he was organist at the first Huddersfield festival, but declined to accept the post of organist at Salisbury Cathedral. In August 1882 he succeeded Sir George Elvey as organist of St George's Chapel, Windsor, a post which he retained until his death. At Windsor the organ was rebuilt in consultation with Ouseley by the firm of Gray and Davison, and Parratt reformed the scope and quality of the music sung, so that after some years there were more than 450 anthems in regular performance. He also conducted the Windsor and Eton Madrigal Society and founded and conducted the Windsor and Eton Orchestral Society. In 1883 he composed music for a performance of 'The Tale of Troy' at Cromwell House and in 1886 music for 'The Story of Orestes' at Prince's Hall. The additional responsibility of professor of organ at the newly formed Royal College of Music, London, was taken on in 1883, leading to friendships with its director, Sir George Grove, and fellow professors Hubert Parry and Charles Villiers Stanford. In 1892 he was knighted and made private organist to the queen, and in 1893 succeeded Sir William Cusins as master of the queen's music, a position he was to retain under Edward VII and George V. Parratt was awarded an honorary DMus at Oxford in 1894, and received the same degree from Cambridge in 1910 and Durham in 1912. In 1898 he travelled to Russia with W. J. Birkbeck, visiting Moscow and St Petersburg. For the queen's eightieth birthday (1899) he composed the madrigal 'The Triumph of Victoria' ('O happy hour'), published in his compilation of works by distinguished British writers and musicians, 'Choral Songs in Honour of Her Majesty Queen Victoria' (1899). He was created MVO by Edward VII in 1901, and George V created him CVO (1917) and KCVO (1921). For the coronation of Edward VII in 1902 he composed his anthem 'Confortare' ('Be strong and play the man'), which was repeated at the coronation of George V in 1911. 
In 1905 Parratt became dean of the faculty of music at London University, and from 1905 to 1909 he held the position of president of the Royal College of Organists. In 1906 he was elected an honorary fellow of Magdalen College, and in 1908 he succeeded Parry as Heather professor of music at Oxford, a post he held until his resignation in 1918. Also in 1908 he received the degrees of MA and DMus. During the First World War, Parratt maintained the choral services at Windsor, despite the absence of lay clerks on service. He was greatly affected by the death of his daughter Amy in 1917. On his eightieth birthday in 1921 he received many tributes, including a celebration at the Royal College of Music. 
Parratt was regarded as the greatest exponent and teacher of the organ of his day, seeming to Paul Benecke (Knights, 141) 'to be for the organ what Joseph Joachim was for the violin', with a style founded on technical accuracy, clarity of phrasing, and simple registration. He held a position of great influence in English church music, and succeeded in raising both the standard of organ playing and the status of the organist. He was important in the promotion of the works of Bach and the music of contemporary Britons: out of 211 compositions directed by Parratt at Buckingham Palace during the reign of Edward VII, fifty-three were by British composers. His pupils (listed in Tovey and Parratt, 166) included almost all the notable British organists and composers of church music in the succeeding generation. His compositions include an impressive setting of the Obiit service, several anthems, many hymn tunes and Anglican chants, and some twenty songs and partsongs. He wrote the article on music in Humphry Ward's 'The Reign of Queen Victoria' (1887) and contributed ten articles to the second edition of Grove's 'Dictionary of Music and Musicians' (1904-10). 
F. G. Shinn's 'Musical Memory and its Cultivation' (1898) was dedicated to Parratt as 'a natural memorizer'. Parratt's chief hobby was chess, a pursuit suited to his innate talent: he performed several documented feats of blindfold chess and was the first captain of the Oxford University Chess Club, founded in 1873. Tall (5 feet 11 inches), with a spare frame and erect carriage, Parratt possessed an energetic personality, and was highly strung but self-controlled in his strict adherence to everyday duties. A charcoal portrait by John Singer Sargent (1914) in the Royal College of Music was said by his son and biographer Geoffrey to show him at his best; another portrait by Gerald Moira (1892) hangs in Magdalen College. He appears with Stainer in William Holman Hunt's painting 'May Morning on Magdalen Tower' (1888-91), in the Lady Lever Art Gallery, Port Sunlight. 
Parratt suffered a heart attack on 19 October 1923, but recovered to continue his duties as organist, playing for the last time at St George's Chapel on 2 March 1924. He died at his home, 12 The Cloisters, Windsor Castle on 27 March 1924 and, after a brief service at St George's Chapel, was cremated at Woking on 31 March. The following day a memorial service was held in the chapel and his ashes were buried near the organ-loft stairs. 


@@@@@


doc= 35393


Parry, Sir (Charles) Hubert Hastings, baronet (1848-1918), composer and historian of music, was born on 27 February 1848 at 2 Richmond Terrace, Bournemouth, the sixth of six children of Thomas Gambier Parry (1816-1888) of Highnam Court, Gloucestershire, painter and art collector, and his first wife, (Anna Maria) Isabella (1816-1848), the second daughter of Henry Fynes Clinton and his wife, Katherine. 
Hubert Parry grew up at Highnam Court in the company of his elder brother Charles Clinton ('b'. 1840) and his sister Lucy ('b'. 1841). His mother died in Bournemouth from consumption twelve days after his birth. In memory of her and three infant sons, Francis Gambier ('b'. and died 1843), Edward Clement Hervey (1844-5), and Henry ('b'. and died 1846), his father built a church in the grounds of Highnam. The church, perhaps one of the finest examples of the nineteenth-century Gothic style, was also a monument to Thomas Gambier Parry's enthusiasm for the high-church ecclesiological movement. In 1851 he married Ethelinda Lear (1826-1896), the second daughter of Francis Lear, dean of Salisbury, and Isabella Mary Majendie. By this marriage he had a further six children, who took the surname Gambier Parry. 
Hubert Parry's education began in January 1856 at a preparatory school in Malvern, where he stayed until the summer of 1858. From there he moved to a school at Twyford, near Winchester, where, owing to the sympathetic encouragement of its headmaster, George William Kitchin, and the acquaintance of S. S. Wesley at Winchester Cathedral, his interest in music began to develop significantly. During the school holidays he studied the piano and took rudimentary harmony lessons with Edward Brind, organist at Highnam church. Parry went with Brind to the Hereford Three Choirs festival in 1861, an experience which left a deep impression and which marked the beginning of a lifelong association with the festival. In 1861 Parry followed his elder brother to Eton College, where, despite the early signs of heart trouble, he entered with great alacrity into the sporting life of the school, playing in the oppidan wall eleven and the field school eleven. In 1866 he became head keeper of the field and second keeper of the school wall team. More formal musical instruction began in 1863 with Sir George Elvey, organist at St George's Chapel, Windsor, under whom Parry produced a series of anthems and motets, pieces for organ and piano, partsongs, madrigals, and several songs. Some of these pieces were performed at the Eton College Musical Society, which he helped to found in 1863 with his friends Edward Hamilton and Spencer Lyttelton. In December 1866, as the youngest ever successful candidate, he took the Oxford BMus degree examination, submitting a cantata, 'O Lord, Thou hast Cast Us out', as his exercise. After Eton he matriculated in 1867 as a commoner at Exeter College, Oxford, where, with John Stainer, he participated to the full in the Exeter College Music Society (of which he became president in 1869) and in the playing of chamber music. 
While at Oxford, Parry studied law and history but received only sporadic tuition in music. Probably the most significant period of instruction was with Henry Hugo Pierson in Stuttgart during the summer of 1867, in which Parry studied orchestration and composition. Under Pierson he orchestrated the slow movement of his early sonata in F minor for piano duet, the 'Allegro religioso', which was performed at the Gloucester festival in September 1868 under S. S. Wesley's baton. Although it had become apparent at Oxford that Parry wanted to pursue a career in music, his father was candidly against the idea. An important purpose of the visit to Stuttgart was to learn German, and in 1868 a visit to Liege was organized for Parry to practise French; both sojourns abroad were calculated to smooth the way for a life in the world of commerce. Moreover, Parry had fallen in love with Lady (Elizabeth) Maude Herbert (1851-1933), the second daughter of Sidney Herbert, first Lord Herbert of Lea, whose family were also averse to his serious pursuit of music, particularly after his clandestine engagement to Maude in the spring of 1870. Parry therefore resolved to embark on a career as an underwriter at Lloyd's and to study music in his spare time, a course of action which he hoped would placate his father and convince Maude's family that he could support her. It had the desired effect, and they married at St Paul's, Knightsbridge, London, on 25 June 1872. 
While working at Lloyd's, Parry took lessons with Sir William Sterndale Bennett, but found them insufficiently critical, so he made enquiries through his friend Walter Broadwood and through Joseph Joachim to study with Brahms in Vienna. This came to nothing, so Parry applied to Edward Dannreuther, a renowned pioneer, champion of Wagner, and piano virtuoso. At first study with Dannreuther was in the form of piano lessons, but later these developed more in analytical and compositional directions and included an introduction to the music of Wagner. 
The period 1870 to 1876 proved to be an important formative time for Parry. Exposed to the concert life of London, the opera, the sub-editorship of George Grove's new 'Dictionary of Music and Musicians' (from 1875), for which he provided numerous articles, and the second cycle of 'The Ring' tetralogy at Bayreuth in 1876, Parry rejected the Mendelssohnian aesthetic of his early works for a more progressive musical language influenced by both Wagner and Brahms. Dannreuther, whose role was one of artistic mentor and counsellor, provided Parry both with an introduction to London's influential musical circles and a vital platform for his new compositions with a series of chamber concerts at Dannreuther's home at 12 Orme Square, Bayswater. Nearly all Parry's chamber works -- the 'Grosses duo' in E minor, the three piano trios, the wind nonet, the 'Fantasie-Sonata' for violin and piano, the piano quartet, the string quartet no. 3, and the string quintet -- were composed for Orme Square. In 1877, during the Wagner festival in London, Parry met Wagner while he was staying at Orme Square. He was also introduced to Hans Richter, who was soon to establish himself as the capital's premier conductor. Parry's first important orchestral work, the overture 'Guillem de Cabestanh', was performed at the Crystal Palace in March 1879, followed a year later by two performances of his piano concerto in Fsharp major conducted by August Manns and Richter, both with Dannreuther as soloist. This brought Parry's name to prominence, as did the more controversial performance of his first choral commission, 'Prometheus Unbound', for the Three Choirs festival at Gloucester in September 1880. 
The importance of 'Prometheus Unbound', with its overt Wagnerian rhetoric, has perhaps been overstated as a milestone in the so-called English musical renaissance. Nevertheless the choice of Shelley's text signified much in the context of Parry's developing philosophy and political outlook. Since leaving Oxford, where he had been profoundly influenced by John Ruskin and Charles Darwin and later by the writings of Matthew Arnold, Samuel Butler, George Eliot, and Herbert Spencer, Parry, like his brother before him, steadily found himself rejecting the traditional Christian dogma of his upbringing. By 1873 he was forced to declare his unbelief, which, coupled with his support for Gladstone and the reforming policies of the Liberals, caused a period of alienation from his father. 
In 1876 Maude gave birth to their first daughter, Dorothea, named after their favourite character in George Eliot's 'Middlemarch'. The strain of childbirth took its toll on Maude, who was slow to recover. Her health, which continued to be a cause for concern to Parry throughout his life, eventually forced him to spend six months in Cannes from November 1876 until April 1877. Here, isolated from London's musical life, he developed a close working relationship with the violinist Edward Guerini. After arriving back in London, Parry ceased working at Lloyd's in order to pursue music full time. The following year there was a further addition to the family with the birth of their second daughter, Gwendolen (named after the character in George Eliot's 'Daniel Deronda'). 
After the publicity gained by the piano concerto and 'Prometheus', Parry's reputation in London and the provinces began to increase substantially. His first symphony in G, initially commissioned by Richter, was conducted by the composer at Birmingham in August 1882 and by Manns at the Crystal Palace in 1883. Charles Villiers Stanford, who had performed 'Prometheus' at Cambridge in 1881, commissioned some incidental music for the Amateur Dramatic Club's production of Aristophanes' 'The Birds' and also a second symphony in F (the 'Cambridge') for the Cambridge University Musical Society. Both were performed in 1883, as was Parry's second commission for the Gloucester festival, the ode 'The Glories of our Blood and State'. The same year Parry received an honorary doctorate from Cambridge University in recognition of his work as a composer and scholar. Perhaps more auspiciously, he took up his post as professor of music history at the newly founded Royal College of Music. In sharp contrast to the satisfaction brought by his professional achievements, 1883 also brought news of the death in Sydney, Australia, of his elder brother, which affected him deeply. Clinton Parry, a brilliant scholar at Oxford, yet sent down in disgrace, had squandered large sums of his father's money in South Africa, had become an alcoholic and a danger to his wife and family, and had been a liability to his father. 
A sign of Parry's increasing success was marked by the completion in 1881 of 'Knight's Croft', a seaside home at Rustington, near Littlehampton, designed by the architect Norman Shaw. Maude spent much time in Rustington, and for Parry it proved to be a refuge from the vicissitudes of life in London as well as an important base for his chief recreation, sailing. Pressures were indeed mounting in the form of teaching and lecturing at the Royal College of Music, at Oxford (where he was choragus and from which he received an honorary doctorate in 1884), and at Cambridge and Birmingham, which inevitably restricted the possibilities for composition. In 1884 Parry began work on his opera 'Guenever', but the following year his worsening heart trouble (probably a combination of angina and rheumatic fever) led him to take an extended holiday on a cruise around the coast of South America in the company of Sedley Taylor. For Parry these periods of convalescence rarely had their desired effect. Always motivated by a sense of duty and mission, he could not be prevented from resuming work at the earliest opportunity. In 1886, a year which marked his removal to 17 Kensington Square, he completed 'Guenever', but it was refused by Carl Rosa and, despite Stanford's efforts, failed to be taken up on the continent. This experience inevitably dented Parry's confidence, leaving him embittered and disillusioned by a genre which he never attempted again. 
And yet within a few months Parry's fortunes were transformed with the triumph of his setting of Milton's 'Blest Pair of Sirens', commissioned by Stanford for the Bach Choir's celebration of Queen Victoria's golden jubilee in 1887. Almost immediately there was an insatiable demand for new works: the oratorio 'Judith' was composed for Birmingham in 1888, the 'Ode on St Cecilia's Day' for Leeds in 1889, and two symphonies, no. 3 in C (the 'English') for the Philharmonic Society, and no. 4 in E minor for Richter, were both given in 1889. In acceding to the public demand for choral music, and particularly for oratorio, Parry found himself in something of a dilemma. He was loath to turn down commissions from choral festivals, and yet he disliked the conventional 'Old Testament' oratorio form which he knew would be expected. Indeed, for the Birmingham commission of 1888 he considered a variety of subjects ranging from the Albigensians to the story of Columbus, but had to capitulate to the Birmingham committee, who wanted a work with sufficient choral participation. 'Judith' was an immediate success with the public, who clamoured for more. 'Job', a shorter work whose text indicates a shift away from a historical subject towards philosophical allegory, was written for Worcester in 1892 and 'King Saul' for Birmingham in 1894. Bernard Shaw, who admired the creative vigour of 'Prometheus' and of the cantata 'L'allegro ed il penseroso', written for Norwich in 1890, severely criticized Parry's oratorios on the grounds that he believed the genre did little to draw out the composer's natural gifts for 'absolute music'. These gifts for instrumental music did momentarily surface in 1897 with two fine orchestral works, the 'Symphonic Variations' and the 'Elegy for Brahms', but the demand for choral music remained intense. 
With the 'Invocation to Music', written to mark the bicentenary of Purcell's death in 1895, Parry entered into the first of several collaborations with the poet Robert Bridges. The relationship was never easy, but it did not prevent them from working together on 'A Song of Darkness and Light' for Gloucester (1898), on a 'Memorial Ode' for Eton College (1908), and, during the war, on a naval ode, 'The Chivalry of the Sea' (1916), one of the composer's finest choral essays. He was also expected, as the country's unofficial composer laureate, to respond to official occasions of national significance. In celebration of the queen's diamond jubilee in 1897 he produced a setting of the 'Magnificat' for the Hereford festival, and in commemoration of the achievements of the British forces in South Africa he wrote a splendid 'Thanksgiving Te Deum' (1900). The anthem 'I was glad', composed for the coronation of Edward VII in 1902, is one of the most impressive and enduring pieces of ceremonial music ever written. 
In January 1895 Parry succeeded Grove as director of the Royal College of Music. Although Frederick Bridge, Walter Parratt, Stanford, and Franklin Taylor had also been strong candidates, the college council unanimously recommended Parry. The appointment was testimony to his extraordinary charisma. An eminently likeable man, he was generous, open, and able to engender inspiration, vision, sympathy, and self-belief, particularly among the young. Behind the face presented to the world lay a nervous and depressive temperament, but his public profile was one of immense warmth, happiness, and geniality, and his conscientiousness, selflessness, and sense of duty were unshakeable. Even Bernard Shaw feared meeting him, lest he should come under his spell. In recognition of his contribution to the nation's musical life he was knighted in 1898, in 1902 was created a baronet, and in 1905 invested with the CVO. 
Away from the public gaze, Parry's domestic life was less happy. Arthur Ponsonby, his son-in-law, recalled that Maude 'never cared for his music, never shared his life, was no companion, and with her funny arrested development and self-centred smallness of vision was no help or comfort to him at all. His devotion to her was pathetic and yet it always seemed as if he were unaware that he could never win her. She hampered him, irritated him, bullied him [and] was a drain on him. (Ponsonby, diary, October 1918)' The resultant inner loneliness, Ponsonby maintained, 'gave him the note of melancholy which came out in his music'. The affection he craved from his wife came instead from his elder daughter, Dorothea. She married Ponsonby in 1898, and their home after 1902 at Shulbrede Priory on the north Sussex border became a favourite haunt. Gwen, his younger daughter, married Harry Plunket Greene, the famous baritone, in 1899. With the death of his stepmother in 1896 Parry also inherited Highnam Court. After a bitter dispute with his half-brother Ernest Gambier Parry over the management of the estate, which was in severe financial trouble, Parry took up residence at Highnam. Ernest moved out, and a lifelong rift between the two brothers ensued. 

'A Song of Darkness and Light', written for the Norwich festival in 1898, marked the beginning of a series of choral works in which Parry hoped to express something of his own heterodoxy. Works such as 'War and Peace' (1903), 'Voces clamantium' (1903), 'The Love that Casteth out Fear' (1904), 'The Soul's Ransom' (1906), 'A Vision of Life' (1907), and 'Beyond these Voices there is Peace' (1908) express his profound commitment to humanitarianism. These ethical oratorios, with texts partly written by the composer and partly compiled from the 'Bible', had their advocates, among them Elgar, Vaughan Williams, Walford Davies, and Howells, but the unfocused philosophical message of the works left audiences unmoved. Only his setting of Browning's 'Pied Piper of Hamelin' (1905) stands out, as the most successful large-scale choral work of this period. 
At this time Parry began to suffer a series of breakdowns in his health. He took several holidays abroad, but he was too stubborn to desist from his work at the Royal College for long. A more serious breakdown occurred in 1908, when he felt compelled to give up his position as professor of music at Oxford, a post he had held since 1900. His severance with the university was a powerful blow, for his closeness to academic life found voice not only in scholarship and lectures, but also in incidental music written for the Oxford University Dramatic Club's productions of Aristophanes' 'The Frogs' (1892) and 'The Clouds' (1905). 
Resignation from Oxford combined with the failure of his ethical choral works induced Parry to reassess his creative objectives. He fulfilled a desire to write a book on his idol, J. S. Bach (1909), added to his Darwinist historical perspective in 'The Art of Music' (1893; rev. 1896), and published a compilation of his Oxford lectures in 'Style in Musical Art' (1911). Presented with new opportunities from the Philharmonic Society, he extensively revised his fourth symphony (1909-10), and produced his fifth symphony in B minor in four linked movements (later renamed 'Symphonic Fantasia '1912''), perhaps his masterpiece, for the Philharmonic's centenary celebrations in 1912. This Indian summer of compositional activity was also underlined by his last choral work for the Three Choirs festival, 'Ode on the Nativity' (Hereford, 1912) which, with its intricate structural and motivic organization, reflected the concentrated thinking of the fifth symphony. 
Parry's last orchestral work, 'From Death to Life' (1914), a symphonic poem with a strong ethical programme, was composed during the first months of the First World War. Its mixture of lament and optimism articulated many of his conflicting emotions and beliefs. Even with the deterioration of the international situation Parry, a pro-Teuton, genuinely believed that Germany would not go to war, a view that was clear from the incidental music he wrote for 'The Acharnians' in February 1914, in which he sought, by means of popular tunes from the street and music-hall, national anthems, and other patriotic songs, to parody those in government and elsewhere who were whipping up panic and hysteria. Therefore, when hostilities did break out, the shock was devastating. During the war he watched a life's work of progress and education being wiped away as the male population -- particularly the new fertile generation of composing talent -- of the Royal College dwindled. Sailing, his chief form of pleasure, was forbidden, so instead he devoted his time to the Music in Wartime movement, providing funds for concerts in schools, hospitals, and camps as well as for ailing choral societies. To meet the War Office's demand for rifle butts, many of the trees on his beloved Highnam estate were felled. Another casualty of the war was his relationship with Stanford, which, after a serious altercation at the end of 1916, became strained to the point of estrangement. 
Most of Parry's last works, organ preludes, piano pieces, and songs, were small-scale. The overwhelmingly popular 'Jerusalem', a setting of William Blake's poem which has earned Parry's music the national distinction of concluding each year the last night of the Proms, was written originally for Francis Younghusband's Fight for Right society in 1916 and was taken up by Millicent Fawcett and the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies in 1917, an organization to which Parry and his wife (a keen suffragist) gave their support. Most substantial was his naval ode, 'The Chivalry of the Sea' (1916), a dark, brooding choral elegy, and a cycle of six unaccompanied motets, the 'Songs of Farewell', which, as well as being some of the finest romantic 'a cappella' music, are perhaps the most eloquent and personal disclosures of his unorthodox credo. His last literary work, 'Instinct and Character', a kind of philosophical apologia, was rejected by Macmillan and remains unpublished. 
Though heart trouble had dogged Parry all his life, his death was caused by blood poisoning and influenza. He died at Rustington on 7 October 1918, a month before the armistice. At the suggestion of Stanford he was buried, nine days later, in the crypt of St Paul's Cathedral. A memorial tablet, with an inscription by Bridges, was unveiled in Gloucester Cathedral during the Three Choirs festival in 1922. 
Parry's importance can be measured in several branches of the music profession. As a scholar he was an original thinker on a wide variety of historical, theoretical, and aesthetic issues which are promulgated in his books, articles, and lectures. Parry believed that music and life were inseparable and this he communicated almost evangelistically to his students. As an academic and administrator he did much to promote the status and welfare of the musician, though, much to his frustration, he was unable to establish the condition of residence as part of the Oxford BMus degree (as Stanford had done at Cambridge in 1893), which he felt had held back the acceptance of music as a major academic discipline. Yet it must be as a composer that Parry should be remembered. Although his creative life was to some extent hindered by administration, teaching, and examining, his finest choral and instrumental works were enormously influential. His broad, muscular diatonic language, as revealed in works such as 'Blest Pair of Sirens', 'I was glad', the 'Songs of Farewell', 'Jerusalem', and the five symphonies set a powerful precedent for later British composers. Parry's distinctive style provided a tangible link between Wesley and Stainer of the mid-nineteenth century and those that followed him, such as Elgar, Vaughan Williams, Walton, and Finzi. 


@@@@@


doc= 35394


Parry, Joseph (1841-1903), composer, was born on 21 May 1841 at 4 Chapel Row, Georgetown, Merthyr Tudful, the second son of Daniel Parry and his wife, Elizabeth ('nee' Richards). Daniel Parry, a finer at the local ironworks, was illiterate, which may account for some confusion over the rendering of his name in official documents: though he is Daniel on Joseph's birth certificate and his own marriage certificate, the 1841 and 1851 censuses wrongly record him as David. He and his wife came from west Wales; Elizabeth Parry was reputed to be a good musician. At the time of the 1851 census -- the last before the family emigrated -- Joseph had an elder brother, Henry, and two younger sisters, Elizabeth and Jane. 
Parry had little early education and began work in a coal mine at the age of nine. Three years later he moved to the Crawshay family's Cyfarthfa ironworks, where he was a puddler. In later life he claimed to have acquired his first taste for music by listening to the Cyfarthfa band rehearsing outdoors. In 1853 his father emigrated to America, and the rest of the family followed a year later. They settled in Danville, Pennsylvania, where there was a large Welsh community. At Danville, Parry took a job in an iron mill, where he remained until 1865, but learned music, including harmony and counterpoint, while working at the mill. His teachers, John Abel Jones and W. J. Price, were both emigre Welshmen, the latter from Tredegar. In May 1862 he married at Danville, Jane, the daughter of Gomer Thomas. They had five children: Joseph Haydn, Mendelssohn, William Sterndale, Annie, and Dilys. 
In 1860 Parry won a composition prize at the Danville eisteddfod with a work called 'Temperance Vocal March', and it was about this time that he began sending works to Welsh eisteddfodic competitions. He won prizes at Swansea in 1863 and Llandudno in 1864. He attended the Aberystwyth eisteddfod in 1865 and it was there, following his induction to the gorsedd (the Welsh eisteddfodic bardic society), that he was conferred with the bardic title Pencerdd America. His eisteddfod successes and the popularity of some of his publications caused a public subscription fund to be set up to enable him to study at the Royal Academy of Music, which he attended between 1868 and 1871. He was a composition pupil of Sterndale Bennett and learned vocal technique from Manuel Garcia. In 1871 he received the MusB from Cambridge University, the first Welsh person to do so. On leaving the academy he returned to Danville, where he set up a private music school or, as he preferred it to be known, a 'musical institute'. 
Three years later Parry returned to Wales to become professor of music at the newly opened University College of Wales at Aberystwyth. In 1880 he resigned. Several reasons have been given for the brevity of this appointment: the college could not accept Parry's insistence that women should be allowed to become undergraduates (so that there would be an appropriate supply of female voices for his choirs), but there were other issues. The college was in some financial difficulty and its managers were in frequent dispute with their professor of music, who was less respected as an administrator and teacher than as a composer. In addition, there is evidence to suggest that Parry himself was not an easy man to deal with. None the less, while at the college, he was awarded a MusD by Cambridge University. A male voice choir travelled from Aberdar to Cambridge to perform his composition exercise, a cantata called 'Jerusalem', in King's College chapel. Parry's national reputation was consolidated during his period at Aberystwyth, and he spent a great deal of time travelling around Wales, conducting and promoting his own works. He was much sought after as a conductor of the 'cymanfa ganu' (singing festival). 
Between 1881 and 1888 Parry lived in Swansea, where he established and ran the Musical College of Wales. He left Swansea in order to become lecturer and head of the music department at the new University College of South Wales and Monmouthshire at Cardiff. At this time he established yet another private music school, the South Wales School of Music. He bought a house called Cartref in Victoria Road, Penarth on the outskirts of Cardiff, and died there on 17 February 1903. He was buried at St Augustine's churchyard, Penarth. 
Parry's output was considerable and included six operas, of which 'Blodwen' (first performed in concert at Swansea, 1878) was the first Welsh-language opera and is said to have had five hundred performances by the end of the century, although its first staged version was given in Colwyn Bay on 29 April 1919. He also wrote two oratorios -- a third was in preparation at the time of his death -- and a number of cantatas and orchestral and vocal works. His 'Tydfil Overture', written and arranged for the Cyfarthfa band, is probably the earliest original work for brass band written by a significant musical figure. Parry's work has never been properly catalogued or assessed, but there is no doubt that he, more than any other Welsh composer before him, successfully engaged with the main forms and traditions of Western art music while preserving a distinctively Welsh identity. His hymn tunes, particularly 'Aberystwyth', have enduring popularity, and his partsong 'Myfanwy' can confidently be cited as the most popular and performed piece written to a Welsh text for male voice choir. In 1893 he co-edited 'Cambrian Minstrelsie', a national collection of Welsh songs. He wrote and lectured widely on Welsh music and was at the forefront of many initiatives to improve musical education in the principality. His obituaries properly described him as the most important Welsh musician of his generation. Parry's life was romanticized in Jack Jones's novel 'Off to Philadelphia in the Morning' (1947), which was made into a popular television serial by the BBC. 
One of Parry's sons, 


@@@@@


doc= 35395


Parsons, Alfred William (1847-1920), landscape painter, illustrator, and garden designer, was born at Beckington, Somerset, on 2 December 1847, the second son of Joshua Parsons (1814/15-1892), surgeon, of Beckington, and his wife, Letitia Harriet, 'nee' Williams (1823/4-1897). He was educated at private schools and entered the savings bank department of the Post Office as a clerk in 1865, but two years later (1867) he gave up his career in the civil service and devoted himself to painting. He trained briefly at the South Kensington School of Art. 
Parsons exhibited widely, showing oils, watercolours, and pen-and-ink drawings. Early in his career he showed at the Dudley Gallery. The first appearance of his work at a Royal Academy exhibition was in 1871 and he continued to exhibit there until his death. He also contributed to exhibitions of the Royal Institute of Painters in Water Colours (and sat on the council of that body), the Royal Society of Painters in Water Colours, and the Royal Society of Artists in Birmingham. He submitted works to the Walker Art Gallery autumn exhibitions and the Manchester City Art Gallery exhibitions of watercolour drawings, as well as to international exhibitions, such as the world fair at St Louis (1904), where he was also responsible for arranging the display of British art works. He also showed with commercial galleries, including the Leicester Galleries, the Grosvenor Gallery, the New Gallery (where he also sat on the consulting committee), and the Fine Art Society. At the society he held a number of important one-man exhibitions, including 'Gardens and orchards' in 1891, for which the American writer Henry James wrote an exhibition catalogue essay. 
Parsons also participated in the late nineteenth-century arts and crafts movement. In 1881 he joined William Morris's Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings and helped to found the Art-Workers' Guild in 1884. Through his friendship with the American painter Edwin Austin Abbey, he participated in the American Tile Club. Abbey and Parsons were associated with the 'Broadway group', an informal gathering of painters and writers, including Henry James, F. D. Millet, and John Singer Sargent, who sojourned at Broadway, Worcestershire in the 1880s and 1890s. A member of many artistic organizations, Parsons joined the New English Art Club in 1886. Elected associate of the Royal Academy in 1897, he attained full membership in 1911. In 1899 he was elected associate of the Royal Society of Painters in Water Colours, and he became a full member in 1905. Parsons was chosen president of the society, in succession to Sir Ernest Albert Waterlow, in 1913, and held that office until his death. In 1910 he joined the Imperial Arts League. 
A very important section of Parsons's artistic output is formed by his work as a book illustrator, much of which appeared in 'Harper's Magazine'. He also contributed the illustrations to 'The Genus Rosa' by Ellen Willmott (1910), and collaborated with Edwin Austin Abbey in illustrating Robert Herrick's 'Hesperides' and 'Noble Numbers' (1882), 'She Stoops to Conquer' (1887), 'Old Songs' (1889), and 'The Quiet Life' (1890), and with F. D. Millet in providing the illustrations for Millet's book 'The Danube, from the Black Forest to the Black Sea' (1893). In 1892-4 Parsons paid a visit to Japan; he published his impressions of that country, with illustrations, in his book 'Notes in Japan' (1896). Parsons also provided illustrations for several editions of William Robinson's 'The Wild Garden' (1881, 1894), as well as for several of Robinson's gardening magazines and other publications. 
In 1899 Parsons embarked on a career as a professional garden designer in partnership with Captain Walter Croker St Ives Partridge and Charles Clement Tudway. Extant examples of his work include Wightwick Manor, Staffordshire, and Great Chalfield, Wiltshire. His keen interest in gardens and flowers was reflected not only in his paintings and designs but also in his participation as judge at the Chelsea flower show. 
Henry James claimed that Parsons possessed 'an inexhaustible feeling for the country in general, [and] his love of the myriad English flowers is perhaps the fondest part of it' (H. James, 'Our artists in Europe', 'Harper's Magazine', 79, 1889, 59). Parsons's landscape paintings embodied the naturalistic trend in nineteenth-century British landscape painting and reflected the influence of the French Barbizon school. In 1887 Parsons's painting of an orchard in springtime, 'When Nature Painted all things Gay' (exh. RA, 1887; Tate collection), was purchased by the trustees of the Chantrey fund. His botanical illustrations were regarded as learned and correct. Collections holding examples of his work include the Art Gallery of New South Wales, the Royal Academy of Arts, the Royal Collection, and the Royal Society of Painters in Water Colours. Parsons, who was unmarried, died at his house, Luggershill, at Broadway, Worcestershire, on 16 January 1920 and was cremated at Golders Green on 20 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 35396


Parsons, Sir Charles Algernon (1854-1931), engineer and scientist, was born at 13 Connaught Place, Hyde Park, London, on 13 June 1854, the youngest of the six sons of William Parsons, third earl of Rosse (1800-1867), and his wife, Mary Parsons, countess of Rosse (1813-1885), photographer, elder daughter of John Wilmer Field, of Heaton Hall, Yorkshire. His eldest brother was Laurence Parsons, later fourth earl of Rosse. William Parsons provided a stimulating environment for his sons at Birr Castle, Parsonstown, Ireland; he engaged tutors of high scientific calibre, and encouraged the boys into his workshops and observatory, where Charles developed a taste for mechanics. This mechanical aptitude had one unfortunate outcome; conveying friends on their home-made steam car at 7 m.p.h. one day, with Charles as stoker, the boys' cousin Lady Bangor fell from the vehicle and was killed. Before William Parsons's death the family cruised each year on their yacht 'Titania'; afterwards they took a summer vacation in the alpine region. 
At the age of seventeen Parsons entered Trinity College, Dublin, where he spent two years before proceeding to St John's College, Cambridge, in 1873. There was then no engineering school at Cambridge, but Parsons attended lectures on mechanism and applied mechanics, and he studied mathematics with such effect that in 1877 he graduated as eleventh wrangler. He later recalled, of these five years of pure and applied mathematics, 'that the strain was more severe than anything in business life, and luckily for me, boat racing interfered with reading' (Clarke). 
Parsons at once began his engineering training by a four-year apprenticeship at the works of Sir William Armstrong & Co. at Elswick, Tyneside. This was followed by two years (1881-3) with Kitson & Co. of Leeds, where he developed a four-cylinder high-speed epicycloidal steam engine that he had patented, and he also occupied himself with experiments on the propulsion of torpedoes by means of rockets. In 1883 he married Katherine (died 1933), the daughter of William Froggatt Bethell of Rise Park, East Riding of Yorkshire. They had a son and a daughter. 
In 1884 Parsons acquired a junior partnership in the firm of Clarke, Chapman & Co. of Gateshead, and assumed charge of their newly organized electrical department. In those days electric dynamos were small machines driven usually at 1000 to 1500 revolutions per minute by a belt from the flywheel of a reciprocating engine. Parsons set about designing a high-speed generator and then developing a steam turbine to drive the dynamos directly. It occurred to him that, by dividing the expansion of steam into a number of pressure drops, it should be possible to run a turbine at a moderate speed and at the same time secure a proper relationship between the steam speed and blade speed. His first patents, taken out in 1884, show how thoroughly he considered all the difficulties in the path for the construction of such a high-speed turbine and the steps which he proposed to take to overcome them. The principle of subdividing the whole expansion of the steam into a number of stages, so that only comparatively moderate velocities have to be dealt with, still forms the basis of all efficient turbine design. The first Parsons turbo-dynamo, constructed in 1884, developed an output of 7.5 kW when running at a speed of 18,000 revolutions per minute, and was an immediate success. Many such machines were constructed almost exclusively for ship lighting, and by 1888 about 200 were in service. 
Realizing the possibilities of the new type of prime mover, and in order to develop it to its fullest extent, Parsons dissolved his partnership and in 1889 founded the firm of C. A. Parsons & Co. He bought back his patent rights, and established a small works at Heaton on a site about 2 miles from the centre of Newcastle upon Tyne. The first power station in the world to employ turbo-generating plant was the Forth Banks power station at Newcastle. This station went into commission in January 1890 with an initial equipment of two 75 kW Parsons turbo-alternators. Other public lighting companies quickly followed this lead, and turbo-alternators were installed at Cambridge and Scarborough. The Cambridge station went into commission in 1892 with three 100 kW units. These machines were the first turbine units to be operated with condensers, and tests showed their efficiency to be comparable with that of the best reciprocating engines of equal power. 
As the size of turbo-alternators for power station work gradually increased, so the efficiency of the sets was improved. Parsons lived to see an output of more than 200,000 kW delivered by a single turbo-generator and the reciprocating steam engine completely superseded by the turbine for central station work. 
The growth of electricity supply consequent upon the invention of the turbine created a demand not only for larger generating units but also for higher transmission voltages, in order that more extensive areas might be economically served. In the early days the practice had been to generate at about 2000 volts, and to increase the pressure when required by transformers. By 1905 Parsons had constructed turbo-alternators generating at 11,000 volts, and this voltage became the usual generating pressure for many years. In 1928 he again attacked the problem of generating at higher voltages and produced a 25,000 kW turbo-alternator generating directly at 36,000 volts. The machine was entirely successful and Parsons had set a new standard in power station practice. Many of the most important power stations, both in Great Britain and abroad, adopted the practice of generating directly at 36,000 volts, thereby eliminating the large and costly step-up transformers necessary with the previous method. 
Parsons's patent of 1884 had referred to steam-turbine propulsion of ships, but it was not until 1894 that he decided to attack this problem. He established a separate organization with works at Wallsend, and formed a separate company, which was later known as the Parsons Marine Steam Turbine Company. A small vessel, the 'Turbinia', with a length of 100 feet and a displacement of 44 tons, was constructed and fitted with turbine machinery, and after much experimental work attained a speed of 34 knots. At the naval review held in 1897 to celebrate the diamond jubilee of Queen Victoria, the 'Turbinia' created a sensation by racing down the lines of warships at a speed greater than that of any other vessel afloat, as at that time the fastest destroyers could hardly exceed 27 knots. In 1899 the Admiralty entrusted Parsons with the construction of a 30 knot turbine-driven destroyer, the 'Viper', which attained a measured speed of over 37 knots. A second destroyer, the 'Cobra', was also fitted with turbine machinery, but shortly afterwards both these ships were lost at sea by accidents. 
In 1901 the first turbine-driven passenger vessel, the 'King Edward', was built for service on the River Clyde, followed by the sister ship 'Queen Alexandra', and within the next year or two the cross-channel boats 'Queen' and 'Brighton' were fitted with turbines. The Parsons Marine Steam Turbine Company, in order to demonstrate to the Admiralty once more the advantages of turbines for warships, laid down in 1901 another turbine-driven destroyer, which was acquired in 1903 by the fleet under the name of 'Velox'. This was followed in 1902 by the first turbine-driven cruiser, the 'Amethyst', which was one of four cruisers then under construction. The performance of the 'Amethyst' was so remarkable that the last prejudices against turbine machinery in the Royal Navy were overcome, and the way was open for its general adoption. In 1905 a committee on naval design appointed by the Admiralty advised that in future turbine machinery should be used exclusively in all classes of warships; the dreadnoughts were the first class of battleship to be affected by this decision. The Cunard Company was first among the merchant fleets to install turbines, in 1905 in the 30,000 ton liner 'Carmania'. The 'Lusitania' and 'Mauretania' followed in 1906, the latter vessel holding the 'Blue Riband of the Atlantic' for nearly a quarter of a century. 
There remained yet to be met the demand of the immense fleets of low-speed tramp steamers and cargo vessels. Parsons realized that the only satisfactory solution was the introduction of mechanical reduction gearing between the turbine and the propeller shaft, thus enabling each vessel to run at its most efficient speed. In order to test this he bought in 1909 an old cargo vessel, the 'Vespasian', and replaced the 750 hp triple expansion engines by geared turbines; after exhaustive tests the new machinery was proved to be entirely successful. This was another great advance, for not only did it diminish the size of the machinery and increase its efficiency, but it enabled the ordinary cargo vessel to profit equally by the employment of turbines. 
Lastly, after the First World War the competition of the marine oil engine had to be met. Parsons felt very strongly that marine engineers ought to take advantage of the economies in fuel resulting from the use of higher pressures and temperatures as obtained in installations on land. Knowing that a practical demonstration was the surest and quickest way to convince the sceptics, he accordingly equipped a small passenger vessel, the 'King George V', with high-pressure geared turbines. This vessel was the pioneer of high-pressure steam at sea, and thereby opened up a new field for marine engineers. 
Parsons took a keen interest in all matters connected with optics, and when he established the Heaton works in 1889 he organized a special department for the production of searchlight reflectors. He built up what was probably the most important business devoted to the manufacture of such reflectors. In January 1921 he acquired a controlling interest in the optical firm of Ross Ltd, of Clapham. Here he introduced various improvements in the methods of glass-grinding, but soon turned his attention to the much larger question of the manufacture of optical glass itself. The following July he purchased the Derby Crown Glass Company, and under the name of the Parsons Optical Glass Company produced about a hundred different kinds of glass for optical purposes. Parsons made many scientific and mechanical improvements in the processes employed in the manufacture of the glass. In 1925 he purchased the firm of Sir Howard Grubb & Sons, makers of large astronomical telescopes, and under the name of Sir Howard Grubb, Parsons & Co. built new works for it at Walkergate, adjacent to his turbine works at Heaton. Many notable instruments were constructed there, including 36 inch reflecting telescopes for the Royal Greenwich Observatory and for the Royal Observatory, Edinburgh, and two 74 inch reflectors, one for Toronto and the other for Pretoria. 
Parsons also invented an 'auxetophone', a loudspeaker for increasing the sound of stringed instruments, particularly of the double bass. This was used at the Queen's Hall in 1906, and was generously supported by Henry Wood, but was otherwise not accepted by the musical profession. Of Parsons's many inventions and experiments, an attempt to make diamonds was the only one in which he failed to achieve his aim. 
Parsons was appointed CB in 1904 and KCB in 1911, and was admitted to the Order of Merit in 1927. He was elected fellow of the Royal Society in 1898, and was vice-president in 1908 and Bakerian lecturer in 1918. He received the Rumford medal in 1902 and the Copley medal in 1928. From the Royal Society of Arts he received the Albert medal in 1911, and from the Institution of Electrical Engineers, the Faraday medal (1923) and the Kelvin medal (1926). He was elected an honorary fellow of his college in 1904, and received honorary degrees from the universities of Oxford, Cambridge, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Dublin, Durham, Liverpool, and Sheffield. In 1911 he delivered the Rede lecture at Cambridge, and he was president of the British Association in 1919. The city of Newcastle upon Tyne made him a freeman in 1914. He died on 11 February 1931 on board the 'Duchess of Richmond' at Kingston, Jamaica. 
Parsons is considered to be the most original engineer whom this country has produced since the days of James Watt. He lived to see the fruit of his labours in the complete transformation of the method of producing power from steam, on both land and sea. He took out more than 300 patents. Outside his work, he was an enthusiastic fisherman; in society, he was shy and retiring. 
Parsons's son was killed in action in 1918. His daughter, Rachel Mary Parsons (1885-1956), was one of the first women members of the Institution of Naval Architects. A keen racehorse owner, she was killed at her Newmarket home in July 1956. 


@@@@@


doc= 35397


Parsons, Sir John Herbert (1868-1957), ophthalmologist and physiologist, was born in Bristol on 3 September 1868, the youngest of the five children of Isaac Jabez Parsons, grocer, and his wife, Mary Goodhind Webb. He was educated at Thomas Turner's private school, at Bristol grammar school, and at University College, Bristol, where he studied arts, science, and medicine. His entry into the college was aided by his gaining a Gilchrist scholarship and his medical studies by a Stewart scholarship, and he won the first entrance scholarship to Bristol Royal Infirmary. Parsons left Bristol in 1889 and pursued medicine further at University College, London, where he graduated BSc with honours in physiology (1890). He completed his medical course in St Bartholomew's Hospital, where he graduated MB in 1892. He thereupon returned to University College as Sharpey scholar and assistant and demonstrator in physiology to E. A. Schafer (later Sharpey-Schafer). He married in 1894 Jane Roberta (died 1911), daughter of John Hendrie of Uddingston, Lanarkshire; a son and a daughter survived him. 
Parsons settled in London, and after a short period in general practice in Finchley he found himself compelled to return to his initial interest in physiology; through this he took up ophthalmology and became a clinical assistant at Moorfields Eye Hospital. He qualified FRCS in 1900 and was elected pathological curator and librarian at Moorfields Hospital. In 1904 he was elected to the consulting surgical staff of that hospital and of University College Hospital, both of which he served throughout his working life; he was also for a time consulting surgeon to the Hospital for Sick Children, Great Ormond Street. At the same time he conducted a large ophthalmic practice at a house in Queen Anne Street. 
Parsons's concern was the working of the eye and its behaviour in health and disease. After his own studies ceased he encouraged others to continue this work. His first book was a small manual, 'Elementary Ophthalmic Optics' (1901), an attempt to impress on the student that it was wrong to test a patient's vision or examine him or her clinically without a thorough understanding of the optics of the methods he was using. Simultaneously he undertook research work on the physiology of the eye in the department of physiology of University College, beginning with the innervation of the pupil and the lacrimal gland. His fundamental work on the control of the intra-ocular pressure was summarized in his second book, 'The Ocular Circulation' (1903). For these researches he obtained the degree of DSc (London, 1904). Thereafter Parsons turned his attention to ocular pathology, and from his laboratory at Moorfields he published a series of original papers; the whole subject was also correlated and integrated for the first time in his classical treatise, 'The Pathology of the Eye' (4 vols., 1904-8). With its appearance Parsons became a world authority and his hospital clinics a mecca for students from abroad. At the same time his maturing clinical experience was reflected in the appearance of a comprehensive and yet concise clinical textbook, 'Diseases of the Eye', which, soon after its appearance in 1907, became the most popular work of its type; it went through ten editions before passing to other editorial hands. 
Parsons's interests then turned to the psychology of vision and perception; in this vast field his main thesis was that perceptive phenomena could be analysed only on a factual basis; that the only safe approach to their understanding was a materialistic one, through physiological experimentation; and that introspective psychology divorced from biology was dangerous. Endowed with untiring energy, unusually wide knowledge, critical ability, and scientific honesty, Parsons attained a unique place in the scientific world by the publication of four books on this wide subject. Two of them were classical, 'An Introduction to the Study of Colour Vision' (1915) and 'An Introduction to the Theory of Perception' (1927); and two of them were small and incidental, 'Mind and the Nation: a Precis of Applied Psychology' (1918) and 'The Springs of Conduct' (1950) -- the latter being a summary of Parsons's neuro-psychological creed, written when he was eighty-two. 
Parsons had wide interests in public, professional, and cultural life. He served on several government commissions, his greatest contribution in this respect being in the adequate lighting of factories, a subject gravely neglected at the time. During the thirty-one years of the activities of the departmental committee set up by the Home Office on factory lighting, he played a prominent part; and he was one of the founder members of the Illuminating Engineering Society, of which he was the first chairman of council, its president in 1924, and honorary member in 1943. In professional societies Parsons participated wholeheartedly. To the Ophthalmological Society of the United Kingdom, which he joined in 1900, he made some 140 contributions, and he was its president in 1925. He was president of the Royal Society of Medicine (1936-8) and honorary fellow (1942). 
Parsons also took a prominent part in international ophthalmology, directing his influence towards the resumption of friendly relations between ophthalmologists throughout the world after the First World War. He helped to create the International Council of Ophthalmology (1927) and to arrange the very successful 13th International Congress of Ophthalmology in Amsterdam (1929). He was chairman of the editorial committee of the 'British Journal of Ophthalmology' from its foundation in 1917 to 1948. He was one of the founder members of the British Council of Ophthalmologists and was largely responsible for its substitution by the Faculty of Ophthalmologists to serve as the co-ordinating and academic custodian of the specialism. Of the greatest importance was his association with the Medical Research Council on which he served from 1929 to 1932; to his influence was largely due its efforts to maintain an interest in research in visual problems in the period between the two world wars. In the first of these he served initially with the rank of captain as ophthalmic surgeon to the 3rd London General Hospital, between 1916 and 1917; he then took the rank of colonel as ophthalmic consultant to the home forces between 1917 and 1918; and thereafter he served in an advisory capacity to the army, the navy, and the Royal Air Force. In 1919 he was appointed CBE, and he was knighted in 1922. 
The Royal College of Surgeons invited Parsons to give the Arris and Gale lectures in 1903-4; from the British Medical Association he received the Middlemore prize in 1904 and again in 1914. From the Ophthalmological Society he received the Nettleship gold medal (1907) and the Bowman lectureship (1925); from the Oxford Ophthalmological Congress he was awarded the Doyne medal (1919); and from the American Ophthalmological Society he was given the Howe medal (1936). He was made honorary DSc of his own university, Bristol, in 1925, and LLD at Edinburgh in 1927. In 1921 he was elected FRS, and he served on the society's council in 1926-7 and 1941-3, and became a vice-president in 1941-2. On his eightieth birthday he was presented with his portrait, painted by John Gilroy, by the Faculty of Ophthalmologists and the Ophthalmological Society; and the same occasion was marked by the appearance of a special number of the 'British Journal of Ophthalmology' consisting of contributions made by his scientific and clinical pupils and associates. 
Parsons's life was full of work, but he also enjoyed leisure. He appreciated good company and was a delightful host, particularly to the young, on whom he lavished much kindness, assisting them freely in their work and professional troubles. He had a great appreciation of music and used to go to the opera armed with a score. His knowledge of languages was wide and Persian literature and art interested him greatly. Golf was an absorbing hobby most of his life and he enjoyed periodic holiday cruises. 
At the outbreak of war in 1939 Parsons left London and retired from practice, lending his London house to the French Red Cross. He went to live in Leeds with long-standing friends, though he visited London frequently. In his later years progressive deafness, an annoying tremor, and cardiac troubles -- disabilities exasperating to a nature so forceful and active -- gradually curtailed his activities. He died in University College Hospital, Grafton Way, London, on 7 October 1957. 
Stewart Duke-Elder', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35398


Parsons, Laurence, fourth earl of Rosse (1840-1908), astronomer and engineer, was born on 17 November 1840 at Birr Castle, Parsonstown (Birr), King's county, Ireland, the eldest of the four surviving sons of William Parsons, third earl of Rosse (1800-1867), astronomer, engineer, and politician, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Field (1813-1885) ['see 'Parsons, Mary, countess of Rosse], daughter of John Wilmer Field of Heaton Hall, Yorkshire. His youngest brother, Sir Charles Algernon Parsons, invented the marine steam turbine. Known in his youth by the courtesy title of Lord Oxmantown, Laurence was educated at home by tutors and under the close supervision of his parents. His father achieved fame by completing in 1845 the great 6 foot reflecting telescope which was to remain the largest in the world for seventy years. The countess of Rosse combined the roles of loving mother, architect, and pioneering photographer. Laurence and his brothers enjoyed a healthy though severe regime at Birr which combined an open-air life with practical work in their father's well-equipped workshops. They had opportunities to meet many of his distinguished friends at Birr or in London. Laurence graduated from Trinity College, Dublin, in 1864 as a non-resident student. 
Oxmantown's first scientific paper, entitled 'Description of an equatoreal clock', appeared in the 'Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society' in 1866 and described a hydraulic device to drive a telescope at a constant rate; his propensity for such ingenious inventions never left him. There followed a memoir which appeared in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' giving an account of observations of the Orion nebula made at Birr from 1848 to 1867. The work collated drawings made over seven seasons with the 3 foot and 6 foot telescopes by several assistant observers (B. B. Stoney, S. Hunter, and R. S. Ball) and by Oxmantown himself. The centrepiece of the paper was a detailed engraving which was judged by J. L. E. Dreyer as being 'always of value as a faithful representation of the appearance of the Orion nebula in the largest telescope of the nineteenth century' (Dreyer, 251). The advent of photography soon rendered such painstaking work unnecessary. 
The third earl died in October 1867 and Oxmantown succeeded to the title and the estates. That same year he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society and of the Royal Astronomical Society; he was also appointed high sheriff of King's county. In 1868 he became a representative peer for Ireland. On 1 September 1870 he married Frances Cassandra Harvey-Hawke (1851-1921), only child of the fourth Baron Hawke and his second wife, Frances Fetherstonhaugh. They had three children: William Edward, who inherited as fifth earl and died of war wounds in 1918, Geoffrey, and Muriel. 
The fourth earl is best remembered for his work on the radiant heat of the moon which he started in 1868 and continued more or less for the rest of his life, although much of the later work was carried out by his observing assistant, Dr Otto Boeddicker. Lord Rosse was the first to make infra-red measurements of any astronomical body other than the sun and he recognized the importance of compensating for heat emitted by the telescope and by the sky. He detected the radiant heat with a pair of thermocouples at the focus of the 3 foot reflector. He studied how the radiant heat varied with the phase of the moon, and measured how the atmospheric attenuation increased with the distance of the moon from the zenith. He was the first to use an infra-red filter which took the form of a glass plate; by placing the plate in front of the detector he was able to block radiation with wavelengths longer than eight microns. He estimated the temperature of the lunar surface by comparing filtered and unfiltered temperature rises from the moon, the sun, and a blackened reference source of heat. An account of the lunar investigations was delivered to the Royal Society in the Bakerian lecture of March 1873, and he continued to improve his techniques. His initial estimate of 500 degree F (260 degree C) was revised to 247 degree F (119 degree C) and later to 197 degree F (91.7 degree C). A reanalysis of the data by W. M. Sinton in 1958 gave a value of 158 degree F (70 degree C), in excellent agreement with later observations. Boeddicker remarked that 'the results of these investigations were treated with considerable coolness by the scientific world' and that the lack of recognition 'was a life-long disappointment to him' (Boeddicker, 375). 
Lord Rosse was a gifted inventor and never happier than when he was busy in his own workshops. As commercial thermocouples were not sensitive enough for the lunar heat observations he made his own and with infinite patience gradually refined their design. In 1869 he fitted a clock drive to the massive 6 foot telescope which allowed it to be used more efficiently. In 1874 the old wooden mounting of the 3 foot telescope was replaced by an equatorial mounting of metal, designed in consultation with B. B. Stoney and W. G. Strype and built by W. Spence of Dublin. Other unpublished work at Birr included observations with a heavy Browning spectroscope, and photography of the Orion nebula and the Milky Way. 
Lord Rosse took a keen interest in the development of the steam turbine which was invented by his brother Charles and he served as chairman and director of both the Marine Steam Turbine Company formed in 1894 and the Parsons Marine Steam Turbine Company formed in 1897. He seldom missed a meeting, often crossing from Ireland specially for the occasion. Charles frequently sought his advice on both technical and business matters. In recognition of his services he was made an associate of the Institution of Naval Architects in 1899. 
Lord Rosse was elected chancellor of the University of Dublin in 1885 and remained in office until his death. In 1903 he played a key role in persuading Lord Iveagh to donate a capital sum to provide new buildings and equipment for the departments of experimental physics and botany. Apart from contributing generously to the building fund himself, he made a bequest to the scientific departments in the university. The fourth earl was made a knight of the Order of St Patrick in 1890 and was lord lieutenant of King's county from 1892. He served as president of the Royal Dublin Society (1887-92) and of the Royal Irish Academy (1896-1901). The University of Oxford conferred the honorary degree of DCL in 1870 and Dublin and Cambridge universities that of LLD in 1879 and 1900 respectively. He was made an honorary member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1888. 
Insight into Lord Rosse's character comes from the testimony of Boeddicker who was his assistant for twenty-eight years. He attributed 'a strong reticence and shyness' (Boeddicker, 374) to his relatively sheltered childhood. Lord Rosse himself occasionally mentioned 'the effort it cost him to mix in public life, and especially to preside and speak at public meetings' (ibid., 375). On the other hand Boeddicker described him as 'a man of extraordinary tenacity of purpose, whom no failure could turn away from a project he once considered feasible' (ibid.) and added 'he was a man of absolute rectitude, with a strong sense of duty, a true friend, a sound and conscientious adviser' (ibid., 376). After a decline in health lasting two years, the fourth earl died at Birr Castle on 29 August 1908 and was buried in the old churchyard of Birr on 2 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 35399


Parsons, Sir Leonard Gregory (1879-1950), paediatrician, was born at Kidderminster, Worcestershire, on 25 November 1879, the son of Theophilus Lessie Parsons and his wife, Sarah, daughter of Timothy Sharpe, a farmer who migrated to the United States. Parsons came of a Worcestershire farming family and was devoted to Wesleyan Methodism. He grew up at Aston in a home in which devout living was inculcated through parental example, education was liberal, and hospitality generous. He attended the King Edward VI Grammar School for five years, where his enthusiasm for chemistry and rugby football were encouraged. In 1896 he entered Mason College, Birmingham, to study zoology; later he turned to medicine, winning many scholarships and acting for a time as a prosector of anatomy. He qualified MB BS (London) in 1905. During his university years he was involved with the Student Christian Movement and missionary activities. He also developed his talent as a shot and a sprinter and played tennis and rugby with great enthusiasm. 
In 1908 Parsons married Ethel May (died 1955), daughter of the Revd Dr John Gregory Mantle, a Wesleyan Methodist minister. He had known her since childhood. They had one son, who also became a paediatrician, and one daughter. 
Parsons held junior hospital appointments at Birmingham and London and practised for a few years at Bromsgrove. His habit of self-criticism and inquiry, and an unusual skill with children, diverted him to paediatrics. Postgraduate training at the Hospital for Sick Children, Great Ormond Street, London, followed by his election to the staff of the Birmingham Children's Hospital as physician to out-patients in 1910, culminated in an active term of service as lecturer in diseases of children and paediatrics at the University of Birmingham. During the First World War Parsons served in Greece and Serbia and was appointed consulting physician to the Serbian army. In 1917 he received the order of St Sava. 
During the post-war years Parsons established himself as a kindly, diligent doctor. He was greatly in demand as a consultant and personal attendant to doctors throughout the midlands and his appointment in 1928 as first professor of child health in the University of Birmingham came as no surprise. The following year he was elected subdean of the medical faculty. New buildings and equipment were added to the Children's Hospital as Parsons's fame grew and research workers flocked to his busy clinic. His personal influence in Birmingham was such that by 1930 he was able to gather together representatives from various hospitals, the university, and the city council in an active campaign for the prevention of children's diseases; despite serious interruption with the outbreak of war in 1939 this great project resulted in the opening of the Leonard Parsons infants' block at the Children's Hospital in October 1945 and the establishment of the Institute of Child Health in that year. The outbreak of war also saw Parsons appointed group officer for the Emergency Medical Service in Birmingham. All through these years, too, Parsons served his university and medical school in many capacities. He supported the hospitals centre plan, from which came the fine medical centre at Edgbaston; and he discharged carefully his administrative responsibilities, which were considerable after he was appointed dean of the medical faculty in 1941. Yet he found time for all who sought his advice on medical education, child welfare, or the practice or problems of post-war medicine. He retired from his professorship in 1946. 
Parsons was elected FRCP in 1923, he was knighted in 1946 for his work for children during the war, and in 1948 he was elected FRS for investigations into child health and the wasting disorders of children. He lectured widely, served as president of many conferences and scientific associations, and received the honorary fellowship of numerous societies for the study of children's diseases. Parsons was a physician who combined great clinical acumen and original talent for scientific investigation with an eminently practical outlook on everyday affairs. He left his mark on medical affairs in Birmingham, while the medical research conducted in his laboratory brought it an international reputation. By means of painstaking chemical and clinical studies of the blood of children, his team tracked down the origin of a serious type of jaundice in the newborn infant, which he proved to result from excessive destruction of the red corpuscles and the consequent stimulation of production of new blood cells in various regions of the body. A serious wasting disease of infants was shown to set up complicated symptoms because fats and vitamin D are absorbed with difficulty from the intestines. Parsons also added significantly to our knowledge of rickets, which through the emphasis he placed upon environment and diet he did much to prevent and cure. Finally, he brought clarity to paediatrics by stressing the importance of antenatal factors. He saw clearly that deficient diet for, or infection of, the mother might well result in serious disability of the child. By his insistence on the need for quantitative chemical investigation of problems often enough dismissed as peculiar to the child, Parsons greatly helped to raise paediatrics to a high scientific level and opened up hitherto unrealized fields of investigation. Together with Seymour Barling he wrote 'Diseases of Infancy and Childhood' (1933). 
A simple, rather shy man, Parsons had a quick sense of humour and delighted in the company of a wide circle of friends. He was a devout Methodist who read his 'Bible' morning and evening, neither smoked nor drank alcohol, and attended chapel with great regularity. It was shortly after returning to his home, Hillfield, Wentworth Road, Four Oaks, Warwickshire, from the morning service at the Four Oaks Methodist chapel that he died suddenly from cerebral haemorrhage on 17 December 1950. 


@@@@@


doc= 35400


Parsons, Richard Godfrey (1882-1948), bishop of Hereford, was born at Pendleton, Lancashire, on 12 November 1882, the only son of William Parsons, merchant, of Calcutta, who became secretary of the Bengal chamber of commerce, and his wife, Bertha Best, of Thetford, Norfolk. Educated at Durham School (1895-1901), he became in 1901 a demy of Magdalen College, Oxford, obtaining in 1903 a second class in honour moderations and in 1905 and 1906 first-class honours in 'literae humaniores' and theology, and being elected to a Liddon studentship. Postgraduate work in Germany was followed by residence at the deanery, Westminster, as the pupil of the dean, J. Armitage Robinson, and at Cuddesdon College. 
Ordained deacon and priest at London in 1907, with a curacy at Hampstead parish church, Parsons returned to Oxford the same year as fellow, praelector, and chaplain of University College. There he showed the combination of his intellectual command of theological matters and his desire for reform, and he 'dabbled with modernism' (Stephenson, 89). In 1911 he was made principal of Wells Theological College, and in 1912 was associated with B. H. Streeter, William Temple, and others in the publication of 'Foundations', a book on liberal theology which at the time made a considerable stir, and in which Parsons was one of the joint authors of an essay, 'The interpretation of the Christ in the New Testament'. In 1912 he married Dorothy (died 1953), only daughter of Francis Gales Streeter, of Littlehampton, Sussex. They had two sons, the elder of whom died of wounds in Egypt in 1942. 
The war had by 1916 practically emptied the college at Wells, and in 1916-17 Parsons served as a temporary chaplain to the forces in London. In 1916 he became vicar of Poynton, Cheshire, and in 1919 rector of Birch in Rusholme, near Manchester. He combined with his parish activities teaching and organizing work for the University of Manchester, in which in 1929 he became dean of the faculty of theology. He had in 1924 taken the degree of DD at Oxford. In collaboration with A. S. Peake he prepared for publication and saw through the press the English edition of 'An Outline of Christianity' (1926), a work in five volumes originally planned and produced in America. 
Consecrated in 1927 as suffragan bishop of Middleton, Parsons combined this with his other commitments until 1931, when he became residentiary canon and subdean of Manchester. In 1932 Parsons became bishop of Southwark, one of the heaviest and most arduous dioceses in England. Although intellectually extremely able, he had his greatest satisfaction perhaps as a 'grass-roots' churchman given to working for the needy of a parish rather than to great oratory. This came to the fore in his new south London diocese, with large numbers of the poorer working class, and particularly during the winter of 1940 when the diocese suffered heavy bombardment from the air. Parsons's efforts and the strain of this time told on his health. He became bishop of Hereford in 1941. There he remained, and contributed more broadly to church matters, particularly in the immediate post-war years. He paid visits to Romania and Yugoslavia; he acted as chairman in 1947 of an inter-church conference between theologians of the Anglican church and theologians from Denmark and Iceland. He was described in his obituary in 'The Times' as 'no merely academic scholar, but a man of wide outlook in public affairs and with a lively interest in housing and kindred social questions'. He also had a 'passionate' desire to see Christianity applied to corporate, and state, conduct. He was made an honorary fellow of University College, Oxford, in 1942 and an honorary DD of the John Hus faculty at Prague in 1946. He died at the General Hospital, Hereford, on 26 December 1948 and was cremated at Cheltenham on 30 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 35401


Partington, James Riddick (1886-1965), chemist and historian of science, was born on 20 June 1886 at 194 Morris Green Lane, Middle Hulton, Lancashire, the only son and first of the three children of Alfred Partington, bookkeeper of Bolton, and his wife, Mary Agnes, daughter of Adam Riddick, tailor, of Dumfries. He was educated at Southport Science and Art School and became articled to the public analyst in Bolton after his parents returned there in 1901. By private study he qualified for entrance to Manchester University in 1906. After obtaining first-class honours in chemistry in 1909 he did research in physical organic chemistry under Arthur Lapworth, held a Beyer fellowship (1910-11), and was awarded the MSc in 1911; his DSc followed in 1918. 
An 1851 Exhibition scholarship enabled Partington to work on the specific heats of gases under H. Walther Nernst in Berlin from 1911 to 1913. Nernst's belief that mathematics was indispensable to the physical chemist inspired Partington's first book, 'Higher Mathematics for University Students' (1911; 4th edn, 1931), while Nernst's grasp of theory and consummate experimental abilities gave Partington a model for his own academic career. Like Nernst, Partington wrote an influential 'Textbook of Thermodynamics' (1913; 4th edn, 1950). He was an assistant lecturer and demonstrator in chemistry at Manchester University from 1913 to 1919, when London University appointed him professor of chemistry at East London College (renamed Queen Mary College in 1934). On 6 September 1919 Partington married a former student Marian Jones (1890-1940), daughter of Thomas Jones, brickworks manager, of Buckley, Flintshire. Before raising their one son and two daughters she taught chemistry in London secondary schools. She committed suicide at their home in Wembley on 4 March 1940, while Partington was in Cambridge. 
Partington's reputation had grown during the First World War. Soon after it started he joined the army and saw active service as an infantry and engineer officer, becoming a captain. For some time he purified water for the troops on the Somme, working on a barge with fellow chemist Eric K. Rideal. In 1916 they were transferred to the munitions inventions department of the Ministry of Munitions and, in the chemistry department of University College, London, headed by F. G. Donnan, joined a team developing a method of manufacturing nitric acid, needed for explosives, from atmospheric nitrogen. Partington's war experiences of applied chemistry led to two further books, 'The Alkali Industry' (1918; 2nd edn, 1925) and, with L. H. Parker, 'The Nitrogen Industry' (1922). He was appointed MBE (military) in 1918 and thereafter always adopted a military air. 
Until retiring in 1951 Partington remained at Queen Mary College, which elected him a fellow in 1959. He continued research on specific heats of gases, electrochemistry, thermodynamics, and other topics, mainly in inorganic physical chemistry, and spent much time writing and revising textbooks on inorganic and physical chemistry for students at different levels. Despite a dazzling output of research papers it was these influential textbooks rather than his experimental work that made his name familiar to all chemists. His monumental 'An Advanced Treatise on Physical Chemistry' (5 vols., 1949-54) contains a wealth of data in 1.5 million words and is of lasting value. 
Partington's historical writings, which had begun in 1928 with a monograph, 'The Composition of Water', constitute his most enduring work. A meticulous scholar, he taught himself ancient and modern languages, used primary sources wherever possible, and produced a steady stream of books and articles on the history of chemistry. His 'Origins and Development of Applied Chemistry' (1935) is a massive study of the production and uses of materials in the Near and Middle East to the end of the Bronze Age, the date at which previous historians of science had started. His military experience added weight to his criticism of earlier writings on the subject in 'A History of Greek Fire and Gunpowder' (1960). His fine 'A Short History of Chemistry' (1937; 2nd edn, 1948) was the forerunner of the encyclopaedic 'A History of Chemistry' (4 vols., 1961-70). Volumes 2-4 are a richly documented account of the period since 1500; Partington did not complete volume 1, part of which appeared posthumously, so his final views on alchemy remain unpublished. 
During the Second World War Partington's college was evacuated to Cambridge. He lived there until 1964, then moved to Northwich, Cheshire, to be near his sister. His house was full of books, and in his study he could smoke his favourite strong tobacco, but he was often seen in London or Cambridge libraries, reading with intense concentration, constantly writing on slips of paper which he subsequently edited and pasted together to form the manuscript for a tolerant printer. A blunt and outspoken critic of contemporaries whose achievements seemed to him inadequate, he nevertheless gave praise where it was due. He was highly regarded in the 1920s and 1930s for his wide and scholarly knowledge of chemistry, his integrity, precision, and good sense, and those who knew him only as a historian in later years remember a reserved man with a dry sense of humour which reveals itself in the prefaces of some of his books. 
Partington was the first chairman (1935-46) of the Society for the Study of Alchemy and Early Chemistry; now the Society for the History of Alchemy and Chemistry, it awards the triennial Partington prize to a young historian. From 1949 to 1951 he was president of the British Society for the History of Science. He received the American Chemical Society's Dexter award for history of chemistry in 1961 and the Sarton medal of the American History of Science Society shortly before his death. 
Partington died on 9 October 1965 in the Grange Hospital, Weaverham, Cheshire. He bequeathed his fine library to Manchester University. 


@@@@@


doc= 35402


Partridge, Sir (John) Bernard (1861-1945), cartoonist and illustrator, was born in London on 11 October 1861, the sixth child and third son of Richard Partridge FRS (1805-1873) and his wife, Frances Janette (Fanny) Turner. His father was professor of anatomy at the Royal Academy and later president of the Royal College of Surgeons, and his uncle, John Partridge (1789-1872), was portrait painter-extraordinary to Queen Victoria. He was educated at Stonyhurst College, Lancashire, and later studied at the West London School of Art. For a brief period he worked as a stained-glass designer and as a decorator of church interiors. At about the same time he acted professionally under the name of Bernard Gould with Henry Irving and Johnston Forbes-Robertson. He also played the part of Sergius Saranoff in the first performance of 'Arms and the Man' by George Bernard Shaw in 1894. In 1897 he married Lydia Faith, the daughter of Edward Harvey. They had no children. He had joined the staff of 'Punch' in 1891 on the recommendation of George Du Maurier and served as junior cartoonist under Edward Linley Sambourne, succeeding him as second cartoonist in 1901 and as principal cartoonist in 1910. For some years he contributed chiefly joke and theatrical cartoons but in 1899, not without misgivings, he turned to political caricatures. His final political cartoon was published on 18 April 1945, so that his career in this area was almost as long as that of Sir John Tenniel while his years of service to the pages of 'Punch' were still longer. Ninety-four years of 'Punch' cartoons were covered by these two draughtsmen. 
The influence of the theatre was frequently evident in Partridge's drawings, and he sometimes seemed to make his cartoons a stage on which he mounted any scene and setting whether tragic or comic, carefully delineated, and appropriately costumed. He used shading and often rendered the minutest details. He was perhaps less vivacious than Tenniel, but his secure draughtsmanship and his knowledge of historical periods and their right setting made almost any subject safe in his hands. A famous example, 'Unconquerable', of Kaiser Wilhelm II and Albert, King of the Belgians, published on 21 October 1914, shows his talent in depicting facial expressions. He seldom burlesqued his characters, though he could do so with considerable power when the occasion demanded: his general fidelity to truth saved him from the difficulty sometimes experienced by cartoonists when called upon to deal with tragic events, or to administer encouragement rather than rebuke. His likenesses were excellent, and he made regular use of a strong image drawn with academic correctness and a constant emphasis on symbolism. By the time of his death his style was decidedly old-fashioned in appearance, especially when compared to contemporaries such as David Low. 
Partridge was probably at his best in heroic or grandiose scenes, and many of his cartoons during the first and second world wars were strikingly powerful, dignified and memorable. However, it is perhaps regrettable that his lively early book illustrations and social cartoons were overshadowed by his political drawings. Handsome and courteous, he was often spoken of by his colleagues as one of the last of the Victorians. He painted in oils, watercolours, and pastels and exhibited at the Royal Academy and the New English Art Club. He drew for many other magazines, including 'Moonshine', 'Lady's Pictorial' and 'The Sketch'. In 1925 he was knighted. Partridge died on 9 August 1945 at his home, 10 Holland Park Road, Kensington, London. His wife survived him. A collection of his drawings, 'Mr. Punch's Personalities, 1926-1929', is in the National Portrait Gallery, Kensington, London, where there is also a self-portrait in chalk and wash on paper. There are drawings by him in several public collections, including the British Museum, Victoria and Albert Museum, and Imperial War Museum, London, some municipal art galleries, and the University of Kent at Canterbury. 


@@@@@


doc= 35403


Patel, Vallabhbhai Jhaverbhai (1875/6-1950), politician in India, was born in the town of Nadiad, Gujarat, some time between October 1875 and May 1876, the arbitrary date of 31 October 1875 being the officially accepted one. Fourth of six children of Jhaverbhai, a 10 acre farmer of Patidar caste, and his wife, Ladba, of Karamsad village, Kaira district, Gujarat, Vallabhbhai spent his youth in the village with his four brothers and a sister. As he was a middle child, his elder brothers were favoured over him both in family matters and in such life opportunities as early schooling. Although Vallabhbhai accepted his secondary position in the family and later in political life out of a sense of propriety and duty, initially to family then to his country, he also developed self-reliance, determination, toughness of spirit and character, mental balance, and a sardonic sense of humour that became his hallmark in life. He married Jhaverba, daughter of Desaibhai Punjabhai Patel, from the nearby village of Gana, in 1893 when he was seventeen or eighteen and she twelve or thirteen. Jhaverba died in January 1909, having borne two children, Manibehn and Dahyabhai, after which Vallabhbhai, thirty-three years of age at the time of his wife's death, never married nor had any known or suspected liaison with another woman. 
Vallabhbhai was a relatively short man, 5 feet 51/2 inches in height, dour and homely in appearance especially as he aged, whose demeanour exuded far more strength than his height and whose eyes emitted a penetrating glance which gave pause to all who did not know him well. Although he sometimes sacrificed his personal interests to those of his family, particularly his elder brother Vithalbhai Jhaverbhai Patel, and fulfilled his formal parental duties after his wife's death, there is little evidence in his family relations with wife, children, or siblings of displays of affection, very little of personal attention, and some indication of neglect of his children. His daughter, Manibehn, who never married, nevertheless remained devoted to him, became his personal secretary, and looked after him in later life until his death. Vallabhbhai's close personal relations and affective ties were with a very small number of friends and supporters from the business community, with his closest comrades in the nationalist movement, and most of all with Mahatma Gandhi in his years of maturity and political struggle. 
Vallabhbhai Patel was a self-made man in all respects, including his education. He began his elementary schooling at the age of seven or eight, entered an English-medium school in his village at the age of fourteen, transferred to another English-medium school in the town of Petlad at the age of seventeen, and finally passed his matriculation exam in Nadiad in 1897, by which time he was already twenty-two years old. He then studied on his own for three years to pass the pleaders' examination, in which he succeeded at the age of twenty-five and after which he set up a practice in criminal law first in the town of Godhra, then in Borsad town. Prospering in his practice, he had saved enough money by 1905 to go to England to train as a barrister. However, at his elder brother Vithalbhai's request, he gave place to him to go in his stead and postponed his own departure for England for five years until 1910, when he entered the Middle Temple. He completed his training within two years, passing his examinations in the first class. During his two years in England he did little but grind, winning the respect of his teachers, but developing no lifelong friendships or new interests. 
Back in India in 1913 Patel set up practice in Ahmadabad, Gujarat's principal city, where he soon had enough income to take care of all his family obligations and live the comfortable life of an outwardly Anglicized upper-class Indian, wearing English clothes, playing bridge, and spending his evenings at the Gujarat Club. Respect for his achievements and personal character also earned him a place in the developing political life of Ahmadabad, where he was elected unopposed to the municipal board in 1917, became chairman of its sanitary committee, in which capacity he displayed extraordinary devotion to duty and personal courage in fighting an outbreak of plague, and led a successful agitation for the removal of an unpopular British municipal commissioner. At first cynical towards, and holding aloof from, Mahatma Gandhi, who had recently returned from South Africa, he soon became impressed by the latter's defiance of British authority and began to play a more active part in the political life of the province: addressing political meetings in support of Gandhi's demand for 'swaraj' (freedom, independence), intervening along with Gandhi on behalf of textile mill labourers in Ahmadabad, organizing with him a no-tax campaign in Kaira district, and helping Gandhi's recruitment drive on behalf of the British Indian army's participation in the First World War. For his part, Gandhi began to place responsibilities on Patel, appointing him in 1917 secretary of the executive committee of the Gujarat Sabha (association), the precursor of the Gujarat Provincial Congress Committee. In 1921 Patel became the first president of the latter body, a position which he retained until 1946. 
Vallabhbhai's participation with Gandhi in the Kaira no-tax campaign was the decisive moment in his life, a turning point after which nothing remained the same. From this point on, in January 1918, Vallabhbhai devoted virtually all his time and energies to political activities and nationalist agitation in which, strong man though he was, he subordinated himself to the authority of Gandhi for the next thirty years to such an extent that he was sometimes described as the latter's 'blind follower', accepting with faith rather than reason his every twist and turn of policy and tactics. Like other nationalist leaders and followers of Gandhi, he abandoned Western clothes in favour of Indian dress, and took up spinning in his moments of relaxation. 
Even so, Patel also made a name for himself separate from that of Gandhi. He continued until 1928 to play a dominant role, from 1924 to 1928 as president, in the Ahmadabad municipality. He also acquired a reputation as a man who could be counted upon to organize people and money in times of crisis, as when he took the leadership in famine relief in 1918 and flood and famine relief in 1927-8 in Ahmadabad district. 
In 1923 Patel acquired country-wide recognition for his leadership of the flag 'satyagraha' in Nagpur, in the Central Provinces, where he led a prolonged agitation against the prohibition by the British district commissioner there of the flying of the Congress-designed national flag of India. At the end of the same year, he also led in his home locality of rural Borsad a successful 'satyagraha' campaign demanding the removal of a government-imposed tax upon all the residents of the Borsad 'taluka' (administrative subdivision of a district) for their alleged complicity with local dacoits (criminal gangs). Vallabhbhai's most famous campaign was in Bardoli in 1928 when he led a long, hotly contested, but ultimately mostly successful campaign against an increase in the land revenue paid by the peasants in this area of Surat district. It was after this campaign that Vallabhbhai was given the popular title sardar (chief). 
Although he adopted with great skill and success Gandhi's methods of non-violent resistance to unjust authority, his organizing abilities and his personal style were his own. In the latter respect, especially, his manner was different from that of Gandhi, for he was as apt to threaten and intimidate his opponents as to persuade them through gentle reason and self-sacrifice. He was known especially in his mature years for his 'iron will', 'nerves of steel', fearlessness, personal courage, bluntness of speech, and 'fighting capacity'. No doubt was ever cast, even by his enemies and political opponents, on his personal integrity, devotion to his country, and his ideals, especially for the independence, self-sufficiency, and unity of India. 
After the Bardoli campaign, Sardar Patel, as Vallabhbai was also known, remained one of the best known and respected Congress leaders of the country, but most of his activities from then on until the transfer of power were either as Gandhi's chief lieutenant in national campaigns against British rule or as the principal party and electoral organizer and fund-raiser for the Indian National Congress. Throughout the remainder of his political career, though he was considered one of the four or five topmost Congress leaders of the country, he remained subordinate first to Gandhi and, after Gandhi's death, to Nehru as prime minister. Although he was proposed for president of the Indian National Congress after the Bardoli 'satyagraha', he gave place in 1929 to Jawaharlal Nehru, and did not receive this high honour until 1931. During the nationalist movement, beginning with his first arrest during Gandhi's salt 'satyagraha' of 1930, Patel spent many years in gaol. The longest periods were for sixteen months, which he spent with Gandhi, in 1932-4; nine months in 1940-41; and nearly three years from 1942 to 1945. 
Patel's importance in the highest councils of the Indian National Congress derived principally from the critical role he played from 1934 onwards within the party organization. Adopting his son's flat in Bombay as his home base from this time forward, he was the principal fund-raiser and played the critical role in the selection of Congress candidates to contest the 1934 elections for the central legislative assembly; again, as chairman of the central parliamentary board, in the selection and financing of candidates for the 1936 provincial elections; and in the constituent assembly elections of 1946 as well, where he came into frequent conflict with the then Congress president, Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, over the selection of Congress candidates. His responsibilities as party/election organizer also included exercising supervision and imposing discipline over the Congress members of provincial legislatures, including their selection of legislative party leaders and consequently the premiers in Congress-controlled provinces. Although his will did not always prevail, he firmly established the principle that the provincial party organizations and the legislative assemblies were subject to the ultimate authority of the national organization and leadership of the Indian National Congress. 
By the time of independence Patel was supreme in the party organization in the country, though he was second to Nehru in the government. Although Nehru was the more popular figure in the country and Gandhi's choice for prime minister, Patel demonstrated his ability to checkmate Nehru in the party on several occasions after independence, the most notable being the selection of Rajendra Prasad as India's first president and the victory of his candidate for president of the Indian National Congress in 1950, Purushottam Das Tandon -- in both cases against the wishes of Nehru. Nehru was not able, in fact, to assert his primacy over the party organization as well as the government until after Patel's death. 
Patel's influence was not, however, by any means confined to the party organization. He was a critical figure as well in the final negotiations with the British concerning the transfer of power, in the deliberations of the constituent assembly, and in the first government of independent India. 
Patel became home member of the executive council on 3 September 1946. In this capacity he shared authority with Nehru and the Congress president, Azad, in formulating strategy for dealing with the Muslim League demands for Pakistan and with the viceroy in attempting to control the developing violence which surrounded the decision finally to partition India. Although hostile to Jinnah and the Muslim League's demands, Patel was among the earliest of the Congress leaders to accept the impossibility of Congress-League co-operation in an independent India and hence to accept the inevitability of partition. As the violence and mass transfer of populations began between India and Pakistan, Patel pressed Wavell, Colville, and Mountbatten in succession for sterner measures to be taken to control the violence, including the imposition of martial law. However, neither the British rulers nor Patel as home minister after independence proved able to act effectively to stem the violence, which reached terrible proportions during and after the transfer of power. He failed even to bring under control massive rioting in Delhi before extensive violence and murder had taken place. He was blamed also for failing to prevent the murder of Gandhi in Delhi, though he was prevented by Gandhi himself from imposing stricter security measures to protect his life. 
Patel also left his imprint upon the constitution of India through his participation as chairman on important committees. His most important interventions involved support for measures to strengthen the central government in relation to the states and governmental authority in relation to society, protect private property against government expropriation without adequate compensation, and promote the unity of the Indian peoples. He supported a clause in the constitution, article 356, empowering the central government to take over the administration of any state under certain circumstances, the right of dispossessed landlords to adequate compensation for their land, the payment of privy purses in perpetuity to the former Indian princes in compensation for the loss of their kingdoms, the maintenance of the status and importance in government of the elite British Indian Civil Service, renamed the Indian administrative service, and the abolition of the system of separate electorates for Hindus, Muslims, and Sikhs. 
Although there were many occasions of sharp conflict between Patel and Nehru during the period from independence until the former's death, including several when each offered to resign from government because of their differences, the two men nevertheless comprised a duumvirate in which Nehru relied heavily on Patel's advice on many matters of state. As deputy prime minister Patel held three portfolios: home, information and broadcasting, and states. Patel also served as acting prime minister on four occasions. However, the balance in the relationship gradually shifted in favour of Nehru after the death of Gandhi in 1948 and Patel's weakened condition after his first heart attack in March of the same year. 
Nevertheless, in his capacity as minister for states, Patel had virtually complete control over one of the most critical matters faced by the government of India during and after the transfer of power from Britain, namely, the integration into the Indian Union of the now formally independent princely states. With the able assistance of his principal secretary, V. P. Menon, Patel bargained with, cajoled, and threatened when necessary the 562 rajas and maharajas into giving up their rule and acceding to the Indian Union. When even threats failed, Patel did not shrink from the use of armed force, as in the case of both the tiny state of Junagarh, and the much larger state of Hyderabad. In the case of Kashmir, however, Patel played a strongly supportive, but secondary role to Nehru, who took the integration of that state into the Indian Union as his personal responsibility. 
Although Patel never developed a systematic set of ideas for India's political development, economic policies, or foreign relations, he had strong views on many matters, which were expressed in his actions and statements. He stood for the transformation of India into a major industrial power, which he thought could be achieved only by a strong, centralized state. Although not averse to a governmental role in industrial development and agrarian transformation, he did not support assaults against private industrial and commercial enterprises. He was sharply critical of and opposed politically the communist and socialist parties and their leaders, whose ideas he considered unrealistic and irrelevant to Indian society and economy. In agriculture he supported the rights of peasant proprietors against both the former landlords and the state. He opposed the demands for the reorganization of the internal boundaries of the Indian states on linguistic grounds as a potential threat to Indian unity, and favoured the adoption of Hindi as the official language of the country. As home minister he used his powers of arrest to stave off militant Sikh demands in Delhi for a special status for the Sikhs in Punjab. Although he declared his belief in the secular ideology of the Indian state, he adopted a patronizing attitude towards the Muslims who remained in India after partition, while on the other hand accepting as patriotic Indians the members of the militant Hindu organization, the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS). He disputed the complicity of this organization in the murder of Mahatma Gandhi and urged an early removal of the ban imposed on it after Gandhi's assassination. However, Patel took a much stronger stand against communists: he successfully piloted the 'Preventive Detention Act' through parliament in February 1950; it was intended to strengthen the government's ability to detain communists in gaol for longer periods without trial than the courts were willing to allow. 
In foreign relations Patel took such a strong stand in favour of sanctions against Pakistan after partition that he earned the displeasure of Gandhi. He took a position opposite to that of Nehru in relation to Tibet and China, adopting an attitude of distrust towards China in general, condemnation of the Chinese invasion of Tibet in particular, and a willingness to provide Indian diplomatic support to Tibet. He favoured strong condemnation of North Korea's aggression against South Korea in June 1950. Nor did he share the mistrust of Nehru and others on the left in Indian politics of the United States and their reluctance to accept US aid. Patel also supported strongly the maintenance of India's membership in the Commonwealth. 
Patel had his second heart attack on 15 November 1950 in New Delhi; it left him unable to function effectively. He returned to his flat in Bombay on 12 December and died there on 15 December. He was cremated the same day at the public cremation ground in Sonepur, Bombay. Although he had made money in his early career as a lawyer and had many friends among the industrial and commercial magnates of Ahmadabad and Bombay, Patel always lived simply in modest accommodation in Ahmadabad and Bombay, and left no substantial property to his descendants. 


@@@@@


doc= 35404


Patel, Vithalbhai Jhaverbhai (1873-1933), Indian nationalist and politician, the son of Jhaverbhai, a 10 acre farmer, and his wife, Ladba, was born on 27 September 1873 at his mother's home town of Nadiad and brought up in his father's village of Karamsad. Both of these places were in the rich farming tract of the Charotar, located in Kaira district, in central Gujarat (then in the Bombay presidency). He was the third of five brothers, the fourth brother being Vallabhbhai Patel (1875/6-1950), the future deputy prime minister of India. He was of the Patidar caste, the dominant agricultural community of the area and an important force in the political life of the region. His own family was of high status in the caste, but not affluent. He was married at the age of nine to Diwaliben (died 1910) who came from nearby Sojitra. They had no children. 
Vithalbhai broke with family tradition, studied English and became a pleader in local courts in Gujarat. He and Vallabhbhai, who followed in his footsteps, specialized in criminal law, gaining a reputation for being able to secure acquittals in even the toughest of cases. After a few years' practice they had earned sufficient money to be able to finance further legal studies in England, Vithalbhai going first and being called to the bar by Lincoln's Inn in 1908. On his return to India he practised as a barrister in Bombay. He became involved in nationalist politics, and in 1911 he gave up his practice to become a full-time politician. He was elected to the Bombay legislative council in 1913, rising rapidly to prominence as a tireless opponent of British officialdom. He made vigorous attempts to secure for Indians a wider scope in public life. In 1918 he was elected to the central legislative council which sat in Delhi and Simla. 
At this time the Indian nationalist movement was moving in a more radical direction under the leadership of M. K. Gandhi, and Patel, disappointed by the limited reach of the Montagu-Chelmsford constitutional reforms and the shameless reaction in right-wing circles in Britain to the Amritsar massacre of 1919, threw his support behind Gandhi, resigned his council seat, and became a leading figure in the non-co-operation movement of 1920-22. Although he worked closely with Gandhi at this time, he was never a 'Gandhian' in the sense of believing in non-violence as an absolute principle. After Gandhi called off the movement suddenly in 1922, he decided to return to legislative politics, even though this flouted the then Congress line. He was elected to the Indian legislative assembly in 1923, becoming its first Indian president (equivalent of speaker) in 1925. 
Of this phase in his career it has been said that his venerable white-bearded appearance concealed a considerable fund of sheer 'gaminerie'. His position allowed him to devise numerous means of harassing leading officials in the assembly and making the government of India look ridiculous. He was also instrumental in preventing the government from implementing repressive legislation designed to curb nationalist activity. In 1929 moves by supporters of the government to have him removed as president were thwarted only by the intervention of the viceroy, Lord Irwin, who was at the time trying to win over the radical nationalists to his side. 
This Irwin failed to do, leading to Gandhi's launching of the civil disobedience movement in 1930. Patel resigned from the assembly in sympathy with this protest and was subsequently imprisoned. His health was deteriorating, and on his release in 1931 he went to Europe to seek medical aid. After stays in London and Vienna, he died in Geneva on 22 October 1933 and was cremated in Bombay on 10 November. In recognition of his great contribution to the Indian nationalist cause, a statue of him was erected in Bombay, the city which he had adopted as his home and represented in the legislative assembly. Being located on Chowpatty beach, the premier gathering place of the city, it has become a familiar landmark of modern Bombay. 


@@@@@


doc= 35405


Paterson, Sir Alexander Henry (1884-1947), penal reformer and prison commissioner, was born on 20 November 1884 at Bowdon, Cheshire, the youngest child of Alexander Edgar Paterson, a solicitor, and his wife, Katherine Esther Dixon, a voluntary worker. The family background was Unitarian, although Paterson later became a member of the Church of England. He was educated at Bowdon College and at University College, Oxford, where he was secretary of the union. He graduated in 1906 with a third-class degree in 'literae humaniores'. Much later, in 1944, he was elected an honorary fellow. He married Frances Margaret Baker in 1927 and the couple had one daughter. 
At Oxford, Paterson developed an enduring concern about poverty in London and became increasingly involved in voluntary social work with the Oxford Medical Mission in Bermondsey, later known as the Oxford and Bermondsey Club. He took a leading role in the development of the social club and following graduation went to live in Bermondsey, where he also worked as an unpaid elementary school teacher. Paterson devoted his attention to the plight of young people living in poverty, and in particular he involved himself in social work activities with boys. In 1911 he wrote 'Across the Bridges', in which he vividly described the extent of deprivation and material disadvantage in this part of London at that time. He urged the need for 'knowledge and understanding' of social problems and his ideals for change were based upon a faith which emphasized religion as an instrument of reform. 
Paterson's social work activities in Bermondsey almost inevitably led to concerns about crime and about the treatment of offenders. In 1908 he became assistant director of the Borstal Association, which was responsible for the supervision and aftercare of borstal boys, and in 1909 he was asked to organize the first experiment in aftercare for adult prisoners. In 1911, when the Central Association for the Aid of Discharged Prisoners was formed under the instruction of the home secretary, Winston Churchill, Paterson became assistant director and made regular visits to convict prisons to discuss the needs of prisoners due for release. 
In the First World War Paterson served in France with the Bermondsey battalion as a private and later as captain. His fellow soldiers, many of whom were young men from his social club, are said to have appreciated his courage and daring but also his good nature and sense of humour in what must have been grim circumstances. He was badly wounded in action and later received the Military Cross. Back home he became a founding member of Toc H, the society of (originally ex-service) men and women for Christian fellowship and social service, and was made the first chairman of its central executive when it received its charter in 1922. 
Paterson was a major driving force behind penal reform as well as many of the more general reforms of the inter-war years. Following a period of attachment to the Ministry of Labour, in 1922 he became a member of the Prison Commission (later dissolved when the prison department of the Home Office was established in 1963). Unlike other prison commissioners Paterson had no official connection with the prison service or Home Office before his appointment and, while never chairman of the Prison Commission, he was its most dominant figure and spent nearly a quarter of a century working for reform of the prison system. This was a period of significant optimism in penal reform. A mood of scepticism about the efficacy of prison, which originated before the First World War and which was carried over into the inter-war period, was replaced by a new mood in which prisons were increasingly seen as positive institutions that could act as agencies for human change. 
Paterson's vision for penal reform was very much influenced by his earlier work, which had shown him many of the social harms of imprisonment. He was well aware of the 'pains of imprisonment' and of the dehumanizing effects of confinement on the individual offender as well as the impact on their families. He highlighted the ways in which prisoners deteriorate, mentally and morally, throughout the duration of a prison sentence and argued that prisons should primarily be concerned with treatment and reform. Thus, in his evidence to the 1931 persistent offenders' committee he argued that imprisonment was a 'clumsy piece of social surgery' and advocated the abolition of all prisons, and their replacement with institutions dedicated to reform and training. 
Paterson's evidence to the committee also shows the growing influence of the medical model of crime control, and how changing notions about penal purpose legitimated a treatment approach and the increased intervention of the medical profession. The role of the courts, he argued, was not 'to weigh out a dose of punishment', but rather 'to diagnose... and to prescribe the right form of training or treatment for the condition' ('Departmental Committee on Persistent Offenders', 3.669). 
While Paterson's ambition of abolitionism was not achieved, the impact of the rehabilitative approach was swiftly felt. Among the many significant changes in penal measures was the removal of the more dehumanizing practices that destroyed self-identity and self-respect. Thus, the 'convict crop' and the broad arrows marking prisoners' clothing were abolished, facilities were made available for men to shave for the first time, and the rule of silence was greatly relaxed, allowing prisoners to associate for meals and recreation. Educational and training facilities were extended, and provision was made for prisoners to receive visits from voluntary prison visitors. Efforts were made to improve the work available to prisoners. Unproductive labour and the treadmill were abolished and a seven-hour working day was introduced. During this period also experiments with open prisons for adults were started at Wakefield prison, where certain prisoners were allowed to sleep in non-secure accommodation. 
Of all his inspiring ideals for penal reform Paterson is perhaps chiefly remembered for his impact on the borstal system. Indeed, he has been described as 'the man whose conviction and initiative were to change the very spirit of borstal training in its golden age' (Hood, 104). He was largely responsible for refashioning the regime during this period. He intended borstals to be run according to English public school principles with the aim of reforming and training younger offenders. In contrast to previous regimes characterized by enforced discipline, Paterson introduced a system designed around notions of personal responsibility, self-discipline, and decision making. Thus, in his 1932 book, 'The Principles of the Borstal System', Paterson stated that his aim was 'Not to break or knead [the offender] into shape', but instead to 'stimulate some power within to regulate conduct aright' (Ruck, 97). It was only through making their own decisions, Paterson believed, that people could change. 
Paterson organized the borstals around the public school model of the house system, where institutional loyalty was fostered through inter-house sports and recreational activities. He appointed housemasters who were expected to take a close interest in their charges and introduced the post of matron to oversee housekeeping and to provide a maternal influence. In keeping with the emphasis on personal relationships, in 1924 uniform for borstal officers was abolished and all staff were encouraged to involve themselves with the boys in a wide variety of activities. 
The growing influence of rehabilitationist arguments and the innovative optimism inherent in the borstal formula led to further experiments in the care of younger offenders. In 1924 cross-country marches and camping were introduced with apparent success (as measured by a lack of absconding). This success was self-propelling. In 1929 the prison commissioners' annual report foreshadowed the building of a new borstal at Lowdham Grange in Nottinghamshire to cope with the demand for places. This new establishment was inaugurated by a long march in 1930 by a group of staff and boys from Feltham borstal to Lowdham Grange. Led by the Feltham governor, W. W. Llewellin, this famous march is considered to be one of the high points of borstal history. In 1935 Llewellin led a second march from Stafford to Freiston, Lincolnshire, where another borstal, North Sea Camp, was established. 
With a certain showmanship, and what has been described as 'that special blend of compassion and arrogance so long the hallmark of English public service' (King and Elliott, 5), Paterson promoted the borstal as a form of social service. In so doing he won support from the public and politicians alike. There were approving visits from senior politicians, and it is perhaps to Paterson's credit that developments in the borstal system received no serious criticism from the communities in which the institutions were located. 
The goal of rehabilitation became foremost in the penal approach more generally and the borstal formula -- emphasizing personal relationships, responsibility, and trust -- gradually had an impact on the prison system as a whole. The need for a variety of security settings was increasingly recognized and an emphasis on casework, through care, and preparation for release and resettlement was paramount. Paterson became influential across the whole range of penal measures and his values were evident in penal documents and legislation on punishment throughout the 1920s and 1930s. Moreover, as a rehabilitationist who believed that crime, like other social problems, could be studied scientifically to establish its causes, Paterson, along with some senior government officials, strongly advocated the need to establish criminology as an academic discipline. 
An ardent traveller throughout the inter-war period, Paterson also drew upon the ideas and experiences of other countries. Like John Howard before him, he travelled abroad examining the various forms of confinement and reporting in graphic detail on prison conditions. On one such visit to Europe, he reviewed the conditions in a women's prison. He noted that while the prison was 'staffed by a splendid body of nuns', adherence to the silent system had a dehumanizing effect on the women prisoners. In an article in 'The Times', on 5 August 1925, he advocated that women prisoners should live and work together in small units in non-secure establishments, preferably in rural settings. In the early 1930s Paterson spent time visiting penal and reformatory establishments in the United States, and his findings were published in two articles, as 'U.S. way with crime', in 'The Times', on 10 and 11 July 1931. 
As the English borstal system gained success and public esteem Paterson was invited to advise other countries on penal measures and his influence spread at an international level. In 1925, for example, he visited Burma where he demonstrated that younger offenders could be kept in non-secure settings, irrespective of the nature of their crime. His expertise on penal administration also formed the basis of advice to the Colonial Office, and throughout the 1930s he visited a number of British colonies. As a result of one visit to a penal settlement in Cayenne, Paterson was influential in the later decision to discontinue transportation to British Guiana. 
Paterson became an active member of the international penal and penitentiary commission and was elected vice-president in 1938 and later acting president in 1943. At a congress meeting held in Berlin in 1935 Paterson fiercely opposed the reactionary penal doctrines advocated by members of the National Socialist Party in Germany. In keeping with his earlier work he argued that the purpose of imprisonment should be the 'protection of society by the social readaptation of the prisoners' and his proposals found support among delegates from a number of nations, including the United States, Belgium, Holland, and the Scandinavian countries. 
During the Second World War, Paterson acted as director of the Czechoslovakia Refugee Trust, devoting his attention in particular to the social welfare of children and young people, many of whom were orphaned or otherwise separated from their parents. In other ways he was also involved in the war effort and in 1940 he was asked by senior politicians to visit internment camps in Canada to explore the extent of national sympathy. 
The spirit of the Paterson era of penal reform faltered after 1945 as rehabilitative approaches fell out of favour. There was an unprecedented increase in recorded crime which, together with the growing post-war affluence, challenged reformers' claims that crime would be reduced through the growth of social welfare. The medical model, advocated by Paterson, began to come under considerable criticism, not least because it was becoming apparent that it could be used to legitimate a whole range of interventions in the lives of captive audiences that seemed far from humane. In addition, rehabilitative policies resulted in an increase in the length of prison sentences. Paterson himself, while advocating the abolition of prisons, had earlier acknowledged that if offenders were to go to prison, then the sentence needed to be sufficiently long for treatment and training to take effect. Thus in a 1927 'Report of the Commissioners of Prisons', Paterson commented, 'if we are concerned to train [the offender], a few weeks in prison will be an idle pretence' (xiii). The longer sentences that resulted from rehabilitative policies, together with the individualization of sentences, made such approaches seem harsh and raised fundamental questions about justice and about the rights of offenders to receive proportionate sentences. 
In the early post-war years, the lack of any well defined objectives or indicators for judging the success or otherwise of the penal system became clearly evident. It has been argued that despite the 'well-meaning and paternalistic' efforts on the part of the prison commissioners to a process of penal reform, a lack of clarity of purpose dominated a system 'peopled at the top by gentlemen and amateurs' (King and Elliott, 5). 
Paterson died in London on 7 November 1947, the same year in which he received a knighthood. He was survived by his wife. While many ardent supporters remained, the reformist tradition that was associated with Paterson did not last long. Within a few years of the end of the war penal priorities became increasingly driven by the sharp increases in crime and prison numbers and by the justice model of crime control. 
Alexander Paterson has been described as a man with charismatic determination. In his advocacy of penal reform he proved to be one of a select group who might be considered as genuine innovators. He influenced a real change of penal perspective generally while also showing that imprisonment in England, and elsewhere, was deeply flawed. In addition to his public labour his social work values were evident in his personal work with individuals. He regularly corresponded and socialized with ex-prisoners and maintained his early commitment to principles of social welfare. He was physically depicted as a powerful man with broad shoulders, deep chest, and a 'contemplative face'; his contemporaries appreciated his capacity for enjoyment as well as his turn of phrase. Indeed, in addition to the real changes to the penal system he expressed many fine and subsequently oft quoted dictums. One such aphorism revealed his fundamental belief that 'men are sent to prison as a punishment, not for punishment'. In addition, his famous paradox of training people for freedom in an 'atmosphere of captivity and repression' has continued to haunt the prison system ever since it was first uttered. 


@@@@@


doc= 35406


Paterson, Sir William (1874-1956), mechanical engineer, was born at Roslin, Midlothian, on 5 August 1874, the youngest of the five sons of James Paterson, a managing director, and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Hall. He was educated at George Heriot's School in Edinburgh, then at Heriot-Watt College, Edinburgh, where he took an engineering course. There followed a six-year apprenticeship (1891-6) in a firm of paper mill engineers, James Bertram & Sons, where he remained for a short period as a draughtsman. After a year in the drawing-office of D. and J. Tullis Ltd of Kilbowie, Glasgow, in 1898 he became assistant works manager with Masson, Scott & Co. Ltd of Wandsworth, London. 
Early in his working life Paterson realized the importance of water treatment and between 1899 and 1904 he filed several patents. In 1902 he founded in Edinburgh, with just $700 capital and often working alone, the Paterson Engineering Company Ltd, chiefly concerned with the purification of water for all purposes. In 1904 he transferred his offices to Norfolk Street in London, and for some years shared lodgings with two other Scots destined to attain eminence in their professions, John Anderson (later Viscount Waverley) and Alexander Gray. (Both were present in 1952 at the celebration of the jubilee of Paterson's company.) On 16 April 1910 he married Dorothy Isabel ('b'. 1889/90), daughter of Herbert Frank Steedman, master tailor, of Bournemouth. They had one daughter. 
Initially Paterson was particularly concerned with developing and patenting improved means of treating water for industrial use, a matter of great importance with the growing development of large manufacturing organizations. Within ten years he was addressing the need to improve the purification of drinking-water, which greatly widened his activities. An early installation was for the Weardale and Consett Water Company's pre-treatment of 2.5 million gallons of water a day to improve its condition before passing through slow sand filters then in general use. Such pre-treatment greatly prolonged the life of the slow filters and obviated the need for large and costly extensions. In 1910 Paterson designed and installed a plant for the complete purification of 4 million gallons pumped daily from the River Severn for the drinking supply of Cheltenham. It was the first plant in Britain to use chlorine for the routine sterilization of a water supply to eliminate pathological bacteria. Paterson was always interested in the prevention of water-borne diseases, and he had extensive researches carried out on the use of chlorine gas for this purpose, either alone or in conjunction with ammonia to form chloramine. This led to important improvements in the method and equipment for applying these reagents for sterilization, and also in the use of ozone for the same purpose. 
In 1913 Paterson was asked by the Indian army medical authorities to advise on the most suitable means of purifying the polluted water supplies in general use in India where outbreaks of dysentery and other water-borne diseases were common. A successful demonstration plant built at Poona led to the adoption of his process throughout India, and eventually to the formation of a Paterson company there. 
During the First World War, Paterson set up a number of plants for munitions factories, including one with a capacity of 10 million gallons a day for the huge factory at Gretna in Dumfriesshire. The Second World War presented problems in the supply of reliable drinking-water to troops in the field, and a mobile filtration and sterilizing unit was designed which combined light weight and compactness with high capacity and great efficiency. This type of filter was widely adopted by British, American, and colonial forces and was responsible, to a large degree, for the extremely low incidence of fatal outbreaks of water-borne diseases among allied troops. 
Paterson's activities resulted in many other important new developments in water treatment. These included the excess lime process of water softening and sterilization for public supplies in which he collaborated with Sir Alexander Houston, then director of water examination in the Metropolitan Water Board, and the use of chlorine gas for inhibiting algal accumulations in thermal electric power-station condenser systems. This method, originally applied in 1922, was adopted worldwide with important consequent fuel economies, estimated at perhaps half a million tons of coal a year in Britain alone. 
As a result of his lifelong association with John Anderson, Paterson was asked privately by him in 1938, when, as lord privy seal, Anderson had special responsibility for manpower and civil defence, to devise a form of shelter which would not only be suitable for economical mass production and quick and easy to erect in individual homes, but which would also afford adequate protection against the blasts and flying debris caused by German bombing attacks. A simple sheet-steel air raid shelter, known as the Anderson shelter, was designed and patented by Paterson and Oscar C. Kerrison. The 1940 patent, taken out to prevent commercial exploitation, was immediately presented to the nation. The more than 3 million shelters supplied to the public saved many lives. Paterson was knighted in 1944 for this service. 
In 1948 Paterson was elected an honorary member of the Institution of Water Engineers. He donated to them the Whitaker medal and the Alexander Houston medal, to be awarded to the presenters of outstanding papers on the treatment of water supplies. A member of the Royal Sanitary Institute since 1920, he was made an honorary member in 1949, and in 1952 a fellow after it had become the Society of Health. He was also elected an honorary fellow of Heriot-Watt College, a vice-president of the Junior Institution of Engineers, and a life member of the American Water Works Association. He was also a long-standing member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, having joined in 1910 and served on its benevolent fund committee. 
In January 1955 Paterson retired from the chairmanship of his company and active participation in the numerous companies comprising the Paterson group. During his career he had taken out more than seventy British patents, many of which presaged improvements only fully developed by the industry years later. 'The world history of water purification in the first half of the 20th century conforms closely to the pattern of the developments due to his foresight' ('Journal of the Institution of Water Engineers', 496). Paterson died in Westminster Hospital, London, on 9 August 1956, a few days after his eighty-second birthday. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35407


Paterson, William Paterson (1860-1939), Church of Scotland minister and theologian, was born at Skirling Mains, Peeblesshire, on 25 October 1860, the eldest son of John Paterson (died 1889), farmer, and his wife, Mary (died 1899), daughter of John Waugh, laird of St John's Kirk. After Skirling school and three years at the Royal High School, Edinburgh, in 1876 Paterson matriculated at Edinburgh University, where he graduated MA with honours in classics (1880) and BD (1883). Two years (1883-5) of further study at the universities of Leipzig, Erlangen, and Berlin produced a lifelong interest in German culture. 
After brief periods as assistant minister in Galashiels and at St Columba's Church of Scotland, London, Paterson was called in 1887 to the charge of St Michael's, Crieff. His seven years of ministry were punctuated by his marriage in 1888 to Jane Sanderson (died 1928) and the birth of three of their eight children. In 1894 he was appointed by examination to the chair of systematic theology at Aberdeen University. Quickly establishing a reputation as a lecturer of clarity and preacher of eloquence, Paterson was awarded the degree of DD by his alma mater and subsequently appointed in 1903 to succeed his teacher Robert Flint as professor of divinity at Edinburgh University. He held the chair until his retirement in 1934 and served as dean of the faculty of divinity from 1912 to 1928. He was appointed a domestic chaplain to the king in 1916 and was awarded an LLD degree by Glasgow University in 1926. 
Paterson's published work was marked by lucidity of exposition, wide-ranging scholarship in several languages, and an ability to harness philosophical argument to the defence of a broadly orthodox doctrinal stance. The alliance of liberal learning and evangelical piety in his thought was characteristic of Scottish theology in the late Victorian and Edwardian period. His two most notable works were 'The Rule of Faith' (1912), which was the fruit of the Baird lectures (1905-6) after seven years of meticulous revision, and 'The Nature of Religion' (1925), his Glasgow Gifford lectures of that year. 'The Rule of Faith' is a careful examination of method and content in the leading doctrinal systems from the ancient church to the late nineteenth century. Although Paterson's own sympathies can be detected as ecumenical and reformed, he proves himself a patient and generally reliable expositor of different outlooks. 'The Nature of Religion' is a bold attempt to argue from the empirical history of religions to a conception of the truthfulness and practical efficacy of theism, particularly its Christian variant. It is an outstanding example of the apologetic argument employed by successive Gifford lecturers in the early period of the twentieth century, and reveals the keen interest in the phenomena of world religion that had already been developed in Edinburgh in the time of Flint. 
Paterson came to prominence as one of the leading church figures of the day through his popular preaching and involvement in ecclesiastical affairs. Widely respected within the United Free Church, he was one of the leading architects of its eventual union in 1929 with the established Church of Scotland, of which he was a minister. He was one of the drafters of new articles declaratory of the united Church of Scotland, and an influential supporter of the drive towards Presbyterian reunion. 
At the outbreak of war in 1914, Paterson's life and career entered their most critical phase. Insight into this period is provided by the recent publication of diaries he kept from 1912 to 1928. A strong supporter of the war effort, Paterson argued that Britain and her allies had been subject to German aggression which required resistance by force. The struggle was typically cast in religious terms, by which the resurgent paganism within German culture faced the truer Christian spirit of the British empire. Paterson's expert advocacy of the allied cause was reflected in a series of sermons preached during a vacation in Newtonmore in the late summer of 1914, which were published as 'In the Day of the Muster'. The ensuing carnage, however, brought the deaths of two of his own sons. On receiving news of the second loss he wrote in his diary: 'The last sermon he heard me preach was on providence: 'the hairs of your head are all numbered'. He thought I was rather too confident about the ways of providence. At the time he fell, I was conducting the evening service in St George's. We were singing 'Rock of Ages' about that time. I preached on, 'By grace ye are saved through faith', and in the morning I had preached on 'God is love'. It has been a terrible wrench to lose my darling boy. But at least he has been in the world twenty-one years, and it did not corrupt or injure him. And, as it was said in the prayer my father read to us many a time, 'The Lord gave and the Lord hath a sovereign right to take away'. ('Diaries', 164-5)' Paterson continued his active involvement in church and social affairs throughout the war, his own personal tragedy doubtless enabling him to share in that of many others. Further wartime sermons were published as 'In the Day of the Ordeal' (1917). Following the end of the war he was elected moderator of the general assembly in 1919. He continued to argue that the hand of providence overruled human history, which thus progressed towards the kingdom of God. In his moderatorial address he urged the League of Nations to reintegrate Germany within the international community. His later years were devoted to continuing, on a lower and more sombre key, his writing and academic commitments. 
The task of unveiling war memorials around the country and the journey Paterson made to the scene of his sons' deaths were adjudged to have taken their toll. His wife died in 1928, and, though he did not retire until 1934, the theological culture of the post-war period was now rendering his work -- generally liberal, optimistic, and orthodox -- somewhat problematic. He died, as Europe was preparing for a further outbreak of war, on 10 January 1939 at Edinburgh, where he lived, and was buried at Skirling. Widely regarded for his charm, gravitas, and occasional eccentricities, Paterson was a tall and striking figure of imposing appearance. His earlier years were marked by sporting prowess, and something of his physical presence can be discerned in the portrait hung in the Rainy Hall, New College, Edinburgh. He was survived by six of his children, and his youngest son, Arthur, established a reputation in psychiatry as the founder of electroconvulsive therapy. 


@@@@@


doc= 35408


Singh, Sir Bhupinder (1891-1938), maharaja of Patiala, was born on 12 October 1891 in the city of Patiala, Punjab, India, the eldest son of Maharaja Rajinder Singh (1872-1900), and his first wife, who died in 1897. Upon the death of his father in November 1900 he succeeded to the throne of the largest Sikh-ruled state in India. While a council of regency managed state affairs, the maharaja attended Aitchison Chiefs' College in Lahore from 1904 to 1908 and was subsequently invested with full administrative powers in 1910. In 1908 he married the daughter of Sardar Gurnam Singh, whom he appointed as his confidential secretary, and she became his senior maharani. Tall, well-built, with an imposing face and beard, Bhupinder Singh epitomized the British idea of an Indian prince. Bridging East and West, he enhanced imperial ceremonies with his brocaded silk clothes embellished with opulent pearl or emerald necklaces, but also participated in manly, British sports, first by playing and then patronizing cricket and polo, as well as the Indian sport of wrestling. He fulfilled the Indian ideal of a beneficent, ecumenical ruler by liberally endowing religious and educational institutions ranging from the Sikh Khalsa College in Amritsar to the Islamic Anglo-Oriental College at Aligarh to Benares Hindu University. 
Throughout his lifetime, which coincided with significant political change and upheaval in India, Bhupinder Singh was a generous, conspicuous, but wily military and political ally of the British empire, and a shrewd participant in Sikh political activity in the Punjab. During the First World War he and his state provided troop contingents, equipment, and monetary support. He was an enthusiastic recruiter for the British Indian army, once exhorting his subjects that it was far better to meet the angel of death through a manly demise on the battlefield than through the unmanly diseases of cholera and plague. His state furnished more than 28,000 troops, second in number only to Jammu and Kashmir. In 1918 his contributions were recognized when he represented the Indian states at the Imperial War Conference in London. Bhupinder Singh simultaneously sought to contain political hostility against the British government in connection with the forced return of Sikh immigrants from Canada on the 'Komataga Maru', and the German-financed Ghadr conspiracy in North America. During the 1920s and 1930s he astutely acted as a mediator between the government of India and Sikh political activists supporting the gurdwara reform movement launched by the Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak committee. The British crown and government of India recognized his military and political support with the GCIE in 1911, the GBE in 1918, the GCSI in 1921, and the GCVO in 1922. He also served as a representative of India at the League of Nations assembly in 1925. 
Possessed of a strong and shrewd personality, Bhupinder Singh could be both charming and autocratic, winning friends and enemies among British officials, his subjects, his princely peers, and British Indian politicians. Among Indian rulers Bhupinder Singh was a formidable figure. Active in the initial organization of the chamber of princes, an advisory body of princes inaugurated in 1921, he was a perpetual member of its standing committee. Oscillating between collaborative junior colleague and ambitious rival of Maharaja Ganga Singh of Bikaner, the first chancellor of the chamber, Bhupinder Singh was elected chancellor in 1926 and served until 1930, again from 1933 to 1935, and from 1937 to 1938. Because of that office he was the official leader of the delegation of Indian princes to the first round-table conference in 1930 at London. However, Ganga Singh of Bikaner emerged more prominently because of his speech offering tentative princely support for a federation with British Indian provinces. 
After initially endorsing federation, by mid-1931 Bhupinder Singh promoted confederation as an alternative scheme, partly out of personal pique at his eclipse in princely politics and partly from concern about the consequences of a federation for the future existence of princely states. His action was one factor dividing an already fractious princely order, and federation proposals lost political momentum. By March 1932 he became reconciled with Ganga Singh as an advocate for a reconfigured federation. Subsequently, die-hard Conservative politicians and journalists, particularly those associated with the 'Morning Post', who opposed significant constitutional reforms in India during the 1930s, sought to gain his renewed opposition to federation. While Bhupinder Singh wavered, he ultimately remained committed. However, federation was never achieved. 
Among his subjects Bhupinder Singh was noted for his quixotic generosity, his extravagant lifestyle, and his intolerance of political opposition. Popular politicians found him authoritarian, unwilling to accommodate but likely to imprison or co-opt any challengers. In 1930 a scathing attack by the States People's Conference on his dictatorial political practices and financial mismanagement, resulting from his personal indulgences and extensive travels, led to a British investigation of Bhupinder Singh's administration of his state. The Fitzpatrick inquiry cleared him of political wrongdoing, but the government of India imposed constraints on his control of his state's financial affairs. By 1935 challenges from his peers in the chamber of princes, intensified popular, political opposition within his state, and declining health led Bhupinder Singh to be less active in the all-Indian and imperial political spheres. He died on 23 March 1938 in Patiala and was succeeded by Yadavindra Singh, the eldest son of his senior wife. His remains were cremated in Patiala. 


@@@@@


doc= 35409


Paton, Diarmid Noel (1859-1928), physiologist, was born on 19 March 1859 in Edinburgh, the eldest of the seven sons (there were four daughters) of Sir (Joseph) Noel Paton (1821-1901), artist, and his wife, Margaret (died 1900), daughter of Alexander Ferrier, of Bloomhill, Dunbartonshire. He was educated at Edinburgh Academy and Edinburgh University. He graduated BSc in 1880 and MB, CM, with first-class honours in 1882. In the same year he was elected Baxter scholar in natural science. 
After a brief period of study in Vienna and Paris, Paton returned to Edinburgh, where he took up a house appointment at Edinburgh Royal Infirmary and later at the Royal Hospital for Sick Children. In 1883-4 he was awarded a biological fellowship in the Edinburgh physiological department under Professor William Rutherford. In 1886 Paton was elected lecturer in physiology at Surgeons' Hall (School of Medicine of Royal Colleges, Edinburgh), and in 1890 was appointed superintendent of the research laboratory of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh. The output from the laboratory was remarkable for its quantity and diversity. 
In 1898 Paton married Agatha Henrietta, daughter of Alexander Balfour, merchant, of Dawyck, Peeblesshire, and had one son and one daughter. He left Edinburgh in 1906 to take up the regius professorship of physiology in Glasgow University, a position which he held until his retirement in 1928. Paton was regarded as a stimulating teacher, a helpful colleague, and an enthusiastic researcher. 
Attracted from the first by the chemical aspects of physiology, Paton was one of the earliest workers in Great Britain to take up the study of metabolism and nutrition. In 1901, with J. C. Dunlop and E. Inglis, he published 'A Study of the Diet of the Labouring Classes of Edinburgh', which was based on the methods of W. O. Atwater, the American pioneer of dietary surveys. Paton supervised a similar study of the working-class diet in Glasgow, published by D. E. Lindsay in 1913. During the First World War he served on the Royal Society's food (war) committee and represented the society on the Ministry of Food's rationing committee. 
In 1913 Paton became responsible for supervising a large programme of research on rickets in Glasgow, for the newly formed Medical Research Committee (later Medical Research Council). This involved laboratory, clinical, and sociological investigations. The results of one of these projects were published as 'Social and Economic Factors in the Causation of Rickets' by M. Ferguson in 1918. With Leonard Findlay, later professor of paediatrics at Glasgow, Paton opposed the vitamin theory of rickets of Edward Mellanby, arguing that the essential factors were not dietetic but hygienic, and that rickets was associated with lack of fresh air and exercise, poor housing, and inadequate maternal care. 
As chair of the Medical Research Council's Scottish child life investigations committee, Paton was responsible for co-ordinating a wide range of studies on prenatal, infant, and childhood ill health. Paton and Findlay's report 'Poverty, Nutrition and Growth' (1926) argued that the main factors influencing variation in the growth and nutrition of children were maternal efficiency and housing conditions rather than poverty 'per se'. 
Paton was also intensely interested in the endocrine glands, and in 1913 published his lectures on the subject as the 'Nervous and Chemical Regulators of Metabolism'. In 1926 he also published 'The Physiology of the Continuity of Life', in which he vigorously attacked many of the orthodox views on the mechanisms of inheritance. In all he published some ninety papers, as well as textbooks for medical and veterinary students. 
Paton was appointed a member of the royal commission on salmon fisheries (1900) and of the Medical Research Council (1918-23). Elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1914, he was on its council from 1922 to 1924. He was also a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (1886), and a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh (1886). He received an honorary LLD degree from Edinburgh University in 1919. He died suddenly, while walking to the River Tweed, near his home at Wester Dawyck, Stobo, Peeblesshire, on 30 September 1928. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35410


Paton, John Brown (1830-1911), Congregational minister and philanthropist, the eldest of the eight children of Alexander Paton, a shopkeeper, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Andrew Brown of Newmilns, Ayrshire, was born on 17 December 1830 at Galston, Ayrshire. On his father's side he was descended from the covenanter John Paton (died 1684). Both his parents, who were brought up in distinct seceding bodies (Burgher and Anti-Burgher), now belonged to the United Secession church at Newmilns. His father, on account of his sympathy with the more liberal theology of James Morison, joined the Congregationalists when the family moved to Glasgow in 1846. From Loudoun parish school Paton passed in 1838 to the tuition of his maternal uncle, Andrew Morton Brown, Congregational minister at Poole. In 1844 he worked for ten months in the printing office of the 'Kilmarnock Herald', of which Alexander Russel was editor. He then moved to Cheltenham where Andrew Brown was now minister, and there met the Congregational minister and writer Henry Rogers (1806-1877), who persuaded him to seek a career in the Christian ministry. 
In October 1846 Paton was admitted to Spring Hill College, Birmingham, in which Rogers held the chair of literature and philosophy. With his fellow student, Robert William Dale (1829-1895), later of Carr's Lane, Birmingham, he formed a close and lifelong friendship. The pulsating civil, political, and cultural life of Birmingham left a lasting impression on the mind of young Paton. He became convinced that Christianity could not be divorced from the social and economic problems of the day. He also attended (from 1850) the ministry of Robert Alfred Vaughan, to whose 'intense spirituality' he owed much. During his college course he graduated BA from London University in 1849, gaining the Hebrew and New Testament prize in 1850 and a divinity scholarship in 1852 on the foundation of Daniel Williams (1643?-1716). In 1854 he won a double MA at London University in philosophy (with gold medal) and classics, the first to achieve such a distinction. 
Paton left college in June 1854 and in October took charge of a mission in Wicker, a parish in the northern part of Sheffield. He was ordained there in July 1855. His ministry was eminently successful: the Wicker Congregational Church was built in 1855; in addition, the congregation in Garden Street Chapel, Sheffield, was revived. On 14 September 1859 Paton married Jessie, the daughter of William P. Paton of Glasgow. In 1861 Joseph Parker established Cavendish College, Manchester, for the training of candidates for the Congregational ministry; Paton travelled there weekly from Sheffield to teach theology and philosophy. In 1863 the institution was transferred to Nottingham as the Congregational Institute, and Paton was appointed its first principal on 10 September 1863. Temporary premises were exchanged for a permanent building in 1868, and the institute's reputation increased over the thirty-five years of Paton's headship. In his management of young men he was an ideal head; no feature of his teaching was more marked than the skill and judgement with which he conducted the work of sermon making and delivery. 
Although a gifted teacher and a man of deep personal piety, Paton was above all a social crusader. He was a pioneer in seeking to embody Christian principles in practical schemes for social improvement. The Congregational Institute itself was created to enable men with no academic qualifications to be trained to serve rural churches, to be missionaries in the slums of the great cities, and to work aggressively among the poor. The lack of educational opportunities for workers led Paton in October 1873 to initiate lectures for working men, a scheme that contributed to the establishment of the University College of Nottingham in 1877 and provided the University of Cambridge with the inspiration to prepare courses of extension lectures. It was the need for effective technical education that influenced Paton to establish the Trades Council of Learning in 1880. In order to enrich people's literary culture he founded the National Home Reading Union on 13 April 1889. He evinced his concern for young people by creating the Boys' Life Brigade in 1900 and the Girls' Life Brigade in 1903, followed by the (unsuccessful) League of Honour in 1906. 
In September 1873 Paton first expressed his conviction that the German Inner Mission, initiated in 1848 by J. H. Wichern of Hamburg, could provide a model for Christians of all persuasions in Britain to join together in applying the spirit of Christianity to the amelioration of social ills. This vision of Christian ecumenical co-operation provided the agenda for his subsequent career. He created social institutes to occupy the leisure time of workers and arranged holidays for them under the auspices of the Co-operative Holiday Association, established in 1892. In August 1893 he founded the English Land Colonisation Society, followed in 1894 by the Christian Social Union, which in 1895 established the first 'Colony of Mercy' at Lingfield, Surrey. The activities promoted by these organizations were intended to retrain the unemployed and to prove that those with acute physical disabilities had a creative role to play in industry. 
Paton, in conjunction with Dale, edited the 'Eclectic Review' during 1858-62. With his colleague F. S. Williams he edited the 'Home Mission and Tract Series' in 1865, and he was a consulting editor during 1882-7 of the 'Contemporary Review'. Paton was also a prolific author. His interest in promoting Christian brotherhood is evident in his 'The Two-Fold Alternative' (1889), and his distaste for interpreting the ministry as a priesthood is expressed not only in this book but also in 'The Origin of the Priesthood' (1877). His profound concern for social improvement may be seen in his six-volume collection, 'Social Questions of the Day' (1906). 
In 1882 Paton was made DD of Glasgow University. On his retirement his portrait, commissioned by a committee headed by Frederick Temple, archbishop of Canterbury, was presented on 26 October 1898 by John Percival, bishop of Hereford, to the city of Nottingham. Paton died at his home, 22 Forest Road, Nottingham, on 26 January 1911. The funeral service was held at Castle Gate church, and the burial service at the general cemetery was conducted by his friends John Percival and Henry R. Wakefield, dean of Norwich and later bishop of Birmingham. Paton was survived by three sons and two daughters. A son, William, was drowned at Barmouth on 1 August 1894, and an invalid daughter, Jessie Muriel, had died in May 1910. His son John Lewis Paton (1863-1946) ended a distinguished career in education as president of Memorial College, St John's, Newfoundland, from 1925 to 1933. 
Paton's activities had an intense and widespread influence on late Victorian life. His innumerable personal contacts crossed denominational divides and international boundaries (he was the first protestant in England to promote understanding with the Old Catholics after their exclusion from the Roman Catholic church). During his last years he was busily engaged in promoting evangelism in Scotland and in bringing practical help to Christians in China after the Boxer uprising. All in all Paton was one of the outstanding Christian leaders in Britain at the turn of the century. 


