@@@@@


doc= 3083


Bownas, Samuel (1677-1753), Quaker minister and writer, was born on 20 January 1677 at Shap, Westmorland, the second of the two children of Anthony Bownas (died 1677), shoemaker, and his wife, Agnes. Samuel's father died within a month of his birth. Thereafter money was short and he and his brother received only a basic education in reading and writing. At thirteen Bownas was apprenticed to his uncle, a blacksmith, who mistreated him, and later to Samuel Parat, a Quaker of Sedbergh, Yorkshire. Samuel's mother made sure that he was educated as a Quaker, but although he followed the traditional forms of dress, speech, and worship they meant little to him. He went regularly to meeting but confessed that 'the greater part of my time, I slept' (Bownas, 'Account', 5). However, aged about twenty, he was shaken from his lethargy by a visiting travelling minister, Anne Wilson, who rebuked him as 'a traditional 'Quaker'' (ibid.), that is, one who came and went from meeting untouched and unchanged. 
Bownas was 'convinced' and shortly after felt called to the ministry. For the three remaining years of his apprenticeship he stayed in the Sedbergh area. On completing his seven years Bownas began to travel widely, drawing on the experience and encouragement of many fellow ministers, including James Dickinson and James Wilson. They let him know if he was becoming too pleased with his ministry and urged him to be faithful. On his travels he was careful to remain financially independent and supported himself by harvest-work and other enterprises. About 1701, on a visit to Sherborne in Dorset, Bownas met Joan Slade, his future wife. However, the couple agreed to postpone their marriage as Samuel felt called to travel in the ministry to America, and he set sail for Maryland, by way of Scotland, in 1702. 
While in America, Bownas was particularly engaged with challenging the preaching of the renegade Quaker George Keith, who had taken Anglican orders. Keith had Bownas prosecuted for preaching and thrown into gaol on Long Island, where he was held for nearly a year. Samuel learned to make shoes in order to earn a living and received visits from, among others, an 'Indian king' together with 'three of his chief Men' (Bownas, 'Account', 79). After his release in 1703 Samuel travelled in New England in the ministry before returning home at the end of 1706. Early in the following year he and Joan were married and settled in Lymington, Hampshire. In 1708 he visited Ireland, and in 1712 he was imprisoned for tithes in Bristol gaol by the vicar of Lymington. Bownas was soon released after the clergyman tricked Joan into paying the money in question, a mistake which troubled her greatly on her deathbed in October 1719. 
On 11 April 1722 Samuel married Elizabeth Nicholls, 'nee' Priest (died 1746), a widow from Bridport in Dorset, to where he now moved. Samuel used his wife's capital to set up in business and became a prosperous merchant. He also read widely and educated himself, establishing a reputation as a well-known travelling minister. Described as 'of a grave deportment, and of a tall comely and manly aspect' Bownas had a strong, clear voice and preached with 'divine authority and majestic innocence' (Bownas, 'Account', vi). 
In 1726 he returned to America, where he met Elizabeth Hanson, from whom he heard the story of her capture, with her children, by Native Americans in 1724. Hanson's narrative was subsequently published as 'An Account of the Captivity of E. H. Taken in Substance from her Own Mouth by Samuel Bownas'. Samuel offered his own 'Description of the Qualifications Necessary to a Gospel Minister' in 1750; the book, which was well received, reached its fifth edition by 1839. 
Towards the end of his life Bownas grew increasingly disillusioned with the Society of Friends. In a letter to an old companion and fellow minister James Wilson he spoke of a church 'very barren of young ministers to what it was in our youth', and with 'but very little convincement to what was then'. To Bownas, the quality of 'convincement' was the main purpose of his ministry, though its importance was often ignored by his audience: ''The man spoke well' say they, and that is all I get for my labours', he wrote to Wilson ('Samuel Bownas to James Wilson'). In spite of his disillusionment Samuel continued to travel extensively for as long as he was physically able. From 1749 he became increasingly infirm, 'his hands shook and his eye-sight failed him much' (Bownas, 'Account', 197), but he continued to attend meetings locally until his death at Bridport on 2 April 1753 aged seventy-six. 
Samuel Bownas was characterized by his contemporaries as 'a Man of Peace and Prudence' (Bownas, 'Account', vii) who tried to uphold and pass on the traditions of Quakerism while never giving undue importance to forms for their own sake. His life showed the importance for even those born and brought up as Quakers to come to a living faith for themselves. The autobiographical 'Account of the Life, Travels, and Christian experiences... of Samuel Bownas' -- 'a plain Man's plain and good account of his own Progress in Religion' (ibid., iii) -- was published in 1756 with a prefatory note by Joseph Besse. 


@@@@@


doc= 3084


Bownd, Nicholas (d. 1613), Church of England clergyman and religious writer, was one of at least three sons of Robert Bound (died in or before 1573), physician to the duke of Norfolk and living in Cambridgeshire, and his wife, Katherine Wood (died 1612). It is not known whether he was educated at Eton College like his elder brother Alexander (1547/8-1622), but like him went to Cambridge, matriculating from Peterhouse in Michaelmas 1568. He graduated BA early in 1572, and that year became a fellow. In August 1573, if not before, he acquired connections among the East Anglian godly when his widowed mother married Richard Greenham (early 1540s-1594), rector of Dry Drayton, Cambridgeshire. Having proceeded MA in 1575, he followed his brother Alexander into the ministry, being ordained deacon and priest at Ely on 2 June 1580. With John Dod, who was also ordained at Ely that year and who married Bownd's sister Ann in or after 1585, he formed part of a nucleus of Jacobean clergy trained in Greenham's 'rectory seminary', and he was among the minority of Suffolk ministers who 'resolved not to subscribe' to Archbishop John Whitgift's articles of 1583 targeting nonconformity (R. G. Usher, ed., 'The Presbyterian Movement in the Reign of Elizabeth I', CS, 3rd ser., 8, 1905, xlix). He was instituted on 3 September 1585 to the rectory of Norton, near Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk. At some point he resigned his fellowship, and on 3 October 1592 he married Elizabeth (died 1627), widow of John More (1542-1592), the late puritan minister of St Andrew's, Norwich; she already had two daughters. The Norton registers show this to have been Bownd's third marriage, his two wives having predeceased him and having been buried at Norton. Bownd also had three sons, one of whom, Nathaniel, later preached a sermon at St Paul's Cross. He proceeded DD in 1594. 
Bownd took on the mantle of More's literary executor and on 24 August 1593 signed the preface of More's 'A Table from the Beginning of the World to this Day' (1593), dedicated to Edmund Scambler, bishop of Norwich, and the city corporation. However, Bownd is perhaps best-known for his published works on the Christian sabbath. His early reflections on this subject, dating from about 1586, were presented in a series of sermons, eventually published as 'The Doctrine of the Sabbath' (1595) with a dedication to Bownd's patron Robert Devereux, earl of Essex, and a full-page engraving of his arms. Bownd's work articulated a theological understanding of Sunday observance that had become a growing concern for many godly Elizabethan protestants. He emphasized the morally binding character of the fourth commandment, the divine institution of the sabbath as the Lord's day, the duty to rest and worship on Sunday, and the cessation of non-religious activities (working, festivals, sports, markets) that distracted from devotion and acts of mercy. Because of clerical quarrels in Suffolk and political rivalries surrounding Devereux, 'The Doctrine of the Sabbath' was condemned in 1599. Bownd's local clerical protagonist Thomas Rogers tarred his sabbatarian teaching as 'papistry or Brownism' in a sermon delivered on 10 December that year (BL, Add. MS 38492, fol. 104). 
In his early career at least, Bownd was an active member of the classis movement and was among those who presided over the celebrated combination lecture at Bury St Edmunds. Following the pastoral example of his stepfather, he occupied himself with preaching and the cure of afflicted consciences. These concerns were reflected in his later publications. The visitation of plague in 1603 gave rise to 'A Storehouse of Comfort for the Afflicted', 'The Holy Exercise of Fasting' (dedicated to John Jegon, bishop of Norwich), and 'Medicines for the Plague' (dedicated to Humphrey Tyndall, dean of Ely and master of Queens' College, Cambridge), all of which appeared in 1604. By 30 October 1606 Bownd felt sufficiently confident to issue a second edition of his 1595 treatise, now rendered 'Sabbathum veteris et novi testamenti, or, The True Doctrine of the Sabbath' (1606), with a dedication to Bishop Jegon, of whose support to a godly preaching ministry in the diocese he expressed his considerable appreciation; it effectively renounced presbyterianism. Perhaps this explains the otherwise puzzling dedication of 'A Treatise Ful of Consolation for All that are Afflicted in Minde, or Bodie, or Otherwise' (1608) to Sir Henry Warner (died 1617), who although described by Bownd as a 'professor of the Gospel' (sig. 2), has been seen as hostile to the Bury classis. The co-dedicatee was Warner's wife, Frances, previously widow of Robert Forth (died 1600); her former husband, whose 'zeale to the gospel of Christ' is commended (sig. 3), seems to have belonged to the same circles as Warner. On the same day, 24 June 1608, Bownd signed the address to Sir Robert Gardiner and his wife, Anne, which prefaced his 'The Unbelief of St Thomas the Apostle': this work was first published by the printer to the University of Cambridge in 1608 and again in London in 1628. 
In 1611 Bownd became minister of his wife's first husband's church, St Andrew the Apostle, Norwich, but was incumbent for only two years before dying in the city. He was buried there on 26 December 1613. He was survived by his wife, who died in 1627. 


@@@@@


doc= 3085


Bowne, Peter (1574-1624?), physician, was a native of Bedfordshire, born on 20 July 1574; at the age of fifteen, on 24 April 1590, he became a scholar of Corpus Christi College, Oxford. He graduated BA in 1593 and MA in 1597, becoming a probationary fellow of his college in the latter year. He never became a full fellow and disappears from the college records at the end of 1597. About 1605 he took up the study of medicine, but there is no evidence of his presence in Oxford until February 1614, when he was admitted as a reader at the Bodleian Library. He proceeded MB and MD on 12 July 1614 and formally incepted on 3 July 1615. Having decided to practise in London, he was admitted a candidate of the College of Physicians on 24 January 1617, and fellow on 21 April 1620. In 1617 he appears in the college annals as informing against an illicit practitioner, and early in 1624 he published 'Pseudo-medicorum anatomia', a Latin poem attacking quacks and impostors, issued as a quarto pamphlet of twelve leaves. This was poorly printed, and a revised and enlarged version in eighteen leaves was soon produced. The principal additional material is a series of dedicatory verses individually addressed to the president and thirty-one fellows of the College of Physicians. Bowne refers several times to his own failing health, and verses addressed to him in a superscription by Matthew Gwinne describe him as 'medicum senem, corpore imbecillum, mente sanum et floridum' ('an aged physician, feeble in body but sound and flourishing in mind'), although Bowne was not yet fifty and Gwinne was some sixteen years older. He had left London before 3 March 1624, when Richard Spicer was admitted a fellow of the College of Physicians in his place, and is presumed to have died soon afterwards. 


@@@@@


doc= 3086


Bowness, William (1809-1867), portrait and genre painter, was born at Kendal, Westmorland. He was self-taught, and after some practice in his native town, he went to London about 1829 and met with moderate success as a portrait and figure painter. He exhibited at the Royal Academy from 1836 until 1863, but more often at the British Institution and at the Society (later Royal Society) of British Artists in Suffolk Street. He also wrote a number of poems, in the Westmorland dialect, which were collected under the title 'Rustic studies in the Westmoreland dialect, with other scraps from the sketch-book of an artist' (1868). He married the eldest daughter of the marine painter John H. Wilson; they had at least one child. He died a widower on 27 December 1867 at his home at 30 Fitzroy Street, Fitzroy Square, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 3087


Bowring, Sir John (1792-1872), politician, diplomatist, and writer, was born on 17 October 1792 at Larkbeare (also known as Great Larkbeare), Holloway Street, Exeter, Devon, the eldest son and second of the nine children of Charles Bowring (1769-1856), a wool merchant, and his wife, Sarah Jane Anne (died 1828), daughter of the Revd Thomas Lane, vicar of St Ives, Cornwall. His mother was an Anglican, but John Bowring, like his father and the rest of the family, was a Unitarian and, as such, subject to restrictions on participation by dissenters in public life until the repeal of the 'Test Acts' in 1828. He was educated first at Mr Bowden's school in Paris Street, Exeter, and then for two years at a Unitarian boarding-school at Moretonhampstead, on Dartmoor. He began work at the age of thirteen, first as a clerk in his father's wool business and then in the counting-house of the local firm of Kennaway & Co. The presence of foreign traders on the Exeter quayside gave him the opportunity of learning and practising languages. He attended the evening study group of Dr Lant Carpenter, minister of George's Meeting-House, the Unitarian chapel in South Street, Exeter. In June 1811 he joined the London branch of Milford & Co., suppliers to the duke of Wellington's forces in the Iberian peninsula. In his early years in London, Bowring lodged near Cheapside, but he soon established links with Hackney, which was then a centre of Unitarianism. He already knew several European languages, and his ability to speak Spanish resulted in 1813 in his first journey abroad, when his firm chose him to go to the area of hostilities near San Sebastian with cargoes of stores for the army. He remained in northern Spain and southern France until late 1814, before returning to London. In 1815 he travelled to Portugal to negotiate settlement of an outstanding claim for supplies to the army. In Unitarian circles in Hackney he had met the family of Samuel Lewin, a corn merchant in the City, and on 16 September 1816 at Hackney he married Lewin's daughter, Maria (1793/4-1858). The couple took up residence in a smart area of Hackney near London Fields, and their first child, Maria, was born at Hackney in 1818. They also had five sons, John, Frederick, Lewin, Edgar, and Charles, born between 1821 and 1828, and three more daughters, Edith, Emily, and Gertrude, born in the 1830s. 
With Henry Murdoch, in 1817 Bowring established the firm of Bowring & Co. at 23 Bucklersbury, Cheapside, dealing principally in the shipment of herrings to France and the Iberian peninsula, and the importation of wines. In 1819 he travelled to Spain, France, and the Netherlands, extending his business interests. After a brief period back with his family, he set off again late that year on a tour of northern Europe, passing through Germany to Russia and returning through Scandinavia. Among the celebrities he met in St Petersburg was Friedrich Adelung (1768-1843), who supplied him with German and English prose translations of Russian verse, which he put into English verse for his 'Specimens of the Russian Poets' (2 vols., 1820; rev. 2nd edn, 1821). In August 1820 his friend and fellow radical Edward Blaquiere introduced him to Jeremy Bentham, who was delighted to find in Bowring a new disciple. In July 1821 Bowring again set out for the continent on a commercial mission, from which he returned in 1822. Later that year he travelled to Paris, where he developed an association with the Orleanist circle. On arriving at Calais on 5 October on his way home, accompanied by Blaquiere, he was detained and taken to a gaol in Boulogne, accused of complicity in an attempt to secure the release of four sergeants of La Rochelle (who were executed for singing republican songs) and of carrying sealed letters of a treasonable nature. Blaquiere made for England, and following the intervention of Canning, the foreign secretary, Bowring was released, but banned from France. He published his version of the episode in 'Details of the Arrest, Imprisonment and Liberation of an Englishman' (1823). 
Bowring was secretary of the London Greek Committee, founded in 1823 to assist the Greeks in their rising against the Turks. This brought him into correspondence with Lord Byron, at whose instigation he took steps to negotiate a loan for the Greeks by selling bonds. However, it was mainly Byron's name that attracted investors and his death at Missolonghi in May 1824 resulted in financial difficulties. Bowring was accused of having made a fortune at the expense of both the Greeks and the bondholders, though in reality his finances had suffered. Faced with ruin, he adopted the dubious expedient of putting pressure on the Greek agents in London to relieve him of his bonds at a price higher than their market value. Two years later another disastrous Greek loan, in which Bowring and the Greek Committee played little part, brought the mismanagement of both loans into the public eye, and Bowring and others were alleged to have enriched themselves dishonestly. Bentham, however, refused to listen to Bowring's detractors and in 1824, when the 'Westminster Review' was founded, made him the political editor. 
Bowring's Russian anthology was followed by similar volumes of verse translations of Dutch (1824), Spanish (1824), Polish (1827), Serbian (1827), Hungarian (1830), and Czech (1832) poetry, sometimes produced with the help of expert collaborators, whose contribution he did not fully acknowledge. He published translations from an even greater variety of languages in the 'Westminster Review', the 'Foreign Quarterly Review', and the 'London Magazine'. For a time he worked with George Borrow (1803-1881), whom he had met in 1821, on a volume of Scandinavian translations, but this was never completed. The translations brought him temporary fame, but the public's enthusiasm soon declined. His financial fortunes too were in decline, and by late 1827 Bowring & Co. had collapsed. He was hoping, with Bentham's support, to cure his financial ills by becoming a professor of literature at the newly established London University. His sons John, Frederick, and Lewin were sent to stay with relatives, while he, his wife, their daughter Maria, and the infant Edgar moved to Heidelberg, where he thought associating with German professors would improve his chances. He returned to England in 1828 and took up residence with Bentham at Queen Square, Westminster, while his wife went to live with friends at Hackney. He attributed his failure to get the professorship to Anglican influence at London University. By late 1828 his financial situation was desperate, and a group of friends and fellow Unitarians organized a fund to save him from sequestration. He managed to be nominated a commissioner of public accounts, but the prime minister, the duke of Wellington, prevented his employment. He was, however, permitted, as an unpaid commissioner receiving only expenses, to visit the Netherlands to prepare a review of the Dutch public accounting system. Late in 1828 he moved to 7 North Place, Gray's Inn Lane, Holborn, and the following year to nearby Millmann Street, Holborn. During a visit to the Netherlands in 1829 he received an honorary doctorate from the University of Groningen for services to Dutch literature, and was henceforth often known as the Doctor. He was successful at this time in retaining his position with the 'Westminster Review', when it passed from Bentham's ownership to Colonel Thomas Perronet Thompson, who became a friend of Bowring. 
The revolution in France in July 1830 made it again possible for Bowring to visit that country, and following the formation of a whig government that autumn he was engaged as paid secretary to Sir Henry Parnell's commission on the public accounts, which entailed investigating the accounting systems of France and the Netherlands. His fortunes were now improving and he moved with his family into the house at 1 Queen Square, Westminster (next door to Bentham), that was to remain their home for seventeen years. In 1831 Bowring and George Villiers (later Lord Clarendon) were appointed commissioners to investigate commercial relations between Britain and France. In this connection, between 1832 and 1834, Bowring was sent on three long coach journeys through the centre and south of France. His enquiries brought him into conflict with the minister of commerce, Adolphe Thiers. On 6 June 1832 Bowring's mentor Jeremy Bentham died 'in his arms' (L. B. Bowring, 'A brief memoir', 14), leaving him all his manuscripts and a sum of money towards their publication. He now embarked on this formidable task, though, when it eventually came to fruition in 'The Collected Works of Jeremy Bentham' (11 vols., 1838-43), much of the work, owing to Bowring's frequent absences abroad or on official duties, had been carried out by others. Anticipating the effect of the 'Reform Bill', Bentham, in April 1831, had put Bowring's name forward as a parliamentary candidate, and in 1832 Bowring stood for Blackburn but was defeated. In 1835 he stood for the same constituency and was again defeated, but was elected MP for Clyde Boroughs (Kilmarnock). In 1837 he lost his seat, but was sent by Palmerston on an important commercial fact-finding mission to Egypt and Constantinople, which kept him abroad for a full year. On his return, in September 1838, he addressed a meeting in Manchester, at which a proposal was made, leading eventually to the formation of the Anti-Corn Law League. In June 1841 he was elected MP for Bolton as a free-trade candidate and held his seat for over seven years. The issues for which he spoke and voted included the abolition of corn duties, a more humane application of poor relief, the extension of popular education, revision of quarantine regulations, abolition of flogging in the army, the suppression of the opium trade, and the worldwide abolition of slavery. As a supporter of 'laissez-faire', he opposed the regulation of wages. He favoured the introduction of decimal coinage and in April 1847 moved in the House of Commons the introduction of the florin, a coin worth one tenth of a pound, which was first issued in 1849. 
In 1843 Bowring turned once more to commerce and invested his capital in an ironworks in Glamorgan. He also invested in the Llynvi Valley Railway, in the vicinity of his ironworks, and in 1845 became chairman of the directors of the London and Blackwall Railway; but in 1847 his business interests failed and he found himself suddenly in a worse financial position than at any time since 1828. Consequently, when, in October 1848, Palmerston offered him the vacant consulship at Canton (Guangzhou) with a salary of $1800 a year, he accepted, with alacrity, despite his age (he was fifty-six). He arrived at Canton in April 1849, having left his wife and family at Larkbeare. He returned to England on leave in June 1853. During his absence George Borrow had published 'Lavengro' (1851), and Bowring thought certain unflattering passages in it applied to him and his family. Relations became strained. While on leave Bowring was appointed plenipotentiary and chief superintendent of trade in the Far East and governor, commander-in-chief, and vice-admiral of Hong Kong. On 16 February 1854 he was knighted and two days later left for China again, accompanied this time by his wife, two of their daughters, and their eldest son, John. At Colombo he was joined by another son, Lewin. In 1855 Bowring visited Siam and successfully negotiated a commercial treaty with King Mongkut, which provoked strong opposition in England from Lord Shaftesbury and Bowring's radical friends owing to the clauses facilitating importation of opium into Siam. Since his arrival in the Far East, Bowring had modified his views on the opium trade, ostensibly because of the difficulty of controlling it, but his son John was a partner in Jardine Mattheson & Co., the largest dealers in opium in the Far East, and this firm acted as Bowring's bankers. He was accused of having sold himself to opium merchants. 
Following an incident in October 1856, when a British-registered light vessel, the 'Arrow', was boarded by Chinese soldiers, Bowring authorized the dispatch of a naval force, the bombardment of Canton, and its forcible entry. The Chinese then directed several attacks on the British in the neighbourhood of Canton. In January 1857 an attempt was made to poison the European population of Hong Kong by putting arsenic in their bread. No one died, but about 300-400 people, including Bowring and his family, were made seriously ill. Bowring rejected the implementation of martial law and in the ensuing trial the baker of the poisoned bread and other suspects were acquitted for lack of evidence and allowed to leave the colony. Votes of censure on his conduct and on the government were moved in both houses of parliament, but in the ensuing elections the government was strengthened. Although the prime minister, Lord Palmerston, supported him, he thought Bowring had handled the situation badly and decided that he should be replaced as plenipotentiary while retaining the governorship of Hong Kong. Lady Bowring, suffering from the effects of arsenic poisoning, returned to Britain with her daughter Edith, and died on 27 September 1858 in Taunton, while Bowring remained in Hong Kong, accompanied by two other daughters and his son John. On 3 May 1859 Bowring formally handed over his office and, accompanied by his daughter Maria, left for Britain. As it was passing through the Red Sea, their ship, the 'Alma', struck a submerged coral reef. The passengers were rescued after three days of privation. 
While still in China Bowring had read George Borrow's 'The Romany Rye' (1857), which contained a scurrilous attack on him (especially in chapter 11, 'The old radical', of the appendix) and suggested that he had secured his appointment at Canton by exploiting Borrow's work and expertise. This particular slur was without foundation, but there was truth in Borrow's allegation that Bowring was disposed to exaggerate his own reputation as a polyglot and pass off other people's work as his own. 
Bowring's personality aroused the antagonism of many besides Borrow. He was often accused of vanity, obsequiousness, and worse. About 5 feet 9 inches tall and of slender build, he had a refined, intellectual face, a long nose, a high forehead, and large grey eyes. He wore spectacles, not only for reading, as may be seen in the portrait painted in 1826 by John King, now in the National Portrait Gallery. Both supporters and detractors noted his volubility, but he was not a success as a speaker in the House of Commons (Bartle, 'An Old Radical', 61). He received many honours from foreign governments and was an honorary member of numerous learned societies. For his Russian anthology he received a diamond ring from Tsar Alexander I, and on 5 June 1856 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. Besides his editorial work and many contributions to reviews and magazines on a wide variety of subjects, including political, literary, and philological articles, hymns, poems, and verse translations, he published over thirty books and pamphlets, covering a similar range, and wrote his memoirs, which were published by his son Lewin in 1877. His most successful book, 'The Kingdom and People of Siam' (2 vols., 1857), was republished by Oxford University Press in 1969. The volumes of verse translations were also important, for, though not all they pretended to be, they introduced otherwise virtually unknown literatures to the English-speaking world. Bowring's services in diplomacy were valued because of his aptitude for languages, his ability to handle figures, and a 'facility for obtaining access to persons of all stations' (Bartle, 'An Old Radical', 35). His achievement as a radical politician, particularly in the cause of free trade, has tended to be obscured by the controversy over the 'Arrow' affair. 
On his return to Britain, Bowring was granted a pension and an additional special allowance. He remained active in public life and continued to write and publish. Having failed in 1860 in an attempt to be adopted as the Liberal candidate for Exeter, he accepted in February 1861 a semi-official appointment as commercial agent to the new kingdom of Italy, but with Cavour's death in June 1861 all hope of a commercial agreement with that country came to an end. On 8 November 1860 at Lewin's Mead Unitarian Chapel, Bristol, to the consternation of his children, he married Deborah Castle ['see 'Bowring, Deborah, Lady Bowring (1816-1902)], the youngest daughter of Thomas Castle, a prominent Clifton Unitarian. They had no children. As justice of the peace and deputy lord lieutenant for Devon he was active in the cause of prison reform, and in 1865 published 'Remunerative prison labour as an instrument for promoting the reformation and diminishing the cost of offenders'. Bowring died of prostate disease on 23 November 1872 at Claremont, Holloway Street, Exeter, the house he had built only a few yards from his birthplace. Late in November following a funeral service at George's Meeting-House, attended by his family and many local worthies, he was buried in Exeter new cemetery. His gravestone bore the opening line of one of his best-known hymns, 'In the cross of Christ I glory'. His second wife, Deborah Bowring, died on 28 July 1902. 


@@@@@


doc= 3088


Bowtell, John (1753-1813), bookbinder and philanthropist, the third son of Joseph Boudle ('c'.1722-1757) and his wife, Margery ('c'.1720-1780), was born on 1 August 1753, and baptized John Boudle on 15 September 1753 at Holy Trinity Church in Cambridge, where his parents had been resident at least since 1748. The adoption of the form Bowtell was apparently John's initiative. He may have been apprenticed as a stationer to John ('Maps') Nicholson, and was established as a binder from at least 20 September 1785, the date of the first among many surviving bills for binding for Cambridge University Library, one of which was for an elaborate and skilful piece of repair binding. Most of his work in this line, however, issuing from his shop in Trinity Street in Cambridge, was more workaday, albeit effective, as many of his bindings remain in place today. It has been estimated that between one-third and one-half of Cambridge University Library's manuscripts were repaired and rebound by him, as well as very many printed books, including those from John Moore's library. 
Bowtell was also a collector of manuscripts, fossils, and other curiosities. The bulk of his collections were left to the newly founded Downing College, where his books and manuscripts remain. Apart from his notes on the history of the town and university of Cambridge, they contain many items removed from earlier bindings, and a substantial collection of miscellaneous deeds for the town and county of Cambridge and surrounding counties. Among these are a number relating to two tenements in Fairyard Lane, Cambridge, including one by which the property was leased in 1759 by one Mary, widow of John Bowdle of Cambridge, barber, conceivably a relation. Also to be found in his collection are accounts of the Cambridge borough treasurer from 1515 to 1786, with substantial gaps in the eighteenth century. He made many notes for a history of the town of Cambridge and prepared a text in eight volumes, never printed. He was also a keen bell-ringer, and in 1788 rang on the 30-cwt tenor bell of Great St Mary's, Cambridge, 6609 changes 'in the method of 'bob maximus' generally termed 'twelve-in'' ('GM'). 
In October 1786 Bowtell married at St Edward's, Cambridge, Ann Scarr (1742-1807), sister-in-law of his older brother Joseph. They had no surviving children, and after his wife's death on 2 November 1807 a niece, Mary Ann Scarr, kept house for Bowtell, and was rewarded by a legacy of $3000. From his binding, bookselling and transcribing business, and perhaps from the invention of a paper leather-substitute for bindings, for which he claimed in an advertisement of 1798 to have obtained a 'considerable premium', Bowtell amassed considerable wealth. In 1809 he gave to Addenbrooke's Hospital 3 per cent Consols to the value of $100, and by his will he further endowed it with $7000 of the same stock -- about half his estate -- a bequest which, after its terms had been interpreted by the master in chancery, enabled additional buildings which marked a turning point in the development of the hospital. 
Bowtell died in Trinity Street on 1 December 1813 and was buried with his wife in St Michael's Church. His further bequests included, again in 3 per cent Consols: $500-worth, the dividends to be applied by Trinity College to the repair of the church and chancel of St Michael's; $1000-worth, also to be administered by Trinity via the churchwardens for 'repairing and beautifying the church and steeple' of Holy Trinity Church; and $500-worth to the trustees of Hobson's Charity for the apprenticing of poor boys from Cambridge. His portrait was preserved in Addenbrooke's Hospital until its theft in recent years. 
John Bowtell is not to be confused with his nephew, also John Bowtell, assistant at Cambridge University Library from 'c'.1818, who compiled a catalogue which remained in use until 1861. As both part-author and victim of the chaos into which the library had descended, he was dismissed in 1852, with an annual pension of $100. 


@@@@@


doc= 3089


Bowyer, Sir George, first baronet (1740-1800), naval officer and politician, was baptized on 3 May 1740, at Denham, Buckinghamshire, the third son of Sir William Bowyer, third baronet (1710-1767), of Denham, and Anne (died 1785), daughter of Sir John Stonhouse, baronet, of Radley, Berkshire, MP and comptroller of the household to Queen Anne. On 11 May 1751, as a captain's servant, he joined his first ship, the 'Glory' (44 guns), commanded by Richard Howe; in 1752 he moved with Howe to the 'Dolphin' (24 guns), in which he stayed until 1755. In her he saw service off west Africa, in the West Indies, and in the Mediterranean. After three years in the 'Princess Louisa' (60 guns), the 'Lancaster' (66 guns), and the 'Royal George' (100 guns), mostly in the Channel Fleet, he was promoted lieutenant on 13 February 1758 and appointed to the 'Nottingham' (60 guns), initially in the West Indies and then in the channel. In May 1760 he rejoined Captain Howe in the 'Magnamine' (74 guns). 
On promotion to commander on 4 May 1761 Bowyer commanded the cutter 'Swift', which was captured off Ushant on 30 June 1762 by a much larger French privateer. Bowyer was acquitted at the subsequent court martial, 'having done everything in his power for escaping the enemy' (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/5301). Promoted captain on 28 October 1762, he commanded the 'Sheerness' (20 guns) in the Mediterranean until the peace in December 1763. On 11 November 1768 he married Margaret ('nee' Price), widow of Sir Jacob Downing, baronet; the couple had no children and Margaret died in 1778. 
In 1776, after the outbreak of the American War of Independence, Bowyer commanded the 'Burford' (70 guns); he transferred to the 'Albion' (74 guns) in 1778, and took part in the battle of Grenada, under Vice-Admiral John Byron, in the West Indies on 6 July 1779, and in Admiral Sir George Rodney's three actions with de Guichen on 17 April, and 15 and 19 May 1780. On 15 May the fleet, 'led by that good and gallant officer Captain Bowyer' (Rodney's dispatch of 31 May, TNA: PRO, ADM 1/311/217), engaged fifteen French ships in succession. Inevitably the 'Albion', as the first to engage each ship, suffered severely in men, spars, and hull. 
Bowyer returned home at the end of 1781 and on 4 June 1782 married Henrietta (1753-1845), daughter of Admiral Sir Peircy Brett; they had three sons and two daughters. As a commodore he commanded the 'Irresistible' (74 guns), guardship in the Medway, from 1783 for fifteen months. From 1784 to 1790 he was MP for Queenborough, near Sheerness, a seat under Admiralty patronage which his father-in-law had held from 1754 to 1774. In 1785 he was a member of the committee to consider the defences of Portsmouth and Plymouth. On 24 September 1787 he was appointed a colonel of marines. During the Spanish armament in August 1790 he commissioned the 'Boyne' (78 guns) and in January 1791 he paid her off. In April 1792 he inherited the Radley estates from his maternal uncle. 
Having been promoted rear-admiral on 1 February 1793 Bowyer hoisted his flag in July in the 'Prince' (90 guns), commanded by Cuthbert Collingwood, in the Channel Fleet. He and Collingwood transferred to the 'Barfleur' (98 guns) in January 1794 and took part in Lord Howe's victory at the battle of 1 June. The 'Barfleur' was warmly engaged in the action on 29 May but early on 1 June Bowyer lost a leg, being caught by Collingwood as he fell. He received a pension of $1000 p.a. for his wound, and the gold medal with chain for the victory, and on 16 August 1794 he was created a baronet. Unable to serve again, Bowyer was promoted vice-admiral on 4 July 1794 and admiral on 14 February 1799. He succeeded his brother in the family baronetcy as fifth baronet in April 1799 and died at Radley on 9 December 1800; he was buried at Radley parish church on 16 December. At his house, now Radley College, the union flag is flown annually on 1 June in his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 3090


Bowyer, Sir George, seventh baronet (1811-1883), jurist and politician, was born on 8 October 1811 at Radley Park, near Abingdon, Berkshire, the eldest son of Sir George Bowyer, sixth baronet (1783-1860), of Denham Court, Buckinghamshire, and his wife, Anne Hammond, daughter of Captain Sir Andrew Snape Douglas RN. He received much of his early education in Italy, before spending a short time as a cadet at the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich. However, Bowyer soon abandoned any idea of a military career and turned instead to the law. He spent a year in Genoa in 1835, studying Roman law, and later compiled a manuscript, 'Libro della nobilita di Genova', with his friend Stacey Grimaldi. On his return to England, he became a member of the Middle Temple on 1 June 1836. He was called to the bar on 7 June 1839, and was awarded an honorary MA at Oxford in the same month. In 1844 he received the degree of DCL. He was also admitted a member of Lincoln's Inn in January 1845. 
Although Bowyer practised for some time as a draftsman and conveyancer at the equity bar, this did not suit him for he was more interested in the academic side of law. As a legal writer, he first attracted attention with a book published in 1841, 'The English Constitution: a Popular Commentary on the Constitutional Laws of England'. This work sought to place within the reach of educated people the constitutional knowledge to which, in the aftermath of the 'Reform Act', Bowyer felt it was essential that all voters had access. It sold well, and helped to establish his reputation as a constitutional lawyer. In 1850 he was appointed reader in law at the Middle Temple, and in the following year he published his 'Readings Delivered before the Honourable Society of the Middle Temple'. In these lectures, in which he drew widely on Roman and canon law, he sought to show the connection of the various branches of jurisprudence with each other, and to show their place in a general system of moral science. This ambition was echoed in 1854 in his 'Commentaries on Universal Public Law', where he sought to show the universal nature of legal obligation, in the manner of Domat and the civil lawyers. His interest in comparative jurisprudence and Roman law continued, and in 1874 he published his 'Introduction to the study and use of the civil law, and to commentaries on the modern civil law'. 
In his youth, Bowyer was a follower of the Oxford Movement, and in 1839 he wrote an article on ecclesiastical discipline in Newman's 'British Critic'. He converted to Roman Catholicism in August 1850 and immediately became an active spokesman for the Catholic church on legal and constitutional questions. He was soon called on to act as a constitutional adviser to Cardinal Wiseman, at the time of public agitation against the pope's decision to create the archbishopric of Westminster. In his pamphlet, 'The Cardinal Archbishop of Westminster and the New Hierarchy' (1850), Bowyer argued for the legal right of the pope to exercise his spiritual authority by creating a permanent episcopacy in England, saying that the Catholic church was recognized in English law. He remained a regular contributor to the press on religious questions, writing letters frequently to 'The Times', and being a regular contributor to the 'Dublin Review'. He was also a consistent defender of Catholic causes in parliament, his attitudes to politics often reflecting his religious rather than strictly party loyalties. For these services he was made a knight commander of the order of Pius IX, as well as a chamberlain to that pontiff; he was also made knight grand cross of the order of St Gregory the Great, and was awarded the grand collar of the Constantinian order of St George of Naples. 
Bowyer was a fervent whig and an enthusiastic supporter of Lord Henry Brougham, as well as being a friend of Henry Fox, fourth Baron Holland. His passion for politics lasted throughout his life. In the late 1830s, he aspired to become Thomas Duffield's successor as MP for Abingdon, the seat which his father had held between 1811 and 1818, and in August 1849 he stood (unsuccessfully) as a Liberal for the parliamentary seat of Reading, in the by-election caused by the elevation to the bench of T. N. Talfourd. He was finally elected to parliament in July 1852, as MP for Dundalk, co. Louth. As an MP, Bowyer was always independent-minded, and he found himself unsuited to the strictures of party discipline. He flirted with Disraeli's Conservatives in the 1860s, and lost his seat in the election of 1868 to a Gladstonian Liberal. Bowyer returned to parliament in 1874 as MP for co. Wexford, having stood in the election as a home-ruler primarily because he realized that this was the only way in which he could continue his political career. He remained thereafter an indisciplined member of an indisciplined group, continuing to sit on the government benches, and remaining a member of the Reform Club, until 23 June 1876, when he was expelled by a two-thirds majority at a general meeting, for frequently voting against the Liberal Party. In March 1880 Bowyer retired from politics. 
In 1862 Bowyer was one of the sponsors of a bill in parliament to reform the government of the inns of court and the discipline of the bar, which failed as a result of opposition by the inns. He also played a leading part in the parliamentary agitation of 1873-4, which succeeded in persuading Disraeli's government to retain the appellate jurisdiction of the House of Lords. In addition, he was a member of the royal commission appointed to examine the expediency of digesting the law in 1866, although he did not sign its report. 
Bowyer succeeded his father as seventh baronet on 1 July 1860, though the family's landed estate had been leased in 1847 to a nonconformist school (the forerunner of Radley College). He was a magistrate and a deputy lieutenant for Berkshire. He was found dead in his bed at 13 King's Bench Walk on 7 June 1883, having suffered a heart attack. His funeral service was held in his church of St John of Jerusalem, Great Ormond Street, London, and he was buried in the family vault at Abingdon. Bowyer was unmarried, and was succeeded in the baronetcy by his brother William (1812-1893), another barrister of the Middle Temple. 


@@@@@


doc= 3091


Bowyer, Robert (1758-1834), miniature painter and publisher, was born in Portsmouth, the son of Amos Bowyer, a shipwright, and his wife, Betty Ann. He was baptized there on 18 June 1758. He served first as a clerk to a merchant in Portsmouth and then in London; there are conflicting accounts as to why he changed career. The first ('Bowyer memorials'), recounts that he intended to travel to America as a supercargo at his employer's request but, engaged to Mary Shoveller, he wished to present her with a likeness of himself before setting sail, and, unable to afford the services of a miniature painter, painted his own. Encouraged by a number of commissions, he abandoned his plans to go to America and began to take likenesses from a booth at Coxheath camp. Another version of Bowyer's life cites his need for employment as the motivation for his taking up painting ('N&Q', 350). Bowyer married Mary in Portsmouth on 14 July 1777; they had one daughter. 
At some time, probably in the late 1770s, Bowyer undertook professional training in London with the miniature painter John Smart. He exhibited first at the Free Society of Artists in 1782 (a portrait of a gentleman) and at the Royal Academy in 1783. About this time he moved to 68 Berners Street, London, Smart's former residence. Bowyer enjoyed much success as a miniature painter and his patrons included the duke of Rutland, the marchioness of Salisbury, and Lord Nelson; by April 1790 he described himself as miniature painter to his majesty. However, during the next decade Bowyer's interests became more concerned with print publishing, beginning with a number of his own portraits, including that of Dr Francis Willis, physician to George III, which was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1789 and published that same year with a dedication to Queen Charlotte. 
During the 1790s Bowyer began two major publishing projects: an illustrated edition of the 'Bible' and Hume's 'The History of England'. The earliest plates for the 'Holy Bible' were published in 1791 and the series included thirty-two engravings by James Fittler after old masters in English private collections and was completed in 1795. The publication of the first part of 'The History of England' in 1793 coincided with Bowyer's move from Berners Street to Pall Mall, to what he called the Historic Gallery. There he displayed the paintings commissioned from leading artists such as Benjamin West and P. J. de Loutherbourg for this series. By 1806 Bowyer had published five large folios reaching the year 1688 but the work was never completed owing to the high costs involved, a loss of $30,000 said already to have been incurred. 
Bowyer also published a number of engraved series connected with India, probably facilitated by his friendship with Smart, who had gone there in 1785 and to whose children Bowyer acted as guardian. A proposal to publish, in collaboration with the engraver William Sharp and the painter Robert Smirke, the latter's 'Lord Cornwallis Receiving as Hostages the Two Sons of Tipoo Sultan' was abandoned; however, Bowyer later published portraits of the three main protagonists by Smart. In 1794 he published 'Picturesque Views, with a Descriptive History of the Country of Tipoo Sultan' after drawings by Robert Home and in 1797 'Oriental Scenery: Twenty-Four Views in Hindoostan' after drawings by Thomas Daniell. 
The last years of the eighteenth century were difficult for Bowyer personally. The loss of his only daughter at eighteen in summer 1796 caused great personal anguish. In a letter to Warren Hastings he expressed his fear that his loss might be compounded as he was extremely doubtful whether his wife would survive the tragedy. However, in 1799 Bowyer and his wife took into their household a young, orphaned, wax modeller from Bristol named Catherine Andras. She became a member of the family and shared a number of sitters with Bowyer. Bowyer was a member of the Baptist Missionary Society and during the peace of Amiens he, his wife, and Andras travelled to Paris; this visit resulted in the formation of the French Evangelical Society. However, this visit had another important purpose for Bowyer, the collection of prints and engravings of scriptural subjects, which formed the basis of his famous edition of the 'Bible'. 
Bowyer's financial difficulties arising from the publication of 'The History of England' were compounded by a lawsuit over 'Views in Egypt, Palestine and other Parts of the Ottoman Empire' (1803). In 1806 he avoided financial ruin by disposing of the contents of the Historic Gallery by lottery. In that same year he moved to Byfleet in Surrey, although he maintained a house at various addresses in Pall Mall from where he continued to run his publishing business. At Byfleet, Bowyer pursued his evangelism, establishing a Sunday school and giving sermons. He purchased a public house that stood opposite his own residence, pulled it down, and erected a chapel; he also established a day school. Bowyer continued to publish up to his death, including 'Works of Raffaelle, Domenichino, Poussin, and Albano', issued in five volumes in 1819, and his last publication, 'A selection of fac-similies of watercolour drawings from the works of the most distinguished artists' in 1825. However, Bowyer was also occupied in the creation of what became known as the Bowyer 'Bible'. The religious prints and engravings he had collected in Paris were augmented by others, purchased by an agent in Paris by special permission during the Napoleonic wars. Bowyer's collection of prints was inserted into a copy of Thomas Macklin's illustrated edition of the 'Bible', and the resulting work reached forty-five volumes. Bowyer also took up painting again in his later years; George IV, the duke of York, and other members of the royal family sat to him. 
However, Bowyer's last years were not free from difficulties. Following the death of his landlord at Byfleet, the duke of York, Bowyer had to purchase his house at a much increased value, which his own improvements had brought about. Further, great expense was incurred when, acting as executor for a friend, he became involved in a lawsuit. His home was mortgaged, only to suffer a fire. He died at Byfleet on 4 June 1834. The publishing business was left to Mary Parkes who, originally a housemaid at Byfleet, had been involved in the business from at least the late 1820s. 


@@@@@


doc= 3092


Bowyer, William (1663-1737), printer, was born in July 1663, the son of John Bowyer, grocer of London, and Mary, daughter of William King, vintner of London. He was bound on 1 September 1679 to Miles Flesher (died 1688), printer, and freed on 4 October 1686. His first marriage in 1686 or 1687 to Mary (surname unknown; died 1689) brought two children, Frances and William, said to have died in infancy. On 6 March 1699 Bowyer married Dorothy Allport (1665-1727), widow of Benjamin Allport (bookseller of St Botolph without Bishopsgate, died August 1695), daughter of Thomas Dawks (1636-1689) ['see under 'Dawks, Thomas (bap. 1611, d. 1670)] and sister to Ichabod Dawks, printers. Their son, also William Bowyer, was born on 19 December 1699. 
In the same year Bowyer set up as master printer at the White Horse in Little Britain, London, the first of his eighteen apprentices being bound on 7 August 1699. Before the end of the year Bowyer moved to Dogwell Court, Whitefriars, London. Called to the livery of the Stationers' Company on 6 May 1700, he advanced no higher in the company hierarchy, perhaps for reasons of conscience. 
Fourteen years of progress ended suddenly in the small hours of 30 January 1713: Bowyer's dwelling house and workrooms above were gutted by fire. The loss, including works already printed, totalled $5146. The proceeds of a royal brief with debts forgiven and gifts from friends and members of the trade returned almost half this sum. In October 1713 Bowyer began again in Temple Lane, Whitefriars. Tailpieces depicting a phoenix renewed by fire thereafter ornamented many of the firm's works. 
Bowyer brought his son into the firm in 1722, but the father alone continued to be mentioned in imprints and to keep the accounts. The achievements of father and son, best documented of any eighteenth-century London printers, were chronicled in 'Literary Anecdotes' by John Nichols, apprentice, partner, and successor to the younger Bowyer, and have been comprehensively studied by Maslen and Lancaster (1991). 
Works printed by the father from 1699 to 1737 total more than 2632. Their quantity and diversity are remarkable. The printing of literary works, for instance by Alexander Pope, is only a small part of the story. One class of works stands out, justifying the view that Bowyer aimed to be a scholarly printer in the best continental tradition. To this end he sent his son to university in 1716 to train to be a learned corrector. From the beginning Bowyer printed much in the emergent field of English antiquities, often directly for the authors. Works by the Anglo-Saxonists William and his sister Elizabeth Elstob, Roger Gale, the nonjuror George Hickes ('Linguarum vett. septentrionalium thesauri', ed. William Wotton, 1708), John Le Neve ('Monumenta Anglicana', 1716-19), Thomas Rymer (many volumes of the 'Foedera' from 1708), David Wilkins ('Leges Anglo-Saxonicae', 1721), and Moses Williams (proposals issued 1719 for his edition of Humphrey Llwyd, 'Britannicae descriptionis commentariolum', 1731) form a representative few. 
Motives for the study of English history included the wish to justify post-Reformation church reform. Bowyer's many nonjuring authors comprised an especially active subgroup of scholars whom Bowyer, a nonjuror himself, served beyond the commercial call of duty. The first work bearing his imprint, the anonymous 'Defence of the Vindication of K. Charles the Martyr', 1699, by Thomas Wagstaffe, nonjuring 'bishop' of Ipswich, reveals the printer's sympathies. Bowyer was nevertheless moderate in his dissent, like his friend Robert Nelson (of whose 'Companion for the Festivals and Fasts of the Church of England' he printed sixteen editions between 1704 and 1735). Nonjuring principles governed his choice of private school (under Ambrose Bonwicke) and college (St John's, Cambridge) for his son, and in the 1720s his attendance, with the printer James Bettenham, his stepson-in-law, at meetings to ordain nonjuring priests. 
A learned printer required good and exotic types. Bowyer's first Anglo-Saxon types were burnt in the fire. A new fount, used in Elizabeth Elstob's 'Anglo-Saxon Grammar' (1715), was later given to Oxford University. In the 1720s Bowyer was an important patron of the typefounder William Caslon. The first recorded use of Caslon's pica roman is in Bowyer's 'Anacreontis opera graece', 1725, while, according to Nichols, Caslon's pica Coptic, used in David Wilkins's 'Quinque libri Moysis prophetae in lingua Aegyptia', typis Gul. Bowyer, 1731, was cut in 1729 under Bowyer's supervision. 
There are tantalizing glimpses of Bowyer's journeyman years. Letters written by him in 1696-7, reported by Ord (pp. 340-41) but now presumed lost, imply a serious-minded young man. In one letter, said to display a 'vast mass of erudition', he endeavoured to win back his sister 'Elizabeth Ross', who had 'apostasised to popery, and died a professed nun of St. Clare's, at Dunkirk'. Another, addressed to 'Mr. Bowyer, at Mr. Daniel Sheldon's, in St. Bartholomew's Close' links Bowyer with members of the pre-1688 Anglican establishment. Sheldon (died 1699), whose will Bowyer witnessed on 16 February 1697, was nephew to Gilbert Sheldon, archbishop of Canterbury (died 1677), and brother-in-law to John Dolben, archbishop of York (died 1686). 
Bowyer was a highly competent printer, widely respected in the trade and beyond, and able twice in his career to build up a large and successful business. He died in London on 27 December 1737, and was buried at Low Leyton, Essex, where he owned a country retreat. His son raised a monument to his memory in the local church. 


@@@@@


doc= 3093


Bowyer, William (1699-1777), printer, was born on 19 December 1699 at Dogwell Court, Whitefriars, London, the only son to survive infancy of William Bowyer (1663-1737), printer, and his second wife, Dorothy Allport (1665-1727), daughter of Thomas Dawks (1636-1689) of London, printer ['see under 'Dawks, Thomas (bap. 1611, d. 1670)], and his wife, Anne. Young William attended a private school at Headley, Surrey, kept by Ambrose Bonwicke. Then, most unusually, his father sent him to university. In June 1716 William was admitted to St John's College, Cambridge, as a sizar under Robert Jenkin. There he remained until June 1722, mastering Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. At home, at school, and at university he was much among nonjurors and their sympathizers, which is perhaps why he did not take a degree. 
The intention was to place a learned corrector at the heart of the firm, the better to serve the new English scholarship. The success of this plan may be seen in the list of works printed by the Bowyers between 1699 and 1777 given in the Maslen-Lancaster edition of the Bowyer printing ledgers (1991). The two functions of scholar and printer were at best complementary. Often Bowyer acted as a patron of scholarship by encouraging authors to publish on their own account, at times going beyond what was commercially prudent by himself sharing or bearing the financial risk, as when in 1766 he published his friend Samuel Pegge's 'Essay on the Coins of Cunobelin'. However, sometimes there were tensions, expressed by Bowyer himself in a letter of 11 January 1767: 'My father, good man, sent me thither [to Cambridge] to qualify me (by a new kind of experiment) for a printer. But it served only in trade to expose me to more affronts, and to give me a keener sensibility of them' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 3.13). 
In June 1722 young William entered the firm and took over the correcting of proofs; not that he did all himself, for father and son both employed a succession of nonjuring (and hence unbeneficed) clergymen to help with this work. How the complex task of correction was allotted can usually only be guessed. Nichols draws attention to Bowyer's correcting of Selden's 'Opera omnia' (1726). Letters between author and printer, some acrimonious, also tell a tale. Unsent letters of 1757 to William Warburton protest vigorously that the bishop unfairly blamed Bowyer for not correcting the author's own mistakes. Nichols notes Bowyer's freedom in correcting the press, citing his letter to Antony Alsop, author of 'Odarum libri duo' (1752): 'in the last sheet I made it 'obstrepat' against your authority, and will give you leave to advertise me if it is wrong' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 2.234-5n). 
On 9 October 1728 at St Clement Danes, Strand, London, William married his mother's niece Ann Prudom ('c'.1705-1731), by whom he gained farms in Danby Dale, Yorkshire, and at Navestock, Essex. Their second and only surviving son, Thomas, was born on 5 September 1730. Ann died in childbirth on 17 October 1731. 
Meanwhile, Bowyer was venturing in new directions. In 1729, through the friendship of Arthur Onslow, speaker of the House of Commons, he was appointed to print the votes of the House, a profitable employment which remained in the firm until 1940. 
The acquisition of copyrights was another line which became increasingly important. At first Bowyer was careful not to be seen to compete with the booksellers, but later his standing in the trade placed him above such question. In any case, for Bowyer owning copy was primarily useful in conferring the right to print. In 1729 Bowyer began to collect copyrights of pieces by Jonathan Swift and his countrymen. George Faulkner, the notable Dublin printer, who had worked not long before as a journeyman for the Bowyers, initiated the lifelong habit of sending Bowyer printed copies of works first published in Dublin, English copyright going to whoever first printed an English edition. Bowyer did as much for Faulkner. Between May 1729 and February 1733 Bowyer thus reprinted a number of pieces of Swiftiana, including, for instance, 'A vindication of his excellency the lord C -- t, from the charge of favouring none but tories, high-churchmen and Jacobites'. To confirm possession Bowyer secured through the Revd Matthew Pilkington a form of assignment from Swift himself. When Pope protested, meaning to reprint some of these pieces himself, Bowyer insisted on his rights. In later years Bowyer's share of Swift copyrights gave him a valuable stake in the ever expanding editions of Swift's 'Works'. 
After his father's death on 27 December 1737 Bowyer was on his own. He took charge of the all-important accounts, which William senior had kept almost to the last, and a decline in the standard of bookkeeping soon begins to appear. One more step was necessary. On 4 July 1738 Bowyer was made free of the Stationers' Company by patrimony, and almost immediately called to the livery. Thereafter, being retiring by nature, he refused higher office in the company as he became eligible, and paid the usual fines. On 5 May 1741 he bound the first of seventeen apprentices. Some time in the early 1740s he also took stock of his printing materials and equipment by means of a linked inventory and type specimen, which he occasionally updated. These show his care to renew his text types, for instance by buying regularly from Caslon. Also revealing is his ownership of exotics: Hebrew, Greek (in no fewer than fourteen faces and sizes), Anglo-Saxon, Gothic, and Coptic. 
However, output steadily if not alarmingly declined. Complaints by Bowyer about being given only part of a work to print belong to these years. Nevertheless, his learned printing grew in prominence. Bowyer was appointed printer to the Society of Antiquaries in May 1736, and on 7 July was elected to membership. Between 1738 and 1748 he was one of three printers employed by the short-lived Society for the Encouragement of Learning, printing works by Thomas Tanner and others, which brought prestige if not profit. 
On 21 August 1747 Bowyer married Elizabeth Bill ('c'.1700-1771), a widow who had long been his housekeeper. She read proofs for him. Less helpfully she favoured William Emonson, son of and apprentice to Bowyer's overseer James Emonson, against her stepson Thomas Bowyer, who had been apprenticed to his father on 5 August 1746. Disappointing his father's hopes, Thomas left home before completing his time, and after other false starts eventually retired to the country under the name Mr Thomas, and died on 17 December 1783. 
On 10 October 1754, being 'sick of the World' and hoping to lessen 'the fatigues of Business', Bowyer entered into a partnership with James Emonson (Emonson Partnership MSS). Bowyer soon changed his mind, instancing the bookseller John Knapton's bankruptcy in September 1755 following his partner's death. Emonson cited Bowyer's unfairness in refusing to print the second part of Warburton's 'Divine Legation of Moses', while promising to proof-read it. The causes were deeper. Bowyer found he was not ready to retire or accept a likely change to the character of his press. Emonson moved on to print a newspaper, 'Lloyd's Evening Post'. The partnership legally ended on 4 July 1757. 
The nonjuring loyalties of Bowyer's father were transformed into a banking service offered by the son to a dozen or so country clergymen, one-time members and fellows of Bowyer's own college of St John's. 
Early in 1757 Bowyer took yet another boy for training. John Nichols, not yet thirteen, quickly proved himself to be the helper Bowyer had long desired. Nichols was formally apprenticed on 6 February 1759. On 4 July 1761 Bowyer successfully applied to the earl of Macclesfield, the president of the Royal Society, to follow Samuel Richardson as the society's printer, first completing vol. 52, part 1 of the 'Philosophical Transactions'. A later initiative was unsuccessful. During 1765 Bowyer treated with Cambridge University for a lease of its printing privileges. Nichols was freed on 4 March 1766, and made a junior partner on 5 April, with a one-third share in the business. Bowyer cautiously imposed strict conditions. Among Nichols's many duties were keeping most of the accounts and binding the apprentices. Once again, Bowyer was not to be compelled to read proofs. 
The year 1767 brought three 'revolutions' in Bowyer's affairs. He complained to his son in a letter of 13 May that Nichols had deceived him by secretly marrying (Nichols MSS). Also, the 'Printing house in White Fryers being propt up & like to fall', he had taken a new one in Red Lion Passage, with access to Fleet Street. There the printing house remained until it too was destroyed by fire, on 8 February 1808. Finally, he had just been appointed printer of the retrospective series of 'Journals of the House of Lords', to be completed in 31 volumes, 1768-77. Nichols was essential to this undertaking, and Bowyer had to overlook his behaviour. 
By this time Bowyer's health, long troublesome, was giving way; Elizabeth Bowyer had died on 14 January 1771. On 15 May 1773 Nichols, already effectively in control, was made an equal partner. It was he who superintended the slow passage through the press of 'Domesday Book' (1783), using the record type cut to order by Joseph Jackson. 
Bowyer's duties as corrector often led him to indulge in the more congenial scholarly tasks of annotating, commenting, emending, epitomizing, indexing, and translating. These works are listed in the index to the 'Bowyer Ledgers' (1991), and a selection of such minor pieces was published by Nichols in 1785 as 'Miscellaneous tracts, by the late William Bowyer, printer, F.S.A. and several of his learned friends'. Correspondence between Bowyer and these friends, notably Jeremiah Markland and William Clarke (printed in Nichols's 'Literary Anecdotes'), was predominantly antiquarian and textual. Roman and English coinage was a favourite topic of inquiry. Bowyer himself was most proud of his 'Conjectures on the New Testament, Collected from Various Authors' (1772). This work attracted some later attention. 
Bowyer died in London on 18 November 1777, and was buried at Low Leyton, Essex. In his will, having handsomely provided for his errant son, and remembered those who had helped his father after the destructive fire of 30 January 1713, he gave charitable bequests to the Stationers' Company to benefit elderly printers, and also a journeyman compositor aged at least thirty-one 'who shall be able to read and construe Latin, and at least to read Greek fluently with accents' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 3.270-89). To John Nichols, his residual legatee, he gave 'all the Books that relate to Cicero, Livy, and the Roman History... my Grammars and Dictionaries, with Swift's and Pope's Works', also his 'Old Bureau... to survey and preserve my Papers in' (ibid.). These materials together with the old printing house books of account formed the nucleus of Nichols's 'Literary Anecdotes'. 
William Bowyer was surely, as Nichols claimed, 'the most learned [English] Printer of the Eighteenth Century' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 1.2). His printing house is also the best documented. His successor's care to preserve the Bowyer business records for posterity allowed the operations of a major London printing house of the hand-press era to be understood in their fullness. Bowyer was a printer not only of works of learning of every sort (including medical and scientific), but of works of imaginative literature from Pope, Swift, and Voltaire to the soon forgotten publications of Grub Street hacks, and parliamentary papers. Interspersed with these were ephemeral pieces of every description. His achievement, like his father's, was to be not only distinctive, but representative of the vigour and service to society of the best of his trade. Bowyer well understood that scholarly printing, however highly valued, was something of a luxury, needing to be subsidized by more commercial work. His devotion to printing the works of the learned stands out as all the more laudable. 


@@@@@


doc= 3094


Boxall, John (1524/5-1571), administrator, was born at Bramshott, Hampshire, but the identity of his parents is unknown. He was admitted scholar of Winchester College in 1538 at the age of thirteen and proceeded to New College, Oxford, where he was admitted scholar on 9 October 1540 and fellow exactly two years later (vacating in October 1554). It is presumed he graduated in arts at a foreign university, as he supplicated for incorporation as MA at Oxford on 11 July 1554; at the same time he supplicated for the degree of BTh, which was conferred on 15 July. By February 1558 he had proceeded to the doctorate. He appears to have received no benefice before Mary's accession, but was thereafter amply supplied. In 1554 he was admitted rector of Bishop's Hatfield, Hertfordshire. On 15 October he was elected warden of Winchester College (vacated 9 November 1556). He composed a eulogistic account of the first two years of Mary's reign, to the time (spring 1555) when an heir to the throne was expected (BL, Royal MS 12.A.XLIX); this may have brought him recognition at court. In the same year he published a sermon preached before convocation in St Paul's Cathedral on 22 October. On 26 October he was presented by the crown to a canonry in Winchester Cathedral (vacated by February 1558). His formal move into the crown's service came on 23 September 1556 when he was appointed to the council 'at large' and also as master of requests and a councillor of that court. He probably owed his promotion to Stephen Gardiner, though explicit evidence is lacking. He was at once sent to take part in negotiations with the French over disputed territory in the marches of Calais; he was also (31 October) named a tax collector for Calais. On his return he was named as 'umpire' in a case before the court of requests ('Ancient State', ed. Hill, 175). 
Boxall evidently gave satisfaction in these tasks, as on 21 December he was further promoted to membership of the privy council. Between 28 and 30 March 1557 he succeeded Sir William Petre as one of the two principal secretaries. He subsequently (7 April 1558) received a patent for this office, with an annuity of $100 back-dated to 25 March 1557. It was the first time that the secretaryship had been thus formally conferred, an important stage in the development of the office even though Boxall's tenure of it was unremarkable. His inexperience was such that for several months Petre continued to draft state correspondence. Subsequently Boxall's main concern was foreign affairs, his colleague Sir John Bourne handling home matters. Boxall's secretaryship was dominated by the French war, and his chief business was with Thomas Gresham, arranging finance in the Low Countries, and Sir William Pickering, hiring troops there. In March 1558 Bourne resigned, leaving Boxall sole secretary for the rest of the reign. In September King Philip asked Boxall to be among those sent to treat for peace with the French, but the queen replied that he and the others whom the king named were too ill to leave their chambers; Arundel and Thirlby went instead. 
Boxall's ecclesiastical career meanwhile advanced in breadth, if not in eminence. By 21 December 1556 he had become archdeacon of Ely (suggesting that Bishop Thirlby was his patron in a more general way). The queen gave him the deanery of Peterborough on 24 June 1557, and on 1 October the rectory of Overton, Hampshire. On 2 December he was instituted to the deanery of Norwich (vacated by 16 May 1558). On 20 December he was presented to the prebend of Newington in St Paul's Cathedral, in the crown's gift on this occasion. On 19 March 1558 he was appointed dean of Windsor with the associated deanery of Wolverhampton, and on 21 July he became register of the Order of the Garter. By 25 June 1557 he had acquired the prebend of Ilton in Wells Cathedral. On 3 November he was presented by the crown to the prebend of Grantham Borealis in Salisbury Cathedral. On 5 December he was collated to the prebend of Stillington in York Minster. He also held the rectory of Bolton Percy, Yorkshire. With others he was granted wardship of the heirs of Sir Thomas Cornwallis and the earl of Pembroke (31 January and 5 July 1557) and on 21 May 1557 he received a reversionary grant of lands. On 18 July 1558 he was licensed to retain ten gentlemen or yeomen beyond any to whom he was already entitled, and on 17 October, a month before Mary's death, he was authorized to apply her signature by stamp. The queen and Cardinal Pole named him an overseer of their respective wills. 
Boxall's secretaryship was immediately terminated at Elizabeth's accession. In the days on either side of Mary's death he co-operated amicably with his successor, Sir William Cecil, in handing over the papers of the office, though having to make the astonishing revelation that some documents left in the late queen's death chamber had been used to seal her corpse. It was afterwards suggested by Nicholas Sander that Elizabeth was particularly anxious to retain Boxall's services. But while Mary was still alive, Philip II's envoy noted that Elizabeth thought 'muy mal' of him (Rodriguez-Salgado and Adams, 322). Boxall tried to dissuade the queen from giving her assent to the 'Act of Uniformity'. On 2 November 1559 Archbishop Parker was required to administer to him the subsequent oath; on his refusal he was deprived of all his remaining benefices. On 18 June 1560 he was committed to the Tower, where he was allowed some liberty in associating with the other prominent Catholic prisoners. In September 1563 the Tower was evacuated because of plague, and Boxall and Thirlby were committed to Parker's personal custody. Boxall spent the rest of his life in the archbishop's various residences. In June 1564 the council refused him permission to live elsewhere because one of the other Catholic prisoners had broken parole. In July 1569, while at Lambeth, Boxall asked to be allowed to visit his eighty-year-old mother, who was 'dangerously diseasid' (BL, Lansdowne MS 12, fol. 12). Boxall died at Lambeth Palace on 3 or 4 March 1571; his brothers Edmund and Richard were his executors. Boxall was a staunch Catholic, but his disapproval of the Marian persecution gained him esteem from his opponents; Richard Hilles, reporting his death to Bullinger, described him as 'a man of much moderation... and of gentle disposition' (Robinson, 2.183). 


@@@@@


doc= 3095


Boxall, Sir William (1800-1879), portrait painter and museum director, was born on 29 June 1800 in or near Oxford, the son of Thomas Boxall, clerk to the collector of excise, and the brother of Anne (died 1846), later wife of the Revd Charles Boxall Longland. He was educated at Abingdon grammar school and entered the Royal Academy Schools on 26 March 1819, having already exhibited 'Portrait of a Lady' at the academy in 1818. In order to study the old masters he made several study trips to Italy, for instance in 1827-8, 1833-6, and 1845. Hoping to establish himself as a history painter he early on painted scenes from mythology, religious texts, and English literature, for example, 'Jupiter and Latona' (exh. RA, 1823), 'The Contention of Michael and Satan for the Body of Moses' (exh. RA, 1824), and 'Lear and Cordelia' (exh. RA, 1831). Of his allegorical works 'Hope' (exh. RA, 1840) was considered the best. He also painted a few landscapes, including 'View of the Turl with Exeter, Lincoln and Jesus Colleges and All Saints' Church, Oxford' (exh. RA, 1827). 
In search of regular employment Boxall turned increasingly to portraiture and enjoyed some reputation in this field between the mid-1830s and the 1860s. He painted society celebrities and hostesses; leading literary, artistic, and intellectual figures of the day, such as his friend William Wordsworth (1831; NPG); and several high-ranking clergymen. His most important commission was a full-length portrait, 'The Prince Consort as Master of the Trinity House' (exh. RA, 1859; Trinity House, London). His portraits were rarely acclaimed as good likenesses and sometimes criticized for their lack of finish; several were reproduced as mezzotints by Samuel Cousins. On 3 November 1851 he was elected an associate of the Royal Academy, and in 1863 a full academician (retiring from the academy in 1877); he exhibited eighty-six works at the academy between 1818 and 1880, eleven at the British Institution, and seven at the Society of British Artists in Suffolk Street. He was also elected an honorary academician of the Academy of San Fernando, Madrid, in 1868. 
In February 1866 Boxall was appointed director of the National Gallery, succeeding Sir Charles Eastlake; thereafter he virtually ceased to paint. He may have been Eastlake's nominee and certainly was proposed by Gladstone. However, he was not the only, nor the preferred, candidate: the prime minister suggested Austen Henry Layard (under-secretary at the Foreign Office) and Queen Victoria proposed John Charles Robinson (superintendent of art at the South Kensington Museum); Edwin Landseer's name also was put forward. As director Boxall journeyed frequently through Europe to study and make notes on galleries and collections and also to survey pictures for potential acquisition (his papers remain in the National Gallery). He acquired several important paintings during his eight-year tenure, notably Carlo Crivelli's 'Demidoff Altarpiece', in 1868; Michelangelo's 'Virgin and Child with Saint John and Angels' (the 'Manchester Madonna'), in 1870; and Mantegna's 'Introduction of the Cult of Cybele at Rome', in 1873. He also increased the gallery's collection of Dutch seventeenth-century paintings, buying Pieter de Hooch's 'Woman and her Maid in a Courtyard' in 1869 and successfully negotiating the acquisition of Sir Robert Peel's collection in 1871. Two of his purchases caused controversy: the authenticity of both 'Christ Blessing the Children' (the 'Suermondt Rembrandt', now attributed to Nicolaes Maes) and Michelangelo's 'Entombment' was questioned in the House of Lords in 1869. During his directorship the gallery was reconstructed and extended by Edward Middleton Barry RA. 
In 1871 Boxall expressed his wish to retire on account of ill health (he often complained of lameness and seems to have suffered from depression), but he was persuaded to stay on by the trustees and the prime minister until 20 February 1874. He aided the successful candidature of Fredric Burton as his successor. A close friend from the early 1850s of Eastlake and his wife, Lady Elizabeth (whose portrait he painted in 1854), Boxall acted as one of Eastlake's executors after his death. Subsequently, in 1867, he acquired, through Lady Eastlake, nine paintings from her late husband's collection, including Piero della Francesca's 'St Michael' and Pisanello's 'Virgin and Child with Saint George and Saint Anthony Abbot', and also his library. Together with Lady Eastlake, Boxall also ensured that his predecessor's travel journals were collated and transcribed, and a copy deposited in the National Gallery. 
Boxall received the degree of DCL from Oxford University in 1870, and a knighthood was conferred on him on 24 March 1871; he was also a fellow of the Royal Society. In character he was solitary and sensitive; his principal companion in his last years was his dog, Garibaldi. Among his closest friends were the sculptor John Gibson (for whom he acted as executor in 1864) and the painters Landseer and Thomas Webster. Boxall died, unmarried, at his home in London -- 14 Welbeck Street, Cavendish Square -- on 6 December 1879, partly from congestion of the lungs, and was buried six days later at Kensal Green cemetery. The contents of his studio were auctioned at Christies on 8 June 1880. 


@@@@@


doc= 3096


Boxer, Edward (1784-1855), naval officer, was born at Dover. He entered the navy in July 1798, and after eight years' junior service, mostly with Captain Charles Brisbane, and for some short time in the 'Ocean', bearing Lord Collingwood's flag, was confirmed, on 8 June 1807, as lieutenant of the 'Tigre' with Captain Benjamin Hallowell (afterwards Carew). On his promotion to flag rank in October 1811, he followed Hallowell to Malta, and continued, with short intermissions, under his immediate command, until he was confirmed as commander on 1 March 1815. In 1822 he commanded the 'Sparrowhawk' (18 guns) on the Halifax station, and was posted out of her on 23 June 1823. From 1827 to 1830 he commanded the 'Hussar' as flag captain to Sir Charles Ogle at Halifax. In August 1837 he was appointed to the 'Pique', which he commanded on the North American and West Indian stations; and early in 1840 was sent to the Mediterranean, where he conducted the survey of the position afterwards occupied by the fleet off Acre and took part in the bombardment and capture of Acre in November. For his services he received the Turkish gold medal, and was made CB on 18 December 1840. 
In August 1843 Boxer was appointed harbour-master at Quebec, and held that office until his promotion to flag rank, on 5 March 1853. In April 1854 he became port-admiral at Constantinople. Here he was responsible for collecting the boats used for the invasion of the Crimea, and was thereafter responsible for logistics and principal agent for transports. In December he undertook the special duties of superintendent at Balaklava, which the crowded shipping, the narrow limits of the harbour, and the complete lack of wharves and roads had reduced to a state of disastrous confusion. This, and more especially the 6 mile sea of mud between the harbour and the camp, gave rise to terrible suffering and loss. While many blamed the admiral-superintendent at Balaklava, he was in fact responsible for bringing order to the chaos, but despite this he was used as a scapegoat by the Admiralty, and even his commander-in-chief. In truth he ought to be remembered rather as the man who, at the cost of his life, remedied the evils which had given rise to such loss. He died of cholera on board the 'Jason', just outside the harbour, on 4 June 1855, and Lord Raglan in reporting his death wrote that he had worked very hard, in all weathers, and had rendered an essential service to the army by improving the landing-places and establishing wharves on the west side of the port, accelerating the disembarkation of stores and troops and improving communications with the shore. His wife had died on 25 January 1826, nearly thirty years before; he was survived by a numerous family. 
Boxer 'was an able officer, placed in charge of something beyond the talent of any man to organise quickly' (Lambert, 212). After the war he was posthumously decorated. 


@@@@@


doc= 3097


Boyce, Samuel (d. 1775), playwright and poet, was originally an engraver, and held subsequently a place in the South Sea House. In 1751 he published 'The Friend of Liberty: an Ode, to George Heathcote, Esq.; Late Alderman of the City of London'. This was followed by 'The Rover, or, Happiness at Last: a Pastoral Drama' (in two interludes and in verse), which was published in 1752 but never acted (Baker, 3.226). In 1755 'An ode to the right honourable the marquis of Hartington, lord lieutenant of the Kingdom of Ireland' and 'Paris, or, The Force of Beauty: a Poem in Two Cantos' were published; both were reprinted in Boyce's 'Poems on Several Occasions' (1757). 
This edition of Boyce's poems was published by subscription; the original subscribers included Miss Fanny Murray, Miss Middleton, Samuel Johnson, and David Garrick. 'Poems on Several Occasions' has been described as an 'extremely uncommon' book (Williams, 74) and from a bibliophilic point of view the work is of particular interest because of the method of printing and resultant errors in the various print formats. The 'Subscriber's list' shows Garrick (whose copy contains an inscription to him from Boyce and to whom two poems are written) as having subscribed for a copy on 'Royal Paper'. The printing of the special paper copies before the ordinary ones reverses the common eighteenth-century printing practice. I. A. Williams states that 'Poems on Several Occasions' is the first definite instance of this occurring in an eighteenth-century text (ibid., 75). Garrick's large-paper copy was sold after his death and later passed to the Britwell Library (ibid., 74). 
Boyce's title for his collection is an apt one, as the forty-eight poems contained therein reflect a variety of styles and subject matter. Often Boyce frames his poems with classical allusions but his subject is predominantly eighteenth-century culture: in this he is typically Augustan. In 'Song' ('The sun in virgin lustre shone') the classical story of Damon and Sylvia is retold but the sentiments throughout reflect eighteenth-century morality. 'Poems on Several Occasions' is of interest because of the manner in which the collection articulates eighteenth-century concerns of the day; it reflects contemporary cultural debate and politics, and is peppered with references to the famous. 
Dominant themes in the collection include love, which is often represented in a classical pastoral setting and in some poems is yoked to a eulogization of Britishness. The theme of female chastity is wittily expressed in the satiric 'Song' ('The wicked wits, as fancy hits') which reverses the stereotypical anti-woman vein of much early eighteenth-century satire to reveal the double standards in masculine behaviour and contemporary sexual morality: '
The muse shall here th' indicated clear, 

And prove the crimes on you 
(ll. 11-12)' There emerges a strong anti-French sentiment in the collection, clearly represented in a number of poems which reproduce chauvinist cliches about the insidious influence of 'Gallic' tastes. The eclectic nature of 'Poems on Several Occasions' is evident in the range of the subject matter which includes humorous commentaries on drunkenness -- 'Song' ('Push around the brisk glass, I proclaim him an ass') and 'Epigram' ('Quoth Guz to his spouse, with his skin full of beer'). In 1771 Boyce wrote 'A New Occasional Prologue' for 'Othello' produced at Covent Garden (Stone, 8.1595). He died on 21 March 1775. 


@@@@@


doc= 3098


Boyce, Thomas (bap. 1732, d. 1793), Church of England clergyman and writer, was baptized on 11 September 1732 at St Andrew's, Norwich, the son of John Boyce, brewer, and Abigal. He went to school in Norwich and Scarning, before matriculating at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in 1750. He graduated BA in 1754 and MA in 1767. He was ordained deacon on 2 November 1755, served as curate at Cringleford, near Norwich, and was ordained priest on 29 May 1768. From 1780 until his death he was rector of Great Worlingham, Suffolk, and chaplain to the earl of Suffolk. 
Boyce is the author of 'Harold', an eighty-six page verse tragedy which was published in 1786 in London by the author at his own expense (BL, 1344n.29). The play, dedicated to Lady Beauchamp, proctor of Longley Park in Norfolk, was never acted and it would appear from the lack of evidence of any reprints that the tragedy was not a success. A handwritten note on the front-sheet of the British Library copy states that Boyce stopped work on it when he became aware that Richard Cumberland's tragedy on the same subject was in rehearsal at Drury Lane and that the author was 'conscious of the inferiority of his own abilities'. 'Harold' has been described as 'dull' (Genest, 6.8) and the noticeable lack of action in the play (there are no battle scenes) supports the opinion that the tragedy is a vehicle for sentimental moralizing rather than dramatic tension. 
The note on the front-sheet of 'Harold' refers to the author as being a writer of elegies as well as a dramatist. A sample of Boyce's elegies appears in 'Thomas Boyce, a Specimen of Elegiac Poetry' (1773). In the 'Advertisement', the poet states: 'These two Poems are selected, merely as being the most correct, from a small number written in the same manner', and he claims that further publication would be dependent on the 'opinion of the Public upon this Specimen' as to 'whether the others merit further trouble or attention'. It would appear that the opinion of the 'Public' was not favourable as no more elegies were published. The two elegies in the collection are written in heroic couplets and, although technically correct, are conventional and sentimental. 'Elegiac I: On the Death of a Young Lady' praises 'Chloe', described as a 'milk-white Fawn' who gaily 'frisks and frolics round'. 'Elegiac II' concerns a lament for 'the natural Daughter of a Field Officer who fell in the course of the late War'. Its theme is the seduction of a young innocent country maid by the 'arts of a Villain' who quickly abandons her. Boyce died on 4 February 1793. 


@@@@@


doc= 3099


Boyce, William (bap. 1711, d. 1779), composer, organist, and music editor, was born in Maiden Lane, London, and was baptized on 11 September 1711 at St James Garlickhythe, the youngest of four children of John Boyce (1673-1752), joiner and cabinet-maker, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Cordwell (died 1740). His father, 'discovering in his son while an infant, a delight in musical sounds' (Hawkins), had him admitted to the choir of St Paul's Cathedral about 1719 under Charles King, master of the choristers. On the breaking of his voice he stayed on to study the organ as an articled pupil of the cathedral's organist, Maurice Greene, from 1727 to 1734. 
Boyce's first professional appointment was as organist at the earl of Oxford's chapel, St Peter's, Vere Street, in 1734, and he taught the harpsichord, notably at Mr Cavaller's seminary for young ladies in Queen Square. He moved to St Michael Cornhill in 1736 in succession to the organist Joseph Kelway and remained there until 7 April 1768. By 1736 he had composed some fifteen anthems which were in use at the Chapel Royal, and on the death of John Weldon on 7 May 1736 he succeeded him as a composer to the Chapel Royal on 21 June, sharing some of the duties of the second organist, Jonathan Martin. Once again he was closely associated with Maurice Greene, who was the senior composer and organist to the Chapel Royal. 
Boyce was a member of Greene's Apollo Academy, which had met in the Devil tavern, Temple Bar, since 1731. Several of Boyce's larger works for soloists, chorus, and orchestra were first heard there: the sacred cantata 'David's Lamentation over Saul and Jonathan' (words by John Lockman, April 1736), 'The Charms of Harmony Display' (an ode to St Cecilia written by the Revd Peter Vidal, 'c'.1738), and 'See Famed Apollo and the Nine' (Lockman's ode to St Cecilia, 1739). Lord Lansdowne's masque 'Peleus and Thetis' and Walter Hart's Pindaric ode 'Gentle Lyre Begin the Strain' had both been set by Boyce and performed there by 1740. It was probably for the Apollo Academy that Boyce composed his most popular and enduring choral work, the serenata 'Solomon' to a libretto by Edward Moore first heard in the autumn of 1742 and published the following May. 
In the autumn of 1737 Boyce conducted the Worcester festival and was connected with the annual Three Choirs festival until at least 1756, though evidence for his visits is sparse. March 1747 saw the publication of Boyce's first instrumental music, 'Twelve Sonatas for Two Violins and a Bass', whose popularity is confirmed by the extraordinarily large subscribers' list attached. Burney wrote that Boyce's trio sonatas were 'not only in constant use, as chamber Music, in private concerts... but in our theatres, as act-tunes, and public gardens, as favourite pieces, during many years' (Burney, 'Hist. mus.', 3.620). He had a similar success with a set of 'Eight Symphonys', published by Walsh in January 1760, which comprised seven overtures originally composed for other works between 1739 and 1756 and a work which is sometimes known as the Worcester overture. He published a further set of 'Twelve Overtures' at his own expense in 1770, but these were less successful. Hawkins comments: 'The taste of the people at the time of the publication of these, was very unpropitious to their success: they had the misfortune to meet with compositions of [J. C.] Bach and Abel which had already gotten possession of the public ear. (Hawkins, ix)' Boyce was a successful songwriter in the pastoral idiom and some seventy-six solo songs are known. Many of them, along with his duets and cantatas, were popular at Vauxhall and Ranelagh pleasure gardens and found their way into published anthologies, the earliest being Bickham's 'Musical Entertainer' of 1737. Between March 1747 and July 1759 Boyce published a series of six books containing selections from his garden and theatre pieces entitled 'Lyra Britannica'. 
When Garrick became manager of Drury Lane, Boyce, from 1749 to 1759, supplied him with songs and incidental music for thirteen productions, including Garrick's adaptations of Shakespeare. Boyce's afterpiece 'The Chaplet', to a libretto by Moses Mendez, first performed on 2 December 1749, was highly successful for a number of years. 'The Shepherd's Lottery', written by the same librettist, which opened on 19 November 1751, had fewer performances. His final work at Drury Lane was for Garrick's pantomime 'Harlequin's Invasion', which opened on the last day of 1759 and was written to celebrate the end of the 'year of victories'. It featured Boyce's most famous song, 'Heart of Oak', which has been associated with the Royal Navy ever since. 
On 1 July 1749 Boyce was in Cambridge with a large assembly of singers and instrumentalists from London to conduct his ode 'Here All thy Active Fires Diffuse', with words by William Mason, commissioned for the installation of the duke of Newcastle as chancellor of the university. The following day he performed his doctoral exercise, the orchestral anthem 'O be joyful in God', in St Mary's Church, and on 3 July he received the degrees of bachelor and doctor of music. He remained in Cambridge for a further two days performing his earlier compositions 'Peleus and Thetis', Dryden's 'Secular Masque', 'Solomon', and 'Gentle Lyre Begin the Strain'. On his return to London he accepted an invitation to become organist of All Hallows-the-Great, where a new organ had been installed. He was appointed on 28 July 1749 but, according to the vestry minute book, was asked to resign on 21 March 1764, evidently owing to frequent non-attendance. 
On the death of Maurice Greene in December 1755 Boyce succeeded him as master of the king's musick, although he was not officially sworn in until June 1757. This prestigious appointment required him to compose annual odes to texts by the poet laureate for the king's birthday and for new year's day which were performed at St James's Palace. He also received Greene's conductorship of the charity festival for the sons of the clergy held annually at St Paul's Cathedral, for which he composed the fine orchestral anthem 'Lord, thou hast been our refuge'. A third royal appointment, organist to the Chapel Royal, followed on the death of John Travers in June 1758. 
After the death of Handel in April 1759, it fell to Boyce to compose the music for state occasions. He composed the orchestral anthem 'The Souls of the Righteous' for the funeral of George II in Westminster Abbey on 11 November 1760, the wedding anthem 'The king shall rejoice' for George III and Queen Charlotte at St James's Palace on 8 September 1761, and a set of eight anthems for the coronation in Westminster Abbey on 22 September. Boyce declined to set the text 'Zadok the Priest', claiming that Handel had provided an unsurpassable setting for the coronation of George II in 1727. Thereby Boyce inaugurated the tradition of performing Handel's anthem at every coronation thereafter. 
By September 1756 Boyce had left his parental home in Joiner's Hall, where he had lived since 1723, and was living in Quality Court, Chancery Lane. On 9 June 1759 he married Hannah Nixon, which remains a chronological puzzle since their daughter Elizabeth was born on 29 April 1749. A son, William, was born on 25 March 1764, and by this time the family had moved to Kensington Gore. Hawkins implies that this was precipitated by Boyce's worsening deafness. He wrote in the 'Memoirs' 'that before the expiration of his apprenticeship, Boyce's organs of hearing were so sensibly affected, that in a short time he became little less than deaf... it deprived him in some degree of a source of both delight and improvement, but he considered music as a mental and not a sensual pleasure, and secretly and with advantage contemplated that harmony which he could but just hear. (Hawkins, i)' This handicap may explain Boyce's scholarly interest in the history and science of music. In the 1730s he studied with the composer and musical theorist Johann Christoph Pepusch, with whom he shared an interest in earlier musical styles. Boyce in turn shared his knowledge with 'organists and young musicians desirous of improvement in the theory of sounds, the laws of harmony, and the art of practical composition' (Hawkins, vii). His notable pupils included Thomas Linley, John Stafford Smith, Charles Wesley, and Jonathan Battishill. During his life Boyce assembled a considerable music library of manuscripts and printed music which eventually contained Greene's collection bequeathed to him at his death. The sale catalogue of Christie and Ansell (14-16 April 1779) reveals its riches in the descriptions of its 267 lots. As late as November 1778 Boyce evidently visited Christ Church, Oxford, and made an inventory of Dean Aldrich's music books. Philip Hayes returned the list to the college after his death, and it was almost certainly Hayes who acquired for the music school of the University of Oxford a large portion of Boyce's own compositions in manuscript from Hannah Boyce. Also acquired, from where is not known, was the full-length portrait of Boyce painted by Thomas Hudson about 1745. These are now in the Bodleian Library. Other collections of Boyce's music manuscripts are in the British Library, the Royal College of Music, the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, and University College, Aberystwyth. 
Boyce was an assiduous editor and brought to fruition John Alcock's and Maurice Greene's cherished but unfulfilled proposal to publish an uncorrupt corpus of church music, printed in score, to be placed in the hands of all cathedral and collegiate choirs. Boyce's wife stated that he achieved this with considerable financial loss to himself, but its influence on the repertory of English church music was to last for more than a century. 'Cathedral Music' was published in three large volumes in 1760, 1768, and 1773. In his last years at Kensington, Boyce was writing a treatise on harmonic theory and corresponding with Marmaduke Overend on the science of music. This material is also in the Bodleian. 
Boyce died of gout in Kensington on 7 February 1779 and was honoured with burial in the crypt of St Paul's Cathedral on the 16th. The funeral was attended by a large gathering of musicians and he was buried to the sound of his own music played on the organ and sung by the choirs of the Chapel Royal, St Paul's, and Westminster Abbey. Both Burney and Hawkins knew Boyce personally and describe him in their writings. Burney in Rees's 'Cyclopaedia' writes: 'There is an original and sterling merit in his productions, founded as much on the study of our own old masters, as on the best models of other countries, that gives to all his works a peculiar stamp and character of his own, for strength, clearness, and facility, without any mixture of styles, or extraneous and heterogeneous ornaments.' Hawkins, in his 'Memoirs of Dr. William Boyce' of 1788, describes something of Boyce's character: 'He was endowed with the qualities of truth, justice, and integrity, was mild and gentle in his deportment, above all resentment against such as envied his reputation, communicative of his knowledge, sedulous and punctual in the discharge of the duties of his several employments, particularly those that regarded the performance of divine service, and in every relation of life a worthy man. (Hawkins, xi)' This is borne out by Boyce's support for charitable foundations. For Mercer's Hospital in Dublin he composed the orchestral anthem 'Blessed is he that Considereth the Sick' (1741), which he later introduced at the festival of the sons of the clergy at St Paul's. He composed and conducted the funeral music for the burial of the philanthropist Captain Thomas Coram at the Foundling Hospital on 3 April 1751. For the benefit of the Leicester Infirmary he composed the ode 'Lo! On the Thorny Bed of Care', with words by Joseph Cradock, performed in St Martin's Church, Leicester, in September 1774. 
Together with Handel and other eminent musicians, Boyce was a founder member of the Fund for the Support of Decayed Musicians and their Families, inaugurated on 19 April 1738: it is known today as the Royal Society of Musicians of Great Britain. There is evidence to suggest from appeals made by his widow that Boyce himself died impoverished. To assist the family Philip Hayes selected and published two volumes of Boyce's services and anthems -- the first in November 1780, the second in 1790 -- and in the year of Boyce's death Longman and Broderip published 'Ten Voluntaries for the Organ or Harpsichord', which is Boyce's only known set of keyboard works. 


@@@@@


doc= 3100


Boycott, Charles Cunningham (1832-1897), land agent, from whose surname the word 'boycott' is derived, was born on 12 March 1832, the eldest surviving son of Revd William Boycatt (who changed his name to Boycott in 1862), rector of Wheatacre, Burgh St Peter, Norfolk, and Elizabeth Georgiana, daughter of Arthur Beevor. He was educated in Blackheath and Woolwich, and in 1850 was appointed ensign in the 39th regiment. After leaving the army in 1852 with the rank of captain, he farmed 500 acres near Loughmask, co. Mayo, in Ireland. In 1873 he became agent for Lord Erne, who owned 12,000 acres in co. Mayo. 
In 1879 the Land League was formed to fight against tenant evictions and to discourage people from taking a farm from which a tenant had been evicted. In 1880 the Land League demanded a 25 per cent reduction in the rents paid by Lord Erne's tenants, and in September Boycott had to be placed under police protection following mob attacks. 
Meanwhile Charles Stewart Parnell, in a speech at Ennis on 19 September 1880, advised tenants who could not obtain the reductions they demanded to take action against their landlord or his agent by 'isolating him from his kind as if he were a leper of old' (Hammond, 192-3). Parnell was not the first to recommend this course of action: it had been used since the mid-century and by the Land League since 1879, when John Dillon urged that if any man took up land from which another had been evicted 'let no man speak to him or have any business transaction with him'. But Parnell's speech encouraged Lord Erne's tenants to apply this treatment to Boycott. (Kee, 211). Labourers refused to work for him, his walls were pulled down and his cattle scattered, he was unable to obtain provisions from the neighbourhood, and food had to be brought to him by steamer. He was hooted and spat on in the road, and only with great difficulty did he receive letters and telegrams. 
Appeals to the government for assistance were at first made in vain, and on 18 October he sent a letter to 'The Times' complaining of his treatment. A month later a party of fifty Ulstermen, chiefly from co. Cavan (afterwards known as 'emergency men'), volunteered to harvest Boycott's crops, and they were given an escort of 900 soldiers. This was seen as a victory by the Land League, which was able to boast that thanks to its actions it had taken nearly 1000 men to gather in the produce of one farm. The number of evictions declined as a result. Once the harvest was completed, Boycott went to the United States. On his return to Ireland in the autumn of 1881 he was mobbed at an auction at Westport, and his effigy was hanged and burnt. He also received letters signed 'Rory of the Hills', threatening him with the fate of Lord Leitrim, who had recently been murdered. But things gradually improved and by 1883 were back to normal. 
In 1886 Boycott left Ireland and became agent for Sir Hugh Adair's estates, in Suffolk. Boycott soon lived down his unpopularity and he even took his holidays in Ireland, but he was unable to obtain any compensation from the government. On 12 December 1888 he gave evidence before the special commission appointed to investigate the charges made by 'The Times' against the Irish leaders, though he was not cross-examined. 
The word 'boycott' first came into use at the end of 1880. In the 'Daily News' of 13 December it was printed in capitals. Joseph Gillis Biggar, MP for co. Cavan, was among those who used it to signify all intimidatory measures that stopped short of physical violence. It came into general use to describe measures used to isolate an institution or a country. 
Boycott was a shortish man with a bald head, a heavy white moustache, and flowing white beard. In 1853 he married Annie, daughter of John Dunne. He died on 19 June 1897 at Priest's House, Flixton, Suffolk. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 3101


Boyd, Andrew Kennedy Hutchison (1825-1899), Church of Scotland minister and author, was born on 3 November 1825 at Auchinleck manse, Ayrshire, the eldest son of James Boyd (1787-1865), minister of the Tron parish, Glasgow, and his wife, Jane Hutchison. He received his earliest education at Ochiltree parish school and then at Ayr Academy (1838-40). In 1840 Boyd moved to London, studying at King's College and then at the Middle Temple; he seemed likely to follow a career at the English bar, but in 1844 his life changed direction on his decision to enter the ministry of the Church of Scotland. He moved to study at the University of Glasgow, first in arts and then in divinity: he was a fine student, winning nine first prizes while studying divinity and receiving his BA in 1846. On completing his studies he was licensed by the presbytery of Ayr and preached his first public sermon in Greenock, Renfrewshire, in October 1850. 
Boyd's ministry began in Edinburgh, as an assistant at St George's, with his first individual charge being at Newton upon Ayr (1851-4). This was followed by Kirkpatrick-Irongray (1854-9), St Bernard's, Edinburgh (1859-65), and finally by the first charge of St Andrews from 1865 until his sudden death in 1899. His considerable fame was based on a combination of his reputation as a preacher and on his popularity as a writer, as well as his contributions to debates within the Church of Scotland. His various achievements were recognized by the University of Edinburgh, which granted him the degree of DD in 1864 (when Boyd was only thirty-four); by the University of St Andrews, which awarded him an LLD in 1889; by the Church of Scotland, which elected him to its highest position, moderator of the general assembly, in 1890; and by King's College, London, which made him a fellow in 1895. Boyd married on 12 April 1854 Margaret Buchanan (died 1895), with whom he had seven children. On 5 April 1897 he married his second wife, Janet Balfour (died 1917). 
It was during Boyd's time at Kirkpatrick-Irongray that relatively light ministerial duties allowed him the time to develop his skill as a writer, and it was by the initials under which he wrote -- A. K. H. B. -- that he was perhaps best known. He wrote articles for 'Fraser's Magazine', which were eventually published in three series as 'The Recreations of a Country Parson' (1859, 1861, and 1878), and ran into many editions. His writings were also immensely popular in the United States, where the 1861 series of 'The Recreations' went through twenty editions. Despite finding writing difficult and even painful, he wrote prodigiously, a mixture of essays, sermons, and reminiscences, including 'The Graver Thoughts of a Country Parson' (3 ser., 1862, 1865, 1875), 'Counsel and Comfort Spoken from a City Pulpit' (1863), and 'Our Little Life: Essays Consolatory and Domestic' (2 ser., 1882, 1884). The semi-autobiographical works 'Twenty-Five Years of St Andrews' (2 vols., 1892), 'St Andrews and Elsewhere' (1894), and 'The Last Years of St Andrews' (1896) provide a fascinating and readable glimpse into his life and times; a detailed diary combined with a tenacious memory meant that very little was forgotten. 'Many a time', said Boyd, 'have I wished that my memory was not nearly so good' (Boyd, 'Last Years', 2-3). 
As a churchman Boyd's importance was fourfold. First, he was an extremely popular preacher -- Robert Story said, 'I never knew a man more fond of preaching; and few preached better... with his earnest and almost emotional manner' (Story, 91). Second, Boyd was a prominent figure in the contentious late nineteenth-century debate about church and state, with his weight firmly behind the principle of the Church of Scotland remaining an established national church. Third, Boyd's numerous contacts with prominent Anglicans, including J. A. Froude, Richard Whately, A. W. Thorold, A. P. Stanley, H. P. Liddon and R. W. Church, gave the Church of Scotland a reputation and exposure in influential English circles which it would not otherwise have had; 'he made its name familiar, its ministry respected, and its history and character, to some extent at least, understood, among people who became interested in it for his sake' (ibid., 93). 'There is no gulf at all', Boyd claimed, 'between the best in the Church of Scotland and the best in the Church of England' (A. Boyd, 'Sermons and Stray Papers', 1907, 41). This view perhaps contributed to his fourth role in Scottish church life as a leading supporter of the move towards the increased use of liturgy in services. An enthusiastic proponent of the use of the Christian year, he was strongly in favour of a more liturgical service and was also instrumental in the Church of Scotland's adoption of 'The Scottish Hymnal', approved in 1870. Although his views earned him unpopularity in places, his role was an important one in the general adoption of these principles within the Scottish church. 
In the 1890s Boyd suffered recurring bouts of ill health from which he never recovered his customary energy, and in 1898-9 a period of illness persuaded him to go to Bournemouth to recuperate. He died there on 1 March 1899 from accidental poisoning, having taken carbolic lotion which he mistook for a sleeping draught. He was interred in the churchyard of St Andrews Cathedral, Robert Story, principal of the University of Glasgow, preaching his funeral sermon. 


@@@@@


doc= 3102


Boyd, Archibald (1803-1883), dean of Exeter, was born at Londonderry, the son of Archibald Boyd, treasurer of that city. After being educated at the local diocesan college he proceeded to Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated BA in 1823, proceeding MA in 1834, and BD and DD in 1868. He officiated as curate and preacher in the cathedral of Londonderry 1827-42, and here first distinguished himself as an able and powerful preacher, as a controversialist, and as an author. At that time the controversy between the presbyterians and the episcopalians of the north of Ireland was at its height. Boyd came to the defence of the established church and preached a series of discourses in reply to attacks. These discourses attracted great attention, and were afterwards printed as 'Sermons on the Church' (1838), 'Episcopacy, Ordination, Lay-Eldership, and Liturgies' (1839), and 'Episcopacy and Presbytery' (1841). 
In 1842 Boyd was appointed perpetual curate of Christ Church, Cheltenham. With Francis Close, his fellow worker, he took part in a scheme for establishing additional Sunday schools, infant schools, and 'Bible' classes, and campaigned for a public library. He became an honorary canon of Gloucester in 1857. He was also a rural dean of the diocese. From 1859 to 1867 he was vicar of Paddington. 
On 11 November 1867 Boyd accepted the deanery of Exeter, which he held until his death. Like Dean Close, he was a preaching and a working dean. He was a firm but moderate evangelical, and a voluminous writer on the ecclesiastical questions of the day. Notable among his publications are 'England, Rome, and Oxford' (1846), a history of the prayer book (1850), 'Turkey and the Turks' (1853), and works on baptism (1865) and confession (1867). His name is connected with the Exeter reredos case. In 1872-3 the dean and chapter erected in the cathedral a stone reredos, on which were sculptured representations in bas-relief of the ascension, the transfiguration, and the descent of the Holy Ghost, with some figures of angels. In accordance with a petition presented by William John Phillpotts, chancellor of the diocese, the bishop (Frederick Temple) on 7 January 1874 declared the reredos to be contrary to law and ordered its removal. But Boyd's action was found by the privy council (on 25 February 1875) to have been legitimate (or at least not illegitimate). At Exeter, Boyd attempted to suppress vicars choral. 
In the autumn of 1882 Boyd had an accident at Vienna from which he never fully recovered. He died at the deanery, Exeter, on 11 July 1883, bequeathing nearly $40,000 to various societies and institutions in the diocese of Exeter. His wife, Frances, daughter of Thomas Waller of Ospringe, and widow of the Revd Robert Day Denny, had died on 6 January 1877, and Boyd's considerable estate may have come from her. 


@@@@@


doc= 3103


Boyd, Benjamin (1801-1851), stockbroker and entrepreneur, was born on 21 August 1801, in the parish of St Peter Le Pauvre, London, second son of Edward Boyd (1770?-1844), merchant, and his wife, Janet, daughter of Benjamin Yule, of Wheatfield, Midlothian. By 1808 the family had moved from Surrey to an ancestral seat -- Merton Hall, near Newton Stewart, in Wigtownshire, Scotland -- where seven surviving sons and three surviving daughters were raised and educated. 
Edward Boyd had substantial overseas commercial interests, and his eldest son achieved seniority in the East India Company. In 1825 Benjamin joined the London stock exchange, and by the late 1830s he was a director of the North British Insurance Company, the St George Steam Packet Company, the London Reversionary Interest Society and -- with James Matheson and others -- the Union Bank of London. Tall, charming, capable, and commanding, Boyd moved in the highest society, his lively intellect enhancing a natural charisma. Even one of the Rothschilds confessed to being captivated, regardless that in their negotiations 'I always lose money by him; he is such a screw' (Boyd, 94). 
In October 1840 Boyd outlined to the Colonial Office his maturing plans for 'further developing the resources of Australia and its adjacent islands' ('Historical Records of Australia', 21.54-6). He was assured of ready assistance for his proposals to introduce a steamship service (requiring ancillary harbours and coaling stations) between Antipodean settlements; but the response to his enquiries about the possible status of personal territory he might acquire in the south seas was equivocal. In preparation for these activities the Royal Bank of Australia had been floated in March 1840 with a nominal capital of $1 million. Boyd, its chairman, held 6000 of its $50 shares, which carried a guaranteed dividend of 5 per cent for five years. He was also a director (and his brother Mark Boyd the manager) of the Australian Wool Company, and of a private company, Boyd Brothers, both formed in November 1840. Dexterous financial shuffling created further ambiguous commitments. In substance the bank exchanged debentures with the wool company, transferring the considerable difference to Boyd, in cash. The North British Insurance Company advanced him $27,000 against other debentures, and the Union Bank lent the Royal Bank $30,000. The St George Steam Packet Company bought steamships with funds provided by the Union Bank. 
Boyd set out for Australia in his superb, heavily armed, Royal Yacht Squadron brig 'Wanderer' in October 1841. Among its company were his brother James, the artist Oswald Brierly, and Henry Sewell. Having reached Port Phillip on 10 June 1842, Boyd arrived at Sydney on 18 July and set up headquarters at Neutral Bay. Three steamships had preceded him, carrying passengers (including his brother Curwen), cargoes, supplies, bank personnel, and cash. A rudimentary steamship service was already under way, depending for re-coaling on Twofold Bay, south of Sydney. There, Boyd speedily developed a settlement at Boydtown, established a whaling station, and acquired extensive grazing rights in the hinterland. From Twofold Bay livestock, wool, and whaling produce were eventually shipped to Sydney, London, and other markets. 
Boyd had arrived in New South Wales on the eve of a cataclysmic depression. Economic conditions and rampant hostility towards London banks required the diversion of Royal Bank funds into dependable assets, and by mid-1844 Boyd had acquired rights to over 400,000 acres of prime land. As a major landholder he successfully rallied opposition to the moderate land reforms of Governor George Gipps, and for a year from September 1844 he represented the independent-minded Port Phillip district in the New South Wales legislative council. He was also foundation president, in 1844, of the influential Pastoralists' Association that sent his squatter cousin, Archibald Boyd, to lobby in London, where colonial land and emigration issues were also canvassed by Mark Boyd and fellow investors. Employing hundreds of workers in various capacities, and with thousands of stock requiring supervision to make landholding viable, Boyd campaigned for cheaper labour, proposing the transfer of convicts from Van Diemen's Land, and finally importing Pacific islanders, with disastrous results. By 1847 Boyd's resources were desperately over-extended and restive Royal Bank shareholders replaced him with his cousin William Sprott Boyd, who arrived in Sydney in March 1848. The precipitate selling of his assets reportedly made Benjamin Boyd half-deranged; and, having safeguarded his own investment, his cousin William departed in early 1849, to be replaced by a liquidator. 
On 26 October 1849 Boyd left Sydney in the 'Wanderer' for the California goldfields. On 3 June 1851 he sailed from San Francisco to cruise in the Pacific, intent on finding a 'Papuan' base or 'republic'. At San Cristobal in the Solomon Islands he decided to negotiate for 'a tract of land, including Makira [Bay] for future commercial purposes' (Webster, 101), possibly mining for gold. However, on 15 October 1851 Boyd and a crew member failed to return from an early morning shore visit at the neighbouring island of Guadalcanal. After repulsing a native attack, the 'Wanderer' set course for Australia, having failed to find positive evidence of Boyd's fate. When the crippled vessel was wrecked off Port Macquarie, Boyd's highland dress costume, his 'Bible', and a woman's portrait were salvaged. His estate, valued at less than $3000, passed to his creditor, the defunct Royal Bank of Australia. 


@@@@@


doc= 3104


Boyd, Henry (1748/9-1832), translator and Church of Ireland clergyman, was born in Dromore, co. Antrim, the son of Charles Boyd, a farmer. He was educated at Trinity College, Dublin (BA 1776), before becoming a priest. In 1785 he published a two-volume translation of Dante's 'Inferno' in English verse, only the second of its kind, with a specimen of the 'Orlando Furioso' of Ariosto. It was printed by subscription, and dedicated to the earl of Bristol, bishop of Derry. The dedication is dated from Killeigh, near Tullamore, which was presumably Boyd's parish at the time. In 1793 he published a volume of his own verse, 'Poems Chiefly Dramatic and Lyric'. 
In 1802 Boyd issued three volumes of an English verse translation of the whole 'Divina commedia' of Dante, with preliminary essays, notes, and illustrations. The translation is important as the first English version of the complete 'Divine Comedy' to be published. It was, however, limited by Boyd's view of the translator's role as that of contemporizer, and his adherence to neo-classical poetic strictures. He intended to make the work accessible to a contemporary audience, and so the model was condensed, altered, and bowdlerized, Boyd's six-line stanzas bearing no real correspondence to Dante's original tercets. The edition's value was in assisting to re-establish an audience for Dante, whose reputation had suffered a decline in the previous century. It was dedicated to Viscount Charleville, whose chaplain Boyd was until the Irish rising induced him to resign his post. 
In 1805 Boyd published the 'Penance of Hugo: a Vision', translated from the Italian of Vincenzo Monti, with two additional cantos; and the 'Woodman's Tale', a poem written in the manner and metre of Spenser's 'Faerie Queene'; but he was unable to find a publisher for his translation of Ercilla's long poem 'Araucana'. By this time he had also become the vicar of Drumgath, but was possibly best-known until the day of his death as the vicar of Rathfriland, or as chaplain to the earl of Charleville. In 1807 he issued Petrarch's 'Trionfi', translated into English verse as the 'Triumphs of Petrarch'; and in 1809, some notes of his on the fallen angels in 'Paradise Lost' were published, with other notes and essays on Milton, under the editorship of the Revd Henry Todd, as 'Some Account of the Life and Writings of John Milton'. Boyd died at Ballintemple, near Newry, co. Down, at an advanced age, on 18 September 1832. 


@@@@@


doc= 3105


Boyd, Hugh Macaulay (1746-1794), writer on politics, was born Hugh Macaulay on 16 April 1746 in Ballycastle, co. Antrim, the younger son of Alexander Macaulay (died 1766), barrister and member of the Irish parliament, and his wife, formerly Miss Boyd (died 1782). After attending the Revd Thomas Ball's school in Dublin, in 1760, at the age of fourteen, he began his studies at Trinity College, Dublin, and completed them in 1765. At some point in the later 1760s, following the death of his maternal grandfather Boyd in 1765, Hugh Macaulay changed his surname to that of this grandfather and received a small bequest. In 1766 his father died intestate and his estate passed to his eldest son, leaving Boyd without an income. This lack of money reputedly led him to abandon his hopes of an army career and to opt instead for a legal training. He moved to London, but instead of pursuing a place at the bar, he appears to have concentrated on his social life, quickly becoming immersed in the fashionable society of the capital, where his chess and conversation skills made him popular. He was soon able to count Edmund Burke, Catharine Macaulay, David Garrick, John Wilkes, and Joshua Reynolds among his wide circle of acquaintances. Boyd also frequently attended parliamentary debates, and was noted for his ability to memorize speeches. In December 1767, already experiencing the financial difficulties that were to dog him throughout his life, he was fortunate enough to marry a young woman with money, Frances Morphy. His career as a political writer took off in 1776, when he returned to Ireland and published an address to the electors of Antrim from 'a Freeholder'. Back in London, Boyd produced an edition of the earl of Chatham's speeches, and continued to write anonymous political material. In 1777 and 1778 he wrote pieces for the London newspapers in support of the nabob of Arcot, presumably hoping to secure his patronage. Writing on more general political matters, he sent letters to the 'Public Advertiser' signed 'Democrates' and wrote for the 'London Courant' as 'The Whig' in 1779 and 1780. 
At this point in his life, whether due to foolish generosity or an extravagant lifestyle, Boyd had spent his wife's fortune, and was forced to seek employment abroad. In 1781 he travelled to Madras in order to work for the East India Company under Lord Macartney. The following year he travelled to Ceylon on a diplomatic mission to the king of Candy. He met with little success in his negotiations, and was subsequently captured by the French on his journey back to Madras. Once freed, he returned to India and embarked again on a journalistic career, running the 'Madras Courier' during 1792, and launching the 'Indian Observer' and the 'Hircarrah' in 1793. However, his activities were cut short in the following year, and he died in Madras, apparently penniless, on 19 October 1794, survived by his wife, a son, Hugh Stuart Boyd, and a daughter. 
Hugh Boyd did not become famous until after his death, when a number of publications claimed that he was Junius, the pseudonymous writer of a series of letters to the 'Public Advertiser' between 1769 and 1772 that was highly critical of the government. The secrecy surrounding Junius's identity, and the vitriolic nature of the attacks, made unmasking the author a source of great interest among the British public, even as late as the early nineteenth century. In 1800 Lawrence Dundas Campbell, an associate of Boyd, published an edition of his works which identified Hugh Boyd as Junius. John Almon, who had edited the 'London Courant' when it published Boyd's letters under the pseudonym of The Whig, agreed with Campbell, and claimed to have recognized Boyd's handwriting when reading original manuscripts of Junius's letters. However, despite the certainty of men like Campbell, Almon, and others, modern scholarship does not attribute much weight to their claims. 


@@@@@


doc= 3106


Boyd, Hugh Stuart (1781-1848), Greek scholar, was born at Edgware, Middlesex, on 23 March 1781, the son of Hugh Macaulay Boyd (1746-1794) and his wife, Frances, 'nee' Morphy. His father had been born Hugh Macaulay, but prior to his son's birth had assumed the surname of his maternal grandfather, Hugh Boyd (1690-1765), of Ballycastle, Ireland. 
As a boy in Hampstead, Boyd studied Greek with a tutor named Spowers. He was admitted a pensioner of Pembroke College, Cambridge, on 24 July 1799 and matriculated on 17 December 1800, but left the university without taking a degree. He once claimed that he could repeat 3280 'lines' of Greek prose and 4770 lines of Greek verse. 
On 16 September 1805 Boyd married Ann Wilson Lowry (died 1834), daughter of Wilson Lowry, the engraver and geologist. They had one child, Ann Henriette (1811-1901), and lived in various furnished houses in England, financed by his Irish estates. In 1811 he contracted ophthalmia, which led to complete blindness. A move in 1825 to Great Malvern and a reading of Elizabeth Barrett's 'Essay on Mind' (1826) led in 1827 to their correspondence and friendship. She read Greek aloud to him, and he tutored her in the language. The friendship flourished in 1831-2 when both were living in Sidmouth. 
Boyd's original publications included 'Luceria, a Tragedy' (1806) rejected by Drury Lane, and 'A Malvern Tale and other Poems' (1814). His translations included 'Select Passages from the Works of St Chrysostom, St Gregory Nazianzen etc' (1810) and the 'Agamemnon of Aeschylus' (1803). 'Thoughts on an Illustrious Exile' (1825) extolled the Waldensian Christians and praised Napoleon's religious toleration, while Boyd's staunchly Anglican, anti-papist stance is expressed in 'The Fathers not Papist with Select Passages and Tributes to the Dead' (1834). Despite his pedantry and vanity Elizabeth Barrett supported the lonely widower after 1834, when he lived in London, first at St John's Wood, then at 21 Downshire Hill, Hampstead, and then again at St John's Wood. Her 1844 volume, which made her fame, recalled in 'Wine of Cypress' Boyd's hospitality at Malvern. In September 1846 she confided to him, uniquely, her impending elopement. Latterly Boyd suffered from acute lumbago; he died at 1 Hawley Place, Kentish Town, London, from a paralytic stroke, on 10 May 1848 and was buried in Highgate cemetery. Elizabeth Barrett Browning published three sonnets in his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 3107


Boyd, James (1795-1856), schoolmaster and author, the son of a glover, was born at Paisley on 24 December 1795. After receiving his early education partly in Paisley and partly in Glasgow, he entered Glasgow University, where he gained some of the highest honours in the humanity, Greek, and philosophy classes. After taking his degrees of BA and MA (1817), he devoted himself for two years to the study of medicine, but, having abandoned this pursuit, entered the Divinity Hall of the University of Glasgow, and was licensed to preach the gospel by the presbytery of Dumbarton in May 1822. Towards the close of that year he removed to Edinburgh, where for three years he maintained himself by private tuition. In 1825 he was unanimously chosen house governor in George Heriot's Hospital, Edinburgh. The University of Glasgow conferred on him the honorary degree of doctor of laws in 1827. He married, on 24 December 1829, Jane Reid, eldest daughter of John Easton, an Edinburgh merchant. They had nine children. 
Boyd became classical master at Edinburgh high school on 19 August 1829; from this time he edited published editions of a number of classical texts. For many years he was also secretary to the Edinburgh Society of Teachers. He died at his house in George Square, Edinburgh, on 18 August 1856, having taught for nearly twenty-seven years in the high school. He was buried at New Calton, Edinburgh, on 21 August. The affectionate respect in which he was held by his pupils was shown after his death. Two 'Boyd clubs' were formed in the Crimea during the Russian war by British officers who had been taught by him, and other societies were founded in his honour by his classes. At a meeting held in Edinburgh his friends and pupils subscribed for a medal, to be named the 'Boyd medal', and to be annually presented to the 'dux' of the class in the high school taught by Boyd's successor. 


@@@@@


doc= 3108


Boyd, Mark (1804/5-1879), author, born in Surrey, near the Thames, was the son of Edward Boyd, merchant, of Merton Hall, Newton Stewart, Wigtownshire, and his wife, Janet, daughter of Benjamin Yule of Wheatfield, Midlothian. He was a brother of Benjamin Boyd. He spent his childhood mainly on the Scottish estate, which was near the River Cree. Later he pursued an active business career in London, where he became the director of a Scottish insurance society, and an active promoter of the colonization of Australia and New Zealand. He travelled much in Europe and published an account in the 'London and Shetland Journal' of a journey in the Orkney Isles in 1839. On 23 December 1848 he married Emma Anne, the widow of 'Romeo' Coates, who had been run over and killed in the previous February; she predeceased him. 
Boyd was a minor author; in 1864 he published a pamphlet about Australia, where his brother had settled. This was followed by 'Reminiscences of Fifty Years' (1871) and 'Social Gleanings' (1875) the latter being written from Oatlands, Walton-on-Thames. He died at the Alexandra Hotel, Hyde Park, London (his home at the time), on 13 September 1879, aged seventy-four. 


@@@@@


doc= 3109


Boyd, Mark Alexander (1563-1601), humanist scholar and writer, was born on 13 January 1563, possibly in Galloway, the son of Robert Boyd of Penkill Castle, Ayrshire. James Boyd, archbishop of Glasgow, was his uncle. His family was descended from the first Lord Boyd, who was forfeited by James III; his father was the son of the first Boyd of Penkill. The chronology and detail of Mark Alexander Boyd's life are still uncertain, and much that has been said about him is difficult to verify. It is said, for example, that he assumed the name Alexander, but was baptized only as Mark. However, his printed works all refer to him as Marcus Alexander Bodius, indicating that the full name was how he was known by his contemporaries. He is also said to have begun his advanced education at the University of Glasgow, but to have left following some unscholarly behaviour, including burning his books and insulting his masters. However, his name does not appear in the published records of the university, and in later years he exchanged polite correspondence with the principal of the university, Patrick Sharp, and also dedicated a poem to him. From this, it looks rather that his departure to the continent was occasioned by something other than his own insubordinate behaviour towards the university. 
In 1581 Boyd went to France, and he remained on the continent until 1595. He seems to have spent his time there alternately studying and soldiering. He began studying in Paris, and from there went to Orleans to study civil law. He then followed his uncle's example of thirty years previous, and went to Bourges to study under Jacques Cujas. He left for Lyons about 1584, probably because of an outbreak of plague. From Lyons he travelled to Italy, where he met Cornelius Varus, who became his friend and a great admirer of his poetry. He returned to France by 1587, when he took up soldiering on behalf of Henri III. After being wounded, he returned to his study of law, this time at Toulouse, but when forces opposing Henri III captured the city, he moved to Bordeaux. 
In Bordeaux in 1590, one of Boyd's collections of poetry and prose, 'Epistolae quindecim', was printed by Simon Millange; the other collection printed in his lifetime, the 'Epistolae heroides et hymni', was printed at La Rochelle by Jerome Haultin in 1592 (this collection carries the false imprint of Antwerp, but the typeface marks it out as an Haultin printing). These volumes contain a wide range of material, mostly in Latin, though there are some pieces in Greek and a treatise in French; there are also some other works by Boyd contained in manuscript, and these too are mostly in Latin. 
Boyd's poetry includes two sets of 'Epistolae heroides', inspired by Ovid's poems, some of which are responses from the men addressed in Ovid's poems, and others of which extend the idea to other heroines, both mythical, such as Penelope, and historical, such as Julia Augusta. The manuscript version of these is dated 1588, two years prior to their printing. There are also seventeen 'Elegiae', seven only in manuscript, nine only in the 1590 printing, and one in both. The 'Hymni', mostly accounts of flowers and stories attached to them, are additionally interesting for their dedications to various figures, including James VI, the dauphin, and Patrick Sharp, principal of Glasgow University; these appear in the 1592 printing, together with a poem (not about a flower) in Greek. Among numerous epigrams on a range of topics there is an epitaph for James Boyd, Mark Alexander's uncle. There are also a few miscellaneous poems, including a Greek epigram also addressed to James VI. 
Boyd's prose is equally varied, but apart from the letters it survives only in manuscript. Some of the work reflects his studies in law: there is, for example, a commentary on Justinian's 'Institutes', dated 1591, and also a treatise called 'Jurisconsultus', dedicated to Francois Balduin, possibly the Belgian jurist, though Boyd cannot have met him. Political matters are also the concern of two other works: the first is in Latin, 'Politicus', a treatise about the qualities of a statesman, dedicated to John Maitland, Lord Thirlestane, in 1590, and the second is in French, 'Discours civiles sur le royaume d'Ecosse'. The latter is incomplete, however, since only one book survives out of the twelve promised in the introductory material. 
Boyd's other treatise, 'Poeta', is also unfinished. It is dedicated to his friend Cornelius Varus and sets out to explore the nature and training of a poet. It is a theme to which Boyd returns in a letter to Varus, printed in the 1592 collection; in it he seems to imply that he is giving up his poetic endeavours, but not enough is known about Boyd's life to interpret that statement with any certainty. Another eighteen of Boyd's letters, often addressed to the dedicatees of the verse, were also included in the 1592 collection, although none is dated. Other letters survive in manuscript, six to a relative, Robert Boyd, dated 1595, and one from Patrick Sharp to Boyd, dated 1592. 
More recently Boyd has become better known for the vernacular sonnet 'Fra banc to banc' than for his works in Latin or in French. For a number of reasons the ascription of the sonnet to Boyd has been questioned: his discussions of poetry are largely concerned with writing in Latin, though he is not hostile to vernacular writing; no other vernacular work of his survives; the poem survives only in a single contemporary print and two eighteenth-century manuscript copies, and its attribution in all of these is ambiguous. However, recent work on this matter concludes that the attribution should stand. It would seem likely that this piece too was written while Boyd was in France, since the style of the print is very similar to those of the printers responsible for printing Boyd's collections in the early 1590s. 
Boyd returned to Scotland in 1595. At least some of his last years were spent as a tutor to the earl of Cassillis, involving another journey abroad, but he died in Scotland, at Penkill, on 10 April 1601, and was buried at the church at Dailly. While his current reputation may rest on his excellent though isolated sonnet in Scots, it is clear that he is better placed in the world of other Scottish Latin poets -- such as George Buchanan, of whom he speaks so respectfully, and Arthur Johnston, who reprinted his works -- for, like them, he participated in a European rather than a narrowly Scottish culture. 


@@@@@


doc= 3110


Robert Boyd, first Lord Boyd (d. 1481/2), who was involved in the murder of Sir James Stewart of Ardgowan on 31 May 1445. He was made a lord of parliament by James II in June 1452, along with a number of south-westerners, as a way of securing support in the wake of the king's murder of the eighth earl of Douglas. He witnessed the parliamentary forfeiture of the ninth earl of Douglas in June 1455, but was not particularly prominent in royal business at any time before 1466. Instead it is his brother, Sir Alexander Boyd of Drumcoll, who is most visible in the governmental records. A bond of 10 February 1466 makes it clear that at this time Alexander, the keeper of Edinburgh Castle and chamberlain, was virtually a partner with Gilbert, Lord Kennedy, in the governorship of the young James III. Lord Boyd used his brother's links with Kennedy to enable the coup of 9 July 1466, when he led the seizure of James III following the exchequer audit at Linlithgow and took him to his brother's stronghold at Edinburgh. A parliament of October 1466 appointed him guardian, and witnessed the king's declaration, undoubtedly made under duress, that Lord Boyd had acted on his orders. Alexander Boyd was then discarded. He was excluded from the parliamentary apologia, and by early 1467 Lord Boyd had assumed his brother's offices. 
Self-aggrandizement was used to reinforce a very narrowly based regime. Boyd's son Thomas ['see below'] was made earl of Arran, and early in 1467 was married to the king's sister Mary, while his daughter Elizabeth married the earl of Angus. In contrast, very little patronage was given to those who had taken part in the coup, or were sympathetic to it. To the antagonism of the nobility was added the irritation of the now nearly adult king, angered by Arran's marriage to his sister. On 25 April 1468, in order to prop up his authority, and to avoid calling a hostile parliament, Boyd had to make an agreement with prominent members of the council, by which they promised to defend Boyd's guardianship. 
Boyd's period of office saw one notable success, with the ratification on 8 September 1468 of the treaty of Copenhagen by which Margaret of Denmark was betrothed to James III, the 'annual' -- the payment due to Norway since 1266 -- for the Western Isles was cancelled, and Orkney and Shetland were pawned to Scotland, in the first step to their subsequent annexation. But in the summer of 1469, while Lord Boyd was in England on embassy, and Arran still in Denmark, the king assumed control of government, presumably with the help of his councillors, and probably his half-uncles, the earl of Atholl and James Stewart of Auchterhouse. Lord Boyd, Arran, and Alexander Boyd were forfeited in parliament on 22 November 1469 for their treasonous seizure of the king three years before, although only the unfortunate Alexander was present to be executed. Lord Boyd had joined his son in exile in Bruges by early 1470. By 1471 he was in England, where Edward IV gave him a yearly pension of 200 marks, and was residing in Alnwick in 1475, to the annoyance of James III. He died in England in 1481 or 1482. He married Mariota, daughter of Sir John Maxwell of Calderwood, and had three sons. 
The eldest of these, 


@@@@@


doc= 3111


Boyd, Robert, fifth Lord Boyd (c.1517-1590), nobleman, was the eldest son of Robert, fourth Lord Boyd (died 1558), and Helen, daughter of Sir John Somerville of Cambusnethan. In 1535 he married Margaret (died 1601), daughter of Sir John Colquhoun of Glins, with whom he had two sons, Thomas and Robert, and six daughters, Margaret, Helen, Egidia, Agnes, Christine, and Elizabeth. He succeeded to his father's title in 1558. 
The power base of the Boyd family was in Ayrshire, which had a reputation for religious dissidence stretching back to the time of the Lollards of Kyle in James IV's reign. Consequently it is not surprising that Robert Boyd, like some of the other leading Ayrshire landowners, notably the earl of Glencairn and Lord Ochiltree, should have played a prominent role in the events surrounding the Reformation in 1559-60, at both a local and a national level. At Easter 1559 Boyd was nominated one of the lords of the congregation who would protect the protestant reformer John Willock while he engaged in theological debate with Quintin Kennedy, abbot of Crossraguel. The contest was scheduled to take place at St John's Kirk, Ayr, but Kennedy ultimately decided not to participate. Then in the summer of 1559, as the protestant revolution gathered force, Boyd joined Knox and his followers at Perth, and when it became apparent in July that victory was impossible without outside assistance he was among the signatories of a letter appealing to Queen Elizabeth for English support. On 4 November Henry Balnaves, a leading reformer, reported paying 500 crowns to Glencairn and Boyd, thereby helping to keep them loyal to the protestant cause. In February 1560 Boyd was one of the commissioners appointed to negotiate the treaty of Berwick, which guaranteed English military and naval aid against the French forces of the regent, Mary of Guise. Having witnessed the defeat of the latter in the summer of 1560, Boyd attended the convention at Edinburgh in January 1561 at which the 'Book of Discipline', the first blueprint for the kirk, was given parliamentary approval. 
Mary's personal reign from 1561 to 1567 created something of a dilemma for Boyd. He obviously had a strong attachment to the queen, yet some of her actions dismayed him. Thus the announcement in the summer of 1565 of her marriage to Lord Darnley, who had been brought up a Roman Catholic, aroused his fears over her religious intentions and caused him to join Moray's faction against the queen. The upshot of this questionable move was Boyd's participation in the so-called chaseabout raid, a futile attempt at rebellion led by Moray in August-September 1565. After assembling initially in Boyd's home territory of Ayrshire, the insurgents briefly occupied Edinburgh at the end of August, but the absence of any substantial support either in Scotland or from England soon caused the revolt to fizzle out. 
Summoned to stand trial for his actions, Boyd decided to seek reconciliation with Darnley, and in March 1566 he joined those who, in return for a pardon for their involvement in the chaseabout raid, signed a bond recommending that the queen's consort be given the crown matrimonial. In the event Boyd received his remission from Mary herself, when after Riccio's murder she astutely split her opponents by granting pardons to the previous year's rebels, but not to those who had assassinated her secretary. Then after the murder of Darnley in February 1567 Boyd showed himself in favour of the queen's marrying Bothwell. He was a member of the jury which acquitted the earl of involvement in Darnley's death, and also a signatory of the Ainslie bond supporting his proposed marriage to Mary. On 17 May he was made a privy councillor, and in the following month he was a leader in an (unsuccessful) attempt to hold Edinburgh for the queen. 
However, it was after Mary was forced to abdicate (24 July 1567) that Boyd's loyalty to her became particularly conspicuous. It was far from unusual in sixteenth-century Scotland for political allegiance to be at odds with religious affiliation, in whole regions as well as in individuals. Boyd was a native of the protestant south-west, which was nevertheless a powerful bastion of support for the queen. This may have been due in part to the highly successful tour of Ayrshire which Mary made in 1563. Moreover, it is likely that Boyd, like many others, disapproved of Mary's enforced abdication, believing it could only lead to civil war and instability. On 13 May 1568 he fought for Mary at Langside, and in September, following a meeting of her supporters at Dumbarton, he was nominated a commissioner to represent the queen at the forthcoming inquiry into Mary's behaviour which Queen Elizabeth had instigated. Boyd's selection was endorsed by Mary and he joined Bishop John Lesley, Lord Herries, and the others for the proceedings first at York and later at Westminster. Mary seems to have trusted him without reservation, and in a letter to Cecil of 11 February 1569 asked that she could keep him and Lesley permanently with her. In February 1569, with the investigation completed, Boyd was given a safe conduct to return to Scotland, but instead lingered near Tutbury in Staffordshire, where Mary had recently been transferred; he remained in England for much of 1569, acting as a Marian agent and becoming involved in the complex marriage negotiations between Mary and the duke of Norfolk. One of his duties was to deliver, as a token of the duke's affections, a diamond which Mary promised to wear secretly until their wedding took place. Shortly afterwards, in June 1569, he travelled to Scotland and discussed with Regent Moray the possibilities of arranging Mary's divorce from the exiled Bothwell, but he then returned to England once more. Early in 1570 Boyd went back to Scotland and for more than a year was active as one of the 'queen's men' in the civil war waged intermittently between 1570 and 1573. None the less, by August 1571 he had recognized the futility of continuing the struggle, and with other Marians submitted to the earl of Lennox's government. 
The earl of Morton's appointment as regent in November 1572 marked the beginning of the most important phase in Boyd's career. For almost a decade he held a variety of positions in an administration whose political and religious affinities appealed to his own anglophile and protestant leanings. Having been restored to the privy council by Lennox's government on 7 September 1571, Boyd also became an extraordinary lord of session under Morton, and then, as the state assumed control of the kirk's finances, collector of the thirds of benefices. On 17 November 1572 he visited the deathbed of John Knox. Moreover, he was closely involved in the pacification of Perth, of 23 February 1573, when the Gordon and Hamilton families were reconciled to Morton -- Boyd being one of the officials responsible for the execution of the settlement in the southern half of the country. As a reward for his services Boyd received various forfeitures, escheats, and wardships, and in 1575 he was appointed bailie and justiciar of Glasgow, where his nephew James Boyd of Trochrig had become archbishop two years previously. By 1577 Lord Boyd was receiving a yearly pension of 1000 marks from the thirds of the archbishopric and of Paisley Abbey. 
Having remained loyal to the regent during the 1578 crisis, when according to one account he even criticized him for yielding too easily to his enemies, Boyd once more became prominent in government after Morton effected his recovery. Thus he served on the commission, holding discussions with the leaders of the kirk regarding the second 'Book of Discipline'; he was nominated to be one of the roll of councillors who would be in permanent residence with the king at Stirling; he attended the conference of September 1578 which put the final touches to the reconciliation between Morton and the Argyll-Atholl faction; and in 1579 he was named as one of the royal officials responsible for implementing the government's attack on the Hamiltons. 
Morton's overthrow at the end of 1580 signalled the start of a period of fluctuating fortunes for Boyd. In August 1582, undoubtedly unhappy with the policies of the Lennox-Arran government, he joined in the so-called Ruthven raid, the seizure of James VI by ultra-protestants. Less than a year later, however, the raiders were ousted and many of them, including Boyd, were forced to leave the country and seek refuge in England. Only at the end of 1585, when the king assumed personal control of the realm, did Boyd experience better times. Thus in 1586 he was restored to his position as an extraordinary lord of session; and in June of that year he was appointed a border commissioner for negotiations over a proposed Anglo-Scottish alliance. One of his final duties was the supervision of the tax levied to meet the costs of James VI's marriage to Anna of Denmark. Boyd died at Kilmarnock on 3 January 1590, five months before the king and his bride returned to Scotland, and was buried in the Laigh Kirk (Low Church) at Kilmarnock. 
For over thirty years Boyd had been a conspicuous figure in Scottish affairs. Initially he was both a staunch Marian and an ultra-protestant with anglophile sympathies. Latterly, once Mary's cause was indisputably lost, his religious and political outlook dictated most of his actions. The policies pursued by Morton during his regency were highly sympathetic to a man of Boyd's views, making the 1570s the most successful period of his long career. 


@@@@@


doc= 3112


Boyd, Robert, of Trochrig (1578-1627), theological writer and poet, was born in Glasgow, the son of James Boyd of Trochrig, archbishop of Glasgow (died 1581) and his wife, Margaret Chalmers, daughter of James Chalmers, baron of Gaithgirth. Robert was about three years old when his father died and his mother took him and his younger brother, Thomas, to live at Trochrig in Ayrshire. Educated at Ayr grammar school, he studied divinity at Edinburgh University with Robert Rollock, the principal, and philosophy with Charles Ferme, graduating MA about 1594; fellow students included John Murray, Robert Scot, and James Watson. He decided to continue his education abroad, and sailed to Dieppe on 1 May 1597. From there he made his way to Orleans, staying in the house of a Monsieur Gris, settled in Tours for a year, and then spent eight months in Bordeaux before moving to Poitiers. On a visit to Montauban he met Monsieur de Dismes, professor at the protestant university there. His new friend persuaded him to stay, and he taught philosophy at Montauban for the next five years. He lectured for four hours each day, continued his studies in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, and at night read divinity, permitting himself very little sleep. 
It had always been Boyd's desire to enter the church, and in September 1604 he moved to Verteuil, where he was ordained as pastor of the Reformed church on 9 November. His friends in the academic world were anxious not to lose him, however, and in April 1605 his congregation agreed to release him so that he could go to Saumur to be both pastor and professor of philosophy at the protestant university. In 1608 he was given the chair of divinity. He twice visited Scotland during this period, but he felt that his future lay in France and in May 1611 he married Anna (died in or before 1654), daughter of Sir Peter de Maliverne of 'Vineola'. 
Three years later Boyd's happy family life was disturbed when he received a message from James VI and I instructing him to return to Scotland to be principal of Glasgow University. Although reluctant he could not refuse the royal command and he and his family left Saumur on 2 October 1614. He had agreed to a year's trial at Glasgow, where, as well as being principal, he taught theology, Hebrew, and Syriac and was minister at Govan. Admired in Saumur for his fluent French sermons he impressed his Scottish students, like John Livingston, and subordinates like Robert Blair, with his extempore lectures in flowing Latin, as well as his encyclopaedic knowledge of theology, and his personal kindness. His commentary on the epistle to the 'Ephesians', in progress while he was in France but published only after his death, as 'Robert Bidii... in epistolam Pauli Apostoli ad Ephesios' (1652), was a vast work of astonishing learning, and he also wrote excellent Latin poetry, some of which was published in 'Hetacombe Christiana' (1627) and translated by Sir William Mure in 'A Spirituall hymne' (1628). 
His first year satisfactorily accomplished, Boyd agreed to stay on at Glasgow, but as time passed he became embroiled in the controversy over whether the Church of Scotland should have bishops. He believed that it should not. James VI and I was angry when he opposed the five articles of Perth, and in 1621 Boyd resigned, retiring to Trochrig. In October 1622, however, he was invited to become principal of Edinburgh University and minister of Greyfriars church. He accepted, but as soon as James VI heard he wrote to the provost, bailies, and town council of Edinburgh telling them, 'we think his byding ther will do much evil and therefor... we command you to put him not only from his office but out of your town... unless he conform totally' (Wodrow, 189). Boyd refused to comply, and was deprived. 
Back in Ayrshire, Boyd was in 1624 given hopes that he might be restored to his position as principal at Glasgow, but although he signed a qualified declaration of conformity he was not allowed to return. Instead, on 18 December 1625, he accepted an invitation to become minister of Paisley. Even there, however, he was not to have a peaceful life. He had always maintained a wide-ranging correspondence, which he continued, but while one relative, Lady Boyd, wrote to thank him for his care for her spiritual welfare, another was less appreciative. Marion Boyd, the widowed countess of Abercorn, had recently converted to Roman Catholicism. At her urging her second son, Claud, Lord Strabane, broke into Boyd's house, scattering his beloved books and hurling his furnishings into the street. Horrified, Boyd retreated once more to Trochrig and at the end of 1626 fell seriously ill with a painful swelling in his throat, caused by cancer. He travelled to Edinburgh to consult doctors, but died three weeks later, on 5 January 1627 at the age of forty-eight, leaving books worth $1551 and a reputation as 'a very learned and holy man, eminent both in the school and the pulpit' (John Row, in Wodrow, 241). Andre Rivet, brother-in-law of Pierre du Moulin and professor of theology at Leiden, who had known him since his time in France, wrote a sympathetic life, which was in turn a source of Robert Wodrow's biography. 


@@@@@


doc= 3113


Boyd, Sir Robert (bap. 1710, d. 1794), army officer, was baptized on 20 April 1710 at Richmond, Surrey, the son of Ninian Boyd ('b'. 1664) and his wife, Susanna Johnston. In later life he referred to 'an old college friend at Glasgow' (BL, Add. MS 24163, fols. 37-8), and he was probably the Robert Boyd who was entered as an 'Anglo-Scottus' at Glasgow University in 1726. In 1739 Boyd succeeded his father as the board of ordnance storekeeper at Port Mahon, Minorca, a post he held until the loss of the island to the French in 1756. According to a memorial written by Boyd in 1750, for the previous twelve years he had 'done the duties of deputy judge advocate and deputy commissary of the musters' (BL, Add. MS 32721, fol. 31) in Minorca for Sir Anthony Wescombe. Wescombe wanted to resign these offices to him. During the siege of Minorca on 19 May 1756 Boyd made a heroic attempt to reach Admiral John Byng's fleet in an open boat with a message from the garrison commander, General William Blakeney. Consequently he was called as a witness at Byng's court martial. 
On 25 March 1758 Boyd was made a lieutenant-colonel; he then served five campaigns on the staff of the marquess of Granby as commissary general to the Hessian troops serving as part of the allied forces in Germany under the command of Prince Ferdinand of Brunswick. From the German campaign he wrote detailed letters to his political masters in England. It was apparently Boyd's back upon which Prince Ferdinand scribbled the news of his victory at Minden in August 1759 which Boyd took to England. On 13 January 1760 he bought a company in the 1st foot guards. At this time he narrowly avoided being promoted to command a regiment in India, Lord Clive recommending him as 'one of the best, if not the best officer in the King's service' (Russell, 34). Boyd claimed thirty-two years' service abroad in 1762, and with peace in the offing he attempted to secure future employment; firstly he hoped to be employed with the Hessian troops until their contract ended in the summer of 1763: 'this doceur' (BL, Add. MS 38200, fol. 91) would help him furnish his new house in Queen Anne Street in London. His ultimate aim was a governorship which would allow him to retire to England on an income not dissimilar to that he had enjoyed in Minorca. In 1764 Boyd was enlisting Prince Ferdinand in his quest for employment. On 18 September 1765 Boyd exchanged his company of guards for one in the 39th foot regiment, of which he became colonel on 6 August 1766. On 25 May 1768 he was named lieutenant-governor of Gibraltar, where his regiment had been posted. He became a major-general in 1772. 
In May 1773 Boyd landed back on Gibraltar, and as acting governor began work on the 'king's bastion', a fortress able to accommodate 800 men and twenty-six cannon and mortars. Boyd was still there in 1776 with a new governor, General George Augustus Eliott, not yet arrived. In August 1776 he referred to his family being with him; but little is known about his wife, Arabella (died 1791), except that she was similar in age to her husband. Boyd finally left in spring 1777, the year he was promoted lieutenant-general. He returned to play a key role in the defence of besieged Gibraltar from 1779 to 1782 and suggested the use of red hot shot to disable the enemies' floating batteries. Political faction was rife in the garrison, with Boyd a noted client of the opposition in parliament (John Pitt, second earl of Chatham, had served as his aide-de-camp); one of his enemies, Colonel Charles Ross, called his troops the 'storekeepers regiment' (Russell, 83), and Boyd was often at loggerheads with Governor Eliott. 
With the siege over, Ross even objected, unsuccessfully, to the inclusion of Boyd's name in an address of thanks from the House of Commons in December 1782. However, Boyd had to act as royal commissioner when Eliott was installed with the Order of the Bath in April 1783. On 28 January 1785 Boyd was himself made a knight of the Bath, but he had to wait until 19 May 1788 for his investiture. In January 1791 Boyd was back in Gibraltar as governor, leaving his wife at home for she died at Albyns, Essex, on 12 November 1791. He attained the rank of general on 12 October 1793. Boyd died in Gibraltar on 13 May 1794, aged eighty-four, and was buried in the king's bastion. His will mainly dealt with his stock in three per cent consolidated Bank of England annuities, the beneficiaries being nieces and nephews. 


@@@@@


doc= 3114


Boyd, Robert (1808-1883), physician and asylum superintendent, was born in Ireland. He was educated at Edinburgh University, graduating MD in 1831. He became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1830. In 1836 he was elected a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians, London, and in 1852 became a fellow. Boyd's early medical career is unclear, but it is likely that he was involved in hospital medicine as he published a number of articles in the 1830s in 'The Lancet', 'Medical Gazette', 'Edinburgh Medical Journal', and the 'Provincial Medical and Surgical Journal'. By 1836 he appears in the records of the Marylebone guardians as an assistant apothecary at the workhouse infirmary, and would seem to have worked his way up becoming successively house surgeon and, in 1840, resident physician. He took a special interest in the pauper lunatics who were housed in a specialist ward within the workhouse. 
Boyd was an important pioneer of the care of the insane in workhouses at a time when official policy was to move parish paupers into county asylums. In the absence of sufficient space in the county asylum at Hanwell he demonstrated that it was possible to run an effective lunatic ward within a workhouse infirmary setting, thus obviating the need to move patients far away from their local area. This post also provided plentiful opportunities for general clinical experience. In 1840 for example he applied to the board of guardians for permission to use a small room adjoining the boys' bathroom for the purpose of trying scientific experiments. In a later paper on tumours of the brain Boyd commented that he had been present at 1039 post-mortems at Marylebone. During the 1840s he was also listed as a lecturer in medicine, and by this period had married Isabella ('b'. 1814), herself from Ireland, and together they had two sons and four daughters. 
In 1849, as a result of his experience at Marylebone workhouse, which contained almost 2000 inmates, Boyd became superintendent and physician to the new county asylum at Wells, in Somerset, a post he held until 1868. This post provided an ideal opportunity for Boyd to further his keen interest in pathological medicine. Like many superintendents, though, he found the bureaucratic aspects of the job, and opposition to local initiative from the central lunacy commission, frustrating. In 1859 for example he and the county asylum visiting magistrates petitioned the commissioners unsuccessfully for permission to create a special asylum for epileptic patients, who constituted over 13 per cent of all inmates at Somerset. He wanted further specialist facilities created for other categories of mentally ill people so that their illnesses could be studied more carefully. From 1869 until 1875 Boyd was living in Bolton Row, Mayfair, in private practice, but he then became proprietor and physician of Southall Park private asylum. 
Boyd was interested in medical politics and was a member of the Medico-Psychological Association. In 1870 he was elected president and took the opportunity to remind members of the importance of workhouse infirmaries as a source of learning in morbid anatomy and insanity for students. Unlike many hospitals which had selective admission criteria, workhouses took patients with most diseases. This might well have applied to patients with general paralysis of the insane about whom he wrote a landmark article the following year, identifying that it was as much a disease of the general nervous system as of the brain. Using evidence from 924 deaths at Somerset Asylum, of whom 162 (18 per cent) had the disease, Boyd did 155 post-mortems, establishing a 4:1 ratio of men to women, and finding evidence of similar changes in the spinal cord and brain. In 1873 Boyd's commitment to pathological medicine led him to support a move to remove Henry Maudsley from the editorship of the 'Journal of Mental Science'. Maudsley's degenerationist ideas and pessimism had led him to denigrate colleagues' research and the resulting treatments. When Harrington Tuke was made president that year Boyd proposed that editorship of the association's journal should become a function of the presidency which would have ousted Maudsley from a position in which he had been able to promote his ideas. 
Like most asylum superintendents Boyd published annual reports with statistics of the establishments he managed, but he also contributed a number of other important papers to the literature of pathology and psychological medicine. He produced sixteen articles for the 'Journal of Mental Science' including 'Statistics of pauper insanity', 'Diseases of the nervous system', and 'Treatment of the insane poor', several of which were related to mental health policy. His earlier medical papers included pioneer work on comparative measurement of the weight of different body organs at different ages, and more especially of the brain. 
Boyd, like most Victorians, had a range of private interests. He was a fellow of the Zoological Society and pursued antiquarian studies. In the 1860s he corresponded with the Revd George Gordon, an old university friend, on the subject of Roman coins and pottery. Boyd had a robust and powerful physique, was reserved and taciturn in nature, and in speech was steady, weighing his words carefully. He was a popular man, noted for his kindness, and his general regard for patients. On 14 August 1883, together with one of his sons, Captain William Boyd, two patients, and the cook, he tragically lost his life in a fire at his private asylum, while going back into the building to save the inmates. 


@@@@@


doc= 3115


Thomas Boyd, first earl of Arran (d. before 1474), had been contracted on 20 January 1466 to marry Lord Kennedy's daughter, as part of Lord Boyd's wooing of the Kennedy regime. Instead, following the July 1466 coup, he was married to Princess Mary ('b'. 1451), elder sister of James III, and created earl of Arran by his father's influence, shortly before 26 April 1467. The marriage was undoubtedly unpopular, particularly with the king who later claimed to have wept at the wedding, as it was seen as a waste of a valuable dynastic commodity, not to mention an insult to the royal family. Arran's most important public role was as one of the ambassadors who concluded the treaty of Copenhagen in September 1468. When the Boyds fell in the summer of 1469 Arran was still abroad, and he was forfeited on 22 November. In October 1471 Arran, Lord Boyd, and Princess Mary attempted to return to Scotland. After stopping first in England, Mary went ahead, but was detained by the king. She was subsequently married to James, Lord Hamilton (died 1479), a rising star in James III's council, probably following Arran's death, which took place in England, before 1474. Nevertheless, Margaret maintained a residual loyalty for her first husband's family, and in the crisis of 1482 made an (eventually) abortive attempt to secure the succession of her son with Arran, James, to the Boyd lordship. Arran remained in England until his death. 
The rise of the Boyds was short-lived, generally unpopular, and unsustainable in the face of parliamentary hostility and the coming of age of the king. However, they were part of a larger process in the 1460s, by which successive factions, largely based on south-western support, played out the rivalries of their region on a national stage. 


@@@@@


doc= 3116


Boyd, Walter (1753-1837), financier, was born on 18 November 1753 in Scotland. He had at least one brother. He was possibly educated in Amsterdam, and he seems to have served an apprenticeship with a merchant house there or in France. From 1774 to 1781 he managed farms in Lincolnshire, leaving without any definite prospects. 
Boyd's subsequent career developed from a connection with Sir Robert Herries and his brothers, Charles and William. The Herries were merchants in London and Barcelona, and also had a major stake in the London Exchange Banking Company which supplied facilities to travellers in Europe to cash cheques. It is not clear how Boyd was introduced to the Herries, but he was soon in touch with William when the latter was established by his brother Robert as a merchant and banker in Ostend in 1780. As a result of his connections with William Herries, Boyd became associated with Veuve Nettine et Fils of Brussels, bankers to the Austrian administration. In 1782, Herries and Edouard Walckiers, a partner of Veuve Nettine et Fils who married Dieudonnee Nettine, established the Banque Particuliere dans les Pays-Bas Autrichiennes, and appointed Boyd and his fellow Scot, John William Ker, as 'secretaires de direction' (personal secretaries to the directors). 
In 1785 the two ambitious Scots entered a six-year partnership as Boyd, Ker et Cie and opened a bank in Paris. Boyd built up an extensive network of correspondents in France, the Netherlands, and London, drawing in particular on Veuve Nettine et Fils in Brussels, Herries in London, and Hope & Co. in Amsterdam. His main business was foreign exchanges and dealing in securities, but his interests were wide: he probably acted as the agent of Robert Herries in supplying American tobacco to the farmers general; he was banker to Thomas Jefferson; he acted for English visitors to Paris; he made loans to the aristocracy; and he was involved in factional fights for control of the Compagnie des Indes. It was around this time that he married Harriet Anne Hooke Goddard, daughter of Thomas Goddard of London; they had three sons and four daughters. She died on 10 January 1833; one son, Robert, and all the daughters, survived their father. According to Lady Elizabeth Spencer-Stanhope, Boyd stood 'in a pre-eminent position, admitted, as an Englishman, to those highest circles which were closed to the monied men of France, and aspiring to that commanding influence in the commercial world which although often maintained in England is seldom countenanced in France. (HoP, 'Commons')' In 1791 the partnership was renewed for a further six years with the addition of three 'commandite' partners, who provided additional capital without sharing in risks. One was Boyd's young cousin Walter; more important were Edouard Walckiers and Francois Laborde-Mereville. Although Walckiers was an adviser to the emperor Joseph II and a director of the royal treasury, he had taken a leading part in the insurrection of 1789 and fled to Paris: he supplied 1.5 million livres of capital. Francois Laborde-Mereville was the son of a wealthy Bayonne banker who married Rosalie de Nettine, the sister of Dieudonnee. In 1789 Laborde-Mereville opposed Jacques Necker's scheme for financial reform before the national assembly, and instead proposed -- probably with Boyd's support -- to set up a private bank which would pay off state debts and reform the collection of taxes, in return for the right of note issue. Although the scheme came to nothing, Boyd was confident that his new partners would bring both capital and connections. 
At first political turmoil gave opportunities for speculation on the exchanges. He formed a group, with Hope & Co., and Harman, Hoare & Co. in London, to play the market; he joined with Charles Herries in selling gold and silver bullion to anxious French investors. But by 1792 Boyd was sufficiently concerned by the political situation to establish a base in London. He left Paris in September 1792 and was followed by Ker and Laborde-Mereville in 1793. The Paris bank remained in the charge of the younger Walter Boyd, who was arrested on suspicion of being an enemy agent. Although he was released, the situation was precarious: the National Convention was demanding that large bills be drawn on London, Amsterdam, and Hamburg to pay for corn imports. In August 1793 the younger Boyd and Walckiers made an agreement to protect the firm by handing it to Antoine Geneste, the firm's cashier, who would run it without risk; Boyd and Walckiers were limited partners with the right to reclaim the business. Boyd and Walckiers soon fled the country, but Geneste was executed in 1794 and the assets of the bank were seized. 
Boyd had meanwhile re-established his business in London, in association with the nabob Paul Benfield (died 1810). Benfield had gone to India as an architect in the East India Company army in 1764, subsequently resigning his commission to become contractor for the ramparts at Madras, as well as lending large sums to the nawab of the Carnatic to finance his war with the raja of Tanjore. When the governor of Madras reinstated the raja, the nawab refused to repay Benfield; Benfield plotted to kidnap the governor, and was ordered home by the East India Company. He purchased an estate, and was elected to parliament in 1780; but in 1781 he returned to India before being ordered home in 1788 by Cornwallis. Benfield was one of the most notorious nabobs, and even a friend called him 'exacting, dissatisfied and ambitious' (Cope, 39). The important point for Boyd was that Benfield was rich. The new firm of Boyd, Benfield & Co. was formed in 1793, and Benfield subscribed $25,000; he also supplied the funds for Boyd's own share of $60,000 by purchasing French annuities from Boyd, Ker et Cie, which were then placed in the new firm. The firm was, therefore, a combination of Benfield's Indian wealth with Boyd's financial skill. 
Boyd soon started to play the exchanges, and in May 1794, on the advice of Veuve Nettine et Fils, he contracted for a loan of $3 million to Austria to finance the war in the Austrian Netherlands. He faced opposition both from the Austrian envoy in London, who preferred to deal with a leading bank, and from the contractors of the British loan who had secured an agreement from Pitt that there should be no competition for funds. Boyd urged Pitt to condone the loan. Why, he asked, should London 'forego the advantages of being as it were the Banker of Europe?' Remittances would, he argued, be paid 'in such a manner as that 'produce' and 'manufactures' may make the principal part of it' (Cope, 48-9). Pitt permitted the loan to proceed, but Boyd faced severe difficulties when the advance of the French removed the collateral for the loan provided by the revenues of the Austrian Netherlands. The Austrians pressed Boyd to meet his commitments, and one possible solution was for the British government to guarantee the loan to its ally. Boyd's own preference was to make the Austrian loan convertible into consols. The issue became a major element in diplomatic negotiations between the two countries, and was further complicated by the Austrians' need for another loan of $3 million at a time when a large British loan was planned. The outcome was a consortium headed by Boyd, Benfield & Co., which included the Goldsmids, Thellussons, and other leading houses, to contract for a loan of $18 million to Britain and $6 million to Austria. Boyd had, through his contacts with the Austrian Netherlands, become the leader of the syndicate contracting for British government loans. It was, remarked 'The Times' 'the greatest money negotiation that ever took place in this or in any other country at one time' (13 Dec 1794). 
The generous terms secured by Boyd were attacked in both Austria and London, where concern was expressed by the Bank of England, the City, and the Commons. He obtained a further loan contract in 1796, without competition and on favourable terms which led to a committee of enquiry; and he entered into an agreement to make advances to the Treasury through a somewhat devious procedure involving bills of exchange drawn on Hamburg, which led to questions in the Commons. Nevertheless, the syndicate obtained the contract for a further loan for $7.5 million in 1796, again without competition. 'There is', said the 'Morning Chronicle', 'but one booth in the fair' (HoP, 'Commons'). 
Doubtless as a means of self-defence, in 1796 Boyd joined Benfield as the second member of parliament for Shaftesbury. But more serious problems were appearing. Boyd, Benfield was holding large amounts of loan, and could not sell it without a fall in prices and a loss of their premium. In April 1796 Boyd invited leading bankers to a meeting to establish a rival credit institution to the Bank of England in order to force the bank to advance money to the government and introduce a more generous discount policy. This was a sign of mounting desperation. In the late 1790s the situation was bleak, as members of the Boyd network experienced difficulties. Walckiers failed in 1796, owing the firm $66,000, and Charles Herries in London in 1798, owing the firm $188,000; the advances to Veuve Nettine could not be realized. Boyd revealed the position to Pitt and Dundas, but an advance of $40,000 was not enough to maintain the position. Boyd turned to Benfield for assistance to draw on funds in India, but this was not easily achieved: most of Benfield's assets were bonds of the nawab of the Carnatic which could be sold only at a heavy discount. Tension built up with Benfield, who was aggrieved at the heavy losses on his remittances from India. Pitt, issuing a new loan of $18 million in 1797, bowed to pressure and opted for an open subscription. But in April 1798, a syndicate headed by Boyd, and including Thellusson and Goldsmid, obtained a new loan without competition. The terms were not favourable, and there were soon problems as the price of the stock fell. In October 1798 Boyd was not invited to join his former colleagues in the syndicate and early in 1799 his partnership with Benfield was dissolved. By March 1800 he was bankrupt. 
The situation was transformed in 1801 by peace with France: the chance of regaining his lost assets took Boyd to France. When war resumed in 1803, he was interned. He was able to play some small role in international finance, in relation to Spanish payments to France, but these were years of general inactivity and frustration. He survived as a result of the charity of friends: a fund was raised for him, to which Huskisson and Walter Scott subscribed. A legacy of $1000 to his wife contributed to their support. 'Her love for her children and her attachment to me', he wrote to a partner of Hope & Co., 'has given her always so to say supernatural strength, which has sustained us all!' (Cope, 167). She was allowed to return to England in 1811, but Boyd regained his freedom only in 1814. 
Boyd at once started a campaign to regain his assets from the French government. The first payment was received by 1816, and by 1821 he was able to repay the debts against Boyd, Benfield & Co. in full. The creditors granted him an allowance of about $50,000, and in 1823 he invested $33,000 in consols and purchased Plaistow Lodge, near Bromley in Kent, the former home of the banker Peter Thellusson, for $17,000. He was returned to parliament, representing Lymington between 1823 and 1830. When he died at Plaistow on 16 September 1837 he left net personalty of $180,000 which was, presumably, the remnants of his French fortune. He was clearly a financier with flair, who was able to exploit a well-developed network of contacts in France, the Netherlands, and London. The loss of his French assets had gravely weakened his position, but through his ability to tap the funds of Benfield and also to utilize his ties with the Austrian Netherlands, Boyd was able to secure a position in the market for British government loans which was remarkable and unsustainable. Perhaps there are two people who deserve more sympathy: the unfortunate Geneste, who was guillotined, and Benfield, whose considerable landed estate was sold in 1801 to meet the demands of his creditors, and who died in poverty in Paris in 1810. 


@@@@@


doc= 3117


Boyd, William, fourth earl of Kilmarnock (1705-1746), Jacobite army officer, the son and heir of William Boyd, third earl of Kilmarnock (1683/4-1717), and his wife, Euphemia ('b'. 1684, died in or before 1729), daughter of William, eleventh Lord Ross, was born on 12 May 1705 and baptized twelve days later at Kilmarnock. Styled Lord Boyd until succeeding his father in September 1717, he was educated at Glasgow University. During the 1715 Jacobite rising the third earl, a country whig by political background, raised a regiment in support of the government and the young Lord Boyd accompanied him on campaign. 
Kilmarnock inherited an encumbered estate, and his straitened circumstances were made worse by what he later confessed was a 'careless and dissolute life' marked by 'vanity, and addictedness to impurity and sensual pleasure' (Foster, 10-11). In politics he long followed the lead of Sir Robert Walpole and the Campbells. He was a regular voter in peers' elections, invariably supporting the ministry's candidates. In the hotly contested election of 1734, opposition peers noted that he had been brought from France at government expense, and that he and his wife each received pensions of $200. 
It is as a Jacobite, however, that Kilmarnock is best known. After Walpole's fall his pension was stopped, and he was drawn to the Stuart cause mainly because he saw it as an opportunity to retrieve his broken fortune. He later told the duke of Argyll: 'for the two Kings and their rights, I cared not a farthing which prevailed; but I was starving, and, by God, if Mahommed had set up his standard in the Highlands I had been a good Mussulman for bread, and stuck close to the party, for I must eat. (Lenman, 256-7)' A likely contributing factor was the Jacobite leanings of his in-laws. On 15 June 1724 Kilmarnock, a lifelong member of the Church of Scotland, had married Lady Anne Livingston ('bap'. 1709, died 1747), an episcopalian, whose father, James, fifth earl of Linlithgow and fourth earl of Callendar, had been attainted for his participation in the 'Fifteen. Through her maternal aunt, Lady Kilmarnock was also the presumptive heir of the countess of Erroll. A rumour circulated that the latter had threatened to disinherit the Kilmarnocks if the earl did not come out for the Young Pretender, Charles Edward Stuart. 
Kilmarnock had no part in planning the rising of 1745 and joined the Jacobites only in October, after Charles Edward had visited Callendar House, near Falkirk, part of his wife's inheritance. One of the few lowland peers to join the rising, Kilmarnock wrote to his wife that 'I am now in my Boots to join the Prince' and that 'every Scotsman in his senses will go the same way' (Bailey, 25-6). He quickly became prominent in the Jacobite leadership and was named to the privy council. In the internal politics of the movement, he generally followed the prince's lead. He commanded a troop of Horse Guards on the march into England and later distinguished himself at the battle of Falkirk (17 January 1746), where his knowledge of local topography proved useful. (On the same occasion, Lady Kilmarnock was said to have contributed to the Jacobite victory by entertaining Henry Hawley, commander of the government army, with a leisurely breakfast at Callendar House, delaying his reaction to the Jacobite attack.) At the battle of Culloden (16 April 1746) Kilmarnock's troop formed part of the Jacobite reserve and fought dismounted. He was captured when, in the closing stages of the battle, he mistook royal dragoons for a Jacobite regiment. 
Originally imprisoned at Inverness, Kilmarnock was later brought to London, where in late July he was tried for high treason in the House of Lords along with the earl of Cromarty and Lord Balmerino. Kilmarnock pleaded guilty and repented of his part in the rising. At the trial Horace Walpole noted that he looked younger than his forty-one years, 'tall and slender, with an extreme fine person', and that he behaved with 'a most just mixture between dignity and submission' (Walpole to Sir Horace Mann, 1 Aug 1746, Walpole, 'Corr.', 19.281). Though he won much sympathy, Kilmarnock and the other Jacobite lords were convicted and condemned to death. He still hoped for mercy, and the duke of Hamilton, Lady Townshend, and others pleaded for his life. Only Cromarty was pardoned, however, and Kilmarnock and Balmerino were beheaded on 18 August 1746 on Tower Hill. Kilmarnock, dressed in black, met his end bravely and acknowledged in a final statement that his was a just punishment. Though he and Balmerino parted as friends, the latter remained defiantly Jacobite and went to the block protesting his loyalty to the Stuarts. 
The topic of their last conversation -- whether, on the eve of Culloden, Jacobite orders had specified that no quarter be given government troops -- became and has remained a subject of controversy. Though both men denied knowledge of such an order, Kilmarnock acknowledged that while a prisoner at Inverness he had heard that the duke of Cumberland had in his possession a no-quarter order signed by Lord George Murray, the Jacobite general. Some felt that Cumberland suspected Kilmarnock's complicity in the alleged no-quarter decision and that this had doomed his plea for mercy. (None of the surviving copies of the order in Murray's hand includes the no-quarter phrase, and doubts exist about the authenticity of the order that came into Cumberland's hands.) 
Attainted, Kilmarnock's titles and estates were forfeited at his death. His eldest son, James, Lord Boyd, who had fought on the government side at Culloden, successfully regained them through litigation in 1751; in 1758 he inherited the earldom of Erroll from his great-aunt. Kilmarnock, whose head was reunited with his body in the coffin and not displayed, was buried on the day of his execution in the chapel of St Peter ad Vincula in the Tower. 
The highest-ranking peer to be executed for participation in the 'Forty-Five, Kilmarnock's dramatic death was easily the most memorable feature of his career. In repudiating his actions in the rising he played the part expected of the condemned in the eighteenth century, though Balmerino's defiance made the latter the preferred hero in Jacobite tradition. 


@@@@@


doc= 3118


Boyd, William (1685-1772), minister of the Presbyterian General Synod of Ulster, was probably a son of Thomas Boyd (died 1699), Presbyterian minister of Aghadowey, co. Londonderry. He graduated MA at Edinburgh University in 1702, was licensed by the Route presbytery in 1707, and ordained at Macosquin, co. Londonderry, on 31 January 1710. 
In March 1718 nine Presbyterian ministers, mostly from co. Londonderry, and more than three hundred of their members petitioned Colonel Samuel Shute, governor of New England, declaring their 'sincere and hearty inclination to transport ourselves to that very excellent and renowned Plantation, upon our obtaining from His Excellency suitable encouragement' (Bolton, 324). Boyd, deputed bearer of the petition, was favourably received in Boston. Although neither he nor any of the nine clergy themselves emigrated, James McGregor, minister of neighbouring Aghadowey (1701-18), arrived with some of his flock at Boston in August 1718. They settled at Haverhill, New Hampshire, and renamed it Londonderry. 
Throughout his career Boyd took a prominent part in the non-subscription controversy in the General Synod of Ulster. He was among the majority of ministers who voluntarily subscribed the Westminster confession of faith at synod in 1721; and in 1724 he was a member of a committee appointed to draw up articles against Thomas Nevin, minister of Downpatrick (1711-44), accusing him of impugning the deity of Christ. On 25 April 1725 Boyd was installed by the Londonderry presbytery at Taughboyne, with a promised stipend of $50. The congregation had been without a minister since William Gray left for Usher's Quay, Dublin, in 1721. Gray returned to the neighbourhood of Taughboyne in 1727 and, without obtaining presbytery approval, began organizing a congregation in a disused corn kiln at nearby St Johnston. Following arbitration before church courts, Gray was deposed from the ministerial office and Boyd vindicated. In 1731 synod declared 'that Mr. Boid's character stands clear and unexceptionable & that his Doctrine and conversation has been suitable to his station & office as a minister of the Gospel' ('Records of the General Synod of Ulster', 2.166). The St Johnston congregation was admitted to synod the same year. 
Boyd was elected moderator of synod in 1730. At Antrim, in 1731, his sermon to synod was entitled 'A good conscience a necessary qualification of a gospel minister', and it was directed against a famous discourse by the non-subscribing minister of Antrim, John Abernethy, entitled 'Religious Obedience Founded on Personal Persuasion', which had been published in 1720. As an orthodox subscriber to the Westminster confession Boyd maintained that 'conscience is not the supreme lawgiver, the unerring witness, the infallible judge; it always bears respect unto God' (Witherow, 'Memorials, 1731-1800', 4). In 1734 he was an unsuccessful candidate for the clerkship of the general synod. In 1739 he took the lead against a licentiate, Richard Aprichard, who had scruples about some doctrines in the confession and who eventually withdrew from the synod. A number of presbyteries voiced concern at the synod in 1747, complaining of 'sundrie Errors and corruptions creeping in upon the Church' ('Records of the General Synod of Ulster', 2.329). Boyd and eight other divines were appointed to draw up a 'Serious Warning' to be read from the pulpits against 'several dangerous errors that sap the very foundations of Christianity' ('Records of the General Synod of Ulster', 2.330). These errors were in regard to such doctrines as original sin, the satisfaction of Christ, the Trinity, and the authority of scripture. The warning concluded by exhorting all to continue 'steadfast in the faith, that has been handed down to us... contained in the sacred scriptures of the 'Old' and 'New' testaments & summarily abridged in our Westminster Confession of faith, larger and shorter Catechisms' (ibid.). 
Boyd was a constant attender at presbytery, general synod, and the sub-synod of Londonderry, where he was clerk from 1747 until 1766. He was appointed a trustee of the synod's Widows of Ministers Fund in 1761, and at that year's meeting of synod was a member of the group responsible for drawing up an address to George III. His last recorded appearance at the general synod was in 1770. Boyd married, but no details about his wife are known. He died on 2 May 1772 and was buried at Taughboyne. 


@@@@@


doc= 3119


Boyd, Zachary (1585-1653), Church of Scotland minister and university administrator, was born in Kilmarnock, Ayrshire, of unknown parentage. He matriculated at Glasgow University in 1601, and graduated MA from St Andrews in 1607. Perhaps encouraged by his cousin Robert Boyd of Trochrig he completed his education at the protestant University of Saumur, where he was eventually appointed regent professor in 1611. Boyd declined the principalship in 1615 and he returned to Scotland in 1623. After living for a short time in the households of Sir William Scott in Elie (probably Sir William Scott of Clerkington, died 1656) and the marquess of Hamilton, Boyd was called to the Barony parish in the suburbs of Glasgow, where he remained for the rest of his life. 
Boyd enjoyed a long-time relationship with Glasgow University. He was elected dean in 1631, and was re-elected in 1633 and 1635. In 1634, and again in 1635 and 1645, he was elected rector, and in 1644 he was appointed vice-chancellor. Boyd married Elizabeth Fleming of Glasgow, who died in 1636, and Margaret Mure, who outlived him. Both marriages were childless. Remembered for his generosity towards Glasgow University, Boyd bequeathed it assets of approximately 20,000 marks. The source of his income remains a mystery. 
Boyd was a supporter of the national covenant of 1638, and, like other Scots presbyters, he viewed Cromwell and his Independents as a threat to Scottish presbyterian government. An apocryphal story is told of how Boyd remained at his post, even while the magistrates and ministers of Glasgow fled in the face of Cromwell's army. Pagan indicates that when Cromwell and his officers appeared at the cathedral church, Boyd 'railed on them all to their very face in the High Church' (Pagan, 43-4). Cromwell's response was to invite Boyd for dinner, and the two were said to have spent the night together talking and praying. 
Much of Boyd's published work is religious poetry of dubious merit. Samuel Colvil's observation is fairly typical when he wrote, 'bad lines many times causeth more mirth than good ones. Where one laughs the poems of Virgil, Homer, Ariosto, Du Bartas... twenty will laugh at those of... Mr. Zacharie Boyd' (Colvil, sig. A7'r'). Others were kinder, as when John Sleazer argued that Boyd's reputation as a bad poet was 'grossly exaggerated'. Boyd's published poetry appears in three separate collections: 'The Garden of Zion' (1644), 'The Psalms of David in Meeter' (1644), and 'Scriptural Songs or Holy Poems' (1645), all of which are retellings of biblical stories. Two other collections of verse, the 'Four Evangels' and 'Zion's Flowers, or, Christian Poems for Spiritual Edification', were never published, except for four of the poems of 'Zion's Flowers', brought out in 1855 by the Edinburgh bibliophile Gabriel Neil. Boyd's reputation as a bad poet was not helped when his metrical paraphrase of the 'Psalms' was passed over by the commissioners of the general assembly, although he eventually did play a role in the development of the psalter, and merited a special thanks of the general assembly minuted on 1 January 1650. 
Boyd's reputation as a poet has unquestionably influenced opinion about his prose, which is certainly worthy of attention as a revealing barometer of seventeenth-century Scottish religiosity. While his most important published prose work, 'The Last Battell of the Soule in Death', is long and prolix, it possesses a dramatic realism making it an important contribution to the tradition of the 'ars moriendi'. Boyd's strength, though, was as a preacher, and his sermons exhibit a robustness that leaves Boyd well placed in relation to others who wrote in the plain style. A staunch Calvinist, Boyd took very seriously the special role of the preacher in the calling of God's elect to his true church. Only a handful of Boyd's sermons were published during his lifetime, 'A Sermon of Preparation to the Communion' and 'A Sermon for the Day of the Sacrament' (1629) and 'Two Orientall Pearles, Grace and Glory' (1629). Boyd did leave behind, however, 254 unpublished sermons and devotional works currently housed in Glasgow University Library, which Boyd himself organized into a number of collections in anticipation of publication. His unpublished works cover a range of issues, including the need for church reform, the nature of the purified church, the role of preaching in the reform church, and the importance of rigorous spiritual self-examination. 
Boyd died in Glasgow in 1653 and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 3120


Boydell, John (1720-1804), engraver and printseller, the eldest of the seven children of Josiah Boydell (1691-1757?), surveyor and land steward, and his wife, Mary (1693/4-1777), was born at Dorrington in Shropshire on 19 January 1720. Like other men of his day he was disinclined to lose a year of his life to the change in calendar, and so always gave the year of his birth in old style, as 1719. 
As a child Boydell spent much time with his grandfather John (died 1731), who was vicar of Ashbourne and rector of Mapleton, Derbyshire, and who instilled in him by the age of eight an enduring respect for moral rectitude. When he was twelve he moved with his family to Hawarden, Flintshire, where his father was land steward to Sir John Glynne. In 1739 he went to London to work for a Mr Cradock, before a place was found for him as house steward to John Lawton, MP for Newcastle under Lyme. Lawton refused Boydell's demand for a wage of 12 guineas per annum, and Boydell considered emigrating to the East Indies, but instead he walked back to Wales and his sweetheart Elizabeth, the daughter of Edward Lloyd, of the Fords, near Oswestry. Suddenly, he discovered his vocation: 'A large Print of Hawarden Castle and the Country adjacent drawn by Mr. Badeslade and engraved by Wm. Harry Toms in London was just finished. I admired it to a great degree, finding it was an employment that many have got a livelihood by -- I thought I should like to Follow the art of Engraving. My Friends enquired of Mr. Badeslade relating to my wishes, wrote to Mr. Toms who offered to take me on trial. ('Autobiography', 82-3)' In 1741, at the advanced age of twenty, Boydell was bound apprentice to Toms for a $50 premium. Elizabeth promised to wait for him. 
For the next six years Boydell lived with Toms in Union Court, Holborn. At first he copied prints after Claude and Poussin. He was advised to draw at the St Martin's Lane Academy and attended there five nights a week. His master was 'subject to be in Liquor, and very Outrageous and at such times striking his Servants and beating the wainscott with his fist' ('Autobiography', 85). But, to Boydell, Toms was 'very civil' and 'us'd to call me Mr Boydell -- althou' an Apprentice' (ibid.). Boydell had little time for his colleagues in Toms's studio. Louis-Philippe Boitard, he recalled, 'lost much time in taking snuff', while Jean Baptiste Chatelain, who was paid by the hour, 'would often come for half an hour receive sixpence go and spend it amongst bad women in Chick Lane and Black-boy Alley' (ibid., 83). Boydell himself would have made the perfect model for Hogarth's industrious apprentice. In 1746 he engraved a large plate of Penzance and paid Toms a further $30 to release him from his final year's service. After two years as a journeyman, lodging with a stationer called Wroughton, he considered himself able to support a wife, and in 1748 he went back to Wales to marry Elizabeth Lloyd. He took with him four drawings by Gainsborough and four copperplates and, having engraved these, spent his honeymoon summer drawing views of Snowdonia, the Welsh castles, and the High Peak for later publication. Four views near Ipswich after Gainsborough and a view of Wrexham church were published in December 1748. His initial method of selling his prints was to: 'carry them in the Morning my self in a Portfolio to all the Print Shops in the City. In the afternoon to all in the West End of Town, brought what I received and always gave it to my Wife to take care of. (ibid., 86)' He worked hard. During 1750 he published twenty-eight landscapes. 
By 1751, having amassed a total capital of $150, Boydell took the bold decision to purchase the freedom of the City in the Stationers' Company and take a shop, with the sign of the Unicorn, at the corner of Queen Street in Cheapside. In old age he told Joseph Farington that 'his wife was alarmed at the boldness of this determination & wept at the danger of incurring such expence' (Farington, 'Diary', 1415). Within a year he took two apprentices: his brother Thomas paid no fee, but Richard Ford, son of an art auctioneer, brought both $40 and, in his father, a valuable ally. Boydell realized quickly that the main demand both from collectors and for decoration was for foreign prints, so he determined to equip himself to deal internationally. He taught himself French, with a grammar, a dictionary, and 'Les aventures de Telemaque', and by attending a foreign chapel at St James. By degrees he accustomed himself 'to speak and write the Language which enabled me to Correspond with Foreigners -- which was of great service to me' ('Autobiography', 84). In particular he got to know the leading Parisian printseller Pierre-Francois Basan. 
During the next few years Boydell's business strategy took shape. He was an active committee man, taking livery in the Stationers' Company on 2 April 1754 and becoming common councillor for the ward of Cheap in 1758. In January 1756 he was selected to retail prints published by the Society of Antiquaries for a 20 per cent commission. Meanwhile he expanded his stock of plates by buying others secondhand. Joseph Goupy's plates comprised one of his first major acquisitions, in 1755, and he bought Picart's 'Impostures Innocentes' in 1756. It was only now that he began speculative publishing. Boydell joined the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce in 1760 and immediately undertook publication of the paintings that won its major prizes. He had commissioned a young landscape specialist, William Woollett, to engrave a Claude in 1760. Now he commissioned Woollett to engrave two paintings by Richard Wilson and two by the brothers Smith of Chichester; he also commissioned Francois Ravenet to engrave the prizewinning history painting. This venture proved highly profitable. Woollett's 'Niobe', in particular, drew great critical accolades and sold very well abroad, helping Boydell to pay for his imports in kind rather than in cash. Boydell then launched a major initiative billed as 'A Collection of Prints, Engraved from the most Capital Paintings in England'. The original proposal was for seven numbers at a guinea per number. A subscription for 251 copies was headed by the king, the princess dowager, and the earl of Bute. Boydell himself engraved several prints for the collection, but he was wise enough to realize that he himself would never be more than a pedestrian engraver. His claim for this enterprise was that it would give talented young English engravers an opportunity to try their hand at engraving history pictures, and, although he gave some of the most important engravings to experienced expatriates such as Francois Ravenet, this major enterprise did help to establish several promising artists ['see 'Boydell, John, engravers]. The prints also sold very well abroad: even among subscribers almost a third were foreigners. Boydell presented the first complete volume to the king in 1769. 
As Boydell's 'Collection' took shape he moved to a larger house at 90 Cheapside. A second volume was completed in 1772. Into this some English paintings by William Hogarth, Benjamin West, and Nathaniel Dance were introduced. A third volume, compiled in 1773, consisted entirely of republished prints from celebrated plates that Boydell had acquired secondhand. He added two more volumes before 1786. The 'Collection' was the backbone of Boydell's empire, but he substantiated his position as the publisher of the finest works of art in Britain with two further projects. In 1775 he announced plans to engrave the Walpole collection at Houghton Hall, Norfolk, before it was sold to Catherine the Great of Russia and to publish the duke of Devonshire's book of designs by Claude. In addition he published a number of fine mezzotints of paintings by Rembrandt. 
When it came to publishing contemporary paintings Boydell was only one of several notable figures, but he was nevertheless responsible for the publication of some of the most impressive paintings of the period. He was the publisher of Joseph Wright of Derby's 'Orrery' (1768), 'Air Pump' (1769), 'Blacksmith's Shop' (1771), and 'Iron Forge' (1773), which are among the finest mezzotints ever engraved. He published Reynolds's celebrated history painting 'Ugolino' (1774) and several paintings by the court favourites Dance, Johann Zoffany, and West. He cemented his place in royal favour with huge mezzotints of the king's paintings 'Regulus's Return to Carthage' (1771) and 'Hannibal Swearing Enmity to the Romans' (1773), by West. Boydell owned only a third share with Woollett and Ryland in West's 'Death of Wolfe' (1775), but this proved to be an enormously successful plate, and after the untimely deaths of Ryland and Woollett he acquired the whole copyright. Now Boydell began to work on a munificent scale. In 1779 he bought from West 'Alfred the Great Dividing his Loaf with the Pilgrim' and presented it to the Stationers' Company, turning his generosity to account through an engraving of it by Sharp. In 1784 Boydell paid Copley $800 for 'The Death of Major Peirson'. He acquired Hogarth's plates in 1786. 
Boydell's shop, with its grand second-floor showroom (10 ft x 70 ft) lit from above, with pictures displayed on hinged screens, became a tourist attraction. In the inner gallery he displayed paintings that he had bought and published together with the portraits of artists who had painted and engraved them for him. Over the chimney was 'The Death of Major Peirson'. 
Meanwhile Boydell's career in public office continued. Apart from a brief interruption in 1771, he was common councillor for Cheap until 1782, in which year he became an alderman. He was commonly thereafter referred to as Alderman Boydell. He served as sheriff in 1785, as master of the Stationers' Company in 1783-4, and as steward of the Marine Society in 1785. He was closely associated with the Royal Academy and a regular guest at their dinners, and he made not infrequent visits to court. Elizabeth Boydell died on 27 January 1781 and was buried at St Martin Pomeroy on 4 February 1781. Thereafter, Boydell's household was run by his niece Mary. He took her brother Josiah Boydell into partnership in 1786. 
At a dinner at Josiah Boydell's house in West End, Hampstead, in November 1786 Boydell eagerly embraced a proposal that he might publish a series of prints illustrating the works of Shakespeare. The project rapidly took shape, and proposals dated 1 December 1786 were published in the press. The Boydells and the bookseller George Nicol proposed the works of Shakespeare edited by George Steevens, with typography by Bulmer and paper by Whatman. These would be embellished with one series of large and another series of small prints, all taken from specially commissioned paintings by artists led by Joshua Reynolds and Angelica Kaufmann and engravers led by Caroline Watson and Francesco Bartolozzi. The alliance between the Boydells and Nicol was cemented when Mary married the bookseller on 8 September 1787. A rejected suitor, an apothecary named Elliot, was so desperate that he attempted to shoot her from close range but, 'Providentially, though they were so close as to set fire to the lady's cloack, yet by the balls glancing on her stays, she received only a slight contusion under the shoulder' ('British Mercury', 1787, 152). In September the newly-weds went with John Boydell to Paris, where they dined with Boydell's principal correspondent, Basan. 
To house the Shakespeare paintings a new gallery was built in Pall Mall. Reynolds was given an advance of $500 to secure his first contribution, but the Boydells immediately fell out with Gainsborough, who wanted equal pay, and soon after with Wright of Derby, whose 'Romeo and Juliet' they then rejected. The fact was that they could not, or would not, afford to pay the best artists enough to secure their services. The problem was even more acute with engravers. To engrave large prints in line took a very long time, and the best engravers already had their hands full with work of their own. Josiah Boydell, who had the management of the project, chose to have most of the prints engraved in stipple -- chiefly, perhaps, for the sake of speed -- and many were given to inexperienced young artists, who nevertheless had to be paid 300 guineas a plate. The gallery opened in May 1789 with thirty-four paintings by eighteen artists on show: 20,000 people visited, 6600 catalogues were sold, and 100 names were added to the subscription. The last figure might have been disappointing but, with Boydell's more ambitious projects, success or failure rested on sales abroad. At home his triumph was complete. He was chosen as lord mayor for 1790-91 and his niece Mary acted as his mayoress. 
When the first 'Shakspeare' prints (Boydell used the contracted form of the name) came out in 1792 they were not well received. The grandiloquent claims that had been made for the project as a forum for British history painting now rebounded on the publishers. The painters blamed the engravers. West told Farington that 'He had looked over the Shakespere Prints and was sorry to see them of such inferior quality'. He complained of a 'general defficiency in respect of drawing' and 'did not wonder many subscribers had declined to continue their subscriptions' (Farington, 'Diary', 2331). Others were more critical of the paintings, few of which showed much flair. The engraver William Byrne blamed the publishers, telling Farington that: 'J. Boydell had ruined publications by his manner of managing the Shakespeare work, which had been sacrificed to a narrow economy; That the subscriptions to it had fallen off near two thirds. Alderman Boydell is excused, the blame is imputed to J. Boydell. (ibid., 631)' Well into his seventies, the alderman seemed undaunted by this set-back, though he admitted to Farington that these days: 'if He rises at 5 in the morning He is obliged to lay on a couch for an Hour in the course of the day. -- He said He had always been an early riser and a moderate eater. He said he drank milk in the morning, which agreed with him & he thought did him more service than anything. (Farington, 'Diary', 209)' About 1794 he presented the corporation of London with twenty-four paintings, most of which had been commissioned for publication and had been hanging in 90 Cheapside. But perhaps even he was feeling the strain of his business difficulties. The problems with Shakespeare were dwarfed by the disastrous effect on the European trade in luxury goods of the French invasions of the Netherlands and the Rhineland. By 1797 it was clear that the Boydells were in trouble. By November 1803 they were in debt to the tune of $41,000 and had to stop payments. Their bank had loaned $12,000 with the houses in Pall Mall and Cheapside as security, but there were worries about bankruptcy. They had applied to parliament for leave to conduct a lottery to raise money by disposing of the Shakspeare Gallery and its contents. Josiah Boydell hoped the lottery would raise $80,000 (and it did raise $78,000), but before it could be drawn the great alderman was dead. 
Josiah Boydell told Farington that his uncle had caught a cold by going to the Old Bailey to do his duty as an alderman on a damp, foggy day; he died, presumably at his house in Cheapside, on 12 December 1804. Farington noted that he was opened after his death and all the material parts were in so good a state that it was thought he might have lived ten years longer had this accidental complaint not attacked him. He was buried at St Olave Jewry on 19 December 1804. Some time later, his niece Mary Nicol bequeathed money to pay for a bust and memorial tablet to be placed in the church. 
In his public pronouncements Boydell tended to suggest that he had created an export business in British prints single-handedly and that his Shakspeare Gallery provided the first opportunity for British history painters. This was a great exaggeration. John Landseer was not afraid to assert that fine engravers such as Strange, Ryland, and Woollett had done more for the reputation of British engraving than Boydell, and other publishers had helped to ensure that contemporary British art was widely respected long before the Shakspeare Gallery was projected. Nevertheless, Boydell was the most important single print publisher during the period in which British art rose to European prominence. Moreover, his shrewd selection of paintings for publication and of fine young engravers to interpret them produced, especially in the 1760s and 1770s, some of the most distinguished (and profitable) copperplates to be crafted in Britain. No print publisher before or since has ever exerted as much influence on the course of British art. 


@@@@@


doc= 3121


Boydell, Josiah (1752-1817), artist and publisher, was born on 18 January 1752 at the Manor House, Hawarden, Flintshire, the fourth of nine children of Samuel Boydell (1727-1783), farmer, and his wife Ann, 'nee' Turner (1725-1764). Apprenticed in 1766 to his uncle, John Boydell, for seven years, he studied painting under Benjamin West and mezzotint engraving under Richard Earlom. His later, principal, plates included 'Charles I', 'Jane Wenman' (after Van Dyck and published in 1778 and 1779, respectively) and the frontispiece to 'Liber veritatis' (a self-portrait of Claude Lorrain). 
When John Boydell undertook to publish engravings after the paintings in Houghton Hall, Norfolk, prior to their imminent export to the empress of Russia, Josiah Boydell, with Joseph and George Farington, made the necessary drawings in preparation for the engravers. While in Norfolk he married, on 6 December 1774, Jane North ('fl'. 1760-1820), granddaughter of Sir Roger North. They were to have several children, one of whom, John North Boydell, became involved in the family publishing business. An accomplished artist as well as engraver, Josiah Boydell exhibited at the Royal Academy between 1772 and 1779, giving his addresses in London as 90 Cheapside (1772-3), Great Castle Street, Leicester Fields (1776), and Southwood, Highgate (1779). He was adept at portraiture and historical painting, and his output included a portrait of Alderman John Boydell (exh. Royal Academy, 1772); one of his wife (when Miss North) in the character of Juno (exh. Royal Academy, 1776), and one of himself and his wife (exh. Royal Academy, 1776). Though not identified conclusively, the latter may be the portrait in Newport Adams School, Shropshire. He painted pictures for John Boydell's Shakspeare Gallery (receiving $157 10's'. each for scenes from '1 Henry VI' and '3 Henry VI', and $105 each for two scenes from '2 Henry IV'). His 'Field of Battle Near Towton' was presented to the City of London by John Boydell (this decayed and was subsequently disposed of just prior to the Second World War), together with 'The Battle of Agincourt' (of which the City has no record). 
While living at West End, Hampstead, Josiah Boydell helped form the Hampstead infantry in 1798 and became their captain. After its standing down he became lieutenant-colonel commandant of the subsequently formed Loyal Hampstead Volunteers from 1803. After his uncle's death in 1804 he succeeded John Boydell as alderman of Cheap ward and was in control of the print publishing business at Cheapside of which he had formerly been a partner. Although his business acumen was not equal to that of his uncle, he was as enthusiastic towards promoting the arts in England. His 'Suggestions towards forming a plan for the encouragement... of the arts... in this country in two letters addressed to Robert Udney, dated 22 & 23 December 1801' (1805) reveals a sincere believer in the importance of the arts to the country's economy. His own artistic talent was generally underestimated. It was of some 'surprise, that an artist of such promise, is not to be found among the Royal Academicians' ('The Times', 3 April 1790). A member of the Royal Society of Arts from 1790 and master of the Stationers' Company (1811-12), he was forced to resign his aldermanic status in 1809 owing to ill health. Having suffered respiratory problems for some years, he died at his home at Halliford, Middlesex, on 27 March 1817 and was buried in Hampstead church. Examples of his work are in the Guildhall Library, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 3122


Boyer, Abel (1667?-1729), lexicographer and journalist, was most probably born on 24 June 1667, at Castres in the upper Languedoc, the son of Pierre Boyer, one of the two chief magistrates or consuls of Castres, and Catherine Campdomerc ('b'. 1651), the eighth child of the marriage of Eleazar Campdomerc and Sara De Terson. As magistrate, his father had suffered suspension from office and was fined for his commitment to protestantism. It was from Pierre Campdomerc, his maternal uncle, that Abel Boyer apparently got his first rudiments of learning. 
In 1683 or 1684 Boyer embarked upon the first formal educational training for which there is evidence. He entered the nearby protestant academy of Puylaurens (formerly Montauban), as his uncle had done before him. He enrolled as a student of theology, apparently aiming to follow a family tradition and become a minister in the Huguenot church. Among the alumni of Montauban was Pierre Bayle, a close friend of one Andre Terson, a member of Boyer's mother's family. However, Boyer's studies at Puylaurens were curtailed in March 1685 when the academy was suppressed by royal decision. Some time after the revocation of the edict of Nantes in October, Boyer fled France for the Netherlands. 
In 1687 poverty may have obliged Boyer to serve briefly in the army of the Dutch republic, as did many other Huguenots at the time. The experience, if it took place, may have contributed to his later close technical interest in things military which, he claimed in 1696, was based partly on what he had seen of some of the battlefields of Flanders. However, he soon resumed his interrupted studies at the University of Franeker in Friesland. According to Pierre Bayle, who had declined in 1684 the offer of the chair of philosophy at Franeker, Boyer attended courses in philosophy and theology, and also in mathematics and fortification -- then regarded not only as connected studies, but as regular parts of the education of a gentleman. 
When Boyer left the Netherlands some time after 11 July 1689, he took with him to England a letter of introduction from Bayle to Bishop Burnet, recently consecrated as the bishop of Salisbury and well known to Bayle as a scholar with a passionate concern for the plight of the Huguenots. In October 1690 Boyer is recorded as having received a payment of 15's'. out of the Royal Bounty Fund as a student in divinity, and it seems reasonable to give credence to the claim of Boyer's first contemporary obituarists -- his widow, Mary, and a cousin -- that his first employment in England was writing and preparing for publication in 1691 Dr Thomas Smith's edition of William Camden's letters. In July 1691 Boyer was established in the family of Sir Benjamin Bathurst, comptroller of the household of the prince and princess of Denmark, and was then, or soon after, appointed French and Latin tutor to Bathurst's eldest son, Allen. 
Boyer's own first published work, 'The compleat French master for ladies and gentlemen: being a new method, to learn with ease and delight the French tongue' (1694), was, as its subtitle suggests, French without tears, a genre of literary production then much in vogue, and it enjoyed immediate and lasting popular favour throughout the eighteenth century in Britain, Europe, and North America. In the hope of courtly preferment as French teacher in the household of the duke of Gloucester (the son of Prince George of Denmark and Princess Anne), it was dedicated to the duke and, according to Boyer's preface to the eighth edition of 1721, had been encouraged by Anne herself. At the time of Boyer's death the work had gone through ten editions. 
In 1695 Boyer published his 'Character of the Virtues and Views of the Age', with a fulsome preface to 'the much honoured Allen Bathurst'. The following year he published 'A Geographical and Historical Description of those Parts of Europe which are the Seat of War', which was dedicated to the duke of Ormond, one of the Denmarks' circle of friends. In the second half of 1698 Boyer appeared as a translator in the publication of 'Ductor historicus', a historical work by the French priest and theologian Pierre Le Lorrain de Vallemont. In dedicating this work to John, Lord Churchill, Boyer acknowledged the Churchill family's repeated encouragements in his endeavours to serve the public. 
In 1699 Boyer published his 'Royal Dictionary', which he had begun in 1694 or thereabouts, and which was dedicated to the duke of Gloucester, with, as Boyer claimed, the knowledge, favour, and encouragement of Princess Anne. The work was something of an innovation in England in announcing a particular and unusual view of language as a changing, living thing. It did this by citing recent and living writers as sources or authorities, and by attempting to convey the variety of meanings of a word according to word usage as found in their works. 
Apart from giving Boyer entrance into English intellectual and social circles, the 'Royal Dictionary' also made him a European man of letters. Immediately upon its publication, and well into the second half of the eighteenth century, the work was published -- and pirated -- across Europe. However, the record of European publication, though impressive, is dwarfed by the reception in England. Nineteen editions each of the 'Royal Dictionary' and the 'Royal Dictionary Abridged' were published in London between 1699 and 1797. The 'Royal Dictionary' found a place in the libraries of scholars, public figures (including Dr Johnson), politicians, and clerics; increasingly, however, it found its main use in the classroom. But for Boyer himself the most important consequence of the 'Royal Dictionary' seems to have been the encouragement it gave him, perhaps above all financially, to abandon tutoring and to make a living as a writer: not a year went by between 1699 and his death in 1729 without publication. 
In 1700 two publications came from Boyer's pen: a translation of Racine's 'Iphigenie', entitled 'Achilles', which saw a few performances at Drury Lane, and an aid to the learning of French by English speakers, and of English by foreigners, entitled 'The Wise and Ingenious Companion, French and English'. In 1701 there was a return to military history in 'The Draughts of the most Remarkable Fortified Towns of Europe', and in 1702-3 he published in three volumes 'The History of King William the Third', the first complete published account of William's life and reign. In 'A Geographical and Historical Description' Boyer had described William as 'our Glorious Monarch' (p. 1). The possessive pronoun is significant: Boyer wrote of England as if he were an Englishman, though he remained proud of his French roots. 
Boyer had intended originally to carry his 'William III' as far as the coronation of Queen Anne. He made good that promise with 'The History of the Reign of Queen Anne Digested into Annals' (1703-13), concerned more with British than with continental affairs, and Boyer took particular pride in his coverage of parliamentary affairs, including parliamentary debates. In the same year as he began the 'Annals' he started, or was already engaged in, a manuscript newsletter service, and by 1714 he was well known as a newsletter writer, willing to write a letter every post for a guinea a month. In 1704 he also became something of an intelligence agent, employed, and possibly paid, by Robert Harley, then secretary of state for the northern department. 
In July 1705, in response to a plea from Abel Roper, the publisher of Boyer's 'William III' and of his 'Annals', Boyer agreed to write for the thrice-weekly newspaper the 'Post Boy', as the author of its foreign coverage. Boyer later claimed that he had turned around the fortunes of the paper within a year. Good fortune also came his way in 1706 when he achieved naturalization at his second attempt. However, in August 1709 he fell out with Roper, and in a pre-emptive coup Boyer took over the newspaper himself; he continued to write for it under that title and under the title the 'True Post Boy' until April 1710. 
In 1710 Boyer hoped to renew the patronage that Robert Harley had conferred upon him in 1704, and dedicated to him his 'Annals' for that year. The 'small place' for which he petitioned was that of gazetteer, editor of the only officially authorized government newspaper, the 'London Gazette', the office having become vacant probably in August upon the resignation of its holder, Richard Steele (R. P. Bond, 71, n. 57). Unfortunately, in his concern to prove his loyalty to Harley, Boyer crossed swords with Jonathan Swift: although the appointment of gazetteer fell to Henry St John, the secretary of state for northern affairs, it was to Swift that St John deferred in all matters of the press. 
Boyer first attacked Swift in the March issue of a new periodical, the 'Political State of Great Britain', which Boyer had begun in January 1711. The journal -- which provided a register of monthly occurrences across Britain, America, and Europe, abstracted pamphlets and books, offered observations on trade and public finance, and reported regularly on current parliamentary debates -- was Boyer's enduring historical monument, and he compiled it until his death. It was also the main vehicle for Boyer's lifelong feud with Swift. In September 1711 the feud approached its climax, with the publication by Boyer of 'An Account of the State and Progress of the Present Negotiation of Peace', a reply to Swift's 'New Journey to Paris'. The next month, at Swift's prompting, St John charged Boyer with seditious libel, and required him to provide a recognizance of $200 as surety for his appearance at the court of queen's bench to answer the charge against him. However, as a result of intercession by Harley, now earl of Oxford and first lord of the Treasury, Boyer was discharged at the end of the Michaelmas term; in respect of the gazetteership, however, he was disappointed, passed over twice, in both cases in favour of creatures of Swift. 
Stung, Boyer now sought to position himself as an ardent supporter of the Hanoverian succession. Initially he continued to attack the proposed peace between Britain and France in the 'Political State'. He claimed to be acting as an impartial reporter of the arguments on both sides, but gave the whigs the best of the argument, congratulating them on having won not only the argument but also the overwhelming support of the political nation. Boyer was freer to express a personal opinion as a pamphleteer than as the compiler of a periodical that laid claim to be a paper of record. In summer 1713 he translated a learned, wide-ranging, and widely circulated attack on the folly of the peace, written originally in French by another Huguenot refugee, Jean Dumont, entitled 'Les soupirs de l'Europe etc., or, The groans of Europe at the prospect of the present posture of affairs'; this was followed by a translation of a work by Andre-Francois Deslandes, entitled 'A Philological Essay, or, Reflections on the Death of Free-Thinkers'. 
Having in these publications acted as a conduit of French culture, Boyer engaged in cultural traffic in the opposite direction, providing the first French translation of Addison's 'Cato' in 1713. Whether or not Addison's 'Cato' and Boyer's translation of it can be considered political acts is unclear, but what is certain is that most of Boyer's publications of the following year were deliberately political, designed to restore connections with those (like the Marlboroughs) who had assisted him in the past, to distance himself still further from Oxford and Bolingbroke, and to demonstrate his own zeal for the Hanoverian succession. In the 'Memoirs of the Life and Negotiations of Sir William Temple' (1714) Boyer made of Temple's life as diplomat and servant of the crown a tract for his own times. The work branded Oxford and Bolingbroke as Jacobites, just as they had abandoned negotiations with the Pretender (James Stuart) and were facing the difficult task of establishing their loyalty to the Hanoverian succession. This was made more difficult with Boyer's publication on 1 July 1714 of letters from Anne to Sophia, the dowager electress of Hanover, to the elector of Hanover (later George I), and to the duke of Cambridge (later George II). These gave an unwelcome public airing to the divisions between the Hanoverian court and Anne and her government, and cast doubt upon the professions of private and public zeal for the Hanoverian succession by Bolingbroke and Oxford. Two days later Bolingbroke issued a warrant for Boyer's arrest: he was bound over in a recognizance of $100 and ordered to present himself at the court of queen's bench on the first day of the next term. However, the action was overtaken by events: on 27 July Oxford was dismissed, on 1 August Anne died and was succeeded peacefully by George I, on 31 August Bolingbroke was dismissed, and on 29 November Boyer was discharged. 
Boyer expected some return for his services and sufferings for the Hanoverian cause, and his impatience at the delay in this was evident in an advertisement of April 1716 heralding the publication of his 'Compleat and Impartial History of the Impeachments of the Last Ministry'. However, neither the advertisement nor the work itself won Boyer the gazetteership he still seems to have coveted most: once again, he was passed over. None the less, one favour soon came his way from James Stanhope, shortly to become secretary of state for northern affairs. In November or December 1716 Boyer published a defence of the ministry's northern policies, 'The Interest of Great Britain', which was written, according to Boyer, at the particular request of Stanhope, with materials provided by the minister. In his dedication to Stanhope, Boyer saluted him as a patron nonpareil, but there is no evidence that Stanhope did anything more for Boyer. 
Boyer continued to serve Stanhope and also to hound Oxford; Oxford, awaiting his trial for treason in the Tower and nurturing his antipathy towards whig journalists, awarded the palm of his opprobrium to Boyer as 'the greatest scoundrel in the world that understands neither French nor English' (BL, Portland loan, 29/38/6). A week before Oxford was due to come to trial, in June 1717, Boyer, accused of being the author of 'Minutes of the Negociations of Mons', denied the charge and instead proclaimed the tract a forgery of a kind that pointed unmistakably to Daniel Defoe as its author. Defoe responded at once with a 'tu quoque' decrying Boyer as 'the scum of Hackney Scribblers', a mercenary plagiarist who clumsily cobbled together the works of others, cheated his booksellers, and practised openly almost all abominable vices; Defoe even attempted to publish a newspaper advertisement describing Boyer, now fifty and still apparently unmarried, as a sodomite ('Portland MSS', 5.537). Boyer ostentatiously disdained from replying, though he continued to snipe at Defoe in the 'Political State' long afterwards. 
In August 1718 Boyer published anonymously 'Animadversions and Observations', a lengthy and closely argued defence of the government's financial policies in reply to an attack on them from the disaffected whig Archibald Hutcheson. Though concerned primarily with the detail of financial policy and with praising the excellent financial judgement of ministers, without 'any Design to make my Court to any Body', Boyer ranged beyond finance to applaud the government's foreign policy, revisiting ground he had covered in 'The Interest of Great Britain' in 1716, and to clear the crown of blame for the party quarrels which had accompanied the accession of George I (p. 88). He also took up the defence of his fellow Huguenot refugees in England, praising their large contribution to public funds in perilous times, to the growth of manufacture and of trade, and to raising Britain to an unprecedented peak of prosperity and contentment. In contrast, the only other separate publication by Boyer in that year was far removed from high politics, though it showed him once again in cantankerous dispute with a fellow writer: he accused John Ozell, with the latter's new translation of Fenelon's 'Telemaque', of plagiarizing a 1699 version of which Boyer had been a translator. 
However, the spat with Ozell contributed to a much more serious confrontation with the government in April and May 1722. Having been alerted in a letter from Edmund Curll, the publisher of Ozell's translation of 'Telemaque', to the publication in the March issue of the 'Political State' of a libel against Walpole, the government apprehended Boyer and obliged him to enter a recognizance for the huge sum of $500. Salt was further added to the wound as the author of the libel was Archibald Hutcheson, though Boyer claimed that he had provided abstracts in order to expose its author to the detestation he deserved. The threat of punishment and the large pecuniary penalty were evidently seen as sufficient to ensure better behaviour in future, as no further legal action was taken. Boyer occasionally took a more critical line, even crossing swords with a former hero, Bishop Benjamin Hoadly (with whom he had sided during the Bangorian controversy of 1717), in Hoadly's capacity as government propagandist, and by 1729 he was taking up a somewhat isolationist position in respect of Europe. 
Towards the end of 1722 Boyer produced what he regarded as his greatest work, 'The History of the Life and Reign of Queen Anne', essentially a reformed version of the 'Annals' and the early volumes of the 'Political State'. In the following year Boyer was able to complete the work in his new home he had built for himself in Five Field Row near Chelsea College, in a fashionable and then distinctly whiggish suburb of London; he had lived previously -- since 1708 at least -- at a property which had doubled as a shop in Queen's Court, King Street, near Covent Garden. Chelsea was also noted for its good air, which could have been a consideration for a sickly man. By January 1729 Boyer complained of having been housebound for more than a year and 'under the disadvantage of a crazy Constitution, broken with Age, constant Labour, and a Compilation of a stubborn Gout and Rheumatism, and the remains of a long fit of Ague and Fever' ('Political State', 37, 1729, preface). 
Poor health and general decrepitude were not Boyer's only difficulties. In February 1729 he was threatened with arrest by the House of Commons for having breached parliamentary privilege by publishing abstracts of the 'Votes' in the 'Political State'. Boyer huffed and puffed, but heeded the warning, immediately ceasing to report current proceedings in parliament, summarizing them only after the end of the parliamentary session. This was Boyer's last brush with authority, but he continued pen in hand, living only long enough to see into print a revised and enlarged edition of his 'Royal Dictionary', a further edition of his 'Theory and Practice of Architecture', which he had first published in 1703, and the tenth edition of his 'Compleat French-Master'. He also completed 'The Grand Theatre of Honour, Nobility, and Chivalry', in French and English, taking the history no further than the tenth century on the grounds that he wished not to offend the niceties of certain reigning princes, and planned a second volume to cover parts of Europe omitted in the first. However, he died on 16 November 1729, presumably at his home in Chelsea, a month before 'The Grand Theatre' was published. 
Boyer retained to his end a sense of double identity; in the month before he died he described himself as 'Gallo-Britannus' ('Political State', 37, 1729, 298). This was reflected in his will, made in December 1727. It reveals the existence of a daughter (said to be about three years old in 1729) named Pierre Catherine, presumably in memory of his parents. The bulk of his estate was left to her, with instructions that his executors -- his wife and his cousin, the latter certainly a French Huguenot by origin -- should turn everything into money and invest it in the Bank of England. As an institution that owed much to Huguenot expertise and investment, and that was distinctly whiggish from its start and thereafter, it was a fitting resting place for the fiscal remains of someone of Boyer's origins and loyalties. He was buried in Chelsea Old Church yard on 19 November 1729. 


@@@@@


doc= 3123


Boyes, John Frederick (1811-1879), classical scholar, was born in London on 10 February 1811, the son of a Yorkshireman, Benjamin Boyes. His father being then resident in Charterhouse Square, in October 1819 Boyes entered Merchant Taylors' School. After a very creditable school career extending over nearly ten years, he went in 1829 as Andrew's civil law exhibitioner to St John's College, Oxford, having relinquished a scholarship which he had gained in the previous year at Lincoln College. He graduated BA in 1833 (MA 1835), taking a second class in classics. Soon afterwards he was appointed second master of the Forest School, Walthamstow, and eventually succeeded to the headmastership, which he held from 1844 to 1848. Among a large circle of discriminating friends, he enjoyed a high reputation for culture and scholarship. The fruits of his extensive reading and literary taste were to be seen in his published works: 'Illustrations of the tragedies of Aeschylus and Sophocles, from the Greek, Latin, and English poets' (1844); 'English Repetitions, in Prose and Verse' (1849); 'Life and Books, a Record of Thought and Reading' (1859); and 'Lacon in Council' (1865). The closing years of his life were largely devoted to practical benevolence, in the exercise of which he was as humble as he was liberal. He died at 10 St James's Terrace, Harrow Road, London, on 26 May 1879, leaving a widow, Charlotte Augusta Cobourg Boyes. 


@@@@@


doc= 3124


Boyle, Charles, fourth earl of Orrery (1674-1731), politician and Jacobite conspirator, was born in Little Chelsea near Kensington, Middlesex, on 28 July 1674, not 1676 as stated in the 'Dictionary of National Biography', and was baptized on 1 August at St Mary's, Kensington, the youngest son of Roger Boyle, second earl of Orrery (1646-1682), and his wife, Lady Mary Sackville (1648-1710), daughter of Richard Sackville, fifth earl of Dorset. His grandfather was Roger Boyle, first earl of Orrery, a Cromwellian minister and playwright, and his great-uncle was the natural philosopher Robert Boyle. 
Following the separation of his parents in the 1670s, Boyle was brought up by his mother at Knole in Kent, the seat of his uncle, Charles Sackville, sixth earl of Dorset. Educated first at a school in Sevenoaks and then at St Paul's School, London, he matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1690, aged fifteen, where he studied with Francis Atterbury, later bishop of Rochester and a co-conspirator for the Jacobite cause. A 'studious man not given to the lifestyle of many peers' sons' (Bennett, 380), Boyle was the only nobleman to take a degree from the college during a thirty-year period. 
Boyle's abilities undoubtedly generated respect and led to his involvement in a famous episode, recalled in Swift's 'Battle of the Books', during the long-running controversy between the 'ancients' of Christ Church and 'moderns' led by the Cambridge classicist Richard Bentley. To showcase the talents of their young scholar, the dean of Christ Church, Henry Aldrich, had assigned Boyle to translate the 'Epistles of Phalaris', a collection of letters supposedly the work of a Sicilian dating from the fifth century BC. However, Boyle believed that his research on the 'Epistles' (which, via a third party, required him to consult the collection at the king's library at St James's, Westminster) had been hindered by Bentley, the collection's custodian. His incomplete edition appeared in 1695, a year after his graduation, and contained a prefatory remark concerning Bentley's disobliging manner which proved the catalyst for the controversy. Embarrassed and insulted, within four years Bentley had produced two dissertations on the epistles which disproved Phalaris's authenticity; subsequent rejoinders to Bentley (principally 'Dr Bentley's Dissertation on the Epistles of Phalaris... examin'd', 1698), though attributed to Boyle, were almost certainly written by Atterbury and fellow Oxford ancients. Boyle's Oxford years also saw the development of a wide-ranging intellectual curiosity evident in his growing personal library (ultimately consisting of 10,000 volumes, and now preserved at Christ Church), which constitutes a comprehensive corpus of medical and scientific treatises between 1690 and 1730. Elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1706, Boyle later supported the Quaker horologist and scientific instrument-maker George Graham, whose tellurion -- an instrument to display the motion of the moon, sun, and earth -- was renamed the orrery after the earl. 
After Oxford, Boyle also continued to produce works of literary scholarship, as well as satirical poems and a play, 'As you Find it' (1703), on the then popular theme of marital discord and reconciliation. In addition to George Graham, Orrery supported several prominent writers of the day, including the poet Elijah Fenton, whose 'Oxford and Cambridge Miscellany Poems' (1708) contained two of the earl's lyrical verses, and the dramatists Thomas Southerne and George Farquhar, whose most celebrated work, 'The Recruiting Officer', was based on his experiences in Boyle's (then Orrery's) Irish regiment. 
Boyle's public career began with his election to the family borough seat at Charleville, co. Cork, which he represented from 1695 to 1699. In 1701 he ran, successfully, for election to one of the borough seats for Huntingdon. His defeated opponent, John Pedley, disputed the election, and in a petition accused Boyle of improprieties including the intervention of an unnamed peer who with 'Swords & Clubs' had threatened to 'menace, assault, and strike the Recorders of the said Borough and others of the Petitioner's Voters' ('JHC', 13.333). Boyle denounced these charges in the Commons, and Pedley's petition was later withdrawn. However, Francis Wortley, borough recorder and a fellow Huntingdon MP, whom Boyle mildly ridiculed in his speech, confronted him in a duel in Hyde Park on 27 March 1701. In a bitter struggle Boyle was seriously wounded and spent several months recuperating. Following his brother's death in 1703, he was raised to the Irish peerage as fourth earl of Orrery. Voting fairly consistently along tory lines, he was re-elected for Huntingdon in subsequent elections. In the year after his ennoblement he purchased a colonel's commission and thereafter held the colonelcies of three major regiments of foot. His military career was aided by a long-standing friendship with John, second duke of Argyll, who arranged for his award of the order of knight of the Thistle. 
On 30 March 1706 Orrery married Lady Elizabeth Cecil ('c'.1687-1708), sister of the sixth earl of Exeter, at a ceremony at Burghley House. On 2 January 1707 their only child, John Boyle (styled Lord Boyle and later fifth earl) was born, the countess dying in June of the following year. Orrery never remarried, although from at least 1718 he maintained an intimate relationship with Margaret Swordfeger (died 1741), the wife of his secretary, who became his consort and mistress. With her Orrery had two sons, Charles and Boyle, and two daughters, Clementina and Martha Sophia, names which belie the earl's by then well-formed Jacobite sympathies. 
During 1709 and 1710 Orrery participated in three military campaigns in Flanders, and was involved in fierce fighting at Malplaquet and the siege of Bethune. Now a major-general in the prestigious Royal Scots Fusiliers (1710), he advised the first minister, Robert Harley, on military reforms designed to offset the influence of their mutual political opponent, the duke of Marlborough. From 1711 to June 1713 he served as the queen's envoy-extraordinary at Brussels and The Hague. His attachment to Harley also brought him a place on the privy council (1711) and a seat in the Lords as Baron Boyle of Marston, Somerset. Yet growing dissatisfaction with the apparent duplicity of Harley (now earl of Oxford) prompted him to follow Argyll into opposition in 1713. 
Following the Hanoverian succession Orrery was designated lord lieutenant of Somerset and lord of the bedchamber to George I. Within two years, however, he was a victim of Argyll's fall from court grace following the duke's unacceptably close intrigues with the prince of Wales. Forced to dispose of his regiment and commission, Orrery joined the dissident whigs under Argyll's leadership, a relationship which was instrumental in his conversion to the Jacobite cause. As a disgruntled former courtier with diplomatic, military, and political experience, Orrery was a valuable individual for the exiled Stuarts and was now sought out by the Jacobite secretary of state, the earl of Mar. By late 1717 Orrery had embraced Jacobitism, although his ongoing circumspection and caution in correspondence drew criticism from fellow conspirators. A firm believer of the need for a sizeable foreign army as an essential requirement of a successful Jacobite invasion, he also insisted that the Stuarts guarantee the security of the Anglican church to their potential supporters. 
After 1716 Orrery became a permanent member of the parliamentary opposition, joining forces with staunch tories and suspected Jacobites, and engaging in numerous foolhardy protests designed to annoy the whig ministries of Stanhope, Sunderland, and Walpole. By the early 1720s he was instrumental in many of these protests and has often been included in the handful of tory leaders associated with the Atterbury conspiracy of summer 1722, which resulted in the execution of Christopher Layer for treason in the following year. In fact, while undoubtedly close to Bishop Atterbury, and receiving a military commission from James Edward Stuart, the Jacobite Pretender, Orrery almost certainly did not advocate or assist in the planning of the conspiracy, and was then otherwise engaged in raising money to return tories to parliament. 
None the less, Orrery's association with Layer and Atterbury prompted his arrest and imprisonment in the Tower from late September 1722 to March of the following year. His release on bail of $50,000 was granted only after desperate appeals from his family and medical testimonials claiming that his life was in danger. After a protracted convalescence Orrery resumed his parliamentary opposition, as well as his Jacobite activities, assisted after 1725 by a close friend and fellow officer, Colonel William Cecil. In 1725 he undertook the second of his missions (the first being in 1720) to the French court to solicit support for the Jacobite cause. The former was hindered by its coinciding with the financial crisis caused by the collapse of the Mississippi Company; the second failed largely as a result of its emissary's timidity. Plans for a third journey were underway when Orrery died at his house in Downing Street, Westminster, on 28 August 1731. He was buried on 11 September at Westminster Abbey. 
Orrery's will reveals the extent to which relations had broken down between the fourth earl and his son, John, who now inherited the Irish and English titles. The worsening relations had been prompted by John's dislike of Margaret Swordfeger, a sentiment he shared by the late 1720s with his new in-laws, the earl and countess of Orkney. This opposition prompted Orrery to draft a will which, to the disgust of his legitimate heir, entitled Margaret and her children to a generous provision of nearly $10,000 to be supplemented by the fifth earl if required. Following Margaret's death in 1741, her two eldest children sought to collect their mother's bequest in full, but were cut off by the fifth earl following Clementina's marriage to a Roman Catholic. The fourth earl's claim that John lacked the 'Inclination either for Entertainment or Knowledge which study and Learning afford' (will, TNA: PRO, PROB 11/646, fols. 241-2) led him to bequeath his library and instrument collection to Christ Church, Oxford. Although father and son were reconciled before the fourth earl's death, his will was never revised. 


@@@@@


doc= 3125


Boyle, David, Lord Shewalton (1772-1853), advocate, was born on 26 July 1772 at Irvine, Ayrshire, the fourth son of Patrick Boyle (1717-1798), of Shewalton, army chaplain and landowner, and of his second wife, Elizabeth (died 1832), daughter of Alexander Dunlop (1684-1747), professor of Greek at the University of Glasgow; Patrick Boyle was the third son of John, second earl of Glasgow. Boyle was educated at the University of St Andrews from 1787 to 1789 and then at the University of Glasgow, where he studied law with John Millar, the whig pupil of Adam Smith and in his day the most famous teacher of law in Britain. Boyle was called to the Scottish bar on 14 December 1793. His abilities and connections impressed Lord Melville, political manager of Scotland, on whose recommendation he became solicitor-general for Scotland in May 1807, in the duke of Portland's administration. In the general election of the following month he became MP for Ayrshire, which he continued to represent until his appointment on 23 February 1811 to the court of session as Lord Boyle. He was appointed lord justice clerk on 15 October 1811. He was sworn on 11 April 1820 a member of the privy council. In 1837, on succeeding to the estate of his elder brother, he changed his judicial title to Lord Shewalton. 
Boyle practised as an advocate and gained a good reputation. He increased his political value by dynastic marriage, on 24 December 1804, to an heiress from the landed gentry of his native county, Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Alexander Montgomerie of Annick, brother of the twelfth earl of Eglintoun; she died on 14 April 1822. They had six sons and five daughters. Boyle married secondly, on 17 July 1827, Camilla Catherine, eldest daughter of David Smythe of Methven, Lord Methven, a Scottish judge. She died on 25 December 1880, leaving three sons and one daughter. One of Boyle's daughters by his first marriage, Helen, married the advocate and philanthropist Sir Charles Dalrymple Fergusson, fifth baronet, and was mother to the colonial governor Sir James Fergusson. Boyle's sons by his second marriage included George David Boyle, who became dean of Salisbury in 1880. 
After acting as lord justice clerk for nearly thirty years, Boyle was appointed lord justice-general and president of the court of session, on the resignation of Charles Hope, Lord Granton. Boyle resigned office on 5 May 1852, declining the baronetcy which was offered to him. He died at Shewalton on 4 February 1853 and was buried at Dundonald, Ayrshire, on 11 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 3126


Boyle, Henry, Baron Carleton (1669-1725), politician, was born on 12 July 1669, the third and youngest son of Charles Boyle, Baron Clifford of Lanesborough (1639-1694), and his first wife, Lady Jane Seymour (died 1679), the youngest daughter of William Seymour, second duke of Somerset. He was a scion of a prominent Anglo-Irish aristocratic family; his grandfather was Richard Boyle, second earl of Cork. After Westminster School he was commissioned into the army, almost certainly through the offices of his uncle Laurence Hyde, earl of Rochester. He did not share the legitimist views of his Hyde relations, however, adopting instead the moderate whiggery of his father. In November 1688 he had joined the desertion of James II for the prince of Orange. He entered parliament for Tamworth, his father's old constituency, in May 1689, but after losing the seat at the general election in 1690 went to Ireland to run his grandfather's huge estates in counties Cork and Waterford. He served briefly in the Irish parliament, where he was noted for his great skill and 'quickness'. In 1692, having resigned his army commission, he was elected MP for Cambridge University, of which his cousin Charles Seymour, sixth duke of Somerset, was chancellor. Identifying himself with the 'country' opposition, he shone as a speaker and scrutineer of government activity, and obtained election to the commission of accounts during the years 1695-7. Tiring of opposition, however, he crossed to the court party during the winter of 1697-8, and his effective advocacy of the court's financial measures brought him appointment as a lord of the treasury in May 1699 and advancement to chancellor of the exchequer in 1701, which latter office he retained until 1708. From 1704 until 1715 he was also both lord treasurer of Ireland and lord lieutenant of the West Riding of Yorkshire. Urbane and superior, he avoided political infighting wherever possible, preferring the steady routines of treasury business, from which he profited handsomely. 
Following the 1705 election, when he became MP for Westminster, Boyle emerged as one of Godolphin's chief lieutenants in the lower house, and in February 1708 he replaced Robert Harley as secretary of state in the southern department. His leadership over the court whigs, the high point of his career, ceased, however, towards the end of 1709 as the ministry succumbed increasingly to the dominance of the junto whigs. Early in 1710 he was a manager in the Sacheverell trial, but, unable to face the battles engendered by ascendant toryism, he declined re-election later in the year and withdrew from politics altogether. Following Queen Anne's death in 1714 he was, inevitably, tipped for the highest offices under the incoming whig ministry, but received only a barony. He supported Lord Sunderland's government during the 'whig schism' and in 1721 was appointed to the cabinet rank of lord president; he was retained as such by Walpole. Boyle died, unmarried, at his London residence, Carleton House, on 14 March 1725, leaving estates in Oxfordshire, Wiltshire, and Petersham in Surrey, plus a personalty in excess of $27,000. According to Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, Carleton was the real father of Kitty Hyde ['see 'Douglas, Catherine, duchess of Queensberry and Dover], daughter of Jane Hyde, countess of Clarendon and Rochester, and her husband, Henry, Lord Hyde. The veracity of the story remains unclear, but certainly both Kitty and Jane benefited in money and jewellery from Carleton's will. He was buried in the family vault at Londesborough, Yorkshire, on 31 March 1725. 


@@@@@


doc= 3127


Boyle, Henry, first earl of Shannon (1681x7-1764), speaker of the Irish House of Commons, was born in Castlemartyr, co. Cork, Ireland, the second son of Lieutenant-Colonel Henry Boyle ('c'.1650-1693) of Castlemartyr and Mary O'Brien, daughter of Murrough O'Brien, first earl of Inchiquin (c.1614-1674), the commander of protestant forces in Munster in the 1640s. His father was killed in Flanders in 1693 while fighting with the duke of Marlborough's army. He was a member of the Church of Ireland, and was educated at Westminster School, where he became queen's scholar in 1702, and then at Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated in March 1705; both institutions were high tory and had strong connections with the Boyle family. In 1705 he succeeded to the family estate, a minor one within the Cork Boyle family, after the death of his older brother, Roger. He served as MP for Midleton, co. Cork, from 7 July 1707 to 2 November 1713, then for Kilmallock, co. Limerick, from November 1713 to October 1714, and finally for co. Cork from October 1715 until 17 May 1756. He was sworn of the privy council on 28 April 1733 and in November 1733 was appointed chancellor of the exchequer, a post which he held for three separate periods. He was elected speaker of the Irish House of Commons on 4 October 1733 and sat in the chair until 17 April 1756, when he went to the Lords. He was appointed to the Irish revenue board on 12 September 1735 and was first commissioner until 5 April 1739. He was also a long-serving lord justice, holding that position fifteen times between 1734 and 1764. On 16 April 1756 he was made baron of Castlemartyr, Viscount Boyle of Brandon, and earl of Shannon and was granted a $2000 per annum pension for thirty-one years. 
Boyle continued the rebuilding work at Castlemartyr, which had been destroyed in 1689, and he improved the demesne and the borough town, preferring this to his Dublin residence in Henrietta Street. He was awarded an honorary degree of LLD from Trinity College, Dublin, in July 1735 and, on his being raised to the peerage, was given the position of governor of co. Cork on 3 May 1756. Boyle married twice, first in 1715 to Catherine (died 1725), daughter of Childly Coote and his wife, Catharine Sandys, of Killester, co. Limerick; she died childless on 5 May 1725. Then he married a distant cousin, Henrietta Boyle (1701-1746), sister of the third earl of Burlington and youngest daughter of Charles Boyle, second earl of Burlington, and his wife, Juliana Noel, on 22 September 1726. They had five sons (three of whom died young) and one daughter; Henrietta Boyle died on 13 December 1746. The children included Boyle's heir, Richard (1728-1807), who became second earl of Shannon in December 1764. 
For a thirty-year period from 1734 to 1764 Boyle was perhaps the leading Irish politician in both the House of Commons and Dublin Castle. He was described as a deep politician; in appearance he was most open, and in reality most reserved. Contemporaries often underestimated him, mistaking country gentleman manners and a preference for residence in Castlemartyr over fashionable Henrietta Street as a sign of bucolic indifference. Boyle was, however, the most effective undertaker or Irish parliamentary manager before 1800, with his wielding of patronage, his electoral interest, and, above all, his sense of his own and other MPs' honour. He owed his political power primarily to his Commons following, estimated in 1753 at a total of forty members. His interest was not based on his own land, although he controlled the boroughs of Castlemartyr and Clonakilty in co. Cork, but on his family connections and political guile. One of his connections was with the Brodrick family, later viscounts Midleton and absentees, who first returned him as an MP. By the late 1720s he had become the manager of both their interest in co. Cork and also, through marriage, of the interest of the third earl of Burlington. By 1729, when the Commons speaker William Conolly died, Boyle considered standing as his successor but did not. Four years later he was strong enough to be the unrivalled candidate with his 'Munster squadron' of MPs, so named at the time because of their regional base in counties Cork and Waterford. He married to this parliamentary strength his control of the Irish revenue board in the 1730s, which gave him patronage over a thousand minor posts. He soon gave up his revenue post, however, and relied instead on his influence in the Commons, thus making him a different type of undertaker from William Conolly or John Ponsonby. His appointment as lord justice for the first of many times in 1734 and then as chancellor of the exchequer, a sinecure worth $800 per annum, marked his recognized place in the Dublin Castle administration after that date. 
Boyle's period as speaker and chief undertaker was largely a quiet one because there was no serious threat of a money bill between 1733 and 1753. Despite this, successive viceroys all distrusted him, partly because he openly opposed unpopular government measures, like the unsuccessful effort to introduce regulations to stop the smuggling of wool to France in 1741, and partly due to his indispensability. This distrust began with the duke of Dorset in 1733, who hesitated about appointing the new speaker of the Commons one of his lords justices, especially after Boyle refused to support legislation to repeal the 'Test Act'. His relationship with subsequent viceroys during the 1730s and 1740s was one of cautiousness on both sides and was marked by his refusal to break fully with his country's past; for example, he demanded and gained government support both for popular anti-Catholic measures and for the use of crown revenues to aid the Irish economy and the local interests of the gentry through the building of canals, the spreading of tillage, and the development of linen manufacturing. The good relations broke down after 1750 with the premature attempt of the duke of Dorset to replace Boyle as speaker and lord justice in order to satisfy the ambitions of Archbishop George Stone and the Ponsonby family. Boyle was now in his sixties and the prospect of retirement must have appealed. However, he chose to resist and a battle soon ensued over the rights of the Irish parliament to dispose of the revenues it raised and also over the use, by Boyle and his allies, of a growing Anglophobia among Irish protestants inside and outside parliament. After the money bill was rejected in the 1753-4 session the Dublin parliament was prorogued by Dorset, and Boyle was dismissed from all his government offices. Yet, with the prospect of war with France and the worries about another disrupted parliamentary session, Dorset was replaced in March 1755 and the new viceroy, the marquess of Hartington, was authorized to negotiate a settlement with Boyle. The outcome of this was his retirement as speaker and his creation as first earl of Shannon in April 1756. Boyle's patriotism had been called into question several times by pamphleteers during the 1750s crisis and his 1756 settlement was compared with William Pulteney's apostasy in the wake of Walpole's fall in 1742. Despite this vocal criticism he kept his electoral interest intact and was persuaded to return as a lord justice in April 1758 in order to prop up the administration of the duke of Bedford. Although he served as a lord justice for another three terms this was in order to give the government extra parliamentary credibility rather than to enable him to remain an active politician. 
Shannon died from an attack of gout in the head on 27 December 1764 at his home in Henrietta Street, Dublin, and was buried in St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, on 31 December. By the time of his death he had created a remarkable rise in fortunes for his branch of the Cork family, coming from minor beginnings to create an electoral interest and landed estate which survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 3128


Boyle, John (1563-1620), Church of Ireland bishop of Cork, Cloyne, and Ross, was born in Kent, the eldest son of Roger Boyle and Joan Naylor, daughter of John Naylor of Canterbury, and brother of Richard Boyle, first earl of Cork (1566-1643). The brothers' education suggests that their parents were of at least yeoman status. John Boyle was educated at King's School, Canterbury, and matriculated, with his brother Richard, from Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, in 1583. He gained the degrees of BA (1587), MA (1591), and BD (1598), then obtained the rectory of Elstree, Hertfordshire, and in 1610 that of Great Stanmore, Middlesex. On 5 February 1611 he was collated to the prebend of Bishopshill in the diocese of Lichfield. He is sometimes described as dean of Lichfield. With financial assistance from his brother Richard he secured the degree of DD at Cambridge in 1614, thus opening the prospect of episcopal office, but he still needed to undergo considerable expense to secure the duke of Buckingham's support for his appointment as bishop of the diocese of Cork, Cloyne, and Ross. He surrendered his other livings and was consecrated in 1618, one of a number of Cork's kinsmen to secure strategic church livings in Munster. Following an accident, resulting in a broken leg, he died at Cork on 10 July 1620, and was buried at Youghal. 


@@@@@


doc= 3129


Boyle, John, fifth earl of Cork and fifth earl of Orrery (1707-1762), biographer, was born in Glasshouse Street, London, on 2 January 1707. He was the only son of Charles Boyle, fourth earl of Orrery (1674-1731), and his wife, Lady Elizabeth Cecil ('c'.1687-1708), daughter of the fifth earl of Exeter. He never knew his mother and saw little of his father, a soldier and diplomat. He was educated at home, being tutored from 1713 by the poet Elijah Fenton, his father's secretary, and from November 1717 at Westminster School. He matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 16 August 1723, and two years later, now styled Lord Boyle, left Oxford without a degree and departed for a continental tour, ostensibly to complete his education but also disguising his father's Jacobite mission. 
On 9 May 1728, soon after coming of age, Boyle married, in London, Lady Henrietta (died 1732), daughter of George Hamilton, first earl of Orkney. As Henrietta's parents strictly forbade her association with her father-in-law and his mistress Margaret Swordfeger (died 1741) the already uneasy relationship between Lord Boyle and his father grew worse. The fourth earl not only made generous provision in his will for Mrs Swordfeger and their children but, unjustly declaring that his legitimate son had never demonstrated 'Inclination either for the Entertainment or Knowledge which Study and Learning afford' (will, TNA: PRO, PROB 11/646/341-342), he bequeathed most of his immense personal library to Christ Church. Struggling between filial deference and devotion to his wife Lord Boyle lamented: 'I lost my Mother before I knew I had one; I have a Father but he seems not to know he has a Son' ('Orrery Papers', 1.83). There was a reconciliation in 1730, but the fourth earl died on 28 August 1731, with his will unamended. 
Profound personal tragedy struck the new earl of Orrery again, on 22 August 1732, with the death of Henrietta on the couple's arrival in Ireland. Orrery was left with three small children: Charles ('b'. 27 Jan 1729), Hamilton ('b'. 3 Feb 1730), and Elizabeth ('b'. 7 May 1731). Compounding his grief was his financial predicament; he had assumed his father's debts of over $20,000 but, owing to negligence and the dishonesty of his father's agent, his Irish estates were far less profitable than had been expected. For eighteen years he pursued lawsuits, attempting to regain sums due. 
On 30 June 1738, in Dublin, Orrery married Margaret Hamilton (1710-1758), of Caledon, co. Tyrone, with a fortune of about $3000 p.a.; shortly after the marriage she pledged her diamonds as security for her husband's debts. The pair enjoyed domesticity, and, unlike his own father, Orrery deeply cherished time spent with his growing family. He and Margaret had three children: Lucy, Catherine, and Edmund ('b'. 21 Nov 1742). At Oxford in 1743 he was created MA (University College) and DCL. He took his seat in the House of Lords on 7 November 1735 but he shunned public affairs wherever possible, preferring instead the rural tranquillity of his estate at Marston, Somerset, or his wife's house at Caledon. 
Orrery began his political career as a tory and Jacobite. In parliament he associated with Bolingbroke, and attacked the ministry in 1739; he also communicated with the exiled Stuart court and involved himself in Jacobite schemes before the rising of 1745. He joined signatories who asked Louis XV to dispatch 10,000 troops and was designated a member of the council of regents for Prince Charles Edward in 1743. A Jacobite prisoner disclosed his name to a Lords committee in 1746 but it decided against his prosecution. He was reportedly still toasting James Stuart publicly as late as 1747 but he was also turning towards the opposition court of Frederick, prince of Wales. By 1749 he was listed as a potential office-holder on Frederick's accession, but Frederick died in 1751 and soon afterwards Orrery withdrew from politics. His finances were so hopelessly confused that he was obliged to place his estates in the hands of trustees for the benefit of his many creditors and, in September 1754, to retire with his wife and daughter Lucy to live more economically in Italy. He became acquainted with Horace Mann, the British consul in Florence, whom he convinced of his loyalty to George II; on his return to England in late 1755 he began to receive a secret service pension of $800 p.a. that continued until his death. 
Orrery was on intimate terms with Alexander Pope from the early 1730s until the latter's death; his acquaintance with Swift began in 1732, during the dean's waning years. His correspondence with both figures suggests deep friendship and an undying mutual respect; he was instrumental in the publication of their letters and other works. His own best-known work is his popular and controversial 'Remarks on the Life and Writings of Dr. Jonathan Swift' (1751), in the form of a series of letters to his son Hamilton. Though 'Remarks' elicited hostile contemporary criticism modern studies applaud Orrery's reasoned objectivity, his creative innovation in utilizing the epistolary method in biography, and his judicious consultation of reliable, first-hand sources, which compensated for his limited acquaintance with Swift. 
Orrery's other works include translations of two of Horace's odes (1741); a translation of Pliny's letters (1751), dedicated to his son Charles (which was overshadowed by a more academic edition in the same year); and 'Letters from Italy in the Years 1754 and 1755', published posthumously in 1773, which is filled with perceptive social and cultural observations. He also contributed anonymous essays to periodicals, but arguably his greatest literary contribution is as a letter-writer. A two-volume selection from letters now at Harvard, edited by Emily Boyle, countess of Cork and Orrery, ('The Orrery Papers', 1903), poignantly unveils a complicated, hypersensitive individual; an affectionate, attentive father and passionate, devoted husband; and a conscientious landlord of Irish estates whose pungent commentaries about the backward, unsophisticated country around him are both hilarious and informative. Orrery's letters display a man striving for literary recognition, not solely because of his family's historical legacy; his unpleasant youthful memories; and the fact that his leisure and innate abilities lent facility to such endeavours. Orrery encouraged other authors, including Fenton, Thomas Southerne, Elizabeth Rowe, Mary Barber, Samuel Bowden, Lewis Theobald, and Charlotte Lennox; Johnson said that had he 'been rich, he would have been a very liberal patron' (Boswell, 'Life', 5.238). 
Lady Orrery died in London on 24 November 1758, followed by her elder stepson, Charles, on 16 September 1759. Orrery lived on until 16 November 1762, when, at Marston, complications from his long-time affliction with gout ended his life; he was buried at St John's, Frome. Contrary to common misconceptions his lands had not been augmented by the Cork estates of his cousin Richard, earl of Cork and Burlington, upon the latter's death in 1753; all Orrery received was the Cork title. 
Johnson called Orrery 'feeble-minded' and said that his conversation 'was like his writings, neat and elegant, but without strength. He grasped at more than his abilities could reach; tried to pass for a better talker, a better writer, and a better thinker, than he was' (Boswell, 'Life', 5.238). Yet Lady Mary Wortley Montagu remarked in 1754 that despite the inherent flaws in Orrery's 'Remarks', it clearly established its author as 'a Poet, a Patriot, a Philosopher, a Physician, a Critic, a compleat Scholar, and a most excellent Moralist, shining in private Life as a submissive Son, a tender Father, and zealous Friend' ('Complete Letters', 3.56). If her usually acerbic criticism is not the sole motivation for her comments, a re-examination of the man and his writings lends it credence. 


@@@@@


doc= 3130


Boyle, Michael (1580?-1635), Church of Ireland bishop of Waterford and Lismore, was born in London, the third son of Michael Boyle (died 1596), a merchant, and his wife, Jane Peacock, and younger brother of Richard Boyle, archbishop of Tuam. He entered Merchant Taylors' School, London, in 1587, and proceeded to St John's College, Oxford, in 1593. He graduated BA (5 December 1597), MA (25 June 1601), BD (9 July 1607), and DD (2 July 1611), and became a fellow of his college. He was appointed vicar of Finedon in Northamptonshire. Though esteemed for his learning and prudence, Boyle's subsequent rise in Irish ecclesiastical circles owed much to his relative Richard Boyle, first earl of Cork. In 1613 he was appointed to the archdeaconries of Cork and Cloyne and the prebend of Glanworth. In 1614 he became dean of Lismore and by 1619 was bishop of Waterford and Lismore. He married twice; his first wife was Dorothy Fish, daughter of George Fish of South Hill, Bedfordshire, and his second Christian, daughter of Thomas Bellott of Chester, but he had no children by either marriage. He held until death the chancellorship of Lismore and Cashel and the treasurership of Waterford. Boyle died at Waterford on 27 December 1635, where he was buried in the cathedral of the Blessed Trinity. 


@@@@@


doc= 3131


Boyle, Michael (1609/10-1702), lord chancellor of Ireland and Church of Ireland archbishop of Armagh, was the eldest son of Richard Boyle (c.1574-1645), archbishop of Tuam between 1638 and 1645, and his wife, Martha, daughter of Richard or John Wright of Catherine Hill. A member of a cadet branch of the prolific tribe of Boyles which colonized public offices and the established Church of Ireland, Michael Boyle graduated BA from Trinity College, Dublin, in 1637. In the same year he was incorporated as MA at Trinity College, Oxford. Local links immediately secured his preferment to the parish of Clonpriest, one of the richest in the diocese of Cloyne. In 1640 he was advanced to the deanery of Cloyne. Enjoyment of these emoluments was soon interrupted by the outbreak of the confederate war and personal tragedy. Boyle, who had married, probably in the late 1630s, Margaret, daughter of George Synge, bishop of Cloyne, lost his wife and their only daughter in 1641 when they drowned at sea. At about the same time Boyle offered his services as chaplain to the protestant forces in the province of Munster and later in the 1640s Boyle married the Hon. Mary, daughter of Dermod O'Brien, fifth Baron Inchiquin, and sister of Murrough O'Brien, first earl of Inchiquin. They had three sons and six daughters. Boyle's new connections (the sixth baron was commander of the protestant army) may have assisted him into the post of chaplain-general. His skills as an emissary were soon revealed. He seems to have followed his brother-in-law in aligning with Charles I rather than the Westminster parliament in 1648. He was looked upon as the head of the protestant clergy of Munster who remained loyal to the Stuarts throughout the revolutions of the late 1640s. As such, Inchiquin addressed to him queries about the stance of the clergy, some of whom were acknowledging the regime which had succeeded the executed Charles I. 
Unlike many of his colleagues and some within his own family, Boyle stayed aloof from the new government. Continuing in Munster, he provided one of several channels through which the exiled royalists could be informed of opinion and opportunities in the area. In December 1652 he was with his kinsman Richard Boyle, second earl of Cork, the head of the Boyles in Ireland. He also attended the wedding at Youghal in 1656 of one of Cork's daughters. Again, in the uncertain time late in 1659, Boyle dined with Cork. It is likely that Boyle travelled covertly between England and Ireland during the interregnum. Boyle's loyalty was acknowledged and his losses recompensed when he received lands formerly owned by Sir Hardress Waller in 1660. The grant was confirmed in the 'Act of Settlement' of 1662. 
Boyle's unimpeachable loyalty and his considerable sufferings brought his advancement to the bishopric of Cork in August 1660. He also held six sinecures in the diocese until attacked for doing so by his kinsman the earl of Orrery, lord president of Munster. Boyle's capacity for business, especially to safeguard the material interests of the church, attracted favourable notice. In addition, his record, coupled with diplomacy, enabled him to escape the suspicions to which those in his family such as Orrery and Cork, who had collaborated with the previous regime, were prone. In the autumn of 1660 he was sent to London to advance the claims of the established Church of Ireland for compensation. In 1661 the Irish convocation chose him as one of its agents to solicit in England: a tribute to his skills and perhaps to the links with English bishops and courtiers forged during the 1650s. In November 1661 he appeared before the English council, but meetings with the lord chancellor, the earl of Clarendon, and Gilbert Sheldon, bishop of London, convinced him that the Irish church had pitched its claims too high. The lord lieutenant, the duke of Ormond, backed his translation to the archdiocese of Dublin in November 1663. Already Boyle had been sworn of the Irish privy council, but his more regular presence in Dublin meant that he frequently attended. As an astute observer of politics, both secular and ecclesiastical, he was valued by Ormond as an informant. In 1665 his skills, together with the political interest which he commanded (particularly in Munster), led to his appointment as lord chancellor. Boyle accurately protested that he lacked any great proficiency in the law. On occasion he had expressed dislike of the common lawyers, and hoped that the clergy might no longer be harassed in the courts. Initially Boyle deputed much of the work of chancery to a keeper of the seal. However, this stratagem did not deflect the criticism of those opposed on principle to the choice of a cleric and those simply contemptuous of Boyle. He sought to improve chancery procedures to the extent of issuing orders for its regulation in 1668. These were repeated in 1673 and 1685, perhaps indicating that they had had only a limited effect. 
The office of lord chancellor brought Boyle additional patronage, fees, and further chances of surreptitious enrichment. In 1672 his rents alone yielded $1941. In 1686 he was listed among a score in Ireland worth more than $2000 p.a. A sign of his increasing wealth was the acquisition of a country property at Blessington, in co. Wicklow. During the 1670s he erected a large mansion there, which was lavishly embellished and furnished. He also undertook the improvement of the archiepiscopal residence of St Sepulchre's in Dublin. Detractors pointed not just to this unabashed enjoyment of his wealth, but to delays and partiality in chancery and to torpor in his diocese. On 8 March 1673 it was alleged that under the 'proud and insolent' Boyle, the whole kingdom groaned (Conway, letter, de Vesci MSS, H/15). These criticisms did not lessen the confidence of the administration in his abilities. Boyle skilfully picked his way through the contending factions within the Irish council. In 1677 it was rumoured that he might be translated to Canterbury in succession to Sheldon. Early in 1679 Ormond, again lord lieutenant, had him translated to the primatial see of Armagh. He was named three times to the triumvirate of lords justices who governed in the absence of a lord lieutenant or lord deputy. 
Complaints were voiced that Boyle as lord chancellor had allowed overt or covert Catholics to be included in the county commissions of the peace. To some Irish protestants this seemed the more culpable as the panic over the Popish Plot spread to Ireland. Boyle's marriage into the O'Brien family, the earls of Inchiquin, some of whom had remained Catholic, was also used to embarrass him politically. However, with the storms of the Popish Plot and exclusion weathered, and a tory reaction setting in, he was vulnerable to attack on other grounds. Some noted that he had not purged the magistracy of all who had served the Cromwellians. The truth was that Boyle, whatever his failings as a judge, was too closely identified with the English protestant interest in Ireland to join enthusiastically in the restitution of Catholics to offices and lands. As the political atmosphere altered under James II, he was replaced as chancellor in 1686. The lord lieutenant at the time praised Boyle as an able and loyal servant of the crown, but admitted that he had a large following beyond his dependants in chancery. As archbishop of Armagh he retained considerable power, but did nothing openly to challenge the Catholic 'revanche'. 
Increasing incapacity, first physical and then mental, diminished Boyle's influence. Already in 1689 he was thought 'decrepit' (J. Bonnell to J. Strype, 19 April 1689, BL, Stowe MS 746, fol. 191). He did not join wealthy protestants fleeing from Ireland. However, in 1690 he quickly rallied to the new monarchs, hoping thereby to prevent any religious settlement which might comprehend or tolerate the dissenters. When archbishop of Dublin, although his see contained a sizeable population of protestant nonconformists, he had protected individuals against the full rigour of the laws, but he did not favour a general toleration. By 1697, reportedly both blind and deaf, he left other, younger bishops such as Narcissus Marsh, Samuel Foley, William King, and Nathaniel Foy to devise and apply measures to invigorate the established church, although Boyle's inactivity, it was felt, frustrated reform. Before old age slowed him, however, during more than three decades as a bishop he had deployed legal rather than spiritual weapons in the battle against the many adversaries of the Church of Ireland. Concurrently, in the traditions of his family, he enriched himself. Boyle died on 10 December 1702 at his house in Oxmantown, near Dublin, in the ninety-third year of his age, and was buried in St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin. 




@@@@@


doc= 3132


Murrough Boyle, first Viscount Blessington (1648-1718), government official, was the son and heir of Michael Boyle and his second wife, Mary. Murrough matriculated from Trinity College, Dublin, on 18 August 1662, and was MP for Kilmallock during 1665-6. He married Mary (died 1668), daughter of John Parker, archbishop of Dublin. They had one daughter. Mary died on 13 September 1668, and in November 1672 Boyle married Lady Anne (died 1725), daughter of Charles Coote, second earl of Mountrath. They had two sons and two daughters. On 23 August 1673 Boyle was created Viscount Blessington in the peerage of Ireland. He was governor of Limerick and constable of Limerick Castle from 1679 until 1692. Blessington was inclined to drama rather than politics, writing a play, 'The Lost Princess', which has been described as 'truly contemptible' (Baker, 1.58). Blessington died on 26 April 1718 at Islandbridge, co. Dublin, and was buried on 29 April with his father in St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin. His widow died on 5 April 1725 and was buried on 11 April in the same vault. The title was inherited by his son Charles (died 1732), who died without issue, whereupon his peerage became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 3133


Boyle, Richard, first earl of Cork (1566-1643), landowner and administrator, was born at Preston, near Faversham in Kent, on 13 October 1566, the second son of Roger Boyle (died 1576), landowner, and his wife, Joan, daughter of Robert Naylor. Roger Boyle, a cadet of a Herefordshire family, was able to send his eldest sons to Cambridge. Richard went from King's School in Canterbury to Corpus Christi College in 1583. His studies were continued at the Middle Temple, where he attached himself as a clerk to Sir Roger Manwood, chief baron of the exchequer. Soon he was noticed by a Kentish neighbour, Sir Edward Waterhouse, who was chancellor of the Irish exchequer. 
In 1588 Boyle travelled with Waterhouse to Ireland. He later contended that he had arrived with a gold bracelet, a diamond ring, and $27 3's'. in his purse: not negligible assets. In Ireland, following the earl of Desmond's uprising in the southern province of Munster, opportunities abounded. English authority had to be restored, partly through confiscating the estates of the defeated. An unscrupulous opportunist, Boyle abandoned the ailing Manwood and turned to Sir Geoffrey Fenton as his principal patron. Fenton, as secretary to the council and escheator, presided over the confiscations and parallel search for 'concealed' lands which the crown claimed as its own. He was also a confidant of Lord Burghley. Through Fenton, Boyle secured the powerful post of deputy escheator. In this capacity he oversaw much of the detail of identifying, valuing, and leasing the confiscated lands. The work gave Boyle great chances for both legitimate and illicit gains and, applying himself energetically to the tasks, he quickly mastered the intricate procedures and profited. He granted large tracts at low rents to cronies and clients and kept some -- especially in the western province of Connaught -- for himself. 
Boyle's personal holdings were further enlarged when on 6 November 1595 he married Joan, daughter of William Apsley and coheir to lands around Limerick. Joan died giving birth to a stillborn child on 14 December 1599. They had no other children. Boyle's blatant exploitation of the system in which he was officially involved and the meagre profits for the crown aroused growing criticism. These attacks also reflected the factionalism within the English administration in Dublin, where Boyle's principal patron, Fenton, was at loggerheads with Sir William Fitzwilliam, the lord deputy. Boyle, through whom Fitzwilliam planned to ruin Fenton, was threatened with arrest. He survived this threat, only to face another from the newly arrived treasurer-at-war, Sir Henry Wallop, in January 1596. Evidence of Boyle's malpractices accumulated, and he was arrested later in the year. When a new English lord deputy, Thomas, Lord Burgh, arrived in 1597, it was rumoured that Boyle might be executed for felony. Instead Burgh died, and the threat was temporarily lifted. However, Boyle's evident chicanery meant that he remained a target for 'reformers' in the Irish administration. In 1598 he withdrew discreetly to Munster, only for rebellion to break out there, forcing him to return to London and to work at the Middle Temple. Still he was haunted by his activities in Ireland, as the warring groups carried their complaints to England. Again, luck favoured Boyle. Adversaries died. Also, the appointment of Sir George Carew as lord president of Munster enabled Boyle to attach himself to a new patron. He promptly purchased the clerkship of the presidential council of Munster, and with it a chance to re-establish himself in the province. 
Carew smoothed Boyle's return to favour with the London government. He also prepared the ground for perhaps Boyle's greatest coup. Sir Walter Ralegh, who had been granted enormous acreages of the forfeitures in Munster during the earlier plantation, had decided to unload them. Boyle bought the Ralegh holdings, for a bargain price of $1500. Much of the money for this purchase was supplied by the $1000 portion of his second wife, Catherine ('c'.1588-1630), a daughter of Sir Geoffrey Fenton. They married on 25 July 1603 and had seven sons -- including Richard Boyle (1612-1698), Roger Boyle (1621-1679), and Robert Boyle (1627-1691) -- and eight daughters, including the future Katherine Jones (1615-1691) and Mary Rich (1624-1678). Again, Carew was the vital intermediary to the match. Boyle was knighted on the day of his marriage. With over 42,000 acres, Boyle was pre-eminent among the newcomers in Munster and potentially one of the richest men in Ireland. His perspective changed. The defence, consolidation, and exploitation of his estates henceforth preoccupied him. Residence and direct oversight were identified as crucial to success. Boyle rapidly developed an unrivalled familiarity with the physical and human geography of his properties, concentrated around the fertile lower reaches of the River Blackwater on the borders of counties Cork and Waterford, but with outlying portions further to the west. He also assembled a trusted and talented team of subordinates. Relations, including an elder brother, John Boyle, were encouraged to set up in the area. At the same time he needed to protect his wealth against the envious. Technically he was already contravening the government ban on any single undertaker holding more than 10,000 acres in the plantation. These insecurities obliged him to participate in politics, in both Ireland and England. Another strategy was to hold office in Ireland, in order to increase his influence over policy. 
The vagaries of the early Stuarts constantly threatened to disturb those lately established on Irish estates. Monarch and ministers, short of money, suspected what adventurers in Ireland such as Boyle had surreptitiously accumulated. Successive administrations considered devices by which the incumbents might be forced to disgorge some of what they held. In the event the danger of antagonizing the likes of Boyle made the government cautious. Instead, in 1606, through a commission for defective titles, the new proprietors were encouraged to buy secure titles for what they held by paying the government sums by way of composition. Boyle was particularly insecure after Ralegh was arrested and his possessions seized by the crown. Boyle protected himself by activity at court during 1604-5 and, as a result, he received a fresh grant of Ralegh's Irish lands from the king. But his rights to some of his other acquisitions remained open to challenge. Accordingly Boyle exerted himself with the officials in Dublin to protect what he had earlier gained through the system of escheats. He beat off a challenge in the 1613 parliament, in which he sat as member for Lismore. Boyle had acquired this ancient settlement, and secured its recent incorporation as a borough. By 1614 he had procured a patent which promised to put his possession of lands beyond challenge. At the same time his wealth and importance were acknowledged by his appointment to the Irish privy council on 15 February 1613. Moving with increasing confidence within the Dublin administration, he formed alliances with the officials, some of whom -- like Boyle -- were on the way to regional eminence and whose methods of personal enrichment differed little from his. 
Meanwhile Boyle took his estate in hand. Through tenancies, ecclesiastical patronage, and appointments in his boroughs he fashioned a settlement responsive to his own interests and highly profitable to himself. It was also designed as a model of what the resident and vigilant proprietor could achieve in Ireland. Simultaneously a peaceful and protestant island would be achieved and the English protestant interest advanced. Subsequently, and in part thanks to his own talents for self-advertisement, Boyle was held up as an exemplary landlord. There was no gainsaying his success in enriching himself. By 1640 his Irish rents probably yielded an annual $18,000. Only the Butlers, a much older-established family, rivalled this wealth in Ireland. Even in English terms his income put Boyle on a par with the richest noblemen. And it was with such noblemen that he wanted to rank. 
In the venal world of early Stuart Ireland it was easy enough to gain a title. Created Lord Boyle, baron of Youghal, on 6 May 1616, Boyle was advanced to the earldom of Cork on 6 October 1620. A subsidiary title, Viscount Dungarvan, was used by his heir. For these distinctions he apparently paid $4500. In 1628 his younger sons Lewis and Roger were created Viscount Boyle of Kinalmeaky and Lord Broghill respectively on account of their father's services. In all, eleven of his children survived into adulthood. These children were used to advance their father both politically and socially. Their marriages were intended to strengthen ties with the dominant personality at the English court, Sir George Villiers, the future duke of Buckingham, and with the Clifford and Howard dynasties. In Ireland the same strategy linked the Boyles to the ancient and locally important Barrys, earls of Barrymore, and Fitzgeralds, earls of Kildare. 
Despite this thickening web of connections, Cork felt insecure. He was still affected by the inherent instability caused by factional manoeuvrings in Dublin and London. He also attracted the jealousy of other settlers, the resentment of those whom he had displaced, and the suspicions of the administration that it had been tricked by him. In Ireland he faced the hostility of the lord deputy from 1615, Sir Oliver St John, whose own patronage and profiteering had been considerably depleted by Cork's activities. On his side, Cork needed to treat St John warily, since behind him stood the much more potent figure of George Villiers, the king's favourite. Villiers, thanks to St John, realized that Ireland could add substantially to his own wealth and influence. Others, hopeful of prospering from Ireland, cultivated Villiers and St John, and might come to threaten Cork's enormous acquisitions. Settlers in Munster, headed by Cork, were further perturbed by the interest of Villiers and St John in annexing the profitable export trade from Ireland to their system of patents and monopolies. This threatened to divert potential profits away from the newcomers in Ireland and in 1621 they counter-attacked. Sir John Jephson, a landowner in Munster, levelled charges against St John in the English House of Commons. St John was duly recalled, but the mood in England, encouraged alike by Buckingham and the lord treasurer, Cranfield, was to view Ireland as an asset to the king (and themselves), the potential of which had yet to be fully realized. 
New inquiries into what had happened during the recent plantations and what might next be achieved shone a searchlight into the shadowy practices of Cork, but he was saved from immediate action by the crown to recover some of what it had lost when Cranfield was toppled in 1624. At the same time Cork hoped to ingratiate himself with Buckingham. Notwithstanding Cork's courtesies and caresses, however, Buckingham remained an uncertain ally, the more so as he was willing to entertain the complaints of Cork's adversaries from Ireland, notably the lord chancellor, Adam Loftus. 
Buckingham's death in 1628 reduced the pressure to investigate Cork's Irish ventures but Cork, well aware that to be secure in Ireland he needed friends in England, set about cultivating new patrons, the then powerful lords Coventry and Goring and Humphrey May. As a result he received a fresh grant of much of his disputed property in 1629. This favour was eased by a loan from Cork of $15,000 to the crown. An even clearer sign of his high standing was his appointment on 8 August 1629, in tandem with his rival, Adam, Viscount Loftus, as lord justice of Ireland, a post he retained until a new lord deputy sailed to Dublin in 1633. 
As a lord justice Cork headed the English government of Ireland and had arrived at the plenitude of his power. His authority and status matched his wealth. Critics contended that he misused his office for personal gain. A wish to avenge himself on his old opponents made his rule divisive and -- in some quarters -- hated. Some whom he offended subsequently harassed him throughout the 1630s. The most serious quarrel developed over the finances and Cork was soon ranged against the vice-treasurer, Francis Annesley, Lord Mountnorris. The latter was briefly superseded, leaving Cork in effective control of the exchequer. This temporary situation was made more permanent when, in October 1631, Cork secured the lord treasurership, paying a mere $300 for it. More positive, although hardly disinterested, were Cork's schemes while lord justice to strengthen the protestant settlers, of whom he was now clearly the most successful. He believed the government should lighten taxes and subsidize ventures to create industries of the type -- textiles, iron making, timber trades, and glass manufacture -- which he had encouraged in south Munster. Further measures, such as a tougher enforcement of the penalties for religious recusancy, were advocated to weaken the already enfeebled Catholics. Ireland, Cork contended, would thrive only if peace prevailed. Otherwise the export trade would be interrupted. The exploitation of natural resources, practised vigorously on Cork's estates, threatened to exhaust many of them simply for short-term gain. Cork, however, was prepared to justify the felling of woodlands and reclamation of bogs and waste as 'commonwealth work' (Ranger, 'Career', 131), since it destroyed the habitats of the indigenous Irish Catholics. More constructively, he sponsored urban development. Some towns in his bailiwick -- Youghal, Dungarvan, and Lismore -- were long established. Others, notably Tallow and Bandon, owed much to Cork's investment. 
In 1633 the installation of a new lord deputy, Thomas, Lord Wentworth, once again caused Cork anxiety as to how he and his possessions would be treated. At first Wentworth proceeded circumspectly, and was thought broadly to agree with the anti-Catholic measures favoured by Cork. The earl also hoped that a projected marriage of his heir with a niece of Wentworth would ease the situation. However, Mountnorris, since his recall from Ireland, had endeared himself to Wentworth and so prejudiced the latter against Cork. Seeing favour drifting away from Cork, old opponents, fair-weather friends, and erstwhile associates deserted him. Wentworth, bent on restoring and enhancing royal authority over Ireland, saw Cork as the personification of all that had undermined it in recent decades and decided to make an example of him by stripping him of many of the church lands and other of his properties, on the grounds that they had been acquired illegally or were enjoyed on forged evidence. Simultaneously a more trivial dispute arose over the desire of Cork to raise a monument in the Dublin cathedral of St Patrick to his second wife. The monument was placed at the east end of the cathedral where the altar had formerly stood, a theologically sensitive position which attracted objections from Wentworth and the Laudian Bishop Bramhall of Derry. In addition, the monument came to symbolize the way in which Cork had commandeered so many assets of the church, sometimes by installing kinsmen and clients as bishops and deans, and through that and other devices securing beneficial leases on church lands. Wentworth, in alliance with Archbishop Laud and Bishop Bramhall, backed a campaign to recover the wealth of the church in Ireland detained by powerful lay people and Cork offered a conspicuous target. 
Wentworth was at first uncompromising in his determination to humble Cork but intermediaries in England and Ireland eventually worked out a settlement whereby Cork was fined $15,000 and surrendered his impropriations, but retained his lease on Youghal. No sooner was this protracted negotiation concluded than other parts of Cork's empire came under attack. The lord president in Munster, Sir William St Leger, unleashed by Wentworth, hounded Cork in his locality. The earl mobilized his contacts in the English privy council and court, and from 1636 spent more time in England, where in Dorset and Somerset he had bought land. His eldest son, thanks to marriage to the Clifford heiress, was inserting himself into the English aristocracy. Younger sons, after protracted education on the continent, followed the same path. All could work to their father's advantage, and shield him against what increasingly looked like a vendetta on Wentworth's part. Indeed, the lord deputy's aggression in Ireland created a coalition against him but Cork, for all his dislike of Wentworth, did not actively abet this group. He preferred to consolidate his position by building up alliances in London with Goring and Sir Thomas Stafford, the illegitimate son of his old boss Carew. On the fringes of the circle of the queen, Cork still refrained from any open criticism of Wentworth. In 1639 he demonstrated his loyalty by sending three of his sons to wait on the king as he prepared to fight the Scottish covenanters. Cork's good standing was indicated publicly in June 1640, when he was added to the English privy council. 
In Ireland the summoning of parliament in 1640 allowed a concerted attack on Wentworth, by this time earl of Strafford, chiefly through his subordinates who remained in Ireland and in office. By 1640 Cork controlled six parliamentary boroughs in south Munster, and had influence in another four. Although he used this patronage to advance his own interest, he did not direct these members to attack Strafford. In England, too, he abstained from the scheming to bring down the lord deputy. However, once the impeachment began, he backed it. Sweeter still was the removal of many of Strafford's supporters from the Irish administration. At last Cork was freed from the meddlesome inquiries into what he had or had not done to amass his possessions. But full enjoyment of these riches was frustrated when the Irish Catholics rose. The uprising, originating in Ulster in October 1641, gradually spread into Munster. The property and persons of recent settlers, like the Boyles, were particular targets. From his seat at Lismore, the former bishop's palace, Cork organized resistance. Several of his sons were sent to fight the insurgents; one, Lewis, Lord Kinalmeaky, was killed in action at Liscarrol in September 1642. Arms and equipment were shipped in through his port of Youghal. The expense, coupled with the loss of rents, burdened Cork but, in acting to save his and co-religionists' holdings, he also looked to a future in which protestant power would be increased. He joined the campaign of Irish protestants to use the rebellion to justify further expropriation of Catholic-owned property. By 1643 the fiercely anti-Catholic in Ireland, such as Cork, found themselves at odds with Charles I and his deputy Ormond. Unable to defeat the insurgents in either Ireland or England, the king authorized a truce with the Irish adversaries in September 1643. This cessation strained Cork's attachment to the royalist cause. Since acquiring his great stake in Ireland, his attitude towards official policy had altered. Distant regimes were judged ultimately on the freedom that they allowed to buccaneers like himself. Concessions to the local Catholics were strenuously but -- in 1643 -- unsuccessfully opposed. Cork, having retreated to his enclave of Youghal, died on 15 September 1643, and was buried in St Mary's Abbey, Youghal. It fell to his sons to sustain and finance the war effort in the region. Through flexible strategies reminiscent of Cork's, they saved and subsequently enlarged the extensive settlement which would be regarded by Oliver Cromwell as the model for a placid and prosperous protestant Ireland. Others, less sympathetic to these freebooters, felt that they personified both a system which sacrificed Irish to English interests, and the licence granted to rapacious adventurers from England, Wales, and Scotland. 
Cork composed an autobiography through which he hoped to impress contemporaries and later generations with what he had accomplished. He allowed that divine favour had assisted his rise. Indeed, he adopted 'God's providence is mine inheritance' (GEC, 'Peerage') as his motto. Inevitably his account exaggerated the gradient of his rise, and glossed over much of his ruthlessness. The plantation over which he presided was built on the wreckage of earlier civilizations, not all of which were totally effaced. Cork was prepared to marry children into families which belonged to those earlier settlements. Similarly he used the compliant among them as his auxiliaries. He was happy to take over ancient buildings in Lismore and Youghal as his principal residences. Although they were enlarged and furnished sumptuously, their essential characters were not altered. Rivals, whether among the older Catholic or newer English communities, were relentlessly harried. Cork had a vision of a protestant Ireland which he set out to realize on his own estates. Much of it was lifted from an idealized lowland England, and did not always fit the conditions of southern Ireland. Silently he dropped some of his ambitions and adjusted to indigenous ways. Just as there was no denying that Cork had scrambled to the top of Irish protestant society, he also attracted new settlers to the region, so altering it permanently. Impressive as the achievements looked, his protestant towns were too fragile to withstand the Catholic onslaught after 1641. The protestant population in the Munster countryside, increased perhaps to 22,000, remained puny. Much that he had built so painstakingly was destroyed and had to be refashioned after 1649. Nevertheless, Cork had laid durable foundations for a dynasty which for more than a century would dominate the economy, society, and politics of Munster, Ireland, and even England. His reputation as the nonpareil of the industrious English settler, carefully fabricated by his own writings, survived long after he had died. Similarly, vestiges of what he had achieved were visible under his successors, from the 1750s the dukes of Devonshire, into the twenty-first century. 


@@@@@


doc= 3134


Boyle, Richard (c.1574-1645), Church of Ireland archbishop of Tuam, was the second son of Michael Boyle (died 1596), merchant, of London, and Jane, daughter of William Peacock, and was an elder brother of Michael Boyle (1580?-1635), bishop of Waterford and Lismore. He was admitted to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, in 1590, graduated BA in 1595, proceeded MA in 1598, and was incorporated MA at Oxford on 16 July 1601. Foster refers to his holding the vicarage of Finedon, Northamptonshire, in 1606 (Foster, 'Alum. Oxon.', 1.163), but his ecclesiastical career was based in Ireland, where the influence of his cousin Richard Boyle, first earl of Cork, ensured his steady rise in ecclesiastical circles. He became warden of Youghal on 24 February 1603, dean of Waterford on 10 May 1603, dean of Tuam in May 1604, archdeacon of Limerick on 8 May 1605, and bishop of Cork, Cloyne, and Ross on 22 August 1620. By 30 May 1638 he was advanced to the see of Tuam. On the outbreak of the Irish rising in 1641 he retreated with Dr John Maxwell, bishop of Killala, and others to Galway for protection, where, when the town rose in arms against the garrison, his life was saved through the influence of the earl of Clanricarde. After a time in Bristol he returned to Cork, where he died on 19 March 1645 and was buried in the cathedral of St Fin Barre. Ware commends him for having repaired more churches and consecrated more new ones than any other bishop of his time ('Whole Works of Sir James Ware', 1.566). By his marriage to Martha, daughter of Richard or John Wright of Catherine Hill, Surrey, he left two sons and nine daughters. His eldest son, Michael Boyle (1609/10-1702), became archbishop of Armagh, while his second son, Colonel Richard Boyle, died at Drogheda in 1649. 


@@@@@


doc= 3135


Boyle, Richard, first earl of Burlington and second earl of Cork (1612-1698), royalist army officer and politician, was born on 20 October 1612 at Youghal, co. Cork, the second child but eldest surviving son of Richard Boyle, first earl of Cork (1566-1643), and his wife, Catherine Fenton ('c'.1588-1630), daughter of Sir Geoffrey Fenton. His siblings included the natural philosopher Robert Boyle, Roger Boyle, first earl of Orrery, Katherine Jones, Viscountess Ranelagh, and Mary Rich, countess of Warwick. From 16 October 1620, when his father was ennobled, the child was known by his father's subsidiary title of Viscount Dungarvan. Knighted by the Irish lord deputy in 1623, he studied briefly at Oxford in 1629-30 and was then sent on a more extended continental tour. He visited both Saumur and Paris in 1633. The care which had been devoted to his education was also evident in the way his ambitious father negotiated his marriage. On 3 July 1634 he married Elizabeth Clifford (1613-1691), daughter of Henry Clifford, fifth earl of Cumberland. The alliance connected Boyle, the son of an 'arriviste' in protestant Ireland, with an ancient aristocratic house. It brought the prospect of substantial English estates concentrated in Yorkshire, Westmorland, and Cumberland which in time would transform this branch of the Boyles from Irish to English grandees. Dungarvan was further connected with nobles powerful at court, such as the earls of Pembroke and Salisbury. He flourished in this environment, though his extravagance alarmed his father. A measure of his standing was the fact that he was selected to greet the Venetian ambassador in 1638, and the presence of the king and queen at the christening of his heir, Charles, on 17 November 1639. In the latter year he had hastened to the king's side as preparations began for a war against the Scots. 
Dungarvan was elected to the Short and Long parliaments in 1640 for the Westmorland borough of Appleby, an area where the Cliffords' influence was strong. However, he sailed back to Ireland at the time of the uprising in autumn 1641. In November 1641 the English parliament commissioned him to command a cavalry troop, and he took part in Irish engagements in the region where the family's property lay, notably the battle of Liscarroll in September 1642. In November he sailed to England, to seek aid for the protestants of the region; he returned to Ireland in July 1643, but in the event defence of the Boyles' Irish interests was deputed to his younger brothers, and Dungarvan returned once again to England. There his adherence to the king's cause led to his being disabled from sitting in parliament on 10 November 1643 and, on 4 November 1644, to his being granted an English peerage as Baron Clifford. Already in 1643 he had succeeded to the Irish earldom of Cork. Although he was not conspicuous as a royalist commander, the importance of the family into which he had married ensured that the parliamentarian authorities monitored his activities. The victorious parliament penalized him. He had paid a fine of $1631 to recover the English estates by the end of May 1650. Not until 1653 did he regain full control of his much more valuable Irish holdings under the terms of the Dublin treaty of 1647. He removed himself discreetly to the continent in the later 1640s, and for a time was with the exiled royalist lord lieutenant, Ormond, at Caen. 
Cork returned to Ireland on 28 May 1651, and there attended to the repair of his estate, which his wife had already begun. Once more discretion was his watchword, since members of the occupying army and administration eyed him suspiciously. Nevertheless in private he remained loyal to the liturgy of the proscribed Church of England, and manifested the personal piety which continued for the rest of his life. The enforced attention to his patrimony gave him an intimate knowledge of its human and physical geography, and in no small measure explained its subsequent prosperity. By the 1670s it was probably yielding an annual $30,000, making its owner the richest man in Ireland. From 1655, under the more congenial regime of Henry Cromwell, Cork undertook modest local duties. In 1658 he was appointed a justice of the peace for counties Cork and Waterford. He also welcomed the itinerating lord deputy to his estates in the summer of 1658, and had political discussions with him when in Dublin. In December 1659, as confusion threatened to envelop Ireland and England, Cork positioned himself in London. Along with others from protestant Ireland he schemed to prevent the dispossessed Irish Catholics being treated generously. 
Cork was appointed a privy councillor in Dublin in December 1660, and installed in his father's office of lord treasurer on 6 July 1661. The second office, essentially a sinecure, conferred precedence and a daily allowance of $1. It was symptomatic of Cork's limited political influence that he was not consulted about proposed reforms of the Irish revenue despite being nominal head of its administration. The lord treasurership had, nevertheless, given him the disposal of posts in the revenue with which to gratify the politically powerful and his own dependants. His high standing at the English court, together with his wealth, his wife's lineage, and his past services to the Stuarts (especially the queen mother, Henrietta Maria) secured advancement to an English earldom -- of Burlington (or Bridlington) -- in 1665. Other posts, such as governor (the equivalent of lord lieutenant) of counties Cork and Waterford and military governor of Hawlbowline Fort in Cork harbour (1662), attested to his pre-eminence as a proprietor in the region. For similar reasons he was appointed lord lieutenant of the West Riding of Yorkshire, a position he held briefly in 1667 and from 1679 to 1687, and recorder of York (1685-8). But the manner in which the king asked him to vacate the lord lieutenancy in 1667 in favour of Buckingham, newly reconciled to the court, was a reminder of Burlington's light political weight. Nor could royalist ultras forget how he had compromised with the Cromwellians. As one of the latter remarked, Burlington 'was a cautious man that had no mind to venture too far for fear of his great estate, and so seemed to carry fair with all parties' ('Memoirs of Sir John Reresby', ed. A. Browning, 1936, 306). In 1667 he had absented himself from the proceedings against the disgraced Clarendon, into whose family his own had recently married. His attitudes towards exclusion and the accession of William III and Mary II were deliberately opaque. In the end, the safety of his valuable Irish holdings overrode other considerations. Oversight of the distinct Irish and English estates necessitated a peripatetic life. In 1667 he acquired the carcass of Sir John Denham's London mansion in Piccadilly, which was completed with a grandeur consonant with the Burlingtons' new dignity; they moved into Burlington House the following year. In 1682 an estate at Chiswick, in Middlesex, was bought, to which in 1684 the family moved permanently. After 1686 advancing years and disturbed conditions prevented further voyages to Ireland. Predeceased by his wife (in 1691) and his eldest son, Charles, Viscount Dungarvan and Lord Clifford (in 1694), he died at Chiswick House on 15 January 1698 and was buried at Londesborough, his Yorkshire seat, on 8 February. He was succeeded by his grandson Charles. 


@@@@@


doc= 3136


Boyle, Richard, third earl of Burlington and fourth earl of Cork (1694-1753), architect, collector, and patron of the arts, was born on 25 April 1694 at Burlington House, Piccadilly, London, the only son of Charles Boyle, second earl of Burlington and third earl of Cork (died 1704), and Juliana (1672-1750), daughter and heir to Henry Noel, second son of the fourth Viscount Campden. He was educated at home, and at his father's death on 9 February 1704 he succeeded to his titles and estates. In 1715 Burlington was made lord treasurer of Ireland and governor of co. Cork and was sworn of the Irish privy council. In the same year he became vice-admiral of the county of York and lord lieutenant of the East and West Ridings of Yorkshire. Burlington was sworn of the privy council of England on 15 May 1729. His nomination as knight of the Garter came on 18 May 1730, and he was installed at Windsor on 18 June 1730. On 21 June 1731 he was made captain of the band of pensioners. His legal claim to the barony of Clifford was granted on 25 May 1737. In May 1733 Burlington resigned all his offices, apparently because George II failed to honour a promise to appoint him to a high household office, probably that of lord treasurer. Until that date he was a supporter of Walpole's government but in the pre-sessional forecast of January 1734 was listed as against the ministry. He attended the House of Lords only intermittently after coming of age in 1715, and showed particular interest in debates and committees concerned with Ireland, Yorkshire, and other personal interests. 
Burlington was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 1 November 1722 and a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries on 5 February 1724. On 21 March 1721 he married Dorothy Savile (1699-1758), lady of the bedchamber to Queen Caroline ['see 'Boyle, Dorothy], eldest daughter and coheir of William Savile, marquess of Halifax, and Mary, daughter of Daniel Finch, earl of Winchilsea. They had three daughters: Dorothy (1724-1742), who married George, earl of Euston; Juliana (1727-1731); and Charlotte (1731-1754). 
Burlington owned four principal seats, three of which were acquired by his great-grandfather Richard, the first earl of Burlington and second earl of Cork, by marriage and purchase. He resided annually in three of these seats: his London town house, Burlington House in Piccadilly; his suburban seat on the Thames at Chiswick in Middlesex; and his country seat at Londesborough in the East Riding of Yorkshire. His Irish seat of Lismore Castle in co. Waterford, located on a vast estate numbering some 42,000 acres in the counties of Cork and Waterford, was the original family seat purchased by Richard, the first earl of Cork, from Sir Walter Ralegh in 1602. Although his Irish estates provided the major source of revenue for his architectural projects on his English estates, Burlington never visited Ireland. 
Architecture was Burlington's outstanding area of contribution to the arts. Like his fellow aristocrat and contemporary Henry Herbert, ninth earl of Pembroke, Burlington was an 'Architect earl', who practised architecture not from economic necessity but as a passionate avocation. Surprisingly, he showed no interest in architecture during his grand tour of 1714-15. While on it, he purchased a number of paintings and several drawings, made the acquaintance of William Kent, and indulged his passion for music: he returned to England with three Italian musicians. Like Lord Shaftesbury, who in his 1712 'Letter Concerning Art, or Science of Design' argued for a national architecture based upon classical precedents, Burlington aimed to place England within the mainstream of the classical tradition. His architecture -- with its didactic, lucid character -- was intended to demonstrate that England could create an architecture worthy of Rome. It was the centrepiece of an elaborately orchestrated campaign, with Burlington as the spokesman for the revival of an English classical style whose content he would dictate. 
The traditional view of Burlington as a whig nobleman has been challenged. It has been argued that Burlington led a double life in service to the Jacobite cause, that his public life and architectural endeavours were a subterfuge for clandestine political activity in support of the exiled Stuarts, and that his grand tour and 1719 Italian sojourn served as opportunities for both cultural enrichment and political contacts with the exiled Stuart court. Burlington's reliance on the Stuart architect Inigo Jones as a cornerstone of his architecture is interpreted as a return not merely to Jonesian classicism but also to the early Stuart court, and as a reaffirmation of the divine right of kings (Barnard and Clark). Jacobite sympathies could explain one important early architectural commission: the Westminster School dormitory, a building erected under the aegis of the Jacobite dean of Westminster Abbey, Francis Atterbury. However, Burlington's record in the House of Lords, and his conduct during the Jacobite risings of 1715 and 1745, give no hint of Jacobite sympathies, and it is extremely doubtful that his architecture is encoded with Jacobite symbolism or that his architectural patronage reflected Jacobite leanings. Until more than circumstantial evidence is produced, Burlington's putative crypto-Jacobite proclivities must remain in the realm of speculation. 
Burlington's interest in architecture began during the four and a half years between his two Italian sojourns. About 1717 he was probably responsible for replacing James Gibbs with Colen Campbell as the architect responsible for remodelling Burlington House. This change reflects his evolving tastes from Gibbs's baroque classicism to Campbell's more rigorous classicism based on the architecture of Andrea Palladio. Under Campbell's tutelage at Burlington House and in the garden at Chiswick, Burlington learned the practical aspects of architecture. When he returned to Italy in 1719 he had made architecture his muse. In Venice and the Veneto he studied Palladio's architecture, recorded annotations of his impressions in a prepared copy of Palladio's 'I quattro libri dell'architettura', and purchased a large collection of Palladio's drawings of his reconstructions of the Roman baths. On returning to London in November 1719, Burlington began what became his lifelong architectural project: the transformation of his suburban estate at Chiswick, Middlesex. 
Burlington was one of the most rigorous practitioners of the English classical architectural movement known as Palladianism. His architecture is didactic in character and is based upon the architecture of Inigo Jones, Palladio, and classical Rome, as represented in Palladio's drawings and in his treatise 'I quattro libri dell'architettura'. Like Alberti, Burlington believed that the visual arts should provide moral instruction: for him classical architecture was a mute but eloquent language capable of conveying ideas and stimulating the imagination visually and intellectually. 
With two notable exceptions Burlington's executed designs were for town or country houses and were executed for his fellow aristocrats and members of his family. At Chiswick he designed a suburban villa with its gardens and garden buildings. In the garden at Oatlands, Surrey, he designed a small villa ('c'.1725) for the seventh earl of Lincoln. He also designed: the huge Belvedere Tower (1725-7) for Sir Robert Furnese at Waldershare Park, Kent; an octagonal temple (1743) at Woburn Farm, Surrey, for Sir Philip Southcote; a summer house ('in situ' by 1744) for Sir Robert Clifton at Clifton Hall, Nottinghamshire; and wings ('c'.1733) to Petersham Lodge, Surrey, for the first earl of Harrington. For his brother-in-law Charles, Lord Bruce, he designed a country house at Tottenham Park, Wiltshire, begun in 1721, with wings added about 1730-38 and an octagonal building and banqueting house (1743) in the garden. Also for Lord Bruce he designed a 'pied-a-terre' (1726-7) at Round Coppice, Iver Heath, Buckinghamshire, located halfway between his Wiltshire country house and London, and interior alterations to Warwick House (1726-7), his London residence. 
Burlington also designed five town residences, of which, however, only three were built. Two were erected on land behind Burlington House that he had provided for a town house development in 1717: one for Lord Mountrath ('c'.1721) and the other for General Wade (1723). His third London town house was designed for the second duke of Richmond at Whitehall (1733-4). The two unexecuted designs were a sumptuous London residence for the earl of Bath and an elegant house for Colonel James Gee ('c'.1722) at Bishop Burton in the East Riding of Yorkshire. He also designed five institutional buildings: York assembly rooms (1731-2), Westminster School dormitory (1722-30), Chichester Council House (1730), a hospital, and Sevenoaks School and almshouses ('c'.1724). Of these, only the assembly rooms and dormitory were erected. 
Tottenham Park, Wiltshire -- Burlington's only country house -- was designed for his brother-in-law Charles, Lord Bruce, to replace the family seat destroyed by fire. Burlington's work at Tottenham Park spanned his entire architectural career, from 1721 to 1743. Henry Flitcroft, Burlington's personal draughtsman and architectural assistant, executed the drawings and was the site architect for at least the first building phase. Although Tottenham Park was Burlington's first and largest commission, he was in full command of his architectural ideas, and designed a house containing architectural elements that would become his architectural leitmotifs, and bearing allusions to the architecture of Jones and Palladio. 
Begun in 1721, the front elevation of Tottenham Park was a slightly recessed three-bay central section crowned by a cupola, reminiscent of the north elevation of Amesbury Abbey, a nearby country house then believed to be by Inigo Jones (later attributed to John Webb) and owned by Burlington's uncle Lord Carleton. Its tall, two-storey corner towers punctuated by Serliana windows (often referred to as Palladian or Venetian windows) recall towers found in many of Palladio's villa designs in Burlington's drawing collection and similar towers on the villas Pisani and Thiene in Palladio's treatise. Large expanses of wall punctuated by single and double hung windows dominate the front elevation, giving it an emphatic rhythm. In addition to the house, Burlington designed two service buildings facing each other across the courtyard. Their facades are pared-down versions of Palladio's design for a small villa in Burlington's drawing collection, but without the recessed Serliana entrance portal and the robust aedicular windows flanking it. 
In the early 1730s Burlington added elaborate wings to the front and garden elevations of Tottenham Park. On the garden elevation, corner towers matching those on the front elevation were added, but without Serliana windows. Defining the central section was an impressive free-standing, hexastyle, Ionic portico with an Italianate rusticated podium, derived from the podium of Burlington's villa at Chiswick. The wings consisted of a series of individual units, or small buildings, each with its own roof and fenestration. This, which Rudolf Wittkower terms the 'staccato principle' (Wittkower, 155), is a defining characteristic of the villa and Link Building at Chiswick. The elevations at the end of each wing have Serliana windows with Ionic capitals and a full entablature flanked by niches and Italianate rusticated quoins at the corners. In 1743 Burlington designed two garden buildings for Tottenham Park: a 70 foot Tuscan banqueting house and an octagonal garden building. 
From 1720 Burlington transformed his suburban estate at Chiswick into a paradigm of classical architecture, with buildings exemplifying his architectural theory and practice. His first act was to complete the formal garden begun before his 1719 Italian trip. Every aspect of the garden was made subservient to its architecture, with each of the four garden buildings representing aspects of the architecture of Inigo Jones, Palladio, and classical Rome. At the end of the east 'allee' of the 'patte d'oie' Burlington designed a diminutive rustic building whose front elevation was modelled on Jones's vineyard gate at Oatlands Palace, Surrey; buildings attributed to Campbell and Gibbs probably occupied the termini of the west and central 'allees'. Along the western boundary of the garden Burlington designed two buildings. Overlooking an apsidal pool within its own garden enclosure stood a (now demolished) banqueting house featuring a portico with a pair of Tuscan columns patterned after the Tuscan portico of Jones's St Paul's Church, Covent Garden. To the south, in its own garden enclosure, a tetrastyle Ionic temple was erected, a miniature version of two famous classical Roman buildings, the Pantheon and the Temple of Fortuna Virilis, both depicted in great detail in Palladio's treatise. The Ionic temple faces an orange-tree garden in the form of an amphitheatre. It consists of three concentric grass terraces where tubs of orange trees were placed during the summer months. From the circular pool at the centre of the orange-tree garden rises a stone obelisk on a pedestal. Burlington's fourth garden building (also now demolished), was an orangery located on the eastern boundary of the estate. There are two extant orangery designs: a domed and arcaded one, inspired by Palladio's thermal drawings, such as the Baths of Agrippa; and a seven-bay design with a gigantic, superimposed Corinthian portico in the manner of Palladio's Venetian church facades. As the domed and arcaded orangery design could function successfully as a greenhouse, it was probably this design that was erected. 
Burlington now embarked on a more ambitious project by designing an extraordinarily idiosyncratic villa (1726-9) facing the Thames. Erected in close proximity to an existing Jacobean house, the villa at Chiswick was designed without the amenities of a residence, which the earlier house provided. To confirm this symbiotic relationship, the villa and house were connected by the so-called Link Building and loggia in the early 1730s. Diminutive in size and jewel-like in the intensity of its architectural detailing, the villa is a paean to Jones, Palladio, and classical Rome. Its design was based upon Palladio's two famous suburban villas, La Rotonda at Vicenza and the Villa Foscari, near Venice. Palladio's standard Corinthian order in his treatise defines the exterior and interior. The free-standing hexastyle portico derives from Palladio's Villa Foscari, but was dramatically altered by the addition of a boldly rusticated podium. This rustication was inspired by that defining Palladio's Palazzo Thiene (Vicenza), which Burlington described as 'certainly the most beautifull modern building in the world'. For the portico's capitals, Burlington deviated from Palladio's Corinthian order and selected the luxuriant Corinthian capitals from the Temple of Castor and Pollux in the Roman Forum, as illustrated in Palladio's treatise. The Serliana windows on the side and garden elevations and the thermal windows in the drum of the dome also derive from Palladio's Roman bath drawings. 
The villa's innovative floor plan consists of simple geometric forms. Circles, semicircles, octagons, squares, and rectangles create a circular flow of space unlike the traditional linear spatial disposition of English domestic architecture. Burlington's novel treatment of such space derives from Palladio's Roman bath drawings and his Palazzo Thiene, in which similar spatial configurations were employed. The rooms on the piano nobile of the villa bristle with sumptuous architectural detailing, deriving in large part from Inigo Jones and to a much lesser degree from Palladio and classical Rome. There is nothing perfunctory or merely decorative about the interiors of the villa. The architectural detailing is a lexicon of classical architecture and is intended to be a standard for others to follow. 
Burlington designed his villa as a temple to the arts. It functioned as a place for contemplation, entertainment, and the exhibition of art. Lord Hervey's scathing epigram based on the Roman poet Martial suggests that the villa did not function as a residence: '
Possess'd of one great hall for state, 

Without a place to sleep or eat; 

How well you build let flattery tell, 

And all mankind how ill you dwell! 
(Hervey, 1.574)' The walls of the piano nobile were lined with Burlington's painting collection, interspersed with pieces from his sculpture collection and gilt furniture designed by William Kent. In such an ambience, Burlington could escape the formalities of the nearby Jacobean house to study, work on his architectural projects, and meet friends. The circular flow of space and the openness of the floor plan also made the piano nobile an ideal place for musical gatherings and entertainments, with the Serliana windows providing views of the formal garden and glimpses of Burlington's garden architecture. 
In contrast to his suburban villa at Chiswick, the York assembly rooms (1731-2) are the finest public statement of Burlington's architectural principles. With an unprecedented archaeological fidelity and reliance upon Palladio as his guide to classical Rome, Burlington created a building that was a precursor to neo-classicism. Austere on the exterior, clearly and sumptuously articulated on the interiors, the assembly rooms functioned as a place for the nobility and gentry of town and county to meet and entertain. From Palladio's drawings of the Roman baths came the severe five-bay arcaded front elevation of the assembly rooms (now demolished), as well as the apsidal and domed circular rooms surrounding the Great Assembly Room. With this room, Burlington attempted to rival the ancients, creating a modern version of Vitruvius's Egyptian Hall for dancing and other entertainments. Relying upon Palladio's reconstructions of the Egyptian Hall and the Roman basilica, he combined these to create a peripteral hall of forty-four Corinthian columns supporting a clerestory, and in accordance with Vitruvius and Palladio, an open loggia around the building at the clerestory level to view the activities in the Great Assembly Room. 
Burlington's opinion and imprimatur on classical architecture were sought by his fellow peers. With Lord Pembroke, he oversaw Roger Morris's remodelling of Castle Hill, Devon (1729- 'c'.1740), for Lord Clinton; his advice was solicited about details such as the proportions of the hall entablature. For Sir Mark Pleydell at Coleshill, Berkshire (1744), the chimney-stacks at the angles of the house were rebuilt at the direction of Burlington and the earl of Leicester. With the assistance of William Kent, Burlington was instrumental in formulating the design of Holkham Hall ('c'.1734), the Norfolk country house of his friend the earl of Leicester. For the earl of Carlisle at Castle Howard, Yorkshire, Daniel Garrett designed and obtained Burlington's approval for the addition to Nicholas Hawksmoor's mausoleum of an elaborate staircase based on the one at the villa at Chiswick (1737-42). In 1727, as part of his campaign to create an English classical architecture, Burlington paid for repairs to the Tuscan portico of Jones's St Paul's Church, Covent Garden, and in 1733 similarly for Jones's Barber-Surgeons' Hall, London. To save Jones's Beaufort House gate from demolition, Burlington had it removed from Hans Sloane's Chelsea garden in 1733, and re-erected in his garden at Chiswick. 
Through influence wielded behind the scenes, Burlington placed a contingent of his Palladian architectural proteges in positions throughout the office of works. At the core of the English architectural establishment, the office of works was responsible for the care and the design of royal buildings. William Kent, whom Burlington promoted as a history painter and then architect and landscape architect, was appointed first master carpenter (1726), then master mason and deputy surveyor (1735). Henry Flitcroft held a number of positions, among them the clerkship of works at St James's, Whitehall, and Westminster (1726). Isaac Ware, architect, author, and translator, held several offices, among them clerk of the works at Windsor (1729) and Greenwich (1732-3). Even such minor proteges as Daniel Garrett and Stephen Wright were also given positions in the office of works. 
Burlington's art collections, although not large by the standards of the day, reflected not only his fondness for Italy but also his architectural interests. His painting collection, hung at Burlington House and in the villa at Chiswick, consisted mainly of works from the Italian baroque by such artists as Annibale Carracci, Domenichino, Pietro da Cortona, and Carlo Maratta. In addition, Burlington owned a representative sample of paintings by Dutch masters, including Rembrandt, as well as English family portraits. His small sculpture collection, located primarily at Chiswick, expressed his devotion to the classical tradition. Three full-length Roman statues, which according to Daniel Defoe were excavated from Hadrian's villa, stood in the garden along with sphinxes, a boar, and other statues modelled on classical prototypes by John Cheere, Giovanni Battista Guelfi, and Peter Scheemakers. John Michael Rysbrack's full-length statues of Palladio and Jones flanked the stairs to the piano nobile of the villa. 
Burlington's most important collection was that of his architectural drawings. The collection consisted of the single largest corpus of Palladio's architectural drawings, including his reconstructions of the Roman baths and other Roman monuments. Jones's architectural drawings as well as his masque drawings, the drawings of John Webb, Jones's pupil, and a miscellaneous collection of sixteenth- and seventeenth-century drawings, mainly Italian, also formed part of the collection. Complementing this was a superb architectural library consisting of virtually all published editions of architectural treatises and texts, beginning with a mid-fifteenth-century incunabulum on vellum of Vitruvius's 'Ten Books of Architecture'. 
Burlington's drawing collection was not only indispensable to his own architecture: he also employed it as a means to disseminate his architectural principles. He made the collection available to his proteges for study and inclusion in their architectural treatises and design books. In 1727 William Kent published a lavishly illustrated two-volume folio, 'The Designs of Inigo Jones', for which Burlington probably provided a subvention. The majority of the book's designs came from Burlington's drawing collection, including the ground-plans, elevations, and a section of the tribune of the villa at Chiswick. In 1731 Isaac Ware published the 'Designs of Inigo Jones and Others'. Ware too was deeply indebted to Burlington, and informed his readers that the unexecuted designs in his text were at Burlington House. The majority of the plates in Ware's publication were devoted to designs by Inigo Jones, including those for the chimney-pieces erected in Burlington's villa; gate piers designed by Burlington for Chiswick were also included. Another publication supported by Burlington was Thomas Malie's publication 'A New and Accurate Method of Delineating All the Parts of the Different Orders in Architecture' of 1737, a translation of Revesi Bruti. Burlington advocated the translation of Bruti's 1627 text, read Malie's manuscript, and encouraged him to publish it; consequently the text was dedicated to him. With the publication of a selection of Palladio's drawings of the Roman baths, Burlington wrapped himself in Palladio's mantle. In his treatise 'I quattro libri dell'architettura' Palladio promised but failed to publish his drawings of the Roman baths; Burlington completed the master's work by publishing 'Fabbriche antiche disegnate' da Andrea Palladio Vicentino'. Although 1730 is the stated publication date of the 'Fabbriche', it probably was not published until later in the decade. Of the fewer than 100 copies published, Burlington gave most to his friends and fellow 'cognoscenti'. Burlington was also intimately involved with Isaac Ware's 1738 English translation of Palladio's influential treatise, published as 'The Four Books of Architecture'. Ware dedicated his publication to Burlington, stating that he was given 'free access to your study, wherein many of the original drawings of Palladio, besides those which compose this work, are preserved'. Burlington also revised and corrected Ware's translation and probably provided a subvention for its publication. 
Music was Burlington's other great passion. Unlike his interest in architecture, which occupied him for approximately twenty-five years, his devotion to music was constant and continual. Throughout his life Burlington patronized composers, librettists, musicians, and the Italian opera, and held musical performances in his various residences. He undoubtedly acquired his love of music, and in particular the Italian opera, from his mother, Juliana, dowager countess of Burlington, who was its ardent champion. The libretto of 'Antioco', an Italian opera by Francesco Gasperini, was dedicated to her, and George Frideric Handel may have stayed at Burlington House during his first brief London sojourn of 1710-11. On his return to London in 1712, Handel was given an apartment at Burlington House, where he wrote the opera 'Amadigi di Gaula' (1715), the libretto of which is dedicated to Lord Burlington. 
On his grand tour Burlington was never without music. He rented harpsichords and other instruments in Rome, Florence, Venice, and Paris for musical performances in his lodgings, and his grand tour account book records that he attended the opera in Rome and Florence. In Rome Burlington acquired the musical services of the string players Filippo Amadei and the brothers Pietro and Prospero Castrucci, who joined his entourage on its homeward journey through Italy and France. Supported and sponsored by Burlington, the Castrucci brothers settled in England, where they played at private musical gatherings in his residences and performed with opera orchestras in London and Dublin. Amadei, a cellist and composer, was also supported by Burlington and he too played for Burlington's musical gatherings and gave concerts, as well as composing for and playing in Handel's opera orchestra. Unlike the Castrucci brothers, Amadei eventually returned to Italy. 
As his account books indicate Burlington was an ardent supporter of public musical events throughout his life, attending operas, masques and Handel's oratorios. His support of the Italian opera, whose performances dominated London's musical life during the first third of the eighteenth century, was unswerving. He was a member of the board of directors of the Royal Academy of Music from its inception in 1719 until its demise in 1728. The academy was formed to provide financial support for the Italian opera with the ultimate goal of making it self-supporting, and each director was required to subscribe $200. Burlington pledged a sum far in excess, $1000. In 1728, however, the academy collapsed, its finances in disarray and torn asunder by internal feuding between Handel and an Italian faction led by the composer Giovanni Bononcini, the librettist Paolo Rolli, and the castrato Senesino. From the dissolution of the academy came two rival opera companies: the Second Academy of Music (1729-33), led by Handel, and the Opera of the Nobility (1733-7), led by Rolli. Although Burlington was a founder member of the Opera of the Nobility, he did not let his support for the rival opera company prevent him from attending Handel's oratorios. Throughout the 1740s until his death in 1753, he purchased boxes for family and friends. 
Both the opera and London's Italian community provided Burlington with an opportunity to immerse himself in the Italian language and culture he so admired. Furthermore, his association with them may well have played an important role in the development of his architectural ideas. During the early years of the century Burlington knew a number of Italian literary figures who were members or partook of the tenets of the Accademia dell'Arcadia, a literary society founded in 1690 in Rome. The Arcadians' aim was to purge Italian literature of its mannered excesses by returning to the literary exemplars of classical Rome and the Renaissance. Like the Arcadians, Burlington's architectural principles were founded upon a classical revival. He may well have discussed and refined his concepts of a classical revival with fellow Arcadians Pietro Grimani, the Venetian ambassador with whom he established a lifelong friendship, and Paolo Rolli, leader of London's Italian opera community, who dedicated his opera libretto 'L'Astarto' to Burlington and taught his daughters Italian. 
Although primarily remembered for his architectural patronage, Burlington was one of the great literary patrons of his day. The wide spectrum of his literary interests is reflected in the variety of the thirty-nine publications dedicated to him. These range from art and architecture, literature, and music to sermons and scientific works. The most famous dedication is Alexander Pope's 'Epistle to Burlington' (1731), which contains the classic statement of Burlington's architectural principles: '
You too proceed! making falling Arts your care, 

Erect new wonders, and the old repair; 

Jones and Palladio to themselves restore, 

And be whate'er Vitruvius was before. 

' Burlington's major support for writers came through his munificent patronage of publication subscriptions. Not only did he subscribe to ninety-seven separate publications, but in many instances he subscribed for more than one copy. The majority of his subscriptions were devoted to literature (twenty-eight) and history (twenty-six), with only nine to architecture, and the remainder to travel, music, science, and religion. He was an ardent supporter of contemporary poets, subscribing for six copies of Alexander Pope's translation of Homer's 'Iliad' (1715-20) and five copies of 'The Odyssey' (1725), five copies of Matthew Prior's 'Poems' (1718), five copies of James Thomson's 'The Seasons' (1730), and fifty copies of John Gay's 'Poems on Several Occasions' (1720). Another form of patronage that Burlington extended to writers and artists was residence at Burlington House. William Kent, described by Horace Walpole as 'a proper priest' to Burlington's 'Apollo of Arts' (Walpole, 56) and Burlington's artistic confidant, was a permanent resident and the poet John Gay, whose 'Epistle to Burlington' was part of his 'Poems on Several Occasions', was a guest for long periods during the 1720s. 
Alexander Pope, however, was 'primus inter pares' among the artists and writers Burlington supported. With Kent, Pope was a member of Burlington's inner circle and a friend and confidant of Lady Burlington. The earl's deep and abiding friendship with him went beyond mere patronage and was based on mutual artistic and aesthetic ideals. Burlington's library contained more of Pope's works than any other poet, including numerous editions as well as an early manuscript and a presentation copy of his 'Epistle to Burlington'. Burlington shielded Pope and his family from anti-Catholic sentiment and provided legal assistance during the publication of Pope's at times scurrilous 'Dunciad' (1728). In 1718 he offered Pope free tenancy of a plot of land behind Burlington House. Pleading that he could not afford to build a house on the plot, Pope declined the offer. At Pope's Thames-side villa, Burlington paid for the remodelling of the interiors and for the stone for the remodelling of the portico. Regarding his villa, the poet wrote to Burlington: 'that there should be nothing Durable in my building which I was not to owe to Chiswick. I am sure there will be nothing in it Beautiful besides, nor (I believe) in this nation, but what is owed to the Lord of Chiswick. ('Correspondence of Alexander Pope', 3.341-2)' 

Judging from his many portraits, Burlington was of average height and of slight build, small-boned, with delicate features, brown eyes, a high forehead, and a receding chin. So closely are his public and private personae intertwined that it is extremely difficult to separate the man from his deeds. His high-minded idealism made him the object of ridicule by his contemporaries. His architectural ideals were lampooned by William Hogarth in the satirical engraving 'Masquerades and Operas' (also referred to as 'The bad taste of the town', 1723-4, British Museum, London) and he was the butt of sarcastic remarks by lords Chesterfield and Hervey, and Sarah, duchess of Marlborough, among others. Walpole's comment is probably a fair assessment of Burlington's personality: 'Never was protection and great wealth more generously and more judiciously diffused than by this great person, who had every quality of a genius and artist, except envy' (Walpole, 53). 
Burlington died on 3 December 1753 at Chiswick and was buried in the family vault at Londesborough on 15 December 1753. Charlotte, his youngest daughter and sole heir, married William Cavendish, fourth duke of Devonshire. She inherited the barony of Clifford, and the Boyle family's landholdings in Ireland, Yorkshire, and elsewhere passed to the Devonshire family. Burlington's personal belongings, papers, and art collection are at Chatsworth, the Devonshire family's country seat in Derbyshire. His drawing collection is divided between Chatsworth and the Royal Institute of British Architects, London, given in trust by the eighth duke of Devonshire in 1894. 
During the nineteenth century Burlington's accomplishments were denigrated. The villa at Chiswick was variously attributed to Campbell and Kent, and at the turn of the century it was let as a mental institution. Burlington was excluded from James Fergusson's 'History of the Modern Styles of Architecture' (1846) and Inigo Jones credited with designing Chiswick Villa. Reginald Blomfield in his 'A History of Renaissance Architecture in England, 1500-1800' (1897) claimed that Burlington paid Campbell, Kent, and others to design buildings to which he affixed his name. In the early twentieth century J. Alfred Gotch in his 'The English Home from Charles I to George IV' simply dismissed Burlington, characterizing him as merely dabbling in design. 
With the rise of architectural history after the First World War Burlington's reputation was slowly revived. The American historian Fiske Kimball led the way with a careful analysis of Burlington's autograph designs, followed by Rudolf Wittkower, who acknowledged Burlington's architectural accomplishments but diminished him in comparison with Kent. Not until Burlington's inclusion in Howard Colvin's 'A Biographical Dictionary of English Architects, 1660-1840' (1954) was his significant contribution to British architecture properly acknowledged. 


@@@@@


doc= 3137


Boyle, Robert (1627-1691), natural philosopher, was born on 25 January 1627 at Lismore Castle in the province of Munster, Ireland, the fourteenth child and seventh and youngest son of Richard Boyle, first earl of Cork (1566-1643), lord high treasurer of Ireland, and his second wife, Catherine ('c'.1588-1630), daughter of Sir Geoffrey Fenton, a literary scholar and principal secretary of state for Ireland. His father, known as the Great Earl, was one of the self-made men of the seventeenth century; having arrived in Ireland in 1588 with virtually no money, he lived to be one of the wealthiest subjects in the kingdom. Of Boyle's thirteen surviving brothers and sisters, many went on to subsequent eminence. They included Richard Boyle, first earl of Burlington and second earl of Cork, Katherine Jones, Viscountess Ranelagh, Roger Boyle, first earl of Orrery, and Mary Rich, countess of Warwick. Their prominence evidently owed at least something to the formative influence of their father's strong personality; he was alone responsible for his children's upbringing after the death of his wife in 1630. Some of Boyle's siblings (such as Mary, later countess of Warwick) seem to have had a somewhat tempestuous relationship with the Great Earl, but Boyle's recollection was that he was his father's special favourite; this did not, however, preclude the earl's insisting that Robin, as his parents called him, should, like his elder brothers, be sent away from home at an early age, by which time Boyle had evidently acquired the stutter which he was never fully to overcome. 
In 1635, when he was eight, Boyle was sent to Eton College with his brother Francis, later Viscount Shannon. The boys were placed under the tutelage of the headmaster, John Harrison. From the outset Boyle distinguished himself by his studiousness: 'he prefers Learning afore all other vertues or pleasures' (Maddison, 'Life', 11n.), his father was informed, though Boyle subsequently recalled his lack of 'Inclination to Latin' (Hunter, 'Boyle by Himself', 26) which had to be rectified at a later date. He also commented in retrospect on the taste for history and for the gallant deeds of heroes of antiquity that he developed at this time; his enthusiasm, he claimed, was especially for the writings of Quintus Curtius and Sir Walter Ralegh. At Eton he was first introduced to romances, and specifically the story of Amadis de Gaule, while he discovered the virtues of algebra as a means to control his thoughts. In 1638 their father took Boyle and his brother away from Eton, and for a while they were tutored by William Douch, a clergyman to whom Cork had given the vicarage of Stalbridge in Dorset, where his chief English estate was situated. 
In 1639, again in the company of his brother, Boyle embarked on a continental tour. Their guardian in their travels was Isaac Marcombes, a French protestant who had earlier conducted Boyle's elder brothers on a similar tour. After travelling through France, they settled at Geneva, Marcombes's home town, where they stayed for twenty-one months. Boyle's studies during this stay and during his subsequent stay at Geneva in 1642-4 covered a range of topics including ethics, history, natural philosophy of a fairly conservative variety, and fortification. In his autobiography Boyle recounted a conversion experience which he had at this time, occasioned by an awe-inspiring thunderstorm, which he claimed had a formative influence on his entire subsequent life. 
In 1641 the two Boyle boys and Marcombes set out for Italy. Boyle's recollections of this visit are again recounted in his autobiography, including their visit to Florence, where he heard of the death of Galileo, whose works he was just then perusing, and to Rome, where he visited the sights and observed the pope with the disdain appropriate to a well-born young protestant. Subsequently the party returned to France, where problems arose due to the outbreak of the Irish rising and the sudden termination of the funds that they had been receiving from their father. As a result, while Francis returned to Ireland to fight, Boyle spent two more years studying in Geneva. 
Boyle returned to England in 1644 and initially spent some months in London: virtually the only surviving record of this episode is his vivid later recollection of his homecoming and reunion with his sister Lady Ranelagh, with whom he had already developed an especially close relationship and in whose house he stayed for four and a half months. In 1645 Boyle moved to Stalbridge, Dorset, where his father had bequeathed him the manor house and estate. There Boyle spent much of the next decade, though it is possible that he travelled to France in 1645, while from February to April 1648 he visited the Netherlands. He also travelled regularly to London, and it was probably during these visits that he took part in the activities of a body called the 'Invisible College', which has been the subject of intense speculation on the basis of brief references in three of Boyle's letters of 1646-7, though none of these gives more than vague clues as to its personnel and aims. In addition, from 1647 onwards, correspondence survives between Boyle and the intelligencer Samuel Hartlib, who frequently reported on Boyle's views and activities in his 'Ephemerides' from 1648 until the end of the 1650s ['see 'Founder members of the Royal Society]. 
At Stalbridge in the mid-1640s Boyle embarked quite self-consciously on a career as a writer. Contrary to what might be expected from his later publications, his efforts were not initially devoted to science. His first project (in 1645-6) was his 'Aretology', a somewhat stilted treatise on 'Ethicall Elements' intended to lay down the rudiments of morality as a basis for the pursuit of virtue. Subsequently Boyle experimented with other literary genres, and the best of his compositions of this period display a real vigour and solicitude for stylistic elegance. Among them were pious essays, and reflections on scriptural passages and events which formed the basis of his later 'Occasional Reflections' (1665). Others were influenced by his reading of French romances, including imaginary lives, speeches, and a romance, 'The Martyrdom of Theodora and of Didymus', said by Dr Johnson to be the first work 'to employ the ornaments of romance in the decoration of religion' (J. Boswell, 'Life', 1.312): the romance was partially published in much altered form in 1687, though the original version also survives. Other compositions included letters presenting moralistic prescriptions to fictional addressees, a number of which survive, some of them forming part of an ambitious work of which one part was ultimately to appear in modified form as 'Some Motives and Incentives to the Love of God' (1659), usually referred to by its running title, 'Seraphic Love'. 
Two other significant writings of this phase in Boyle's career are his autobiographical 'Account of Philaretus during his minority' of 1648 or 1649, which recalls memories of his childhood and continental travels, and his 'Invitation to a free and generous communication of secrets and receits in physick', addressed to Hartlib and almost certainly written in 1649, which was to become Boyle's first published work in 1655. This was a formative period in Boyle's life, even though his writing subsequently shifted to quite different topics. The concern for morality seen in his writings of this period was the source of the concern for probity and self-control that he internalized and sought to exemplify in later life. In addition, remnants of his literary aspirations survived. 
In 1649-50 a major change in Boyle's preoccupations occurred. Most importantly, in 1649 he successfully set up a laboratory at his house in Stalbridge; the experiments that this enabled him to carry out seem immediately to have fascinated him to an extent that transformed his career, and from that summer onwards his work shows an enthusiasm for experimental knowledge that had earlier been missing, though a legacy of his earlier aspirations may be discerned in his ambition to put such experimental knowledge to apologetic use. Writings that survive from this period display an acute concern about the threat of irreligion posed by the predominant Aristotelian natural philosophy of the day, combined with a conviction that the best means to offset this was a recourse to experimental data. His empirical investigations at this point concerned a range of chemical and alchemical trials involving mercury and other substances, while he also refers to his use of a microscope to observe the minute structure of living things, and reveals a preoccupation with collecting data about 'effluvia' and other natural phenomena that foreshadows later interests. Intellectually his mentors at this stage in his career were such sixteenth-century and early seventeenth-century authors as Paracelsus, Bernardino Telesio, Francis Bacon, Tommaso Campanella, and J. B. van Helmont. Boyle also expressed his sense of solidarity with 'the Chymists', and it was evidently in a chemical context that he first encountered atomist ideas to which he gave expression in his treatise 'Of the atomicall philosophy' ('c'.1652-4). Moreover, he forged links with other figures who shared his interests, notably Hartlib's son-in-law, Frederic Clodius, and the American alchemist George Starkey, with whose instructions Boyle prepared alchemical products, including a philosophical mercury and the Helmontian drug 'ens veneris'. 
A further key development of the years around 1650 was that Boyle became interested in the biblical languages -- Greek, Hebrew, Chaldaic, Syriac, and Arabic -- and in the scholarship that had been devoted to the elucidation of biblical and classical history since the Renaissance. The stimulus to the former, Boyle attributed to the scholar and divine James Ussher, archbishop of Armagh. Its fruit is to be seen particularly in the 'Essay of the holy scriptures' ('c'.1652-4), part of which has survived in manuscript, while part of it he adapted to form his 'Some Considerations Touching the Style of the Holy Scriptures', published in 1661. Such interests were shared by Boyle's friend and west country neighbour John Mallet, and were discussed in letters between the two men. To this episode can be traced the expertise in biblical languages which Boyle retained for the rest of his life and by which contemporaries were impressed. 
Between June 1652 and July 1654 Boyle spent all but about three months in Ireland. The reasons for this visit are not entirely clear, but they probably related to the Boyle family's landed interests there. In Ireland Boyle had contact with William Petty, then in Dublin, who apparently introduced him to anatomical dissection, a topic on which he reported with enthusiasm in letters to Hartlib. At this time he also wrote 'a short essay concerning chemistry, by way of a 'judicium de chemia & chemicis'', which apparently contained the germ of his critique of 'vulgar chymists' in his 'Sceptical Chymist' (1661). Towards the end of his Irish stay Boyle fell seriously ill with an anasarca or dropsy: complications developed, which he vividly recounted in his later years, and these affected not least his eyesight, which he claimed never fully recovered. The result of this was that for the rest of his life Boyle was dependent on amanuenses to write his ideas down for him, and this gave his style a digressiveness reflecting his actual manner of speaking, which contrasts with the pursuit of elegance according to literary models which characterized his writings of the mid- to late 1640s. 
Late in 1655 or early in 1656 Boyle moved to Oxford, joining the lively group of natural philosophers centred on Wadham College under the auspices of John Wilkins, who had been intruded as warden there by the parliamentary commissioners; the group also included such figures as the Anglican physician Thomas Willis. After Wilkins moved to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1659, its meetings took place at Boyle's lodgings in the High Street. The significance of this group for the later development of English science has often been emphasized, and it clearly had a major impact on Boyle. It was now that he seriously confronted the writings of the major continental natural philosophers, notably Gassendi and Descartes, refining and modernizing the ideas that he had acquired from the essentially Renaissance authors whom he had encountered earlier in the decade. In the case of Descartes, though Boyle had been aware of his writings earlier, he claimed that the figure who 'made him understand Des Cartes' Philosophy' was Robert Hooke, who entered Boyle's employ at this time and helped him in some of his crucial experiments (J. Aubrey, 'Brief Lives', ed. A. Clark, 1898, 1.411). 
In addition, it seems that at this time Boyle discovered more of the intrinsic interest of knowledge about the natural world, as against the apologetic motives that had dominated his initial espousal of experimental learning earlier in the 1650s. He now also became aware of a further threat which a reformed natural philosophy might have to withstand, namely that posed by the ideas of Thomas Hobbes, whose version of the mechanical philosophy had been attacked as pernicious and implicitly atheistic by one of the leading figures in the Oxford group, Seth Ward, earlier in the 1650s. The threat of materialistic atheism which Hobbes seemed to exemplify added a new dimension to Boyle's apologetic concerns, which was to remain with him for the rest of his life. 
The late 1650s, following Boyle's move to Oxford, saw an extraordinarily intense programme of research and writing on his part. The numerous books on different aspects of natural philosophy which he now began or completed set the pattern for his entire subsequent intellectual career, and it was on them that his later impact was substantially based. At this time he wrote the bulk of 'Some Considerations Touching the Usefulness of Experimental Natural Philosophy' (1663, 1671): the first part, which celebrates the religious value of study of the natural world, had been begun earlier but was revised and extended at this time, while the first section of the second part, dealing with the value of science to medicine, was apparently now newly written. This immense compilation -- which, in the course of expounding its theme, divulged a vast number of cures which Boyle had come across and tried -- was to prove his most extensive medical work and it was widely cited in the debates on medical practice of the time. Boyle also wrote extensively on the application of science more generally, and some sections of these writings were to be published as the second section of part 2 of 'Usefulness' in 1671, though others were abandoned. A key aim of this section was to show that practical inventions and advancements in technique are grounded in theoretical natural philosophy, and to defend the new experimental sciences against critics who doubted their social utility. 
More important still was Boyle's 'Certain Physiological Essays' (1661). This collection comprised a series of essays presenting a very subtle view of experiments and their rationale, and illustrating the way in which they could be deployed to provide an empirical foundation for Boyle's version of the mechanical philosophy, in which natural changes and sensory effects could be attributed to interactions between minute bodies that he called corpuscles. He adopted the name corpuscularianism to avoid the irreligious overtones that atomism had inherited from classical antiquity. In addition to the essays on experimentation generally, which included two key discourses on the significance of unsuccessful experiments, Boyle also laid out some of his specific experimental findings in this collection, perhaps most crucially in 'A physico-chymicall essay, containing an experiment with some considerations touching the differing parts and redintegration of salt-peter' -- often referred to by Boyle as his 'Essay on nitre'. There he experimentally demonstrated how the changes that could be brought about in saltpetre by chemical means could be explained entirely in terms of the size and motion of corpuscles, without the need for any of the explanations in terms of 'forms' and 'qualities' associated with traditional scholastic science. 
Boyle was later to pursue these ideas in various other works, the most notable of which was his 'The Origin of Forms and Qualities' (1666), in which he attacked the predominant scholasticism of the period, trying to wean his contemporaries away from the essentially qualitative modes of thinking associated with Aristotelian ideas, and to indicate the superior intelligibility of mechanical explanations of phenomena. This was accompanied by more extensive collections of experimental and observational data intended to vindicate corpuscularian explanations of the natural world, begun while he was at Oxford, the most notable of which were 'Experiments and Considerations Touching Colours' (1664) and 'New Experiments and Observations Touching Cold' (1665). These writings were an important source for Locke's well-known distinction between 'primary' and 'secondary' qualities. 
In the late 1650s Boyle wrote his most famous work, 'The Sceptical Chymist' (1661), a somewhat discursive dialogue which attacked both the peripatetic doctrine of four elements and the Paracelsian view of the 'tria prima', while at the same time attempting to persuade the 'chymists', from whom he had initially learned so much as an experimenter, that they needed to adopt a more philosophical approach in their study of nature. Like 'Certain Physiological Essays', the work also sought to vindicate corpuscular explanations of chemical reactions, in the course of doing so retailing much information about experimental investigations which Boyle had carried out. 
Alongside this, Boyle's 'New Experiments Physico-Mechanical, Touching the Spring of the Air and its Effects' (1660), written in a relatively short period in 1659 and published almost as soon as it was finished, recounted experiments using a vacuum chamber or 'air pump' which he constructed with the assistance of Hooke. Rejecting the scholastic notion that nature could not tolerate a vacuum, he showed how it was perfectly possible to produce one, and this enabled him to illustrate the characteristics and functions of the air by studying the effects of its withdrawal on flame, light, and living creatures. He also argued that certain characteristics of the air could only be explained in terms of the ingenious hypothesis that it had a certain weight and 'spring'. Subsequent to the publication of the 'New Experiments', and partly as a result of the well-publicized controversies which followed it, the 'air pump' became part of the standard equipment of laboratories, and was widely diffused throughout scientific Europe. 
Apart from his scientific work, Boyle's Oxford period was also notable for the religious contacts that he made. The most important of these was with the Calvinist theologian Thomas Barlow, then Bodley's librarian, who was to become bishop of Lincoln in 1675. Barlow was well known for his skill in cases of conscience, or casuistry, and -- both at this time and later -- he provided Boyle with much advice on such matters; in 1659 he also acted as an intermediary between Boyle and the former regius professor of divinity, Robert Sanderson, whom Boyle had offered to remunerate if he prepared for publication his celebrated casuistical lectures, given at Oxford in the 1640s before he was ejected by the parliamentary visitors. At this point in Boyle's life his active engagement with missionary projects first became apparent: in 1660 he paid the cost of printing a translation into Arabic by the scholar Edward Pococke of Grotius' 'De veritate religionis Christianae', and over the next few years he contributed to the cost of the publication of a Turkish catechism and 'New Testament' and helped the Lithuanian exile Samuel Chylinski, who had translated the 'Bible' into his native language and was seeking to get it published. From this time also dates Boyle's concern with evangelizing the North American Indians. 
The aftermath of the Restoration in 1660 saw a peak of public activity on Boyle's part, something which he had shunned hitherto. In 1660 he encouraged his friends Sir Peter Pett and Thomas Barlow to write tracts on the pressing political question of what degree of toleration was desirable and practicable. He was also a member of the council for foreign plantations from 1661 to 1664, and in 1662 became governor of the Company for the Propagation of the Gospel in New England. A note made by Bishop Gilbert Burnet on an interview with Boyle later in his life records that both the earl of Clarendon and the earl of Southampton tried to encourage Boyle to become a bishop, an invitation that he declined on the grounds that 'he never felt the Inward Vocation so he should be in an Imployment against the grain with him' (Hunter, 'Boyle by Himself', 33). 
Of the activities that Boyle embarked on in the aftermath of the Restoration, only one proved sustained, his governorship of the New England Company; otherwise, the chief long-term legacy of this burst of involvement with the public sphere on Boyle's part was a grant to him from Charles II of impropriations of former monastic lands in Ireland. This may initially have been intended to support the profuse experimental activity which Boyle had already been carrying on in the 1650s and which was to continue for the rest of his life but -- evidently at least partly due to recriminations that followed the grant on the part of disappointed applicants, notably representatives of the Irish church -- Boyle resolved to spend the proceeds on 'pious uses', in supporting both the Irish clergy and the evangelical activity in New England to which he was by this time committed. 
The most significant change in Boyle's career about 1660 was that he began to publish. Prior to 1659, Boyle's only publication was a tract addressed to Hartlib (composed in 1649) that appeared in 'Chymical, Medicinal, and Chirurgical Addresses Made to Samuel Hartlib Esquire' (1655). In 1659 Boyle orchestrated the publication of an English translation of a brief work by the Dutch anatomist Lodewijk de Bils, 'The Coppy of a Certain Large Act... Touching the Skill of a Better Way of Anatomy of Mans Body', and his care over its promotion foreshadows his later concern about his own writings. The same year also saw the publication of 'Seraphic Love', while from 1660 onwards a veritable torrent of works followed, beginning with 'New Experiments... Touching the Spring of the Air' and including many of the works composed in the 1650s. Boyle's writings were published not only in English; he also made careful arrangements to have them translated into Latin by Oxford dons and others, and their subsequent publication by booksellers in Oxford and London ensured that they were widely read in the international scholarly community. Indeed, it is not surprising that one of his publishers later claimed that he had become known throughout Europe as 'the English philosopher'. 
It was a tribute to the new-found celebrity that Boyle enjoyed in the early 1660s that he was the subject at this time of published attacks, particularly on his first scientific book, 'New Experiments... Touching the Spring of the Air'. Works criticizing this were brought out by Thomas Hobbes, by the English Jesuit Francis Linus, and by the Dutch scholar Anthony Deusing, and Boyle replied at length to Hobbes and Linus, disposing of Deusing in briefer comments in the preface to the Latin edition of his defence against Linus. In the course of elaborating his views, in 'A Defence of the Doctrine, Touching the Spring and Weight of the Air', Boyle divulged what later became known as Boyle's law, namely that the quantitative relationship between the volume and pressure of a gas was an inverse one; in Boyle's language that 'pressures and expansions [are] in reciprocal proportion' ('Works', 3.59). 
The controversy with Hobbes has proved of much interest to historians, partly because it involved an attack on the newly established Royal Society combined with an attack on Boyle's methods of investigation. Boyle explicitly recognized this feature of Hobbes's approach: 'though some things in the Title Page [and] in the Book it self seem to make the chief Design of it to be the Disparagement of the Society', he wrote, 'yet the Arguments are for the most part levelled at some Writings of mine', and he expressed his surprise that an experienced writer would publicly attack an institution supported by his own patron, the duke of Devonshire. For his part, in 'An Examen of Mr T. Hobbes's 'Dialogus'' (1662), Boyle used the opportunity to strengthen the grounds for experimental knowledge by contrasting it with Hobbes's method of arguing from plausible hypotheses, declaring that 'on the occasion of Mr 'Hobbs''s Building a great part of his philosophy upon no surer a ground... we may hence learn how little Reason there is to blame me, as he is pleas'd to do, for making Elaborate Experiments' ('Works', 3.115, 120). 
Such controversy did not affect the rise of Boyle's star, which had been enhanced by the foundation in 1660 of the Royal Society, devoted to experimental philosophy of the kind pursued by the group at Oxford to which Boyle had belonged in the 1650s. He was present at the society's inaugural meeting on 28 November 1660, and was active at its meetings throughout its early years. He also benefited from the promotional activities on behalf of the society and the new science undertaken at this time by its first secretary, Henry Oldenburg, who had been a close contact of Boyle since he had tutored Boyle's nephew Richard Jones, later first earl of Ranelagh, in the 1650s. The most significant of Oldenburg's initiatives was his inauguration in 1665 under the society's auspices of the 'Philosophical Transactions': in addition to carrying frequent contributions by Boyle -- some of them almost of book length -- the new journal included fulsome reviews of each of his books as they came out. Boyle was also praised as emblematic of the Royal Society's scientific work in Joseph Glanvill's apologia, 'Plus ultra' (1668). The significance of the society for Boyle's intellectual activities in the 1660s is underlined by the fact that it was in response to its request for a report on the work of the French natural philosopher Blaise Pascal, in 1664, that he wrote his 'Hydrostatical Paradoxes' (1666). 
During the 1660s Boyle continued to live in Oxford, and on 8 September 1665 he was created doctor of physic there, the only academic degree he ever acquired. However, the journal books of the Royal Society reveal that he was frequently in London from 1661 onwards, and in 1665-6 he was clearly in the capital throughout the episode involving the perplexing Irish 'stroker' (so called because he seemed to heal people by stroking their bodies), Valentine Greatrakes, in the debate over whom Boyle became involved when an iconoclastic tract on the subject was dedicated to him by the controversialist and physician Henry Stubbe. Boyle objected to Stubbe's explanation of the phenomenon both on scientific and on theological grounds, and subsequently he took a close interest in Greatrakes's cures, attending more than sixty healing sessions, and in one instance participating in the stroking himself. 
In 1668 Boyle left Oxford and moved to London, where for the rest of his life he shared a house in Pall Mall with his sister Lady Ranelagh, the closeness of his relations with whom was commented on by contemporaries; even this sojourn, however, was punctuated by occasional stays in lodgings elsewhere in London and in the country. Boyle seems to have settled in well at the Pall Mall house, with his own quarters and even his own laboratory, which was evidently located in a 'back-house'. The laboratory became a well-known place of encounter with him, and was much frequented by foreign and other visitors. Indeed, such an attraction for visitors from overseas did the great philosopher become that John Evelyn claimed that 'one who had not seene Mr Boyle, was look'd-on as missing one of the most valuable Objects of our Nation' (Hunter, 'Boyle by Himself', xlii). 
In 1670 Boyle suffered a severe stroke which, in the words of his sister Mary, brought him to 'deathes doore'. Thereafter, his activity at the Royal Society dwindled and he kept more to himself, but he was as active as ever in his publishing activity. His profuse experimental work of the 1650s and 1660s continued throughout the following decade, being represented perhaps most notably by his 'Experiments, Notes, &c., about the Mechanical Origin or Production of Divers Particular Qualities' (1675), aimed (like his earlier books) to vindicate corpuscular explanations against scholastic ones. He also brought out sequels to his 'New Experiments... Touching the Spring of the Air' in which experiments using a vacuum pump were expounded, the last, first published in Latin in 1680, largely written by his then assistant, Denis Papin. In addition Boyle investigated the intriguing properties of phosphorescence in 'Aerial Noctiluca' and 'Icy Noctiluca' (1680-2). 
In the 1670s Boyle also published a variety of shorter, more controversial treatises. Despite his professed reluctance to become involved in controversy, he attacked Henry More in 'An Hydrostatical Discourse' (1672) for More's misuse of Boyle's experimental findings and he returned to the attack on Hobbes; he also published an attack on the chemists who he felt were exaggerating the explanatory power of the interaction between acid and alkali. In addition, he published more speculative treatises such as 'Of the Systematical or Cosmical Qualities of Things' (1670), while the late 1670s apparently saw a peak in Boyle's interest in alchemy. In 1676 he published an article in the 'Philosophical Transactions' on the incalescence of mercury with gold, which stimulated a revealing response from Newton (who did not think that such matters ought to be revealed in public). In 1678 Boyle brought out a short tract, 'Of a Degradation of Gold Made by an Anti-Elixir'. These publications reflected an exceptional intensity at this time in Boyle's contact with people who claimed to have witnessed alchemical processes, together with a burst of epistolary communication with a shadowy circle of French alchemists in which Boyle's chief contact was one Georges Pierre. 
The decade was also notable for the publication of theological writings by Boyle, some of them works which he had compiled in the 1660s but had put to one side at that time, such as 'Excellency of Theology, Compar'd with Natural Philosophy' (1674), to which was appended an important shorter work by Boyle, 'Considerations about the excellency and grounds of the mechanical hypothesis', often regarded as the classic exposition of his philosophy. 
In the last decade of Boyle's life his experimental programme was expressed in such works as 'Experiments and Considerations about the Porosity of Bodies' (1684) and his treatise on mineral waters. He also brought out his 'Experimenta et observationes physicae' (1691), the last work published in his lifetime, which invokes an explicitly Baconian inspiration for its combination of experimental and reported data. However, perhaps the most important works that Boyle published in this decade represented his mature reflections on major theological and philosophical issues, notably 'A Discourse of Things above Reason' (1681), 'A Free Enquiry into the Vulgarly Receiv'd Notion of Nature' (1686), 'A Disquisition about the Final Causes of Natural Things' (1688), and 'The Christian Virtuoso' (1690). In these he made a profound contribution to contemporary debates regarding the true relationship between God and the natural world, and man's potential for comprehending this. 
Various works by Boyle on medical topics also appeared. These were the first such publications since the medical section of his 'Usefulness' published in 1663. In the aftermath of that work, Boyle had considered developing the rather guarded criticisms of orthodox medical practice that it contained into an outright assault on the contemporary 'methodus medendi'. Though he wrote at least part of this work, however, he decided against publishing it. Instead, his later publications in this field dealt mainly with what might be described as 'medical science', comprising his 'Memoirs for the Natural History of Human Blood' (1684), 'Of the Reconcileableness of Specifick Medicines to the Corpuscular Philosophy' (1685), and 'Medicina hydrostatica' (1690). He also brought out a collection of medical recipes in 1688; initially this was privately printed but a properly published edition appeared posthumously in 1692, with sequels appearing thereafter. The 1680s also saw Boyle take a leading part in a project for making salt-water sweet, for which his nephew Captain Robert Fitzgerald obtained a patent in 1683 but which met with only partial success. 
Boyle's active religiosity is much in evidence in the later years of his life. His philanthropy was well known and he backed various projects such as that for the publication and distribution of the 'Bible' in Gaelic, both in Ireland and in the Scottish highlands; he also supported the churchman Burnet while he was producing his seminal 'History of the Reformation of the Church of England' in 1680. In that year Boyle refused to become president of the Royal Society, attributing his decision to his reluctance to take the oaths required under the 'Test Acts' -- reflecting a 'scrupulosity' much in evidence in his later years. Various epistolary discourses on casuistical questions addressed to him by Barlow survive from the early 1680s, while a more extraordinary survival comprises Boyle's own notes on his confessional interviews with Bishop Gilbert Burnet and Bishop Edward Stillingfleet in 1691, which reveal his extreme scruples on matters of conscience affecting his financial affairs, and the blasphemous thoughts that assailed him. Such scruples also influenced his approach to the natural world, since a further interview with Burnet -- who evidently replaced Barlow as Boyle's chief confidant in the last years of his life -- makes clear Boyle's ambivalence about alchemy on the grounds that the insights which it offered might be illicitly achieved by malevolent spirits. 
By the later 1680s Boyle's health was declining. In 1688 he issued a strange broadsheet advertisement apologizing for the imperfection of his publications and blaming it on his anxiety to put as much as possible into print before it was too late. He also curtailed his preparedness to receive visitors. In 1689 he resigned his governorship of the Company for the Propagation of the Gospel in New England on health grounds. It was apparently due to further worries about his health in the summer of 1691 that he drew up an elaborate will on 18 July, though he continued to add codicils dealing with various aspects of his affairs thereafter; his solicitousness about such matters was enhanced by concern over his finances due to the unsettled state of Ireland at the time. A climax of activity in cataloguing his papers in that year evidently reflected a similar sense that his death was not far off. 
Boyle's beloved sister Lady Ranelagh died on 23 December 1691 and he himself died a week later, in the early hours of 31 December 1691; he was buried in the chancel of St Martin-in-the-Fields on 7 January 1692, when the funeral sermon was preached to 'a vast crow'd' by Gilbert Burnet (Maddison, 'Life', 185). That year and the next saw the publication of posthumous works under the aegis of John Locke. One of the numerous codicils to Boyle's will provided for the setting up of a series of lectures for the defence of the Christian religion against atheists and others, the so-called Boyle lectures. The first series of these was delivered by the scholar and divine Richard Bentley in 1692. Other charitable bequests under Boyle's will followed later in the 1690s and into the early eighteenth century. 
The central fact of Boyle's life from his adolescence onwards was his deep piety, and it is impossible to understand him without doing justice to this. His friends remarked after his death how 'the very Name of God was never mentioned by him without a Pause and a visible stop in his Discourse' (Hunter, 'Boyle by Himself', 48), and this slightly disconcerting habit was symptomatic of the overriding significance for him of his deep theism. Burnet's funeral sermon rightly stressed how Boyle's life was devoted to the service of God and to the defence and propagation of the Christian religion, which he carried out by various means. One was by deploying for charitable purposes the wealth that he acquired both by his high birth and by the grant of impropriations to him by Charles II at the Restoration. His support for missionary enterprises was supplemented by philanthropy on a smaller scale: throughout his life he devoted funds to the support of the needy, be they rural ministers in Ireland, impecunious scholars, or religious refugees from overseas, notably Huguenots. He was similarly solicitous in placing the medical expertise that he acquired in the course of his career at the disposal of the necessitous, aspiring in this to a truly Christ-like role. 
Boyle's chief lifework, however, was the pursuit of his religious goals by means of intellectual activity. In the 1640s his preoccupation was the encouragement of piety and of high standards of morality among his peers. Thereafter, his concern was above all with promoting his theistic ends by utilizing the findings from the profuse study of nature in which he engaged from about 1650 onwards. Boyle was fiercely hostile to views of nature that he saw as detracting from a proper appreciation of God's power in his creation. Among these, his principal target was the Aristotelian world view which was prevalent in his day, though he was equally hostile to other intellectual traditions which he saw as pernicious, notably the materialism associated with Hobbes, which contemporaries frequently saw as indistinguishable from atheism. 
The activities in which Boyle engaged in order to confront these threats were twofold, and both were pursued with an energy amounting to obsessiveness which characterized him in all areas of his life. That which emerged earliest was writing. Apart from his published books, which number more than forty and comprise some 3 million words, further evidence of his activity as a writer survives in the Boyle archive, including drafts, notes, and sections of works that were not published in his time, some of which have been printed since, notably in volumes 13 and 14 of the new edition of his 'Works'. Though he sometimes expressed diffidence about the manner in which he expressed himself, Boyle was generally content with the message that he put across in his numerous publications. Indeed, he was highly self-conscious about his 'oeuvre', with strong views about authorship and the threat to it posed by plagiarism. In the 1660s he was behind various proposals put to the Royal Society to register authorship, and his defensiveness about his own writings grew as his life went on, particularly due to the extent to which he believed that he was the victim of intellectual piracy by writers and publishers in the 1670s. 
Equally important was the second leading activity of Boyle's intellectual career, the experimentation which developed from about 1650. From the summer of 1649 Boyle spent much of his time in his laboratory, ceaselessly investigating chemical and other phenomena. The results of this appear not only in Boyle's published works but also among his papers, which include profuse accounts of repeated trials made over many years. Indeed, Boyle was an experimenter 'par excellence', both in theory and practice, eclectically building on precedents provided in the writings of Francis Bacon and in the procedures of the practical 'chymists' and other craftsmen which he consciously sought to graft into natural philosophy. In part he did so through the consideration that he gave to the method and rationale of experiments in 'Certain Physiological Essays' and other works. Equally important was his experimental practice, which displayed an extraordinary ingenuity in devising trials which would reveal significant information about the phenomena he studied, combined with an unprecedented precision in observing their outcome. Indeed, Boyle's experimentation, like his writing -- and, for that matter, his soul-searching in his spiritual life -- was inspired by the obsessiveness that characterized everything he did, ensuring that he was never satisfied until sure that he had penetrated the innermost core of a subject. 
Having executed his experiments, Boyle's persona as writer came to the fore, and he went to great pains to provide a detailed account of them so that others could follow as closely as possible the procedures that he had used in reaching the results that he reported. His hope was that his readers would accept the 'matters of fact' that he had established, whatever rival interpretations might be based on them. Indeed, his experimental accounts from the late 1650s onwards used increasingly sophisticated strategies to deal with the fact that it was impossible to reproduce all the exact circumstances of an experiment accurately in writing, providing a model for others which was widely followed. However, he did not limit himself to observations that he had made himself. He also included accounts of phenomena that he had been told of by others or had read about in books, a practice for which he explicitly cited the example of Bacon. Such books as his histories of cold and colours, or his later 'Experimenta et observationes physicae', are made up of a patchwork of such material, which Boyle saw as offering the basis on which a science of nature would ultimately be constructed. 
When it came to the conclusions that might be derived from such data, Boyle was a little more ambivalent. He was hostile to the premature systematization that he saw as having blighted much science prior to his time, and the result was that he showed a reluctance to draw conclusions for which he was criticized by some more rationalistic thinkers of his day, such as Christian Huygens and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz. Nevertheless his empirical activity was underwritten by clear explanatory goals. In particular, from the 1650s to the end of his life he never swerved from his conviction that the universe was best understood according to mechanical principles, and he ceaselessly urged the superiority of these to the Aristotelian and other alternatives that flourished in his day. Such principles appealed to him not least because he saw them as supremely compatible with God's active role in the world. 
Though Boyle took it for granted that explanations should be formulated in primarily mechanical terms he acknowledged that there might be intellectual differences within this basic framework, and his own views were quite flexible. Thus his interpretation of chemical phenomena took it for granted that corpuscles were endowed with chemical, as against strictly mechanical, principles, while various of the explanations that he adduced invoked 'intermediate causes', such as the concepts of weight and elasticity in the air. His corpuscularianism was itself eclectic, drawing on a range of sources and including concepts such as 'dregs' or 'denseness' which might be seen as at odds with a strict interpretation of the mechanical philosophy. Boyle had no illusions about the complexity of the world -- it was partly for this reason that he was so insatiable in collecting information about it -- and this was reflected by the interpretations of it that he formulated. 
Indeed, Boyle ranged perhaps surprisingly far in the phenomena that he took seriously, with a truly Baconian sense that primacy should be given to establishing whether phenomena actually existed rather than dismissing them according to a priori criteria. Thus he toyed with the notion that there were 'cosmical qualities' transcending purely mechanistic laws in the universe, and he was also fascinated by authenticated reports of supernatural phenomena, on the grounds that these vindicated the reality of God's power in the world. His interest in alchemy fits into this context, since he was perfectly prepared to believe that unexpected phenomena of the kind that it revealed were real. Matters were complicated by his ethical qualms as to whether such knowledge might be illicit and hence to be avoided on moral grounds, but against this was the consideration that alchemy appeared to offer an empirical bridge between the natural and the supernatural realms which might provide irrefutable evidence of God's existence. 
Boyle's major preoccupation was the relationship between God's power, the created realm, and man's perception of it, a topic on which he wrote extensively, in books mainly published in the 1680s though the views that they expressed may be traced in embryonic form in his earlier writings. In them Boyle laid stress on the extent to which God's omniscience transcended the limited bounds of human reason, taking up a position that contrasted with the rather complacent rationalism of contemporary divines such as Joseph Glanvill. He also reflected at length on the proper understanding of final causes, and in conjunction with this provided one of the most sophisticated expositions of the design argument in his period. Indeed, Boyle's significance for the history of science depends almost as much on the profound views on difficult issues put forward in these philosophical writings as it does on his experimental treatises. 
In terms of his affiliations in the religious scene of his day, Boyle was somewhat independent. He conformed to the Church of England in 1660, and specifically stated his allegiance to the idea of a visible church, but he was unusually tolerant towards Catholics by the standards of most English protestants of his day, and he was singularly uninterested in many of the doctrinal debates by which the contemporary English church was riven. He also showed a marked sympathy for the views of those who, unlike him, felt unable to conform to the Anglican church at the Restoration, and his contacts extended even to those described at the time as 'enthusiasts'. The ecclesiastical group with whom he seems to have had the least sympathy were the high-churchmen who were in the ascendant during the Restoration decades, and there is some truth in a loose characterization of Boyle as a 'latitudinarian', so long as this is understood in a fairly flexible manner, as reflecting a general inclination to religious tolerance and a stress on the fundamentals of Christianity, rather than an insistence on comprehension along lines laid down by a triumphalist Anglican church. Equally important was his view that differences among Christians should be minimized in favour of an attack on atheists whose ideas all could agree in deprecating, which was to be institutionalized in the Boyle lectures. 
As for Boyle's political views, in his mature years he was closely associated with the establishment and had personal contact with each of the Restoration monarchs. Prior to 1660 his primary commitment seems to been to political stability; although his views at that time (as later) remain substantially inscrutable, contemporaries noted that he always referred to the government of the day 'with an exactness of respect' (Hunter, 'Boyle by Himself', 25). He was also committed to national prosperity, taking an active interest in economic improvement and in maximizing the effectiveness of the navy. On the other hand, it is revealing that the brief period of active involvement in such affairs on his part which occurred in the early 1660s ended in disillusionment, and there is some evidence of his dissatisfaction with the 'laissez faire' attitudes of the Restoration government. Boyle's sympathies seem to have been more with the egalitarian and interventionist ideals represented by Samuel Hartlib and his associates in the interregnum, with whom he had had close contacts. There is evidence that, in the later decades of the century, Boyle's strong feelings about the plight of the poor placed him somewhat at odds with the prevailing orthodoxy, especially on medical matters, where his views continued to echo the aspirations of the interregnum reform movement. 
These were views, however, which Boyle publicly expressed only in muted form. Although scrutiny of his unpublished papers reveals strong feelings on such topical issues, these views only marginally affected his public persona. Neither were most contemporaries aware of the more stressful aspects of his religiosity, including the doubts that he suffered and the tortured conscience with which he had to live. During his career Boyle learned how to capitalize on those of his characteristics which went down well with his contemporaries, and to keep the more ambivalent aspects of his ideas to himself. Publicly, the image of Boyle in the eyes of most of his contemporaries, which is also the image which has come down to posterity, was one of serenity, of a lofty transcendence of the mundanities of the world in the pursuit of higher goals of truth and piety. This view was formulated with brilliant clarity in Burnet's funeral sermon, which heavily influenced the first full life of Boyle by Thomas Birch, published in 1744. Birch's 'Life' has been the basis of almost all subsequent accounts of Boyle, while Birch and his collaborator, Henry Miles, also influenced his retrospective image by the extent to which they tidied up his archive, more or less consciously clearing away material which they saw as irrelevant to the image of the great and good man which they purveyed. The view of him that resulted was not untrue but merely incomplete. When their omissions are corrected, and Boyle is placed back into his proper historical context, he remains a remarkable figure. Today the achievement of this icon of the new science seems no smaller than it did to his early admirers. 


@@@@@


doc= 3138


Boyle, Roger, first earl of Orrery (1621-1679), politician and writer, was the twelfth child and third son to survive of Richard Boyle, first earl of Cork (1566-1643), and his second wife, Catherine Fenton ('c'.1588-1630). He was born at the family's principal seat of Lismore Castle, co. Waterford, on 25 April 1621. Thanks to his father's standing as the largest proprietor in the southern part of the province of Munster, the boy was ennobled as Baron Broghill on 28 February 1628. The title derived from the estate in the north of co. Cork with which his father endowed the youth. In 1630 Broghill entered Trinity College, Dublin, but by 1632 had removed to England. There, on 17 March 1636, he was admitted into Gray's Inn, at the same time as an elder brother, Lewis, Viscount Kinalmeaky. Soon afterwards he departed on a continental tour under a French protestant, Isaac Marcombes. As well as travelling through France and Italy, he lodged for a time in Geneva with the Calvinist theologian Diodati. These experiences deepened Broghill's attachment to the protestantism already strong in his family. They also introduced him to contemporary continental culture, which later influenced his writings, his architectural projects, and his interests in military theory and practice. On his return to England he gravitated towards a smart court set. His entry into it was eased by his elder brother Richard Boyle, later first earl of Burlington, already familiar with this world, and by Broghill's own suavity. His father sent him to attend the king at Berwick as he prepared to fight the Scots in 1639. The standing within England of Broghill and his family was further acknowledged -- and enhanced -- when, on 27 January 1641, he married Lady Margaret Howard (1623-1689), a daughter of Theophilus Howard, second earl of Suffolk. She came with a portion of $5000. This helped towards the purchase of an estate at Marston Bigod in Somerset, which would prove convenient as he shuttled regularly between England and Ireland. 
Either shortly before or after the outbreak of the rising in October 1641 Broghill returned to Ireland. Much of the defence of his own and his relations' property fell to him. He soon showed his mettle as soldier and politician. In part through a ruse he repulsed the force which was besieging his father's castle at Lismore in February 1642. In November 1642 he sailed to England with his elder brother Dungarvan to solicit supplies and reinforcements. In July 1643 he returned to organize defences. Nominally subordinate to the provincial commander, Inchiquin, he continued to be employed on missions to the English parliament. In July 1644 he and Inchiquin explained publicly that they could no longer be bound by the truce which the lord lieutenant, Ormond, on behalf of Charles I, had signed the previous September with the insurgents. The Munster leaders turned to the English parliament to relieve them in their extremity. Broghill was now appointed governor of the port of Youghal, much of which was owned by the Boyles. In 1645 he was commissioned as a general of horse in the province, and in December that year deputized for Inchiquin. Increasingly, the latent rivalry between the two generals expressed itself in open disagreements over tactics. Broghill regarded Westminster, where he had long-standing and close links, as the best hope of relief for protestant Ireland. He backed the appointment by parliament of Philip Sidney, Viscount Lisle, as viceroy and commander in Ireland in 1646. Lisle belonged to the political grouping at Westminster in which Broghill had friends and relations. Under Lisle he could reasonably expect his own standing to rise and the plight of Munster to be alleviated. Lisle's commission affronted the king's own lieutenant, Ormond, and alarmed Inchiquin. In 1647 the latter defected to the beaten Charles I. As a consequence, divisions among Munster protestants widened ominously. Personally Broghill gained from his parliamentarian affiliation. In February 1648 he was granted $2000 towards his arrears of pay, and the following month was appointed master of the ordnance. But Lisle's expedition failed in its larger aims, leaving the protestants of south Munster still vulnerable to the Catholic forces. 
By 1649, with the king executed and Cromwell with an army campaigning in Ireland, Broghill was expected to dissociate himself from the new order and follow his brothers Richard (now second earl of Cork) and Francis (later Viscount Shannon) into foreign exile. Instead, in circumstances which have always been surrounded with mystery and even fantasy, he was persuaded, seemingly by Cromwell himself, to serve the revolutionary regime. Irish protestants like Broghill, whose holdings had been overrun by the insurgent Catholics throughout the 1640s (and earlier), reckoned that only England could secure their return and guarantee their secure enjoyment for the future. Any incumbent English regime, even when it had originated in regicide, if able to aid protestant Ireland, could be accepted and supported. Now that a Commonwealth had been established, Broghill did not scruple to enlist its backing for a campaign to restore himself and his protestant neighbours to what they had lately lost. The personal intervention of Cromwell with Broghill, a story which originated with the latter's chaplain, was hardly needed to persuade him where his interests now lay. On behalf of the new English republic, he threw himself into soldiering across a terrain that he knew intimately. He helped the English commanders to victory in their southern Irish campaigns. In April 1650 he had the satisfaction of assisting in the defeat of his former ally and commander Inchiquin. At Macroom in co. Cork he captured the Catholic bishop of Ross, Boetius MacEgan, a notable warrior. He also joined in the protracted siege of Limerick, alongside Ireton. He was again rewarded: in February 1651 he was made lieutenant-general of the ordnance and was granted sizeable tracts of confiscated lands with a yearly yield of $1000. These grants promised to ease, but did not end, the chronic indebtedness which beset him. Like so many of his protestant neighbours in Munster, deprived of the bulk of his rents throughout the war, he had resorted to desperate expedients, including the mortgaging of his Somerset property. The cumulative effects of these financial devices dogged him for much of the 1650s, and encouraged compromises with a regime which might assist. 
Radicals within the English army and Irish administration doubted the firmness of Broghill's attachment to their cause, and lost no chance to asperse him. They worried lest he -- and through him his extensive kindred and clientele among the settlers established before 1641 -- secure disproportionate influence. They feared, too, that he might blunt the edge of the reforming government in Dublin. Others, notably the new ruler of Ireland from 1655, Henry Cromwell, were more favourably impressed. So, seemingly, was Oliver Cromwell. In March 1655 Broghill was appointed for a year to head the civil government of Scotland as lord president of the council in Edinburgh. Without any discernible Scottish links, he tackled this brief energetically. Foremost among his tasks was the need to win over the Presbyterian clergy, the more intransigent of whom still prayed publicly for Charles Stuart. Using diplomacy, blandishments, and bullying, he quietened the implacable. But, at best, the calm was temporary. Broghill, nevertheless, acquired clerical contacts which he valued. In 1660, when measures in Ireland, England, and Scotland had to be synchronized, he exploited his Scottish informants. Moreover, his knowledge of their principles made him sympathize with their predicament after 1660. In Edinburgh as lord president he attempted to build a coalition among locals friendly towards the Cromwellian protectorate. This quest paralleled what Henry Cromwell, who regularly sought his advice, was attempting in Dublin, and may have prefigured the calculations of the group that offered Oliver Cromwell the crown in 1657. 
In 1654 and 1656 Broghill was elected to the Westminster parliament for co. Cork. In 1656 he had also been returned for Edinburgh, for which he preferred to sit. In preparation for his own and his allies' returns he had demonstrated his forte for electioneering. Within the parliaments his skills as manager and as deviser of constitutions were displayed. Irish protestants, a minority, needed pliancy both to protect their vulnerable privileges and to exert an influence greater than their small numbers would merit. This flexibility marked his political approach to settling the three nations in the aftermath of war, reconquest, and regicide. Unusually among his contemporaries he knew each of the three at first hand. The wars had given him the chance to operate in this larger arena. But he did so sequentially rather than simultaneously. Even at a time when Britain and Ireland were united, throughout much of the 1650s, the practical impossibility of maintaining a presence in each country defeated even the most energetic like Broghill. His stay in Scotland was brief and his impact there limited, but he retained a better sense of problems in civil society and the church common to all the Cromwellian and Stuart territories. 
Stability and prosperity were his lodestones. In the parliament of 1654-5, which included representatives of Scotland and Ireland, he was one of those who sought -- unavailingly -- to avert a collision between the republicans and the supporters of the Cromwellian protectorate. Outspoken as a critic of rule by the military, adopted during the experiment of the major-generals between 1655 and 1656, he advocated kingship. This device was intended to win over to Cromwell more of the political elites on which government had relied before 1642. He had already moved the regime in Scotland in this direction, through conciliation of local civilians. Henry Cromwell, in Dublin since the summer of 1655, under Broghill's prompting also explored this approach. The hope was that, once Oliver Cromwell had become king, he too would be backed by the propertied in England and Wales, and could reduce his political dependence on the soldiery. Cast down when, in May 1657, Cromwell refused the kingly title, but not the rest of the settlement in 'The humble petition and advice', he retired to his Irish estates. These had recently been augmented by the belated passage of an ordinance which conferred on him confiscated properties in co. Cork, including Blarney Castle and Ballymaloe. This bounty, worth well in excess of $1000 annually, had first been proposed in 1651 but was authorized only on 26 June 1657. 
Broghill was soon cajoled back into public life by, among others, Henry Cromwell. In January 1658 he took his place in the Cromwellian second chamber, the other house. It was rumoured that he might be added to the council of state, but was not. After Richard Cromwell succeeded his father as protector in September 1658, Broghill's power grew. English radicals within the army disliked -- and perhaps exaggerated -- his role. By July 1659 these adversaries again controlled the government, in Ireland as well as in England. Now back in south Munster, he lost his military commands. He bided his time, too wily to reveal his thoughts and contacts. He imposed a similar discipline on his followers in Ireland, lest they jeopardize all by any premature display of preferences. 
Others acted in Dublin to oust the English republicans and to summon a representative assembly in February 1660. Broghill's importance within his native country was recognized, not just by his return for both co. Waterford and Dublin University to this assembly. In January 1660 he had been named by the restored Rump in London as one of its three commissioners to rule Ireland. In the Dublin Convention he diverged from other protestant leaders, notably his fellow commissioner Sir Charles Coote, in his Fabian tactics. Not until Charles II's return had become a certainty did he unequivocally endorse it. He was reluctant to have the king restored unconditionally. Nor was he enthusiastic about allowing the episcopalian Church of Ireland its pre-war pre-eminence. In danger of falling behind the unsullied royalists, in May 1660 he hurried to London. There his voice, stridently hostile to Catholics and the Irish, added to the clamour to retain the essentials of the Cromwellian land settlement. Broghill, and those whom he represented in southern Ireland, had gained much from the recent redistributions, and were reluctant to surrender their booty. He ingratiated himself with the king, who, on 5 September 1660, advanced him to the Irish earldom of Orrery. Thanks to his wife's family, the Howards, he was elected for Arundel to the Westminster Convention of 1660 and the 1661 parliament. On 10 October 1660 he was entrusted, as lord president, with the government of his home province of Munster. On 26 October he was once more a member of the trio to which, as lords justices, the care of Ireland was deputed. In this capacity he implemented much but determined little, since the vital decisions were taken in London. He concealed his own misgivings as he enforced legal conformity to the re-established state church and harassed dissenters, particularly the Scottish Presbyterians of Ulster. He was obliged to order the return of their old properties to a few favoured Catholics. He was mortified when, with the arrival in July 1662 of the lord lieutenant, Ormond, he was relegated to his regional presidency. Ormond, the king's man in Ireland throughout the 1640s, personified an unswerving loyalism; Orrery apparently the opposite. To these differences was added a personal antipathy, masked behind civilities. He scarcely concealed his contempt for his apparently indolent and insouciant superior, whose talents, he believed, were surpassed by his own. 
In addition to the lord presidency, on 22 June 1662 Orrery was commissioned as sergeant-major-general. He was further entrusted with the government of the strategically sensitive city of Limerick and co. Clare. Interpreting his remit broadly, he felt empowered to interfere in any matter which might touch the safety of protestant Ireland. He repeatedly contrasted his own vigilance with Ormond's culpable neglects. He made play with the dense web of kinship which tied Ormond to many Catholic notables. Eager to demonstrate his importance, he refashioned his seat on his north co. Cork estate and renamed it Charleville. Later he was reckoned to have spent $20,000 on these works. Not only did he hold his presidential court there, he aspired to transform the newly incorporated borough into a model of what other settlers might achieve. He founded a school to which the sons of the provincial squirearchy were enticed. Foreign artisans, mostly protestant refugees from the Low Countries and France, were installed in the hope of reviving the depressed textile industries. These prestigious operations resembled those undertaken by his rival Ormond. But for Orrery, as a younger son, such lavish expenditure overtaxed his resources. His income, from lands and offices, seldom exceeded $4000 p.a. Clandestine opportunities for enrichment certainly abounded in the 1650s and 1660s, and it was widely assumed that he availed himself of them. In 1668 it was alleged that he had received over $44,000 from two separate sources. Yet, by the lax standards which prevailed in seventeenth-century Ireland, such profiteering was regarded as a matter of pride not shame. In the main he spent what he received on sustaining the magnificent equipage as a regional potentate rather than enlarging permanently the fortune of his family. 
Orrery used his office in Munster to demonstrate how the affairs of protestant Ireland should be conducted. The province, with its long and remote coasts, might be surprised by the Dutch, French, or privateers. Accordingly, he enjoined watchfulness on underlings. He attended closely to the internal affairs of the boroughs under his charge, many of which contained settlers who had arrived only in the 1650s and who might incline to republicanism or religious dissent. He was equally wary of the Catholics, still by far the largest component in the local population. He strenuously opposed moves to readmit them to a share of their former properties and power. His care, justified by the vulnerable situation of Munster, was also intended to point up the casualness with which Ormond treated international and domestic threats. By 1666, with a risk of invasion by the French, he was urging military preparedness. He put faith in locally recruited militias, to be composed exclusively of protestants. These would perpetuate the military arrangements that had underpinned the original plantations in Munster in the time of his father, and revived an idea that he had put to Henry Cromwell. 
A shrewd self-publicist, Orrery intended that his own assiduity should be contrasted with Ormond's supposed neglects. These comparisons were intended to strengthen his claims on the Irish viceroyalty. Driven by envy of Ormond, he abetted those, in England and Ireland, scheming to topple the lord lieutenant. In particular, he struck up a tactical alliance with the restlessly ambitious second duke of Buckingham. In 1669 they triumphed. Yet the dismissal of Ormond did not bring Orrery to power, as he had hoped. Rumours had circulated that he might even be appointed to a great office of state (such as the lord chancellorship) in England. Instead, he too was attacked. In November 1669 moves to impeach him were begun at Westminster. Alleged misconduct in the government of Munster was the main charge. He trounced his accusers. But the episode revealed how isolated and insecure he had become. Another sign of declining repute came with the suppression on 30 July 1672 of the Munster presidency. He was consoled with a generous pension and other marks of status, and retained a military command. Reassured that no personal slight had been meant, nevertheless it was clear that he was out of step with a movement more friendly towards the Catholics. Henceforward he lacked a formal position, other than as peer, privy councillor, and army officer, from which to shape policy. However, this did not silence him. He monotonously accused those responsible for Ireland of misunderstanding its needs. Moreover, he carried his message into England, where between 1674 and 1676 he attended the Commons. 
Soon after Charles's restoration Orrery had countered the lobbying of the Irish Catholics hopeful of regaining their lost property and influence. In 1662 he published two tracts, 'The Irish Colours Displayed' and 'An Answer of a Person of Quality to a Scandalous Letter', in which he rebutted the contention of a Catholic apologist, Peter Walsh, that many of his co-religionists had loyally supported the Stuarts. This issue of loyalty to the dynasty was one well calculated to embarrass the pliant Orrery. He reverted to it in his plays, several of which were performed in the 1660s. His ability to express -- and sometimes to create -- the anxieties of the beleaguered Irish protestant minority gave him a larger role. The protestant interest, both as idea and actuality, owed much to his unscrupulous industry. In his formulation the earlier construct of 'the English of Ireland' to denote those loyal to English authority evolved into one in which confession -- protestantism -- not ethnicity was the defining quality. In time, and assisted by Orrery's descendants, such as Henry Boyle, first earl of Shannon, the idea of the protestant interest underwent a further transmutation: into the Irish protestant ascendancy of the eighteenth century. 
The vigour and fluency with which Orrery advanced the opinion that the Irish protestants were the only secure foundation for English rule in the island established him as the foremost spokesman for that interest. Furthermore, he had acted on his beliefs. He steered his neighbours through the hazards of the confederate wars and the Cromwellian occupation. He busied himself in the 1650s and 1660s to secure material advantages not just for his immediate family, but for the larger protestant community. He first realized the electoral potential of the Boyles' huge possessions in co. Cork and co. Waterford. In the successive elections of 1654, 1656, 1659, 1660, and 1661 his activities can be detected. His circumspect elder brother Cork willingly deputed this task to his more adept junior. His political aptitudes, glimpsed occasionally in his dealings with the Long Parliament, were perfected in the interregnum. Diplomacy was needed to achieve even a limited understanding with the warring Presbyterian ministers in the Scotland of the mid-1650s. Managerial and rhetorical dexterity was evident as he organized the enthusiasts for kingship at Westminster in 1657. The same can be sensed in his handling of the Dublin Convention in the spring of 1660. In the Irish parliament of 1661-6 he boasted how he led a cohort of 'Orreronians': at least twenty-five members for Munster constituencies. They formed the nucleus of a larger following through which he could guide hesitant MPs into enacting the controversial Restoration settlement. The lord lieutenant, Ormond, was happy to let him act as his undertaker in the parliament. These tastes of power left him embittered when, after 1672, he was denied his formal primacy as lord president of Munster or any adequate outlet for what he regarded as his transcendent abilities. 
From the 1640s Orrery, like other protestant lobbyists from Ireland, encouraged the English and Irish authorities to act on the axiom that confession was now the surest index of political reliability. He identified religious differences as the dynamic in the troubled recent history of Ireland. This opinion was encouraged by his reading, experiences, and reflection. He subscribed to the widespread view that Catholicism, both as political doctrine and as theological system, undermined society. He was suspected of exaggerating Irish Catholics' untrustworthiness and inflating the fears of Irish protestants to further his own career, yet, in his analyses of past and present troubles in Ireland, he treated of more than confessional differences. Conquest, and the resultant expropriation of the older vintages of landowners (almost invariably Catholics), embittered the defeated. These grievances, he predicted, would never vanish. The Catholic majority would watch for a chance to reverse the decision of recent wars, so that the utmost vigilance would henceforward be required. Orrery, in his military, administrative, and private capacities, exercised it. When necessary, he used spies, double agents, and deceit. It was alleged, indeed, that he kept a spy in the king's bedchamber, Ned Progers, who purloined and passed to his paymaster confidential letters from the likes of Ormond. He also insisted that the settlers in Munster stay on alert and that he, even after he had been deposed as lord president, should keep armaments at his houses. 
For the same reasons, Orrery tried to prevent the readmission of Catholic traders into the walled towns in 1672-3. But such exclusions no longer suited either the English government or the Irish economy. His strident denunciations of the official indulgence of the dangerous reached a crescendo during the Popish Plot, when his old rival, Ormond, again ruled the kingdom. Even those who shared his apprehensions were wearied by the monotony and shrillness with which he voiced them. One by one he estranged leading politicians of his time, not only Clarendon and Ormond, but those closer to him in outlook, such as Essex and Shaftesbury. His unremitting anti-Catholicism grated on the king. Appointed to the English privy council in 1665, he was removed in April 1679. 
Orrery owed much of his contemporary and later celebrity to his voluminous writings. He published poems, a lengthy romance, 'Parthenissa', in the French mode, as well as his plays. 'Parthenissa', never completed, occupied its author intermittently from the 1640s onwards. The dramas attracted the notice of contemporaries, being performed to acclaim in London and Dublin. From the 1630s he had mingled easily with writers: first Suckling and Davenant, later -- in the 1650s -- Cowley, and then (during the 1660s) Katherine Phillips. Dryden admired his rhymed dramatic couplets. His easy command of literary genres fitted well with his self-projection as courtier and wit. For a time he stood high at the courts of Charles I, his son, and Henry Cromwell. But his vanities and jealousies tarnished his reputation. In the plays themes of honour, loyalty, and betrayal suggested that, despite their sometimes exotic settings -- Sicily for 'The General', Hungary for 'Mustapha', and in 'Tryphon' the history of the Maccabees -- they expressed the dilemmas that had beset him during his tortuous career. Although imitative of the modes of the age, and ironically derivative from French models at a time when he scorned France, their fluency excited admiration. The same virtuosity, schooled in the adolescent travels and later campaigning, led him to write a pioneering 'Treatise on the Art of War', published in 1677. Typically he bragged that it was the first comprehensive manual in English. A second volume was intended, but, if finished, was never printed. He may also have contemplated a fuller history of his times. Stimulated in the mid-1670s by the renewed interest in the controversial passages of the 1640s, he had the leisure to compose such an account. Arthur Annesley, earl of Anglesey, an erstwhile collaborator, engaged on a similar design, enquired after his death about his manuscripts. Nothing is known to have survived. 
Towards the close of his life, incapacitated and in pain after a botched operation to ease his gout, Orrery composed devotional poems on the chief festivals of the churches of England and Ireland, which would be published posthumously. As he prepared for death, he subscribed to a conventional protestant orthodoxy. Nevertheless, he was still worried enough about the mounting Catholic menace to advocate protestant union. He entrusted his school at Charleville to a nonconformist minister ejected from his English parish. In addition he kept in touch with the veteran dissenter Richard Baxter and his schemes to comprehend orthodox presbyterians. In Ireland especially, the protestant presence was too puny readily to tolerate internal divisions, which could only hearten the Catholics. Ever the polymath, he also designed buildings. The grandiose seat at Charleville may have resulted from his fertile brain. The Charles Fort, commanding the entrance to Kinsale harbour, also owed much to his architectural skills. It further embodied his obsession with the physical defence of Ireland; here against possible Dutch or French invaders. Yet, Ormond received more praise than Orrery for erecting the bastion. He died at his second home in co. Cork, Castlemartyr, on 16 October 1679 and was interred two days later in the family vault at Youghal. 
Constantly overshadowed or thwarted by others whom he regarded as less capable, Orrery's tactlessness alienated the important and probably cost him the highest offices. A contemporary recorded why he was regarded so ambivalently. His vanity 'would not let him be content with what he had of the king's favour unless he held it with ostentation'. Thus, when ill in London, he had persuaded the king publicly to visit him in his lodgings, and so attracted admiring attention which flattered his self-esteem. His 'devising head' and 'towering wit' were turned to destructive ends and left him with a sorry reputation for duplicity. 'He certainly had many qualities of a great man, affable, eloquent, liberal and stout, but he wanted sincerity and as he was still aspiring to be uppermost gave himself no rest but was intriguing to the world's end' ('Account of Restoration politics', Dublin Public Libraries, Gilbert MSS 207, pp. 12-17; 227, p. 246). 


@@@@@


doc= 3139


Boyle, Roger (1617/18?-1687), Church of Ireland bishop of Clogher, was a younger brother of Robert Boyle, bishop of Ferns, and may have been the son of Robert Boyle (died 1665), vicar of Carrickmacross, co. Monaghan. He was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, where he became a scholar in 1638 and was elected a fellow in 1646. Following the outbreak of the rebellion in 1641 he went to England and became tutor to Lord Paulet, in whose family he remained until the Restoration. In 1661 he became rector of Carrigaline and of Ringrone in the diocese of Cork, and in October 1662 became dean of Cork. On 12 September 1667 he was promoted to the see of Down and Connor, a diocese with large numbers of protestant nonconformists. He bowed to pressure from Bishop Leslie of Raphoe and moved to excommunicate local presbyterian clergy, but was apparently restrained by the primate, Archbishop Margetson. On 21 September 1672 he was translated to the see of Clogher. 
Boyle had a reputation for piety and learning, and was the author of 'Inquisitio in fidem Christianorum hujus saeculi' (1665) and 'Summa theologiae Christianae' (1681), the latter prompted by the lack of 'a corpus of Theology which would be agreeable to the Anglican church in every part' (Bolton, 40-41). His commonplace book on various subjects, together with an abstract of Sir Kenelm Digby's treatise on the nature of bodies, is preserved in manuscript in Trinity College Library, Dublin. He died at Clones, co. Monaghan, on 26 November 1687, said to be in his seventieth year, and was buried in the church there. James II did not appoint a successor, granting the revenues of the see to the Roman Catholic bishop, Patrick Tyrrel. 


@@@@@


doc= 3140


Boyne, John (1750s-1810), watercolour painter and engraver, was born in co. Down, Ireland. His father was originally a joiner by trade, but afterwards held an appointment in the victualling office at Deptford for many years. Boyne was brought to England when about nine years old, and subsequently articled ('c'.1770) in London to the landscape engraver William Byrne (1743-1805), who is principally known for his antiquarian engravings after Thomas Hearne. After his apprenticeship had ended, he attempted to work independently but, apparently, lack of application and a dissipated lifestyle worked against him. Unsuccessful as an engraver, he embarked on a more congenial career, joining a company of strolling actors near Chelmsford. He appeared in several plays, and assisted in a farce entitled 'Christmas'. However, soon wearying of life as an actor he returned to London in 1781, and took up a trade of pearl-setting, being employed by a Mr Flower, of Chichester Rents, Chancery Lane. Later he appears as a master in a drawing school, first in Holborn, and then in Gloucester Street, Queen Square, where Thomas Heaphy and James Holmes were his pupils. 
Boyne exhibited eighteen pieces, mainly classical, Shakespearian, and biblical subjects, at the Royal Academy between 1788 and 1809, giving his London addresses as 11 Great Turnstile, Lincoln's Inn Fields (1788), 34 Gloucester Street, Queen Square (1791-1801), and from 1802, 43 Penton Place, Pentonville. Boyne died at the last address on 22 June 1810. His most important artistic works were watercolour heads of Shakespearian characters, resembling those of John Hamilton Mortimer, some of which were engraved; other significant works include 'Assignation', 'A Sketch to the Memory of the Duke of Bedford', 'The Muck Worm', and 'The Glow Worm'. Boyne's best work is probably the large Rowlandson-like watercolour 'Meeting of Connoisseurs' (V&A), a scene in an artist's studio which includes a self-portrait; it was engraved in stipple by T. Williamson. The British Museum holds 'The Quack Doctor' and a head of King Lear in black chalk and wash; other examples of Boyne's work are in the Royal Collection at Windsor and the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 3141


Boys, David (d. after 1465), prior of Gloucester, joined the Carmelite order in Gloucester and graduated BTh at Oxford. He lectured at both Oxford and Cambridge and travelled abroad, furthering his studies at other universities. He went to Rome, where he is said to have preached many sermons. While lecturing at Oxford he collected the works of his fellow Carmelite, John Barningham (died 1449), and donated them to the Carmelite library at Cambridge. He was chaplain to Eleanor, duchess of Gloucester, and probably also to Duke Humphrey (died 1447). In later years he returned to Gloucester, where he was prior until his death after 1465. He was noted for his love of the contemplative life, meditating long hours on the scriptures and rarely leaving his cell. He wrote six books, all lost, including 'On human immortality', 'Against the Moslems', 'On the doctrine of the spirit', and 'On true innocence'. 


@@@@@


doc= 3142


Boys, Edward (1599-1667), Church of England clergyman, born in Hoad Court, Blean, Kent, and baptized on 21 December 1599 in Canterbury Cathedral, was the fifth of ten children of Thomas Boys (died 1625), of Hoad Court, gentleman, and his first wife, Sarah (died 1602), daughter of Richard Rogers, dean of Canterbury and suffragan bishop of Dover. Educated at Eton College, Boys matriculated as a pensioner from Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, in Easter term 1620. Subsequently elected a scholar, he graduated BA in 1624 and proceeded MA in 1627. With his election to a fellowship at Corpus in 1631 Boys embarked on an academic career: in 1634 he received the degree of BD and the same year held the appointment of university preacher. 
In 1640, however, Boys was presented to the living of Mautby, a tiny village in Norfolk, by the antiquary and landowner William Paston, his contemporary at Corpus. Freed from the obligations of his college fellowship in 1641, on 22 March that year Boys married, by licence at Canterbury Cathedral, Mary Herne, a widow related through marriage to a Norfolk gentry family; there were no children. Thereafter he appears to have lived out the years of conflict and Commonwealth quietly in Mautby, in his time 'a Country Village consisting onely of four Farmers' (Boys, sig. a 2). His editor, Roger Flynt, another Corpus contemporary, maintained that Boys's retirement was the result of reticence and modesty. More likely Boys was outspoken in his support of Charles I and deemed it expedient to seek the seclusion of a country parish. The leanings of his friends suggested as much: Paston was knighted by Charles I in 1641, Flint was sequestered for delinquency before May 1645, and Joseph Hall, Boys's bishop at Norwich and an admirer of his preaching, was expelled from the diocese about 1647. On 22 May 1651 Boys's library of 2000 books, the parish register, and the parsonage house were all destroyed by fire. 
Like many of his contemporaries Boys made obedience to the king a strong element in sermons preached after the restoration of 1660. Of the sixteen published posthumously by Flynt in 1672 four bore directly on this theme; the occasion of one of these ('Carolus redux') can be precisely dated (7 July 1666). Boys died at Mautby on 10 March 1667 and was buried in the chancel of his church. In his will he left $10 to his old college to add to gifts made during his lifetime: an edition of Binius's 'Concilia generalia' presented in September 1641 and two volumes of holograph sermons by his uncle John Boys (1571-1625), dean of Canterbury. 


@@@@@


doc= 3143


Boys, Edward (1785-1866), naval officer, was born at Betshanger, Kent, on 24 January 1785, the son of John Boys (1749-1824) and his wife, Mary, daughter of the Revd Richard Harvey. After attending King's School, Canterbury (1794-6), where four of his brothers were also pupils, he entered the navy in 1796. He served in the North Sea, on the coast of Ireland, and in the channel, and in June 1802 was appointed to the frigate 'Phoebe'. On 4 August 1803, Boys, when in charge of a prize, was captured by the French, and remained a prisoner of war for six years, until, after many daring and ingenious attempts, he succeeded in escaping. On his return to England he was made lieutenant (effective from 25 May 1809) and served mostly in the West Indies until the peace. On 8 July 1814 he became commander, but, with the post-war naval reduction, he had no further employment afloat, though from 1837 to 1841 he was superintendent of Deal dockyard. On 1 July 1851 he retired with the rank of captain. 
Immediately after his escape, and while in the West Indies, Boys wrote for his family an account of his adventures in France; the risk of jeopardizing his French friends made him keep this private, and although abstracts from it had found their way into the papers it was not until 1827 that he was persuaded to publish it, as 'Narrative of a Captivity and Adventures in France and Flanders between the Years 1803-9'; this was the source from which Captain Marryatt, the author of 'Peter Simple', drew much of his account of his hero's escape -- more perhaps than from the previously published narrative of the naval officer Henry Ashworth's adventures. Boys also published in 1831 'Remarks on the Practicability and Advantages of a Sandwich or Downs Harbour'. 
Boys had married Elizabeth, 'nee' Sayer; they had three sons and three daughters. He died at 14 Blomfield Terrace, Harrow Road, Paddington, London, on 6 June 1866. His second son was Admiral Henry Boys (1820-1904), captain of the 'Excellent' and superintendent of the Royal Naval College at Portsmouth, 1869-74, director of naval ordnance from 1874 to 1878, and second in command of the Channel Fleet in 1878-9; after his retirement he served on the board of the Maxim Nordenfelt Gun Company, and as governor of the Marine Society. 


@@@@@


doc= 3144


Boys, John (bap. 1571, d. 1625), dean of Canterbury, was born at Elmton, in Eythorne, Kent, and baptized on 12 November 1571 at Eythorne, the sixth of ten children of Thomas Boys (1528-1600) of Eythorne, gentleman, from a family established in east Kent since at least 1380, and his wife, Christian Searles (died 1587), daughter and coheir of John Searles of Wye. Boys entered the King's School, Canterbury, about 1581 and was admitted pensioner at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, in April 1586. He graduated BA in 1590 and proceeded MA in 1593. That year he moved to Clare College, a migration apparently caused by his annoyance that a vacant Kentish fellowship at Corpus had been given instead to a native of Norfolk; he proceeded BD from Clare in 1600. In 1597 Boys was presented to the rectory of Betshanger in Kent through the influence of his uncle Sir John Boys (died 1612), recorder of Canterbury, and in the same year Archbishop John Whitgift gave him the mastership of Eastbridge Hospital in Canterbury. Boys appears to have lived at Betshanger and to have begun to cultivate the art of preaching for, in addition to being presented by Whitgift with the further living of Tilmanstone in Kent in 1599, he preached at Paul's Cross for the first time that year and again on 8 February 1601, when his sermon coincided with a commotion in the cathedral caused by the attempted rebellion of Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex. In 1603 Boys was given a third Kent living, the rectory of Hollingbourne, and on 4 October the following year married Angela Bargrave (died 1645), daughter of Robert Bargrave of Bridge, near Canterbury. There were no children. 
Boys never lost sight of his debt to Cambridge. The foundation of his work was, he said, laid there: John Overall, then a fellow at Trinity College, had taken a special interest in him and the university nurtured his interest in the pulpit. Boys's anonymous eulogist heard him say that 'he never missed publique Sermon at St Maries, during all the time of his abode there, save twice' ('Remaines', sig. b). He preached in Latin at the university church in 1599 and again in 1605 when he received the degree of DD. Soon afterwards Boys began the project that was to bring him renown and, eventually, preferment -- a systematic exposition, through printed sermons, of the church's prescribed lectionary. It was a project well suited to the protestant milieu being developed at Canterbury by Thomas Neville, dean from 1597 to 1615, and it occupied Boys for the next decade. During this time he took 'paines in preaching every weeke, if not at his owne charge, yet there where was more need' (ibid., sig. a3) and the result was eleven books of 'postils' published between 1609 and 1617. Such was the popularity of his volumes that sales were large and rapid. Further impressions were soon required and twelve separate reissues have survived for the period from 1610 to 1616. 
By 1610 Boys's influence was being felt at Canterbury, where Neville reviewed the preaching obligations of the cathedral clergy and instituted a rota of liturgically based expository sermons. Nevertheless, the progress of Boys's career was slow. According to contemporaries his lack of advancement was because 'a great prelate in the church' bore him ill will 'for mutual animosities betwixt them, whilst gremials in the university' (Fuller, 2.155). Boys preached at Ashford during the primary visitation of Archbishop Richard Bancroft in September 1607, but his only preferment during Bancroft's tenure at Canterbury was his appointment by James I in 1610 as one of seventeen founding fellows of the ill-fated King's College, Chelsea, where, under the provostship of Matthew Sutcliffe, the fellows' task was to counter the controversial literature of Catholic writers. One fruit of this work was Boys's sermon at Paul's Cross on the anniversary in 1613 of the Gunpowder Plot (5 November), in which he also commended the lottery set up in 1612 to help refinance the Virginia Company. 
With the succession of George Abbott to Canterbury, Boys's work to promote a preaching ministry found an enthusiastic patron and finally secured him preferment. In 1618, upon resigning the vicarage at Tilmanstone, he was awarded the rectory of Great Monaghan and in May 1619 the deanery at Canterbury. In 1620 he was made a member of the court of high commission, in 1622 he collected together his books and five miscellaneous sermons, publishing them as his 'Workes', and in 1624 he sat in the convocation at London on behalf of the clergy in his diocese. Boys presided over a significant expansion of the cathedral's musical life which, he maintained, much aided the due observance of the prayer book. In his time at Canterbury the cathedral also retained the strongly protestant tenor that Neville had inaugurated, centred on the pulpit: to this Boys brought the predestinarian Calvinism typical of the late Elizabethan and Jacobean church. The subsequent choice as dean in succession to Boys of his brother-in-law, the conservative Isaac Bargrave, signalled a move in the direction of Laudianism. 
Boys probably had independent means. He appears to have inherited his father's house and he was able to maintain a spacious household in his official residence at Chartham, where he refurbished the fabric. Three months after preaching before Charles I at Canterbury Boys died in his study at Elmton in Eythorne on 26 September 1625; he was buried in the cathedral four days later. Six years after his death fifteen further sermons were published as the 'Remaines of... John Boys', 'that reverend and famous postiller'. Boys's widow, Dean Bargrave's sister, erected a monument to her husband, possibly by Nicholas Stone and now considered 'an outstanding example of the discovery of the surface quality of marble' (Collinson and others, 522); it depicts Boys standing in his library. In 1631 Boys's eulogist maintained that 'there were in his time, and yet are few soules... that taste not of his books' ('Remaines', sig. a) and he was, it seems, one of the great book collectors of his time, quoting liberally in his published work from an exceptionally wide range of contemporary literature, including Shakespeare. 
Boys's writings were translated into German and published in Strasbourg in 1683 and 1685; an edition appeared in Philadelphia in 1849. The continuing appeal and convenience to clergy of Boys's exposition of the Anglican lectionary is attested to by C. H. Spurgeon in his 'Commentating and Commentaries' (1876), while in 1906 Charles Higham, a prominent theological bookseller in London, reported a continuing 'steady demand' for Boys's 'Workes', 'which is still much used by clergy' (priv. coll.). 


@@@@@


doc= 3145


Boys, John (bap. 1621, d. 1661), translator and antiquary, was baptized on 14 November 1621 at St Mary Northgate, Canterbury, the only son of John Boys (1590-1640) of Hoad Court, Blean, Kent, and Mary (or Margaret), daughter of Martin Fotherby, bishop of Salisbury. His grandfather Thomas Boys of Canterbury (died 1625), otherwise Thomas of St Gregory's or Dr Thomas of Fredville, had inherited the estate from his uncle, Sir John Boys of St Gregory's Priory, 'a man of much note in his profession of the law' who died childless in 1612 (Hasted, 3.565). Boys's immediate family on both sides was closely connected with Canterbury Cathedral for several generations. 
Little is known about Boys's education, profession, or settled residence. He was admitted to the Inner Temple in November 1640 and took the protestation oath in Blean in January 1642. With his wife, Ann (died 1712), daughter of Dr William Kingsley, archdeacon of Canterbury Cathedral, Boys had some six children, all of whom, including the youngest, Damaris ('b'. 2 May 1658), were born in the city of Canterbury. 
Like several cousins and prominent Kentish men Boys was a committed loyalist, embroiled in the political upheavals of the time. On 24 January 1660 he presented a 'Declaration of the nobility, gentry, ministry and communalty of the county of Kent' to the mayor at the town hall of Canterbury. The magistrates found the petition for a free parliament offensive, as Boys narrates in his 'Vindication of the Kentish declaration' of the same day; unlike some friends, he narrowly escaped imprisonment. On 28 February 1660, with Sir John Boys of Bonnington, a kinsman acclaimed for his defence of the royalist stronghold Donnington Castle, Boys presented 'A letter of thanks to his excellency the L. General Monk' at Whitehall, 'according to the order and advice of east Kent' on the news that excluded members would be returned to parliament. 'A speech' to be delivered on Charles II's landing at Dover on 25 May 1660 'was prevented therein by reason his majesty made no stay at all in that town'; so Boys sent a copy (all these documents were printed at the end of his 'Aeneas his Descent into Hell' of 1661, under the title 'Certain pieces relating to the publick'). 
Boys's principal contributions to the field of letters are his translations in 1661 of books 3 and 6 of Virgil's 'Aeneid': first, 'Aeneas his Descent into Hell: as it is Inimitably Described by the Prince of Poets in the Sixth of his Aeneis', and, second, 'Aeneas his Errours, or, His Voyage from Troy into Italy: an Essay upon the Third Book of Virgils Aeneis'. No single separate translation of either of these books had yet appeared, while translations of other single books or parts of the 'Aeneid' were common, especially of books 2 and 4. Both translations are accompanied by Boys's commentaries 'wherein all passages Critical, Mythological, Philosophical and Historical, are fully and clearly explained' (title-page, book 6). Boys cites numerous classical commentaries on the body politic and the public weal. His works, full of overt references to contemporary politics and undisguisedly royalist, follow Virgil's 'double design': 'the one was (in general) to represent heroical virtue in the person of his most accomplish'd Aeneas'; 'The other was (in particular) to celebrate the Name and Family of Emperor Augustus' ('Preface to the Reader, book 6'). Before and immediately after the Restoration, most published translations of the 'Aeneid' were similarly royalist, or loyalist. Book 6 congratulates Sir Edward Hyde on his succession as lord chancellor, praising his loyalty to the king; book 3 commends Lord Cornbury, Clarendon's son, to follow his father's illustrious example. 
Boys's verse compares badly with earlier verse translations of books 3 and 6, by Thomas Phaer, John Vicars, John Ogilby, and James Harrington, while his pentameters are better than Stanyhurst's hexameters. His heroic couplets mostly follow the sense of Virgil's lines; sometimes the rhymes were deemed felicitous enough for imitation by his successors, Richard Maitland and John Dryden. But Boys's ambitions were not poetic. They were purely against 'the fanaticks' in name of the 'sober' royalist cause. In their appreciation of the classical spirit of Virgil and his hero, Aeneas, most translators of the 'Aeneid' until the end of the century were similarly dedicated to the public weal. Yet no published version is as bald a statement of commitment or 'pietas', of which the inclusion of those dated and signed documents involving public events at the end of book 6 is a testimony. They 'are monuments of loyalty rather than wit: I was alwayes Master of a better heart than head, and ever gloried more in sincere and honest thoughts, then in trim and adorn'd expressions' ('Aeneas his Descent', 217). Book 6 ends with a Virgilian-styled epigram in Latin and English, honouring Charles II, and 'A Satyr', both dated 'Canter. Sept. 30. 1656'. The latter appeared as a dedicatory poem in William Somner's 'Dictionarium' (1659). Book 6 also has commendatory verses by Boys's cousin Charles Fotherby and Thomas Philipot. Both Somner and Philipot's father, John, acknowledge Boys's learning and antiquarian interests in respectively 'Dictionarium' and 'Villare Cantianum'. For the latter, published by Thomas as his own in 1659, Boys also wrote a dedicatory poem. 
Boys died on 18 March 1661. Like his father and five of his children, including his heir, John, a colonel who was knighted for his services, he was buried in Blean parish church. His wife later married Sir Richard Head, and was buried in Canterbury Cathedral in 1712. 


@@@@@


doc= 3146


Boys, Sir John (bap. 1607, d. 1664), royalist army officer, was baptized at Chillenden parish church, Kent, on 5 April 1607, second of the six children of Edward Boys (died 1661) of Goodnestone-next-Wingham, Kent, and his wife, Jane (died 1620), daughter of Edward Saunders of Northbourn in Kent. It does not appear that John Boys attended university. As eldest son he was heir to the estate at Bonnington in Goodnestone, the main seat of his family since at least the mid-fourteenth century. At the age of twenty-one Boys was indicted for the manslaughter in Canterbury of a vagrant, Thomas Alcock, by 'a blow on the head with a fire pan' ('CSP dom.', '1629-31', 336) but he was pardoned in November 1630. Three years later, on 8 March 1634, he married Lucy (died in or before 1650), daughter of John Denne of St Stephen's near Canterbury; they had five daughters. 
Before the civil war Boys spent 'divers years as a soldier abroad' (BL, Add. MS 18891, fol. 15), probably in Ireland. He was a captain in the army raised by Charles I against the Scots in 1640; in February 1642 he was at Chester recruiting for the Irish army to oppose the Catholic Confederate rebels and by November, with civil war in England, he was appointed lieutenant-colonel in the royalist foot regiment of John Savage, second Earl Rivers. In September 1643, in the aftermath of the first battle of Newbury, Boys was appointed governor of nearby Donnington Castle. It had a strong barbican tower but otherwise only a modest curtain wall described by William Camden as 'windows on all sides, very lightsome' (Money, 135). The castle had strategic significance in controlling the London to Bath road and waspositioned between the royalist headquarters at Oxford and the parliamentarians in London; Boys constructed earthworks around it before defending it from two assaults during the summer of 1644. Knighted by Charles I in the days before the second battle of Newbury in October 1644, Boys was made colonel and repulsed a further attack on the castle. During the subsequent winter parliament raised money for a final siege and Boys surrendered Donnington on 1 April 1646 only after John Dalbier's troops blasted it with a 15 inch 'mortar-piece' (Money, 207). 
In September 1646 Boys was in the Netherlands but he was back at Bonnington in November. Now basing himself in Kent, he played the leading role in the county uprising of 1648 which followed the attempt of parliament to ban the traditional celebration of Christmas. He was among those framing a country petition in May with its threat of armed resistance, and following the subjugation of Maidstone and Canterbury by parliamentarian forces in June Boys escaped to the Netherlands. Late in July he sailed with Prince Charles for Yarmouth, but plans to raise Norfolk for the king and relieve Colchester came to nothing. A fortnight later Boys attempted to raise Kent at Deal but in the skirmish that ensued he was shot. 'The buckle of his hanger gave some stop to the bullet' and he was captured ('Packets of Letters', 7). Boys escaped with sequestration and made composition of his fines in April 1649. Following the death of his first wife he married Ann Brockman on 12 December 1650 at Newington-next-Hythe, Kent; after her death about 1653 he married Elizabeth, Lady Finch (died 1672?), daughter of Sir John Fotherby of Barham, Kent, and widow of Sir Nathaniel Finch. 
Boys was arrested and imprisoned in the spring of 1651 and again in February 1655 with a few close colleagues on suspicion of planning military insurrection. In 1658 Boys was listed in succession to Rivers as colonel in the Kent royalist army and was supplying money to Charles Stuart in Brussels. By June 1659 it was the opinion of Sir Edward Hyde that Boys was 'as fit a person to be Major General... as any man; and, if I am not deceived, is well beloved generally in the country' (Newman, 39) and that summer he received a royal commission 'to treat with subjects formerly in rebellion' in Kent (Everitt, 303). In January 1660 with his aged father and others Boys 'designed and propounded' a county petition that called for free elections and he was briefly reimprisoned in Dover Castle ('Mercurius Politicus', 26 Jan-2 Feb 1660, 1068); thereafter he was one of those who plied the English Channel carrying correspondence between Edward Montagu, first earl of Sandwich, and Charles. 
With the dissolution of the Rump Parliament in February there was a final republican effort to divide opinion in Kent but Boys and others issued a counter-declaration on 20 April on behalf of the gentry 'who adhered to the King' which rejected any 'revengeful thoughts and actions' (Everitt, 312-13). The following day Boys dined with Montagu's follower Samuel Pepys along with 'some other gentlemen, formerly great Cavaliers'. To Pepys he 'seemed a fine man' and they met again at sea in mid-May, Boys on his way back from the Brill and still closely involved in the preparations that culminated two weeks later in the restoration of Charles II (Pepys, 1.112, 106). 
In July 1660 Boys was rewarded with the customership of Dover and in April 1662 he was appointed deputy governor of Duncannon Fort, co. Wexford. He died at Ross, co. Wexford, on 8 October 1664, having been on active service in Ireland during 1663-4, and was buried in Goodnestone church. Boys was survived by his third wife, Elizabeth, and three of his daughters who, in 1666, sold the Bonnington estate to Thomas Brome. 


@@@@@


doc= 3147


Boys, John (1749-1824), agriculturist, only son of William Boys of Barham, Kent, and Ann, daughter of William Cooper of Ripple, was born in November 1749. He had a farm at Betshanger, near Deal, Kent, and later at Each, Kent, and was a successful farmer, well known for his breed of Southdown sheep. 
Boys was one of the commissioners of sewers for east Kent, and did much to promote the drainage of the Finglesham and Eastry Brooks. At the request of the board of agriculture he wrote 'A General View of the Agriculture of the County of Kent' (1796), followed by 'An Essay on Paring and Burning' (1805). He was much quoted in encyclopaedias, and his books were translated into French and widely circulated in France. He also contributed to Arthur Young's 'Annals of Agriculture' (1784). 
In 1774 Boys married Mary, daughter of the Revd Richard Harvey, former vicar of Eastry-cum-Word. They had eight sons, including Edward Boys, naval officer, and five daughters. Boys died on 16 December 1824 at Wingham, Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 3148


Boys, Thomas (1792-1880), biblical scholar and writer, was born on 17 June 1792 at Sandwich, Kent, the only son of Rear-Admiral Thomas Boys of Kent. He was educated at Tonbridge grammar school and entered Trinity College, Cambridge, on 13 October 1808. He was made a scholar and a Smythe exhibitioner in 1810, and graduated BA (1813) and MA (1817). After university he entered the army with a view to becoming a military chaplain. He was active under Wellington in 1813 in the Peninsular War, was wounded at the battle of Toulouse, and gained the Peninsular medal. After his return Boys was ordained deacon, in 1816, and priest, in 1822. On 8 January 1822 he married a Miss Somers, of High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire. While in the Peninsula he had translated the 'Bible' into Portuguese so accurately that his version was adopted there by Catholics and protestants alike, and Don Pedro I of Portugal publicly thanked him for his gift to the nation. 
Boys soon established a reputation as a prolific writer and a Hebrew scholar. In 1821 he issued a volume of sermons, which was followed in 1824 by 'Tactica sacra', a book expounding a theory that there were similarities between the arrangement of 'New Testament' writings and the parallelism used in writings of the Jewish prophets. In 1825 he published 'A Key to the Book of Psalms' (reissued as 'A Key to the Psalms', edited by E. W. Bullinger, in 1890), and in 1827 he wrote 'A Plain Exposition of the New Testament'. Drawing inspiration from B. W. Noel's 'Remarks on the Revival of Miraculous Powers in the Church', he published 'The Suppressed Evidence' in 1832, and in 1844 he brought out his first work of history, 'Protestantism in Papal Europe'. Boys also taught ancient Hebrew to Jewish students at Hackney College, Middlesex, from 1830 to 1832, and he became professor of Hebrew at the Missionary College, Islington, in 1836; while holding this last post, he revised several versions of the 'Vulgate', including Deodati's Italian 'Bible' and the Arabic 'Bible'. 
Boys was a frequent contributor to 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine', where he published sketches and papers, including 'My Peninsular medal', which was serialized from November 1849 to July 1850. In 1848 he was appointed vicar of Holy Trinity, Hoxton, London. In addition to the many learned papers which he published under his own name, he also used the pseudonym 'Vedette'. As well as writing about history, Hebrew scholarship, and his military experiences, he also wrote twelve papers on Chaucer and contributed to 'Notes and Queries'. Boys died at his home, 23 Leighton Road, Kentish Town, London, on 2 September 1880. His daughter, Frances Georgiana, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 3149


Boys, Thomas Shotter (1803-1874), topographical watercolour painter and printmaker, was born on 2 January 1803 at Pentonville, near London, the son of a salesman. He was apprenticed on 4 February 1817 to the London engraver George Cooke. His earliest recorded prints are an etching of 1823 after an antique vase in Baron Denon's collection, which he exhibited at the Society of British Artists the following year, and an engraving after Claude Lorrain's 'Cephalus and Procris Reunited by Diana' (National Gallery, London). When his apprenticeship to Cooke ended in 1823 Boys moved to Paris where he soon became the protege and companion of the British artist Richard Parkes Bonington. Bonington introduced Boys to a circle of influential patrons, artists, and literati which included Eugene Delacroix, Baron Charles Rivet, and Prosper Merimee. Boys continued to work for Cooke, and he exhibited four reproductive engravings at the Paris Salon of 1827-8, but as his friendship with Bonington intensified, his professional interests shifted from engraving to watercolour painting. It was undoubtedly from Bonington that he learned the subtleties of this technique, which he later imparted to his own pupils William Callow, Ambrose Poynter, and Edward John Poynter. Boys, in turn, may have instructed both Bonington and the French landscape painter Paul Huet in the art of etching. 
While many of Boys's earliest watercolours tend to be copies of other artists' works, especially Bonington's popular Parisian and Italian subjects, he eventually developed an independent and original style within a few years of Bonington's death in 1828. His most enduring achievements are the hundreds of 'plein-air' and finished watercolours that date to his years of residence in Paris from 1831 to 1837. By submitting many of these to public exhibitions, he contributed to the revival of watercolour painting in France. At the 1833 Salon Boys exhibited seven watercolour views of Paris, Venice, Rouen, Chester, and Salisbury Cathedral -- the last now at the Yale Center for British Art. His address at the time, 19 rue de Bouloy, was the same as that of Callow and the French artists Pierre-Jules Jollivet, Pierre-Toussaint-Frederic Mialhe, and Henri-Joseph, baron de Triqueti. The last's manuscript catalogue of Bonington's prints, preserved in the library of the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, Paris, claims that Boys finished Bonington's only etching, 'Bologna, the Leaning Towers'. 
In 1834 Boys again exhibited at the Paris Salon three watercolour views of Bethune and Paris. During the 1830s he also mastered the art of lithography. Between 1833 and 1845 Boys was a mainstay of the 'Picardie' and 'Languedoc' volumes of Baron Isidore Taylor's magisterial 'Voyages pittoresques et romantiques dans l'ancienne France'. He also collaborated with A. Rouargue in the publication of 'Architecture pittoresque dessinee d'apres nature' (1835). As early as 1830 Boys had envisioned a series of etched views of Paris to rival Thomas Girtin's 'Picturesque Views of Paris and its Environs' (1803), but the project was abandoned in favour of a publication in 1839 of twenty-six chromolithographs titled 'Picturesque Architecture in Paris, Ghent, Antwerp, Rouen, etc.' published by Charles Hullmandel. This series of landscape and architectural views, derived from Boys's own watercolours and produced with the technical assistance of Hullmandel, ranks as one of the most innovative ventures in the history of printmaking. It brought Boys both a modicum of international celebrity and a commendation from King Louis-Philippe. He published his lithographic 'Series of Views in York' (1841) the same year he was elected a full member of the New Watercolour Society, where he exhibited annually until the year of his death. Equally successful was his publication 'Original Views of London as It Is' (1842), which introduced a vivacity previously unknown in the architectural delineation of this metropolis. He was now at the apex of his powers and popularity. In 1842-3 he made several excursions to Germany and to Prague in an effort to expand his repertoire of landscape subjects. He also painted a few oils at this time such as 'Greenwich from Observatory Hill' (exh. Society of British Artists, 1858). Like so many of the landscape draughtsmen of his generation, Boys had modelled his style on Bonington's virtuoso handling and brilliant colouring. As his career progressed, however, he seemed incapable of changing this style to accommodate the public's increasing demand for larger, more highly detailed paintings. By 1850 Boys had spent his creative capital, and his financial fortunes began a steady and steep decline. For the last twenty years of his life he worked intermittently as a drawing master and a reproductive lithographer in London, but he died in oblivion and near poverty on 10 October 1874 at 30 Acacia Road, St John's Wood, leaving a widow, Celestine Marie Barbe Boys. It is one of the tragedies in the history of British art and printmaking that Thomas Shotter Boys was unable to sustain the great promise of his work of the 1830s. 
Boys was prolific, and his watercolours grace most of the public collections in England. In North America, the Yale Center for British Art owns a large and representative group, while the Houghton Library, Harvard University, has many of the working drawings and tracings for 'London as It Is' and 'Picturesque Architecture in Paris, Ghent, Antwerp, Rouen, etc.'



@@@@@


doc= 3150


Boys, William (1735-1803), surgeon and topographer, was born in Deal, Kent, on 7 September 1735, the eldest son of Commodore William Boys (1700-1774), afterwards lieutenant-governor of Greenwich Hospital, and Elizabeth Pearson of Deal. He practised as a surgeon in Sandwich and devoted much of his spare time to literature and scientific research. Descended from an ancient Kent family, he added to the distinguished reputation of the Sandwich branch of the Boys family by working as a historian. As his home, the White Friars, was within a mile of Richborough Castle, the Roman Rutupium, he naturally investigated its history. He also became renowned for deciphering ancient manuscripts and inscriptions, for zealously collecting antiquities connected with Sandwich, and for his studies in astronomy, natural history, and mathematics. 
In 1759 Boys married Elizabeth (1738-1761), daughter of Henry Wise, a Sandwich jurat; they had two children. In 1761 he was elected jurat and acted with his wife's father; in the same year Elizabeth died. The following year he married Jane Fuller (died 1783), coheir of her uncle, John Paramor of Statenborough; they had eight children. In 1767 Boys was elected mayor of Sandwich. In his first publication, published anonymously at Canterbury in 1775, he presented the case for Sandwich against a parliamentary bill to enable the commissioners of sewers to make the Stonar Cut, which it was thought would destroy Sandwich harbour. In 1776 he was elected FSA and in 1782 he again served as mayor. He was also a magistrate and was prominent in the public business of his town and neighbourhood. 
In the same year as the death of Boys's second wife, 1783, John Duncombe published his 'Antiquities of Reculver', which included much information that had been supplied by Boys. In 1784 'Testacea minuta rariora' was published, which contained plates and descriptions of the tiny shells found by Boys on the seashore near Sandwich. The book was put together by George Walker as Boys was too preoccupied with his profession. None the less, in 1786 Boys issued proposals for publishing his 'Collections for a History of Sandwich' at a price to cover only its expenses, and placed his materials in the hands of the printers in Canterbury. The first part appeared in 1788 but there was considerable delay and anxiety over the second and final part, which was eventually published in 1792 but at great pecuniary loss to Boys. This is the work for which he is best known and it occupied the principal part of his life. A quarto volume of 877 pages, it is an outstanding book which was compiled and edited with great knowledge and ability, illustrated beautifully by the author himself. It is notable for a chapter on natural history and for recording the results of his exhaustive explorations of Richborough Castle. 
In 1787 Boys published his 'Account of the Loss of the Luxborough', reporting a case of cannibalism, in which his father had been one of the men compelled to resort to the extreme of cannibalism in order to preserve life. Thomas Pennant recorded that in his parlour Boys hung a series of pictures portraying the terrible circumstances. The account appears in full in the 'History of Greenwich Hospital' (1789) by John Cooke and John Maule. In 1792 Boys sent Dr Simmons his 'Observations on Kit's Coity House', which, being read at the Society of Antiquaries, appeared in volume 11 of 'Archaeologia'. Despite increasing ill health and having led a busy life, Boys was prominent among an army of helpers to the great Kent historian Edward Hasted. He undertook detailed fieldwork in east Kent, which was conveyed and used by Hasted. They subsequently corresponded, became estranged, and then were reconciled. Described as calm, stolid, and full of facts, Boys partnered William Boteler as Hasted's main support in completing the first edition of his 'History of Kent' under immense difficulties. Boys was a member of the Linnean Society and contributed frequently to the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. A new tern found by him at Sandwich was named Sterna Boysii after him by Latham in his 'Index ornithologicus'. In 1789 Boys had been appointed surgeon to the sick and wounded seamen at Deal and in 1796 he gave up his Sandwich practice to live in Walmer, but returned to Sandwich in 1799. His health having declined, he suffered apoplectic attacks in 1799 and died of apoplexy on 15 March 1803, aged sixty-seven. He was buried in St Clement's Church, Sandwich, where there is a Latin epitaph to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 3151


Boyse, Joseph (1660-1728), Presbyterian minister and religious writer, was born at Leeds on 14 January 1660, one of sixteen children of Matthew Boyse, clothesworker, and Elizabeth Jackson. His father was a puritan and former elder of the church at Rowley, New England, and was afterwards resident for about eighteen years at Boston, Massachusetts, before returning to Leeds. On 16 April 1675 Joseph Boyse entered Richard Frankland's academy at Kendal and in 1678 studied at Edward Veal's academy in Stepney. In 1679 he began to preach at Glassenbury, near Cranbrook, in Kent, and ministered there for almost a year. In 1681 he became domestic chaplain to the dowager countess of Donegal in Lincoln's Inn Fields, and in 1682 ministered for six months in the Brownist church in Amsterdam, though retaining his Presbyterian principles. But for the penal laws he would have settled in England. In 1683, on the death of his friend Timothy Haliday, he was persuaded to succeed him in Dublin as colleague to Dr Daniel Williams, then minister of Wood Street. When Williams resigned in 1687 Boyse remained, and here he continued to exercise his ministry for the remaining forty-one years of his life. In 1699 he married Rachel Ibbetson of Leeds; they had three children: Samuel Boyse, who became a gifted poet; Joseph, who probably died in infancy; and a daughter, who married a Mr Waddington. 
Boyse's ordination sermon in Dublin was preached by John Pinney, ejected from Broadwindsor, Dorset. During the greater part of his ministry Boyse was a noted advocate of the Presbyterian cause, defending Presbyterian rights and liberties, and setting forth the teachings of the Christian faith in sermons and pamphlet literature. Early on he came into conflict with William King, chancellor of St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, and subsequently bishop of Derry and archbishop of Dublin. King had attacked the Presbyterians in his 'Answer' to Peter Manby, a former dean of Derry who had converted to Catholicism. This led Boyse to publish his first work, 'Vindiciae Calvinisticae', in 1688, in which he rejected King's definition of the church as those who profess the religion of Christ and live under lawful spiritual governors, insisting that the true church can only be defined in relation to the truth for which it stands. Though forcefully argued, Boyse's pamphlet breathed an eirenical spirit, and concluded with a plea for co-operation and mutual respect between episcopal and reformed churches in spite of deep differences of judgement and practice. 
Boyse was to cross swords with King again. In 1690 he published an important political pamphlet vindicating the Revd Alexander Osborne of Newmarket from a charge against him by Walker, governor of Derry, that he was Tyrconnell's spy. An interesting printed letter is extant in the British Library entitled 'Great News from the Camp before Limrick in a Letter from J. Boyse of Dublin to Tho. Parkhurst'. It is dated 28 August 1690 and claims to be the 'last letter from Limrick that can be given credit to' ('Great News from the Camp before Limrick', 1690). It contains many vivid details of the siege. In 1693 he published a volume entitled 'Sacramental Hymns' intended to supplement the psalter at communion services. In 1694 and 1695 Boyse resumed his controversy with King, who had tried to prove to the dissenters in the diocese of Derry that their ways of worship, and not those of the established church, fell short of what scripture taught. In his 'Remarks' (1694) Boyse produced a major work of controversy, ably answering King's arguments and demonstrating factual inaccuracies. King replied by publishing a second edition of his work, together with a further 'Admonition'. Boyse responded with 'A Vindication of the 'Remarks'' (1695). Both works contain a wealth of fascinating information about congregational life and worship among the dissenters in Ireland, both north and south. Boyse was now firmly established as a formidable and scholarly controversialist, and a liberal-minded dissenter in the tradition of Richard Baxter, whose works he so often quoted. 
The year 1695 was one of considerable literary activity on Boyse's part, including a sermon on the death of Queen Mary and two pamphlets arguing the case for a bill of indulgences for the dissenters. This marked the beginning of his involvement in the campaign to repeal the 'Test Acts'. His pamphlet of 1695, 'The Case of the Protestant Dissenters in Ireland', argued strongly against the illogicality of the current toleration 'de facto' but not 'de jure', and pleaded the excellent service rendered by dissenters during the revolution. It takes strong theological exception to Anglican communion being made a test for civil and military office. In answer to two replies from Tobias Pullen, bishop of Dromore, and Anthony Dopping, bishop of Meath, Boyse published 'The Case of the Protestant Dissenters -- Vindicated'. The position of the dissenters worsened after the 'Test Act' of 1704. Threat of rebellion in 1715 led to a number of dissenters defying the law and endeavouring to serve the crown. A bitter attack on them by Dr William Tisdal, vicar of Belfast, elicited a reply from Boyse in 1716 entitled 'Remarks on a Pamphlet Issued by William Tisdal DD'. The issue was to remain a pressing one for the dissenters until the passing of the 'Toleration Act' of 1719 which, although it fell short of their ultimate hopes, was clearly the most they could get at that time. 
Boyse's sermon before the Societies for the Reformation of Manners was published in 1698. In 1701 he published 'Family Hymns for Morning and Evening Worship', all of them based on psalms, and including a melody line and bass part. 
Boyse entered into the controversy precipitated by the case of Thomas Emlyn, who had been appointed as Boyse's colleague at Wood Street in 1691, and who, unknown to Boyse, or to the congregation, had parted company with the orthodox doctrines of the Trinity and the person of Christ, and had become an Arian. For eleven years he exercised a popular ministry in Wood Street, but one member of his congregation, a physician, who for a time had studied theology, became concerned at consistent omissions in Emlyn's preaching and, after having discussed the matter with Boyse, he and Boyse confronted him with their suspicions. Emlyn readily admitted his convictions, but Boyse felt the matter must be brought before the Dublin ministers, who decided to depose him. Emlyn insisted on writing an account of what had happened, and later published his 'Humble Inquiry into the Scripture Account of the Lord Jesus Christ' (1702). As a result Emlyn was tried and convicted of blasphemy and imprisoned from 16 June 1703 until 21 July 1705. Boyse set out to defend the orthodox doctrine in 'A Vindication of the True Deity of our Blessed Saviour' (1703). In his very first work Boyse had spoken out against Socinianism, and in a letter written to Robert Wodrow in 1720 there is clear evidence that his abhorrence of those who denied the Trinity remained unaltered. 
Boyse also published funeral sermons on the death of Elias Travers (1705) and of William Cairns (1707). In 1708 he brought out a two-volume edition of some of his sermons. The most controversial was 'The office of a scriptural bishop', which drew forth a reply from two Dublin curates, Edward Drury and Matthew French. The sermon was printed separately in 1709 and Boyse added a lengthy postscript in which he replied to the two clergy. This work had the distinction of being burned by the common hangman by order of the Irish House of Lords in November 1711. He continued the controversy on ministerial orders in 1712 by a lengthy work entitled 'A Clear Account of the Ancient Episcopacy', in which he sought to defend the reformed doctrine of ministry. The death of Queen Anne and the accession of George I in 1714 led to the publication of two sermons, while in 1716 he published a funeral sermon for Sir Arthur Langford and an ordination sermon for Dr John Leland, disappointing in that it says nothing about Leland, who was to become a man of such eminence. 
Boyse was consistently opposed to Roman Catholicism. In the years 1687 and 1688 he had preached about the principal points of difference and composed a catechism (now lost) for his young people to highlight these concerns. In 1718 he launched an attack upon Catholicism in a sermon entitled 'Popery Proved to be a Different Gospel', together with a lengthy preface. 
Boyse also became deeply involved in the struggle over subscription, which was to monopolize the debates of the synod of Ulster for nearly a decade. He was present at the synod in Belfast in 1721 as a commissioner from Dublin. In 1721, together with Nathanael Weld and Richard Choppin, Boyse wrote a letter to Dr Victor Ferguson, secretary of the Belfast Society. In 1722 Boyse's was the major hand in a preface to John Abernethy's 'Seasonable Advice' and in the later 'Postscript' (1724). Both works plead for charity and offer a 'via media' solution. Boyse and his friends were concerned for the preservation of doctrinal orthodoxy while at the same time wanting charity and comprehensiveness to be the marks of ecclesiastical fellowship. 
Boyse preached at the 1722 synod in Londonderry, and the sermon was published in 1723 in a personal letter to the northern ministers pleading with them not to sever connections with their non-subscribing brethren. In 1724 he published funeral sermons for Mrs Mary Choppin and Dr Duncan Cumyng, and a volume of sermons entitled 'Discourses on the Four Last Things'. He then published a 'Vindication of a Private Letter' (1726) in answer to John McBride's charges that the Dublin ministers were partisan and working for the non-subscribers. It reflects not only Boyse's own views on subscription but his deep personal sorrow at the course of events that inevitably was to end in rupture. The last work he himself was to publish was a sermon preached in 1727, 'The Sole Headship of Christ', in opposition to the claims of Roman Catholicism. 
The zenith of Boyse's career as a writer came only a few months before his death with the publication of his collected works by a London press. They occupy two huge folios usually bound as one, and are the earliest, if not the only, folios published by a Presbyterian minister in Ireland. The volumes went out with a recommendation signed by Edmund Calamy and a number of other London ministers. They contain a number of important sermons and treatises not hitherto published, as well as omitting one or two works. At the end of the first volume there are two works of great significance on the doctrine of justification revealing a close affinity between Boyse's theology and that of Richard Baxter. Early in his own career some of the Dublin ministers had charged Boyse with Pelagianism. The charge had evidently been answered satisfactorily. On the issues of justification and election, however, it is clear that Boyse, like Baxter, stood for a modification of Calvinism, and this difference in emphasis and direction brought him into conflict with the authoritarian views of some of his contemporaries. In the second volume, as well as two pieces on the Roman controversy, there is a fascinating attack on the Quakers, which called forth a reply shortly before Boyse's death from a Dublin schoolmaster, Samuel Fuller. 
To survey Boyse's writing is to be impressed not only by the range of its subject matter but by the breadth of his learning and skill as a debater. While often polemical, he produced excellent pastoral and devotional material. His warm humanity and sincere personal grief over the bitter divisions of his latter years are reflected not only in his formal writings but in what personal correspondence has survived, notably his letters to Ralph Thoresby of Leeds. It would also appear that some sort of personal memoir had been written by Boyse himself, and valuable quotations from it are made in Choppin's funeral sermon. 
Boyse's final years were marked by increasing ill health and by sadness at the irresponsible behaviour of Samuel, his son. For several months before the end he was unable to carry out his duties. He died in Dublin on 22 November 1728. 
Boyse was a most conscientious pastor and preacher. He did not possess the natural gifts of a clear, strong voice, nor skills of elocution, yet his preaching had a deep effect upon his hearers. His sermons were well argued and firmly based upon the exposition of scripture which was a hallmark of the puritan tradition. Like Baxter he was comprehensive in his churchmanship. Indeed southern Presbyterianism, with its more English ethos, had a less rigid view of church government than was the case in Scotland and the north of Ireland. 
Boyse had a passion for theological education. He himself was a product of the dissenting academies and was a 'patron' of the academy of Dr Thomas Dixon in Whitehaven. In co-operation with the other Dublin ministers he helped to provide training in divinity for students, and was instrumental in setting up an academy in Dublin and attracting as its teacher the brilliant Francis Hutcheson. 
Boyse played a significant part in the life of Dublin, giving with a generosity that exhausted his slender means, encouraging reformation of manners, and speaking out on behalf of French protestant refugees. He composed the Latin inscription on the original pedestal (1701) of the equestrian statue of William III that once occupied a place of prominence in College Green, Dublin. 
One of the ironies of history is that a man of such eminence, who was referred to by contemporaries as 'the great Mr Boyse', should be so largely forgotten by historians of Irish Presbyterianism until recent times. Perhaps it was his unpopular stand in the subscription controversy or the fact that he stood largely outside the dominant Ulster Scots ethos of later Irish Presbyterianism. Perhaps it lay in the fact that the age that followed was weary of doctrinal controversy, and in such an age the liberal puritanism of Boyse may well have seemed largely irrelevant. 


@@@@@


doc= 3152


Boyse, Samuel (1702/3?-1749), poet, son of Joseph Boyse (1660-1728), a dissenting minister, and his wife, Rachel ('nee' Ibbetson), was born in Dublin and educated at a private school there. He was said to have been eighteen when he entered Glasgow University, where he was an undergraduate by February 1721, the year in which his elegy on the theologian John Anderson (1668-1721) was published. His father probably intended him for the Presbyterian ministry, but, under-age, he married a tradesman's daughter, Emilia Atchenson, and abandoned his studies. He returned to Dublin with his wife and her sister, where they sponged on Joseph until his death in November 1728. Samuel's young daughter died in 1726 and was mourned in his verse. He wrote a letter on liberty in James Arbuckle's 'Dublin Weekly Journal' (11 February 1727). 
Boyse went to Edinburgh, where his collection 'Translations and Poems' (1731), dedicated to the countess of Eglinton, attracted over 250 subscribers. Some poems were 'sacred to conjugal love' and addressed to his wife in Ireland, though it was said that Boyse knew she was having affairs. Boyse found patrons among members of the Scottish nobility to whom he dedicated several separately published poems, but he was unresponsive to their offers of help. Shiels said that the duchess of Gordon gave Boyse an introduction for a post in the customs, but the day on which he should have presented himself was stormy, so he chose to lose the post rather than face the rain. This may be an embellishment of the fact that Boyse refused an offered post in the excise because its duties required 'a Strength and Application beyond my Capacity' and because he believed his education fitted him for more respectable callings, such as nobleman's secretary or librarian, or grand-tour tutor (Boyse to Sir John Clerk, 24 May 1733). 
Debts drove Boyse from Edinburgh after 1734. He went to London, but failed to take advantage of introductions to influential men such as Alexander Pope and the future Lord Mansfield. Boyse's wife, with at least one child, had rejoined him, though the pair followed irregular courses to the extent that both were poxed by different partners. Begging letters, including many to eminent dissenters who were friends and admirers of Boyse's father, together with verse writing, much of it for magazines, provided the family's uncertain income. For instance: in 1737 'The Olive, an Heroic Ode' earned Boyse 10 guineas from its dedicatee, Sir Robert Walpole; in 1738 Robert Dodsley gave him only 2 guineas for translations from Voltaire; and in 1739 Boyse's follow-up begging letter to Sir Hans Sloane asked him to replace the bad shilling he had given to Mrs Boyse the night before. Shiels saw Boyse when he had pawned his clothes and 'sat up in bed with the blanket wrapt about him, through which he had cut a hole large enough to admit his arm, and placing the paper upon his knee, scribbled in the best manner he could the verses he was obliged to make. (Shiels, 5.169)' At this time, though, Boyse wrote his best work. His 'Deity' (1739), a long poem in heroic couplets on the attributes of God, shows a firm religious conviction and an intellectual strength quite out of keeping with the disorder of its author's life. 
Boyse published a second collection, 'Translations and Poems' (1738) and continued as a hack. Throughout the summer of 1740 he was employed by Edward Cave in French translation, which his friend Samuel Johnson said he did well; in the following winter he could find only the slavish labour of index making. Then he modernized two of Chaucer's 'Canterbury Tales' for 3died a line in George Ogle's edition (1741). Most of Boyse's poems appeared fugitively in journals, but 'The Praise of Peace', translated from the Dutch (1742), and 'Albion's Triumph', on the victory at Dettingen (1743), achieved separate publication. In July 1742, arrested for debt, he wrote a desperate letter to Cave and obtained half a guinea on account for 'The Praise of Peace' and 'The Triumphs of Nature' (on Stowe gardens). Cave paid Boyse by the hundred lines, later requiring him to produce what he called the 'long hundred'; Boyse signed his work in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' 'Y' or Alcaeus. Three begging letters of 1744 are printed in 'Notes and Queries' (March 1986, 78-80). This was the pattern of his entire literary life. He squandered what little he had, so was still obliged to pawn his clothes from time to time, but was ingenious enough to invent a paper collar and cuffs to conceal his lack of a shirt in public. Johnson once collected money to redeem Boyse's clothes, which two days later were pawned again. 'The sum (said Johnson) was collected by sixpences, at a time when to me sixpence was a serious consideration' (Boswell, 'Life', 4.407n.). 
Boyse had some connection with Reading, Berkshire. His 'Miscellaneous Works... for the Amusement of the Fair Sex' was published there in 1740, and one of its light amatory poems was addressed to 'The Reading Muses'. Emilia Boyse died in Reading some time between 1745 and June 1747, and was buried at the expense of the parish. Her widower, unable to afford mourning clothes, tied half a yard of black ribbon round the neck of the lap-dog that he carried about whenever he affected to be a man of fashion. He took to drink, but managed to compile an 'Historical Review' of the period 1739 to 1745 and an 'Impartial History' of the Jacobite rising of 1745 (published in Reading, 1747-8, by David Henry, Cave's brother-in-law). For writing and proof-correcting these substantial, rushed works he was paid half a guinea a week. On the title pages he is called 'MA', but there is no evidence that he ever took a degree. 
Boyse returned to London and, some two years after the death of Emilia, married again. His second wife, a cutler's widow, originally from Dublin, was uneducated, but 'well enough adapted to his taste' (Shiels, 5.172), and it seems that she induced him to live more regularly and to dress decently. He now expressed remorse for his former life in a poem called 'The Recantation'. After a lingering phthisis, resulting from injuries sustained either from being run over by a coach when drunk or from being assaulted in the street by two or three soldiers, he died in lodgings near Shoe Lane, off Fleet Street, in May 1749. His friend Francis Stewart, Johnson's amanuensis, tried to collect money for a decent funeral, but failed because potential donors had all been sponged upon so often by Boyse during life; so he was buried as a pauper, only with the distinction that the burial service was separately performed over his corpse. 
Boyse's last works were 'A Demonstration of the Existence of God' (1749), translated from Fenelon, and a classical handbook, 'The New Pantheon, or, Fabulous History of the Heathen Gods', published posthumously in 1753 and often reprinted in a version revised and corrected by William Cooke (died 1780). Boyse's 'Deity' received wide publicity when Henry Fielding (who had commended it in 'The Champion', 12 February 1740) praised it again in the introduction to book 7 of 'Tom Jones' (February 1749), prompting a new edition of the poem a month later. Boyse's friend, Dr William Cuming of Dorchester, said that he 'was of a middle size, of a thin habit, slovenly in his dress, which was increased by his necessities, very near-sighted, and his hearing imperfect' (Nichols, 'Select Collection', 6.348). Shiels testifies that, besides his literary attainments, Boyse had a taste for painting and for music, and an extensive knowledge of heraldry (Shiels, 5.174). 


@@@@@


doc= 3153


Brabazon, Sir Roger (b. in or before 1247?, d. 1317), justice, was the son of William le Brabazon and his wife, Amice, and may have been born at Mowsley in Leicestershire. Between 1275 and 1289 he was in the service of Edward I's brother, Edmund of Lancaster, regularly acting as his attorney in the making of final concords and doing other kinds of legal business for him. It was at Edmund's request that he received his first judicial commissions in 1285, 1287, and 1288. These were to inquire into wrongdoing by Edmund's other bailiffs and stewards in various counties, and into poaching in Edmund's parks, and to hold eyres in Edmund's forests in Lancashire and Yorkshire. When Ralph Hengham and William Saham were removed from the court of king's bench, probably at the end of Hilary term 1290, after being convicted of official misconduct, Brabazon joined the court as a junior justice. 
During 1291-2 Brabazon played a prominent role in the hearing of the 'great cause', on Edward's behalf requiring the Scots to acknowledge Edward's overlordship over Scotland at the initial meeting at Norham in May 1291; acting as one of Edward's auditors; pronouncing Edward's final judgment, which awarded the Scottish throne to Balliol in December 1292; and defending Edward's right to hear appeals from Scotland, against the actions of his erstwhile deputies there, in England a few days later. He also played a role in the preparation of the tendentious 'official' notarial record of part of these proceedings made by Master John of Caen. When Gilbert of Thornton died in late August 1295 Brabazon replaced him as chief justice of king's bench. He retained the chief justiceship for over twenty years, until his retirement on grounds of age and ill health on 23 February 1316. 
Roger Brabazon married Beatrice, the widow of William of Kilby, between 1281 and 1284. Beatrice was one of two daughters of Warin of Bassingbourn and his wife, Albreda. Through her mother Beatrice was coheir to Henry Biset with her sister Constance, the wife of Walter Bek, and from him Beatrice inherited the manor of West Allington in Lincolnshire. Brabazon and his wife subsequently exchanged this manor for the lands allotted to Constance on the division of the Biset inheritance, including East Bridgford in Nottinghamshire. The two sisters were also coheirs to the lands held by their uncle John of Sproxton at Coleby in Lincolnshire and at Sproxton and elsewhere in Leicestershire. Brabazon probably himself inherited lands at Mowsley in Leicestershire and Great Rollright in Oxfordshire. His main property acquisitions were at Garthorpe in Leicestershire (close to Sproxton) and Sibbertoft in Northamptonshire, just across the county border from Mowsley. He also acquired a house and other properties in London near Aldersgate. 
Brabazon died on either 13 or 14 June 1317, without surviving issue, and his lands passed to his brother Matthew. He also had a brother Thomas who was in clerical orders and on whom he settled property. The John Brabazon who died 'c'.1302 was probably also a brother. This John was probably the father of the Roger Brabazon junior, or Roger Brabazon clerk, who is once described as Roger the judge's nephew, and who like his uncle was in the service of Edmund of Lancaster (and his wife, Blanche), as also of the Master John Brabazon who was one of Roger's executors. Roger the elder's wife, Beatrice, had died by 1304, and after her death he granted lands to the Lincolnshire Premonstratensian house at Newbo to establish a chantry for her as well as for himself. Shortly before his own death, Brabazon also endowed a chantry in Westminster Abbey to pray for his own soul and for the souls of his erstwhile patron Edmund of Lancaster and Edmund's wife, Blanche. He was buried in St Paul's Cathedral, not far from his London home, which was sold by his executors to another notable royal judge, Hervey Staunton. 


@@@@@


doc= 3154


Brabazon, Sir William (d. 1552), lord justice of Ireland, was the son of John Brabazon, a gentleman of Eastwell, Leicestershire; his mother's maiden name was Chaworth. At an unknown date he married Elizabeth, daughter and coheir of Nicholas Clifford of Holme, Kent; they had two sons and two daughters. William was a protege of Thomas Cromwell. In April 1534 he was dispatched by the chief secretary to the northern marches of England to prepare for Lord Dacre's arrest. He was appointed under-treasurer, receiver-general, and treasurer-at-war in Ireland on 26 August 1534, holding this position until his death. From 1534 he was a member of the privy council of Ireland. 
A virulent opponent of the Kildares, Brabazon was involved in killing 100 of Fitzgerald's galloglass near Naas in March 1535 and campaigned against Fitzgerald in Allen in early August. At that time he withstood the advance of Geraldine forces in co. Kildare, earning the praise of senior members of the Irish council. Later that month he and Lord Deputy Grey negotiated agreements with O'More and O'Connor. In April of the following year he overran MacMurrough's country. Grey departed Dublin in late July 1536 to negotiate with the earl of Desmond and the O'Briens, and left Brabazon in charge of defending Dublin, re-edifying Powerscourt, erecting defences at Fassaroe, and reconstructing the bridge and fortresses at Athy and Woodstock. Brabazon seconded Archbishop Browne's speech in parliament supporting the bill against papal authority and jurisdiction, a stance which is said to have spurred the members of the house to vote in favour of the bill. 
The manner of his administration earned Brabazon a stiff reprimand from Henry VIII in February 1537. Before April, Archbishop Browne made allegations of fraud and peculation against Brabazon. In May Brabazon accompanied Grey on a campaign into the lordships of MacGeoghegan and O'Connor. He campaigned against the earl of Desmond and O'Carroll in August. In October 1538 he unsuccessfully tried to negotiate an agreement with MacMurrough. Later that month he accompanied Grey on a raid on Kavanagh's lordship, and they both travelled to Ulster in an effort to expel the Scots. In 1539 he was appointed a commissioner to take surrenders of monastic properties. The following year he went to England to testify at the impeachment of Lord Leonard Grey. In the summer of that year he was accused of misappropriation of the new crown possessions and an audit carried out in 1540-41 unveiled his vast acquisitions and financial malpractice. 
On 12 October 1543 Brabazon was appointed lord justice of Ireland, and held office from 10 February to 11 August 1544. In summer 1544 he sent 700 men to serve at the siege of Boulogne. On 16 February 1546 he was again appointed lord justice for a term lasting from 1 April to 16 December 1546. In July he drove O'More and O'Connor from co. Kildare, marched into Offaly, and garrisoned Dangan in Offaly and Ballyadams in Leix (Laois). In mid-December St Leger returned and criticized Brabazon for having goaded both Gaelic lords into rebellion. In 1547 Brabazon became constable of Athlone Castle. In spring 1548 he attended St Leger in suppressing the seditious practices of Viscount Baltinglass's sons in Kildare. In February 1550 he was elected lord justice by the council following the death of Francis Bryan and held office until 10 September 1550. He negotiated an agreement between the earls of Desmond and Thomond at Limerick in March, and campaigned against Charles MacArt Kavanagh in August. On 20 January 1551 he was appointed joint under-treasurer with his son-in-law Andrew Wise. He was nominated a commissioner of the court of wards on four occasions, in 1545, 1547, 1548, and 1550. He died while campaigning in Ulster in July 1552. His heart is said to have been interred with his ancestors in Eastwell and his remains were buried in the chancel of St Catherine's Church, Dublin, where a monument was erected in his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 3155


Brabourne, Theophilus (1590-1662), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, was born at Norwich, the elder of two sons of Henry Brabourne, a hosier with puritan sympathies, who wanted Theophilus to 'prove a godly minister' (Brabourne, 'A Reply', 94). He was educated at the Norwich Free School until he was fifteen, and at seventeen, instead of proceeding to Cambridge, he was sent to London as a wholesale agent in the family business. Clergy with puritan leanings were already being silenced for non-compliance, and Henry Brabourne reasoned that it was not an auspicious time for his son to take holy orders. Theophilus remained in London until his marriage, about 1619, to Abigail, daughter of Roger and Joane Galliard of Ashwell Thorpe, a union which was to produce five children. He then returned to Norwich, and with a renewed interest in ministry applied himself to study under the tutelage of 'three able divines' (ibid.) -- compensation, perhaps, for a lost undergraduate training. In 1621 he took the MA degree, and in September of that year he was ordained by Thomas Dove, bishop of Peterborough and formerly dean of Norwich, thus becoming one of a very few to have been ordained in the Anglican tradition without having received a formal university education. He was licensed for the Norwich diocese in April 1622, and in 1630 was noted as curate at Catton in Norfolk. Details of his clerical appointments are meagre, and by 1654 he had relinquished active ministry to devote his time to study, writing, and the management of his not inconsiderable properties. He had by then achieved notoriety as a heretic, and had established a reputation as an able writer and controversialist. 
Brabourne's claim to recognition rests in his vigorous and sustained sabbatarianism, particularly his 'Discourse upon the Sabbath Day' (1628), the first work in the English language to advocate observance of Saturday as the sabbath, and its sequel, 'A Defence of... the Sabbath Day' (1632). These works were catalysts in the development of seventh day doctrine and practice in early seventeenth-century England, and their influence was to extend well beyond their own day and beyond English shores. Although Cox is incorrect in regarding Brabourne as the founder of the Seventh Day Baptists (Cox, 1.157-8), it is none the less true that the 'Discourse' and the 'Defence', together with Brabourne's other works on the sabbath, contributed significantly to the adoption of seventh day principles by Baptists and others in the seventeenth century and later. Brabourne, however, remained an Anglican, eschewed believers' baptism, and wishing to avoid schism did not openly observe the seventh day himself, fearing that it would bring confusion 'to see a few keep Saturday for Sabbath, and a multitude to keep Sunday' (T. Brabourne, 'A Defence', 1632, 229). Despite this reticence few argued the necessity of seventh day observance more cogently or consistently, or with more adverse effects, than Brabourne. Between 1628 and 1660 he published in all ten works which wholly or in part advocated the Saturday sabbath. Brabourne's theology of the sabbath derived from a threefold conviction: that the moral law as expressed in the ten commandments was perpetually binding; that the practice of Christ and the early church necessitated observance of the seventh day; and that the identity of the seventh day, despite changes in the calendar and arguments to the contrary, remained indisputably Saturday. Later sabbatarian apologists would return to the arguments found in his writings, but it was Brabourne who laid the foundation for a revival in the English-speaking world of an ancient practice that was to continue into the twenty-first century. 
The appearance of the 'Defence' in 1632 had unforeseen consequences. Alexander Gordon believed that its publication was one of the reasons that induced Charles I to reissue the so-called 'Book of Sports' in 1633 (Gordon, 567). For Brabourne himself it marked the beginning of a journey to the court of high commission and Newgate gaol. The 'Defence' was boldly dedicated to Charles, who referred it to Francis White, bishop of Ely, for a response. White's reply, 'A treatise of the sabbath-day... a defence of the orthodoxal doctrine of the Church of England against sabbatarian novelty', appeared in 1635, too late to prevent the spread of Brabourne's 'heresy', which White himself admitted might already 'have poisoned and infected many people with this Sabbatarian error, or some other of like quality' (White, 'Epistle Dedicatory'). It was also too late for Brabourne. By October 1633 he was in prison, and in April and June of 1634 he found himself before the court of high commission charged with holding and disseminating 'erroneous, heretical, and judaical opinions' ('CSP dom.', '1634-5', 126). He admitted authorship of the 'Defence' and to holding sabbatarian views, 'as much bound to keep the Saturday Sabbath as the Jews were before the coming of Christ' (ibid.), and was pronounced a Jew, a heretic, and a schismatic. It was ordered that he be deprived of all ecclesiastical privileges, deposed from holy orders, excommunicated, fined $1000, and required to make a public retraction of his errors at such time and place and in such form as the court should approve. 
Brabourne was remanded in custody pending further consideration of his case and the possibility of handing him over to the secular authority should he persist in his views. One of his prosecutors, Sir Henry Marten, moved during the trial that the old anti-Lollard legislation 'De haeretico comburendo' be brought against him, and only the personal intervention of William Laud prevented it. Brabourne remained in gaol for the next eighteen months while proceedings continued. Eventually in February 1636 he was released, having finally agreed to a submission acceptable to the court. Although it was received as a recantation, Brabourne later claimed that he had only retracted the word 'necessarily' in the statement 'Saturday ought necessarily to be our Sabbath'. This had been 'rashly maintained', he agreed, but withdrawal of the word 'necessarily' had been but the retraction 'of a rash word, not the matter' (Brabourne, 'A Reply', 100-01). It was, it seems, the only element of the original sentence that was finally imposed. 
Brabourne returned to Norwich and, after keeping a low profile for some years, resumed publication in the 1650s on a range of topics. His 'Of the Changing of Church-Discipline' (1653) and 'The Second Part of the Change of Church Discipline' (1654), which advocated a form of Erastianism against the papal system, and against presbyterians and Independents, attracted the wrath of a local presbyterian, John Collings (or Collins), a bitter opponent of all non-presbyterians. A vitriolic exchange ensued between Collings and Brabourne which quickly degenerated into a mutual attack 'ad hominem', bringing no credit to either party, and in which Collings taunted Brabourne over his lack of education and aborted ministry, calling him a 'Boltpoak, Weaver, Hostler, Maltster, and now a non-sensical scribbler' (J. Collings, 'A New Lesson for the Indoctus Doctor', 1654, title-page). Brabourne, undeterred, continued to advocate observance of Saturday, in opposition to Daniel Cawdrey, joint author with Herbert Palmer of the important 'Sabbatum redivivum', and against Jeremiah Ives and Edward Warren, both of whom had also opposed him over the seventh day. He also published on other issues. There are eight known pamphlets from his pen in the 1650s and 1660s, in addition to his works on the sabbath and the exchanges with Collings, in which he defended the authority of the king and parliament, supported the oath of allegiance, advocated liberty of conscience, and attacked the Church of England. In 'The Humble Petition of Theophilus Brabourne unto the Honourable Parliament' (1661) he returned to the temporal power of the church, arguing that archbishops and bishops should 'own the king's supremacy' in fact as well as in theory, claiming that the structure of the Church of England had been taken from the papal system and maintaining that Charles I had 'unadvisedly' delegated ecclesiastical power to his bishops (T. Brabourne, 'Humble Petition', 1661, 2, 8-9). In 'Sundry Particulars Concerning Bishops' (1661) he called for a radical restructuring of the Church of England, including abolition of the office of bishop, on the grounds that Anglican orders were derived from Rome, and that the money could be put to better use. 
Brabourne died at Norwich between 28 April 1662, when a codicil was made to his will, and 4 November, when it was proved. He was predeceased by his wife and four of their five children. His estate, consisting largely of property and land, was left mainly to his surviving daughter and her children and to his thirteen other grandchildren, with the exception of a few small bequests and with provisions for outstanding debts to be settled from rental income. He left $10 for 'the poor Sabbath-keepers in Norwich, to be distributed by Mr Pooly [Christopher Pooley] and his elders'. Brabourne's wider legacy to posterity, however, remains his writing on the sabbath, the influence of which is still evident today. 


@@@@@


doc= 3156


Bracegirdle, Anne (bap. 1671, d. 1748), actress and singer, was born in Northamptonshire, the third surviving daughter of Martha, 'nee' Furniss, and Justinian Bracegirdle, 'Coachman, Coachmaker or Letter-out of Coaches', according to her admirer Anthony Aston (Aston, 8). Family wills reveal that surviving siblings were named Frances, Martha, Hamlet, and John. Anne was baptized, probably as an infant, at St Giles, Northampton, on 15 November 1671 and was about seventy-seven when she died in 1748, rather than eighty-five, as recorded on her tombstone in Westminster Abbey. She 'had the good Fortune to be well placed, when an Infant, under the care of Mr. Betterton and his Wife, whose Tenderness she always acknowledges to have been Paternal; Nature formed her for the Stage' (Betterton, 26). Anne first appears in performance records on 12 January 1688, when she is listed as member of the United Company, although anecdotal evidence from Betterton suggests that she may have been a child performer with the company, playing the page in Thomas Otway's 'The Orphan' before the age of six. Downes records that during the 1688 season she was mainly cast in supporting roles, such as Atelina in William Mountfort's 'The Injured Lovers', Lucia in Thomas Shadwell's 'The Squire of Alsatia', and Emmeline in Dryden's 'King Arthur'. 
The following season, on 20 November, Anne Bracegirdle played her first breeches part, Semernia in Aphra Behn's 'The Widow Ranter'. She was to become very popular in breeches parts, and often delivered prologues in male garb. Aston recalls: 'she was finely shap'd, and had very handsome Legs and Feet; and her Gait, or Walk was free, manlike, and modest, when in Breeches', although he noted: 'she had a Defect, scarce perceptible, viz. Her Right Shoulder a little protended, which, when in Men's Cloaths, was covered by a Long or Campaign Peruke' (Aston, 10). She also played Marcelia in George Powell's 'The Treacherous Brothers' and Biancha in Mountfort's 'The Successful Strangers'. On 16 March 1690 she probably replaced Mrs Boutell to create one of her most famous roles, Statira in Nathaniel Lee's 'The Rival Queens', playing opposite Mountfort's Alexander. Colley Cibber recalls the impact of her performance: 'If any thing could excuse that desperate Extravagence of Love, that almost frantick Passion of Lee's Alexander the Great, it must have been when Mrs Bracegirdle was his Statira' (Cibber, 142). By the 1690s Anne was performing in more significant roles, such as Lady Anne in 'Richard III' and Desdemona in 'Othello', and was regularly sent out to charm audiences with prologues and epilogues. Cibber, who joined the United Company in 1690, remembers her: 'blooming to her Maturity; her Reputation as an actress gradually rising with that of her Person... she had no greater claim to Beauty than what the most desirable Brunette might pretend to. But her Youth and lively Aspect threw out such a Glow of Health and Chearfulness, that on the Stage few Spectators that were not past it could behold her without Desire. It was even a Fashion among the Gay and Young to have a Taste or Tendre for Mrs. Bracegirdle. (Cibber, 72)' This fashionable devotion was to have tragic consequences on 9 December 1692, when the infatuated Captain Hill and violent Lord Mohun attempted to abduct Mrs Bracegirdle. The attempt failed and she retreated to her home in Howard Street, but Hill loitered outside, vowing revenge on Mountfort, whom he perceived to be his rival in love. When Mountfort appeared at the scene, apparently by chance, Hill ran him through and killed him. Whether Bracegirdle and Mountfort were lovers is not clear, but this was certainly implied in the novelized version of the story, 'The Players' Tragedy', rushed into print in early 1693. If the tragedy kept Anne off the stage, it was only for the time it took the theatre to recover from Mountfort's murder, as she was recorded by Constantijn Huygens performing Rosamond in John Bancroft's 'Henry II' on 16 January 1693. After Lord Mohun's trial and acquittal in February 1693, she originated the role of Lady Trickitt in Thomas Southerne's 'The Maid's Last Prayer'. Neither this role, nor her Araminta in William Congreve's first play, 'The Old Bachelor', was a great success, but by April her performance in Thomas D'Urfey's 'The Richmond Heiress' had re-established her popularity. This role, like her part in D'Urfey's 'Don Quixote, Part II' the following year, made use of her strong singing voice. John Eccles helped to train her and provided many popular songs. When Dryden saw 'The Richmond Heiress', he thought 'the Singing was wonderfully good, And the two [Dogget and Bracegirdle] sung better than Redding and Mrs Ayloff, whose trade it was' ('BDA'). 
By 1694 Anne Bracegirdle was one of the leading players of the United Company, recognized for her triumphs in pathetic tragedy, her lively comic sensibility, and her singing prowess. But all was not well within the company under Christopher Rich's management. Cibber remembers that Rich, 'under Pretence of bringing younger Actors forward, order'd several of Betterton's and Mrs Barry's chief Parts to be given to young Powel and Mrs Bracegirdle'. Powell accepted, but 'Mrs Bracegirdle had a different way of thinking, and desir'd to be excus'd from those of Mrs Barry' (Cibber, 154). Rich's attempts to divide and rule failed, as the 'petition of the players' of 1694 preserved in the lord chamberlain's records (TNA: PRO LC 7/3) indicates. Mrs Barry petitioned against the splitting of her annual benefit where 'a third part of the profitt of Mrs Barry's play [was taken] from her to give to Mrs Bracegirdle'. In article 12 of the petition, Mrs Bracegirdle made a bid for her own annual benefit of an old play, very reasonably offering to defray the house charges and, 'what ever she can gett above by the Assistance of her freinds ['sic'] is all she desires for her self'. Cibber recounts that, after a private hearing with King William, Betterton, Barry, and Bracegirdle received their licence for a new company at Lincoln's Inn Fields on 25 March 1695. 
Anne Bracegirdle became a shareholder and a key figure in the newly licensed company. She was considered enough of an attraction, playing Angelica in the theatre's opening production of Congreve's 'Love for Love', to be given both the prologue and epilogue to perform. Her contribution to the financial success of the new enterprise is tacitly acknowledged in the prologue to 'Love for Love', where she explains how the theatre was set up: '
By Bribery, errant Brib'ry let me die: 

I was their Agent, but by Jove I swear 

No honourable Member had a Share, 

... I preferr'd my poor Petition 

And brib'd ye to commiserate our Condition. 
(W. Congreve, 'Love for Love', lines 35-7, 46-7)' The early years for the new company were difficult, yet Anne consistently proved to be a draw for audiences. She played a range of leading roles during the next few years, among them Isabella in Gildon's 'Measure for Measure' and Bellinda in Vanbrugh's 'The Provoked Wife'. She had several parts written for her by Congreve, with whom she apparently developed an intimate relationship. She played Almeria in his 'The Mourning Bride' and, most famously, on 5 March 1700 opened as Millamant in 'The Way of the World'. The following year Congreve thought her Venus, in his 'The Judgment of Paris', 'performed to a miracle' ('BDA'). Tom Brown waxed very satirical on the relationship between Congreve and the reputedly chaste Bracegirdle in his 'Amusements Serious and Comical'. He quipped that: 'tis 'the way of the World', to have an Esteem for the fair sex, and she-looks to a Miracle when she is acting a Part in one of his own Plays... he Dines with her almost ev'ry day, yet She's a Maid, he rides out with her, and visits her in Publick and Private, yet She's a Maid; if I had not a particular respect for her, I should go near to say he lies with her, yet She's a Maid. (Brown, 51)' Several poems of the time implied that Congreve and Bracegirdle had married, although there is no evidence of this. Another writer who created roles for her, but in a different vein, was Nicholas Rowe, who wrote pathetic, tragic heroines such as Selima in 'Tamerlane', Lavinia in 'The Fair Penitent', and Semanthe in 'Ulysses'. The Barry-Bracegirdle combination in these plays, which coupled villainess and pathetic heroine, proved to be a popular box-office draw. Anne also captured the headlines during 1701 as Victoria in Southerne's 'The Fatal Marriage' and the following year as Evandra in Shadwell's 'Timon of Athens' and Cordelia in Tate's 'King Lear'. 
Together with Betterton and Barry, Anne Bracegirdle appears to have had a controlling influence in the financial running of the Lincoln's Inn Fields company. When Queen Anne came to the throne, it is these three that are named on the players' petition asking for protection against those reformers who wanted the theatres closed. By 1703 John Verbruggen, a leading player and also a signatory on the shareholding agreement, was complaining that the accounts were kept secret and that 'Mr. Betterton Mrs Barry & Mrs Bracegirdle have made Gains to themselves of benefit plays & other wise' (Downes, 253). The 'Three Ruling B -- 's' are satirized in the dedication to the anonymous play 'The Lunatick' (1705), which prophesies the end of their 'abuses' when the Haymarket Theatre opens. By 1705 Mrs Bracegirdle's weekly earnings were assured at $3, rising to as much as $5 when profits were good. By 1707 her earnings equalled those of the other leading players, Barry, Betterton, Powell, and Wilks -- probably in excess of $120 annually. The 1706-7 season saw what Congreve dubbed 'another revolution' as the companies reorganized, and Mrs Bracegirdle moved to the Queen's Theatre, Haymarket, under the management of Owen Swiny. She played a few new roles, including Aspasia in Beaumont and Fletcher's 'The Maid's Tragedy' and Harriet in George Etherege's 'The Man of Mode', but this season was her last on the stage. Several reasons have been mooted for her departure. Betterton recounts a contest set up between Bracegirdle and the company's rising young actress, Ann Oldfield. They were to play the title role in Betterton's 'The Amorous Widow' on consecutive nights; in the event, Oldfield 'charm'd the whole Audience to that Degree, they almost forgot they had ever seen Mrs. Bracegirdle... which so much disgusted her celebrated Antagonist, that in a short time after she quitted the Stage'. The anonymous life of Ann Oldfield published in 1730 suggests a further twist, that 'Mrs. Oldfield's benefit, being allowed by Swiney [Swiny] to be in the season before Mrs. Bracegirdle's, added so much to the affront that she quitted the stage immediately' (Genest, 2.375). It is possible that Anne's financial position was adversely affected by the younger talent and the reorganization of the companies. After a final performance on 18 February 1707 as Lavinia in Betterton's 'Caius Marius', Anne Bracegirdle quit the stage, 'nor could she be persuaded to return to it, under new Masters, upon the most advantageous Terms, that were offered her' (Cibber, 143). She returned to the stage only once more, for the benefit of her old ally Betterton, in her famed role as Angelica in 'Love for Love'. One or two mezzotints captured her in action, but her grandest portrait is as an emblematic figure, standing at the feet of William III's horse in Kneller's huge painting of 1697. 
It is not clear how Anne Bracegirdle supported herself after her departure from the stage, but she was helped by bequests and contributions from her admirers. The earl of Scarsdale left her $1000 in his will, proved on 2 January 1708. Whatever Anne's actual relationship with such figures, she maintained a reputation for modesty. Aston called her 'that 'Diana' of the Stage', and even suggested that her chaste behaviour had financial rewards: 'The Dukes of Dorset and Devonshire, Lord Hallifax, and other Nobles, over a Bottle, were all extolling Mrs. Bracegirdle's virtuous Behaviour, 'Come', says Lord 'Hallifax', -- 'You all commend her Virtue, &c. but why do we not present this incomparable woman with something worthy her Acceptance'? His Lordship deposited 200 Guineas, which the rest made up 800, and sent her with Encomiums on her Virtue. (Aston, 10)' As Gildon has his Critick quip, she 'has got more money by dissembling her Lewdness, than others by professing it' (Gildon, 70). When Mrs Barry died she left Anne $220 in her will, to preserve her from 'any debt of the Playhouse', which implies that Mrs Bracegirdle may still have had a financial interest in the theatre, although she appeared to spend the remaining thirty-nine years of her life out of the public eye. In the early 1740s she moved from Howard Street to the home of Mr Chute, where she died on Monday 12 September 1748. She was buried at Westminster Abbey on 18 September. In her will she left $10 to the poor, $400 to her nephew Justinian, and $100 to Mrs Ann Hodge, spinster. The remainder she left to her niece Martha. 


@@@@@


doc= 3157


Bracegirdle, John (d. 1614), Church of England clergyman and poet, whose place and date of birth are unknown, matriculated as a sizar at Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1588 and proceeded BD in 1602. Previous accounts of his life state that he was the son of John Bracegirdle or Bretchgirdle (died 1565), vicar of Holy Trinity, Stratford upon Avon, and that he was born in Cheshire, but this seems unlikely as this Bracegirdle's will mentions neither marriage nor children. Bracegirdle was ordained priest in Lincoln by Bishop William Chaderton on 14 May 1598, after which followed a series of clerical appointments in Sussex: as rector of St John's-sub-Castro, Lewes, on 21 November 1598, which he held until 1602; rector of St Thomas-in-the-Cliffe in 1599; vicar of Rye on 12 July 1602; vicar of West Firle on 29 January 1602; and finally vicar of Peasmarsh on 31 July 1606. 
Bracegirdle's only known work is in manuscript: 'Psychopharmacon, the mindes medicine, or, The phisicke of philosophie', in five books and dated 1602; it survives as BL, Add. MS 11401. This is a translation into English of Boethius with the prose translated into blank verse, and the verse into different forms of rhyme; it is dedicated to Thomas Sackville, later earl of Dorset, who as Lord Buckhurst presented him with the vicarage of Rye. This may indicate that Bracegirdle had puritan leanings which Sackville wished to promote; east Sussex was notorious for puritanism from the 1570s onwards and Rye reportedly had a puritan mayor in 1610. The gentry were known to encourage educated ministers who could preach well and Bracegirdle was licenced to preach throughout the diocese on 29 January 1604. 
Bracegirdle was married to Sarah Blaxton (1580-1639), one of nine children of Henry Blaxton (died 1606), chancellor of Chichester Cathedral, and his wife, Joan Nunn (died 1607). Bracegirdle and his wife had at least one son, also called John, who was baptized in 1607 in Rye, and possibly one daughter, Rebecca. 
Bracegirdle's 'Psychopharmacon' included a promise to produce further work but any other literary intentions he may have had were terminated with his death in early 1614, and he was buried on 8 February at St Mary's Church, Rye. As his will is missing it is not known how his finances stood; the plurality of his livings might suggest he was seeking to supplement a low income but the more learned clergy frequently held several offices. In 1614 his wife married another clergyman, William Stonard ('c'.1571-1637), parson of Ashurst, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 3158


Bracken, Henry (bap. 1697, d. 1764), writer on farriery and surgeon, was baptized on 31 October 1697 at St Mary, Lancaster, the son of Henry Bracken, a local innkeeper who held a number of minor offices with the Lancaster corporation. After a grammar-school education at Lancaster he was apprenticed to Dr Thomas Worthington, a Wigan physician. At the end of his apprenticeship about 1717, Bracken went to London and spent a few months as a pupil of St Thomas's Hospital but was disappointed with the lack of cadavers. He next went to Paris to the Hotel Dieu where he found plenty of opportunity for dissection and was able to attend midwifery cases through the intercession of the English ambassador, the earl of Stair. On 29 August 1730 he matriculated at the University of Leiden, where he attended Boerhaave's lectures for eighteen months, though this was in a non-graduate capacity. After an unsuccessful attempt to establish himself in London, Bracken set himself up as a physician, surgeon, and man-midwife in Lancaster. Bracken married Ann Hopkins in January 1720 and may have been the Henry Bracken who married Susannah X. Bracken about 1725. 
Having already written on both human and equine medicine, Bracken published his most famous and best-selling work, 'Farriery Improved, or, A Compleat Treatise upon the Art of Farriery' (1737), which was reissued in two volumes the next year. Its popularity sprang from Bracken's robust language and common-sense solutions, which were grounded as much in his firsthand knowledge of the general care and feeding of horses, as in his application of Newtonian medicine to their treatment. The work ran to twelve editions. Bracken also published several other popular works on farriery, a number of medical articles, and substantial monographs on midwifery and the stone. 
Bracken experienced mixed fortunes in his public and private life. Between 1726 and 1731 he held a variety of offices for the Lancaster corporation, such as auditor, chamberlain, and bailiff, but was politically marginalized for most of the next two decades. During the 1730s he was also engaged in a protracted dispute with Peter Kennedy MD, the author of a treatise on the eye. During the Jacobite rising of 1745 Bracken sent information on Stuart sympathizers to General Wade (TNA: PRO, SP 36/76, fols. 157'r'-158'v'), but in January 1746 was himself imprisoned in Lancaster Castle, probably by tories angered by his apparent support for the Stuarts following the Jacobites' arrival in the town. His imprisonment was short-lived. He was discharged without trial, and it appears there were no grounds for his arrest. Personal tragedy followed. Bracken, who had already lost three infant daughters, now lost his only son to fever -- contracted when he had visited his father in prison. Bracken recovered from his setbacks and was elected mayor of Lancaster in 1748 and again in 1758. He died at Lancaster on 13 November 1764. 


@@@@@


doc= 3159


Brackenbury, Charles Booth (1831-1890), army officer, born in Bayswater, London, on 7 November 1831, was the third son of William Brackenbury (died 1844), lieutenant, 61st foot (1809-16), of Aswardby, Lincolnshire, and his wife, Maria ('b'. 'c'.1798), daughter of James Atkinson of Newry, co. Down, and widow of James L. Wallace. He belonged to an old Lincolnshire family, well represented in nearly all the nineteenth-century British wars. William Brackenbury served in the same regiment as his elder brother, Sir Edward Brackenbury (1785-1864), and was wounded at Talavera and Salamanca. Sir Henry Brackenbury (1837-1914) was Charles Brackenbury's brother. 
Charles Brackenbury obtained a cadetship at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, on 8 July 1847, was commissioned second lieutenant, Royal Artillery, on 19 December 1850, and became lieutenant on 27 September 1852. He served in the Crimea from June 1855, with the chestnut troop of the horse artillery. Having been promoted second captain on 17 November 1857, he was sent to Malta. In March 1860 he was appointed assistant instructor in artillery at the Royal Military Academy, and in February 1864 assistant director of artillery studies at Woolwich. He became first captain on 9 February 1865, and was a boundary commissioner under the 1867 'Reform Act'. 
During the Austro-Prussian War of 1866 Brackenbury was the 'Times' correspondent with the Austrian army, and was at the battle of Koniggratz (Sadowa) -- riding with Benedek under fire at Chlum -- and reported the naval battle of Lissa. He was the 'Times' correspondent in the Franco-Prussian War, accompanying Prince Frederick Charles in the Le Mans campaign; and in the Russo-Turkish War of 1877, when he crossed the Balkans with Count Gourko. 
Brackenbury became regimental major on 5 July 1872, and lieutenant-colonel on 15 January 1876. In September 1873 he was attached to the recently established intelligence branch of the War Office, as acting deputy assistant adjutant-general then deputy assistant adjutant-general (April 1874 to March 1876). In 1875 he lectured at the Royal United Service Institution on 'The intelligence duties of the staff abroad and at home', showing the disparity in size between the intelligence branch and continental staffs, and calling for upgrading and enlargement of the former. From April 1876 to June 1880 he was superintending officer of garrison instruction at Aldershot, and from July 1880 to June 1885 superintendent of the gunpowder factory at Waltham Abbey, Essex. He was promoted colonel in the army on 15 January 1881, and in the regiment on 1 October 1882. He commanded the artillery in the south-eastern district, as colonel on the staff, from 8 May 1886 until 2 June 1887, when he was appointed director of artillery studies at Woolwich. His title was changed on 1 October 1889 to 'director of the artillery college', and he was given the temporary rank of major-general. 
On 6 April 1854 Brackenbury married Hilda Eliza (1832-1918), daughter of Archibald Campbell of Quebec, her majesty's notary, and they had six sons and three daughters, including the portrait painter and suffrage campaigner Georgina Agnes Brackenbury. Two sons joined the Indian staff corps, and died in India -- Charles Herbert, of typhoid fever contracted in the Bolan Pass in 1885; Lionel Wilhelm, killed at Manipur in 1891. 
Unlike many officers Brackenbury had no Indian service or colonial war experience, but he had witnessed continental great-power war. Impressed and influenced by the Prussian army, he became one of the 'Prussophile', 'continentalist' school in Britain, ignoring the American Civil War and urging copying from the Prussians, including replacement of line formation by 'swarm'. He advocated continental offensive doctrine and criticized preoccupation with minimizing losses, claiming 'the side which has the greatest moral force wins' (Bailes, 103). Like other continentalists he became quite rigid in his views. He urged army reform and innovation including tactical change, large-scale manoeuvres, Royal Artillery higher education, and a general staff with a chief of staff. In the early 1870s he advocated machine guns, and in 1878 he advocated iron shields (separate from the gun, not attached as was later the case) to protect field artillery gunners from infantry fire and shrapnel. In the 'Contemporary Review' he warned against military unpreparedness and the danger of invasion. 
Wanting to increase pressure for army reform, Brackenbury after 1884 became friendly with Spenser Wilkinson and they discussed military issues. Brackenbury criticized Wolseley and the duke of Cambridge, and urged Wilkinson to demand a chief of staff and army organization ready for war. Wilkinson later described Brackenbury as 'one of the most accomplished officers of the progressive school, a master of his profession and a clear exponent of its principles' (Gwynn and Tuckwell, 2.389). Sir Charles Dilke, following the collapse of his career with the 1885 Crawford divorce scandal, took up the cause of army reform and cultivated senior officers, seeking expertise. He contacted Brackenbury, who from 1887 advised and assisted him with his articles and books on defence including 'The Present Position of European Politics' (1887), 'The British Army' (1888) -- Dilke wrote in his unpublished memoirs of the articles from which he compiled the books, 'the first two... were entirely from my hand, whereas the others of that series were largely Charles Brackenbury's' (BL, Add. MS 43941) -- and 'Problems of Greater Britain' (1890); these works publicized British defence inadequacies and demanded reform. As Brackenbury was on the active list his role was not disclosed: he wrote to Dilke, 'I am obliged to maintain a strict incognito' (BL, Add. MS 43913, fols. 204-5). Brackenbury was also a friend of George Meredith and discussed military issues with him. 
Brackenbury's main publications were 'European Armaments in 1867' (based on articles in 'The Times', in 1867) -- mostly on ordnance, and including his assessment of the Gatling gun, 'The Constitutional Forces of Great Britain' (1869), 'Foreign Armies and Home Reserves' (from 'The Times', 1871), 'Frederick the Great' (1884), and 'Field-Works: their Technical Construction and Tactical Application' (1888), in a series of military handbooks he edited. His contributions to the 'United Service Institution Journal' (vols. 15-28) included papers on 'The military systems of France and Prussia in 1870' (15), 'The winter campaign of Prince Frederick Charles, 1870-71' (15), 'The intelligence duties of the staff' (19), and 'The latest development of the tactics of the three arms' (27.439). He frequently contributed to 'The Times', and once to the 'Nineteenth Century'. 
Brackenbury's cousin Edward Brackenbury (1848-1907), Royal Artillery, in 1870 married Emilie ('Mimi') Shaw, sister of Flora Shaw (1852-1929). Brackenbury's wife disliked housekeeping and found her children rather burdensome, and in the late 1870s and early 1880s Flora Shaw lived with Brackenbury's family at Aldershot and Waltham Abbey in the role of housekeeper-governess. She became a quasi-filial close friend of Brackenbury, consulting him on her problems, and in the later 1880s he used his contacts, including Spenser Wilkinson -- to whom he described her in 1889 as 'not only clever, but graceful and womanly' (Spenser Wilkinson MSS, 9011-42-133-17) -- to try to advance her career in journalism. 
In February 1890, following overwork, Brackenbury fainted in the street in Woolwich and 'went down to a zero of strength' (Spenser Wilkinson MSS, 9011-42-133-20). Following convalescence, he resumed his duties. Returning from his work at Woolwich to his home in Chelsea, he died suddenly on 20 June 1890 in a first-class railway carriage, between Maze Hill and London Bridge, following a heart attack, and was buried with military honours at Plumstead cemetery, Woolwich. His widow, Hilda Brackenbury, and two daughters, Georgina Brackenbury and Marie Brackenbury, became prominent suffragettes in the early twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 3160


Brackenbury, Sir Edward (1785-1864), army officer, a direct descendant of Sir Robert Brackenbury, constable of the Tower of London in the time of Richard III, was second son of Richard Brackenbury of Aswardby, Lincolnshire, and his wife, Janetta, daughter of George Gunn of Edinburgh. Having entered the army as an ensign in the 61st regiment in 1803, and become a lieutenant on 8 December 1803, he served in Sicily, in Calabria, at Scylla Castle, and at Gibraltar (1807-8), and in the Peninsula from 1809 to the end of the war in 1814. At the battle of Salamanca he alone captured a gun guarded by four soldiers, and repeatedly showed distinguished bravery. 
On 22 July 1812 Brackenbury was promoted captain, and after the war was attached to the Portuguese and Spanish army from 25 October 1814 to 25 December 1816, when he was placed on half pay. He served as a major in the 28th foot from 1 November 1827 to 31 January 1828, when he was again placed on half pay. His foreign services were further recognized by his being made a knight of the Portuguese order of the Tower and Sword in 1824, a knight of the Spanish order of St Ferdinand, and a knight commander of the Portuguese order of St Bento d'Avis. 
Brackenbury, who was knighted by the king at Windsor Castle on 26 August 1836, was a magistrate and deputy lieutenant for the county of Lincoln. He attained to the rank of lieutenant-colonel on 10 January 1837, and ten years afterwards sold out of the army. Brackenbury's first marriage was on 9 June 1827, to Maria, daughter of the Revd Edward Bromhead of Reepham near Lincoln; they had a son, who died in 1845. Secondly, in March 1847, he married Eleanor (died 1862), daughter of Addison Fenwick of Bishopwearmouth, co. Durham, and widow of W. Brown Clark of Belford Hall, Northumberland; they had a son born in 1848. Brackenbury died at his home, Skendleby Hall, near Spilsby, Lincolnshire, on 1 June 1864. 


@@@@@


doc= 3161


Brackenbury, Joseph (1787-1864), poet and Church of England clergyman, was born on 27 September 1787 at Langton by Partney, Lincolnshire, the third son of the Revd William Brackenbury (1753/4-1824) and his wife, Juliet (died 1790), the daughter of Benet Langton, of Langton Hall, Lincolnshire. He matriculated at Bene't College (later Corpus Christi), Cambridge, in Michaelmas term 1806, and became a scholar there. In 1810 he published by subscription his 'Natale solum, and other Poetical Pieces', and on 11 December 1810 he married Mary (1788-1862), daughter of Colonel Richard Brackenbury of Aswardby, Lincolnshire, and his wife, Janetta, 'nee' Gunn. They were to have four sons and three daughters. Brackenbury took his BA in 1811 and was ordained priest in the same year. He served as chaplain to the Madras establishment between 1818 and 1820. From 1828 to 1860 he was chaplain and secretary to the Magdalen Hospital, Blackfriars Road, Southwark, London. In 1862 he became rector of Quendon, Essex, and he died there, in the rectory, of apoplexy, on 31 March 1864, aged seventy-six. 


@@@@@


doc= 3162


Brackenbury, Sir Robert (d. 1485), knight, was the second son of Ralph Brackenbury of Denton in the parish of Gainford, co. Durham. The nearby lordship of Barnard Castle was held by Richard, duke of Gloucester, in the right of his wife, Anne Neville, from 1474, and Robert Brackenbury had probably entered the duke's service by 1477, when ducal retainers witnessed his father's grant to him of land in School Aycliffe, co. Durham. By 1479 Brackenbury was treasurer of Gloucester's household and one of the duke's feoffees. Two years later, in 1481, he acquired the manor of Selaby, co. Durham. Brackenbury's prospects were transformed by Gloucester's accession in 1483. He was not at Richard's coronation, but less than a fortnight later, on 17 July, he was made constable of the Tower of London for life and master of the mint and keeper of the king's exchange in the Tower -- one of relatively few northerners to receive major office in the south so early in the reign. 
Brackenbury was thus constable of the Tower when Richard is believed to have ordered the death of his nephews, Edward V and Richard, duke of York, although no chronicler associates him directly with their deaths. Early writers give no details, and the version current after the execution of Sir James Tyrell in 1502 was that Brackenbury had hesitated to carry out their murder, and Richard accordingly commanded Tyrell to kill them. The most that can be said is that the scale of Brackenbury's subsequent reward makes it unlikely that his role in the affair had offended the king. 
After Buckingham's rebellion of October 1483, which involved many of Edward IV's local servants, Richard used land and office forfeited by the rebels to move trusted northern associates into the areas most badly affected by the rising. In March 1484, Brackenbury, by now an esquire of the king's body, was given extensive land in Kent for his good service against the rebels. One of the manors, Ightham Mote, apparently became his home in the county. He was added to the Kent commissions of the peace in July 1484 and was made sheriff in November. He was also made receiver-general of the forfeited lands and goods of rebels in Kent, Surrey, and Sussex. His local influence was recognized by Archbishop Thomas Bourchier, who made Brackenbury his steward in March 1484. Brackenbury and his wife, Agnes, were enrolled within the confraternity of Christ Church, Canterbury. 
Brackenbury was evidently regarded as one of the king's most reliable supporters in the south-east, and his range of activities kept him busy. In July 1484 he was forced to delegate responsibilities because of 'other arduous business touching the king's right' (TNA: PRO, KB 9/951/28). In addition to his local offices he was one of Richard's commissioners in the office of admiral and a royal councillor. He was knighted around Christmas 1484 and became a knight of the king's body. He continued to receive royal patronage, and by the end of the reign his gains from royal service were probably of the order of $500 p.a., which made him one of the best-rewarded of Richard's household servants. Not all his gains came directly from the king. A fellow knight of the body, the Essex landowner Sir Thomas Montgomery, made over one of his own offices to him, while the rebel John Forster escaped attainder in 1483 by conveying land to Brackenbury, and early in the next reign Margaret Beaufort was seeking to recover silver and gilt cups which Brackenbury had taken. His influence was recognized by the scholar Pietro Carmeliano of Brescia, who dedicated his poem on St Catherine to him. 
Brackenbury fought in Richard's army at Bosworth and was killed there on 22 August 1485. He was attainted, and his land forfeited, in the first parliament of Henry VII. The attainder was reversed in 1489 in favour of his two daughters, Anne and Elizabeth. Brackenbury's bastard children were explicitly denied any immediate share in the restoration, although his illegitimate son was to inherit if Anne and Elizabeth died childless. That son was still alive in 1499 when he was bequeathed $40 in the will of Thomas Barowe, who had been Gloucester's chancellor, but there is no record of his death. Elizabeth, still unmarried, made her will in 1504. She then held Selaby, which she ordered to be sold by her feoffees, and the money to be used to pay her debts, including those to the dowager duchess of Norfolk, Elizabeth Talbot, 'to whom I am especially bound' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/14, fol. 163'v'). There is no mention in the will of her sister, Anne. 


@@@@@


doc= 3163


Bratton, Henry of (d. 1268), justice and supposed author of the legal treatise known as Bracton, was probably born at Bratton Fleming near Barnstaple in Devon. Neither his parentage nor the date of his birth is known. 
Bratton's first appearance in surviving records is in March 1238, when his agreement with Stephen Fleming was enrolled on the plea roll of the court of 'coram rege'. This indicates that he had by then become a clerk of William of Raleigh (died 1250), the court's only professional justice. William of Raleigh had been presented to the rectory of Bratton Fleming by King John in 1212. Bratton's recruitment into Raleigh's service must be connected with Raleigh's possession of the rectory of Bratton's home village. Bratton had probably been in Raleigh's service for some years before 1238, though for just how long is uncertain. Soon after Raleigh left the court on being elected bishop of Norwich in 1239, Bratton was taken into the king's service and put on an annual retainer of 40 marks a year (in February 1240). This has been taken to indicate that he was by then a senior clerk with a long period of service to Raleigh. All that is certain, however, is that he was by then sufficiently senior to have been entrusted with the custody of Raleigh's plea rolls and also those of the justice whom Raleigh had himself served as clerk, Martin of Pattishall (died 1229). He was ordered to surrender them to the exchequer in 1258 and can be shown to have been in possession of them in 1247. He had probably been in continuous possession of them ever since 1239. 
Bratton received only the first year's payment of his retainer, perhaps because he sided with Raleigh in a dispute with the king over Raleigh's election in 1240 to the see of Winchester. He then disappears from view until 1245. By then he had become rector of the Lincolnshire church of Gosberton and received, thanks to Raleigh, a papal dispensation to hold two additional benefices with cure of souls. It was also in 1245 that Bratton received his first judicial appointment, sitting as a junior justice on the eyres of Lincolnshire and Nottinghamshire. Although he was also appointed to act as justice of the Yorkshire eyre and of eyres in four other northern counties the following year, the final concords indicate that he did not act. Bratton's next judicial appointment was as a junior justice of the court where he had previously served as a clerk, the court of 'coram rege'. He probably became a justice of the court in October 1247 and served initially until June 1251. By February 1249 he had also become a canon of Wells Cathedral, holding the prebend of Whitchurch in Binegar: just the kind of preferment that came the way of successful clerics in royal service. He was reappointed to the court of 'coram rege' in July 1253 and served there until late June 1257. Between 1251 and 1258 he authorized (generally with others) a number of mandates enrolled on the close rolls, and some of the authorizations identify him as a member of the king's council. They include a mandate to the justices of the common bench in 1256, on the computation of the year and a day allowed to men essoined of bed-sickness in leap years, and another mandate of the same year which suggests the existence of legislation requiring seignorial assent for alienations in mortmain. He was probably involved in drafting some, if not all, of these mandates. 
Between 1257 and his death in 1268 Bratton's main judicial activity was as an assize justice in the south-west of England. Although appointed to hold sessions of the special eyre for the remedying of local grievances in Gloucestershire, Worcestershire, and Herefordshire late in 1259, it seems unlikely that he ever acted. The close roll also has a memorandum belonging to February 1267 noting that he and others had been appointed to hear the complaints of the disinherited, but again it seems unlikely that he acted. During the same period Bratton was presented to two Devon rectories (Combeinteignhead and Bideford), was briefly (in 1264) archdeacon of Barnstaple, and then held the chancellorship of Exeter Cathedral from 1264 until his death. By 1262 he also held a prebend in the bishop of Exeter's Sussex collegiate church of Bosham. Bratton died, unmarried, in 1268, probably in the autumn (possibly on 30 October). He was buried in the nave of Exeter Cathedral where his executors established a chantry in his memory. A chantry was also established for him at Wells. 
Henry of Bratton was long thought to have been the author of the legal treatise known as 'Bracton'. As may be deduced from its more formal alternative title 'De legibus et consuetudinibus Angliae', it is the most ambitious English legal work of the middle ages, apparently conceived on a grand scale as an overall survey and discussion of the whole of the common law as it was being applied in the king's courts in England, with supporting citations of actual decided cases, and the reproduction of writ and enrolment formulas currently in use. The extant treatise is evidently only part of the work as originally envisaged, but even so the work is around ten times the length of the only previous English legal treatise, 'Glanvill'. The main topics covered are the acquisition and transmission of property rights, criminal law, and the working of the different kinds of real action for the recovery or assertion of rights over land and other forms of real property. Most manuscripts divide up the work into four or five books, but this division is an artificial one and the basic unit of composition appears to be the 'title'. Each 'title' is in turn composed of a number of independent paragraphs. 'Bracton' is clearly the work of an author with a knowledge of Roman and canon law as well as English common law, though there has been a long debate among legal historians about how expert the author really was in the 'learned law'. It is clear that the author did make use of Roman law to fill gaps in his English materials. He also drew on Roman law for some of the more abstract organizing principles of the treatise. Despite the size of the book it survives in about fifty different manuscripts, most of them written during the last two decades of the thirteenth century or the first half of the fourteenth century. 
The ascription of the treatise to Henry of Bratton can be traced back to within a few years of his death. The first folio of one of the earliest surviving manuscripts of 'Bracton' has an inscription recording that this is 'beginning of the book of lord H. de Bratton' and early in 1278 Robert of Scarborough acknowledged having received a loan of 'the book which lord Henry of Bratton composed', evidently a copy of the treatise. When the book found its way into print in 1569, the unknown editor (T. N.) not only ascribed authorship of the treatise to Bratton, but also adopted a reading of one passage near the beginning of the treatise (found only in a minority of surviving manuscripts) in which the authorial 'I' was extended to 'I Henry of Bratton'. The same anonymous editor also transformed Bratton's surname into 'Bracton', the name by which both justice and book have generally been known since. Bratton's authorship of the treatise went unchallenged both by his late nineteenth-century editor, Sir Travers Twiss, whose six-volume edition, published in the 'Rolls Series', appeared between 1878 and 1883, and by George Woodbine, whose four-volume edition appeared between 1915 and 1942. Woodbine did not believe that everything found in the various manuscripts of 'Bracton' (especially in their margins) was necessarily from the pen of Bratton, and went to some pains to distinguish those 'addiciones' he regarded as from the pen of Henry of Bratton from those which could not be 'Bractonian'. Other twentieth-century scholars (H. Kantorowicz, T. F. T. Plucknett, and H. G. Richardson) conducted a long debate about how far the muddled state of the text of 'Bracton' as it now exists was the responsibility of Bratton and how far the responsibility of one or more redactors working before or after his death. The most recent editor of the text, S. E. Thorne, when his edition began to appear in 1968, showed no signs of doubt about Bratton's authorship. It was only when the final two volumes of his new edition appeared in 1977 that Thorne challenged the long consensus by arguing that Bratton was only the reviser of a work originally composed by someone else. Thorne's view is now generally, though not universally, accepted by scholars, though some of his arguments have needed to be revised in detail in the light of subsequent criticism. 
The main argument against Bratton's authorship of major parts of the treatise relates to the date when those parts were written. Although it had long been known that the treatise cites mainly cases of the 1220s and early 1230s the general consensus before 1977 was that it had been written during the 1250s and that the author had deliberately chosen cases of an earlier period as an authoritative source for the doctrine of the treatise. It now seems clear that parts of the text must have been written earlier than the enactment of the provisions of Merton of 1236, as several passages relating to changes made by that legislation are clearly additions to a text originally complete without them. Other parts of the text giving writ forms can be shown to have been written before 1237, for the writs have limitation date formulas which were in use before that year, or are most readily explicable as crudely and inaccurately altered versions of such formulas. Material added to the section on replevin relating to the action of recaption, and to the section on the assize 'utrum' relating to its use by laymen as well as clerics, likewise suggests original composition of both of those sections earlier than 'c'.1240. Other evidence pointing to a date no later than the early 1230s for parts of the treatise is the inclusion of a form of judicial commission apparently last used in 1226 and of a special set of articles of the eyre used at the Shipway session of the Kent eyre of 1227; references to the use of the essoin of the general summons at the eyre (no longer in use after 1234); and to the action of warranty of charter as a way for tenants to stop distraint for services not specified in their charters (not found after the mid-1230s). Bratton is not a plausible candidate for a treatise of which much had already been written by the mid-1230s, for he can hardly by then have acquired the requisite degree of legal expertise. A much more plausible candidate is the William of Raleigh whom Bratton served as clerk, and who had been the clerk of Martin of Pattishall before Pattishall's retirement in 1229. His authorship best explains the author's knowledge of what Pattishall said and did in court, and his occasional use of the great justice's first name. 
The manuscript of the treatise evidently passed to Bratton. Raleigh may have hoped that Bratton would keep the treatise up to date and make the necessary revisions that would allow it to pass into wider circulation. Bratton certainly did make some revisions. He may well (as Thorne suggested) have been responsible for adding material connected with William of Raleigh's period as senior justice of the court of 'coram rege'. He may also have been responsible for other revisions that produced two opposing and unreconciled viewpoints in the text of the treatise. Bratton is also the most likely reviser of a passage that deals with errors in the names included in writs. His first name and surname are used to illustrate errors in syllables ('Henricus de Brothtona' for 'Henricus de Brattona' and letters ('Henricus de Brettona' for 'Henricus de Brattona'). His too is the name used to illustrate an error in the dignity held by the plaintiff ('Henry de Bratton precentor' for 'Henry de Bratton dean'). It was also presumably Bratton who was responsible for the second preface added to the treatise, which talks of greater men who are 'foolish and insufficiently instructed, who climb the seat of judgment before learning the laws', and of how they pervert laws and customs by deciding cases more by their own will than by the authority of the laws, and of the compiler writing for 'the instruction at least of lesser men' and going back to the 'ancient judgments of just men ['vetera judicia justorum'], searching through... their deeds, their 'consilia' and 'responsa'' ('De legibus et consuetudinibus Angliae', 2.19). This was clearly Bratton's apologia for not updating the treatise: it had hardly been necessary when the treatise was originally written, for then the cases cited were much more nearly contemporary. It was certainly Bratton who was responsible for the incorporation of references to cases which he had himself determined or which involved him of various dates between the mid-1240s and the mid-1250s. 
After the mid-1250s Bratton seems largely to have abandoned work on the treatise. It does not include any references to the changes made by the provisions of Westminster of 1259. Nor did he alter those passages in the treatise that dealt with seignorial attempts to control mortmain alienations, or the computation of the year and a day allowed to tenants who essoined themselves of bed-sickness, in the light of the mandates of 1256 relating to both these subjects with whose issue he was closely involved. Given the amount of effort that had been invested in the treatise, its apparent abandonment by its author more than a decade before his death, and at a time when he certainly remained active, has always seemed puzzling. It becomes much less puzzling if it was not the author, but a reviser, who was giving up the unequal struggle to try and keep (or rather bring) the treatise up to date. The treatise does not seem to have gone into general circulation until after Bratton's death, and it may well be the fact that it was found among his possessions at his death that explains why the treatise came so soon to be ascribed to him. 
In 1884 Paul Vinogradoff discovered a manuscript in the British Museum containing about two thousand transcripts of enrolments taken from the plea rolls of the courts over which Martin of Pattishall and William of Raleigh presided as justices during the period from 1217 to 1239-40. Noting the coincidence between these enrolments and the cases cited in 'Bracton', Vinogradoff suggested that the manuscript was 'drawn up for Bracton and annotated by him or under his direction' ('Bracton's Note Book', 1.xviii). F. W. Maitland gave the collection the name 'Bracton's Note Book' when he published it in 1887. He saw it as an essential working tool for the author of 'Bracton', evidence of how he had set to work by first selecting material from rolls belonging to Pattishall and Raleigh and then having it copied into his notebook. Maitland saw that there was one major difficulty with this hypothesis. Of the five hundred or so cases cited in the treatise, only about two hundred are actually to be found in the notebook. His answer was to conjecture that it was the sole survivor of what had originally been two or more such notebooks. The connection between treatise and notebook was generally accepted until 1977. It was again Thorne who cast doubt on the supposed relationship. Bratton had certainly possessed the notebook and been responsible for at least part of its contents. But major parts of the notebook were first copied from the rolls and annotated by or under the direction of others, and it was doubtful whether the notebook was in fact used, or could have been used, in the composition of the treatise. Some connection with the treatise none the less remains a possibility. Even if not used in composing the treatise, it may still have been intended for use in revising it, or even as a companion to it for those without ready access to the rolls containing the cases cited in the treatise. 


@@@@@


doc= 3164


Bradberry, David (1735-1803), Independent minister, was born at Reeth, in the North Riding of Yorkshire, on 12 November 1735; nothing is known of his parents. He was a convert of George Whitfield, and in 1759 he began a course of ministerial training at Mile End Academy, Middlesex, but he terminated his course prematurely in February 1762 in order to take up an appointment as assistant to the Revd John Sayers at Alnwick, Northumberland. He remained there until 1764, when he moved to Wellingborough as minister at Cheese Lane Independent Chapel. He appears to have resigned from this post in the summer of 1767, when he moved to Kent as a supply preacher. After preaching to the congregation at the Ebenezer Chapel in Ramsgate on 10 October 1767 he was invited to become its pastor but, while agreeing to preach there on a regular basis, he did not accept pastoral responsibility until April 1769 and was not ordained until 24 October 1770. He continued at Ramsgate with considerable success for eighteen years. 
On 14 August 1785 Bradberry accepted the invitation to become minister at Cannon Street Chapel, Manchester. There he soon incensed some of the members of the congregation, and especially the Scottish members, by his attempts to remove the ruling elders from office and to break up the semi-Presbyterian form of church government. This dispute led in 1788 to a considerable secession of members from the church and to the establishment by the seceders of Mosley Street Chapel. Bradberry resigned from Cannon Street, probably in 1795, and for a time was minister at Grovers' Hall, London. His final ministerial appointment was in 1797 at Kennington, Surrey. 
Bradberry was not a prolific writer and is credited with just three published works, of which the only one of any note is a poem entitled 'Tetelestai: the Final Close' (1794). He died in London on 13 January 1803 and was buried in Bunhill Fields. His funeral oration was given by the Revd John Humphries of Dead Man's Place, Southwark, and his funeral sermon was preached by Robert Simpson of Hoxton. 


@@@@@


doc= 3165


Bradbridge, William (1507-1578), bishop of Exeter, was born in Chichester, the son of William Bradbridge (died 1546), a wealthy mercer, three times mayor of Exeter, and his wife Alice. His father, who was on good terms with the dean and chapter of Chichester, had fourteen children; one son was brought up to succeed him, while William and Augustine were destined for the church. A sister, Alice, married a successful London draper, established herself as a silkwoman, and commissioned one of the earliest family portraits in England ['see 'Barnham, Alice]. In the mid-1520s William was sent to Magdalen College, Oxford, and became a fellow there in 1529, the year in which he determined for his BA. The only college office he appears to have held was that of supervisor of ale in 1532. He had vacated his fellowship by 1534 and in 1535 was collated to the vicarage of Willingdon, Sussex, by the dean and chapter of Chichester. In 1539 he was admitted to the degree of BTh. In 1542 Willingdon was replaced by the Sussex vicarage of East Dean, followed in 1547 first by that of West Thorney and then by the rectory of West Tarring, also in Sussex. He held the latter until he became a bishop. 
Bradbridge appears to have weathered all the changes in religion of the mid-sixteenth century, remaining in England and in post throughout both Edward's and Mary's reigns, although his brother Augustine was among the Marian exiles. In 1554 William became warden of St Mary's Hospital, Chichester, while on 17 March that year he was instituted prebendary of Lyme and Halstock in Salisbury Cathedral. He renewed his links with Chichester Cathedral when on 7 January 1559 he was installed as prebendary of Sutton there, and in 1562 succeeded Augustine as chancellor of that diocese. Later that year he is recorded as selling old vestments and other furnishings in London to raise money for the chapter. William Bradbridge may well have owed much of his preferment after 1558 to the influence of his brother, and also to the favour of William Barlow, bishop of Chichester from 1559 to 1568. Not only did Augustine marry Barlow's eldest daughter, but he and William seem to have been the only members of his chapter whom the bishop felt able to trust with tasks of discipline and reform. 
It is possible that Barlow's support put William Bradbridge into the circle of patronage around Sir William Cecil -- explaining, perhaps, why on 29 March 1563 he was presented by the crown to the deanery of Salisbury. In the same year he aligned himself with the reformers in convocation by voting for the six articles proposing the abrogation of ceremonies, and signing the petition for the reformation of discipline. In 1565 he became rector of Ditchling, Sussex, regularizing his position in 1570 when he was dispensed to hold three benefices. In spite of his continuing connection with Sussex he was diligent at Salisbury in performing his duties as dean, regularly attending chapter meetings, and for several years held the position of keeper of the muniments, which required residence in the cathedral close. 
It might well have looked as if his deanery was the most that Bradbridge would achieve, but early in 1571 he became bishop of Exeter. Royal assent was granted on 26 February and he was consecrated on 18 March. Well over sixty, he was one of the oldest men to be made a bishop under Elizabeth. His diocese was a poor one, and in 1572 he was dispensed to hold the livings of Lazant, Cornwall, and Newton Ferrers, Devon, 'in commendam'. There were equivocal aspects to his religious position. He is unlikely to have pleased the godly in his diocese when within forty-eight hours of his consecration he made his 26-year-old nephew William Marston his chancellor. Yet he was also a firm supporter of the meetings of reformist clergymen known as 'prophesyings', and himself sometimes acted as their moderator, reporting to Archbishop Grindal in 1576 how 'Great profit groweth thereby, I do persuade myself, for that I see the people delight to hear and gladly do resort, the clergy become studious in the tongues and grow ripe in the Scriptures' (Collinson, 238). Nevertheless he had difficulties with both Catholics and puritans. In 1576 he failed to make any impression on a group of Cornish Catholics who obdurately refused to come to church, and a year later had to deal with the schoolmaster of Liskeard who caused scandal by denouncing as valueless oaths taken on the 'Bible', 'because it is nothing but ink and paper' (Rowse, 334). 
Bradbridge seems to have been an isolated figure as bishop. He usually lived not in his palace at Exeter but at Newton Ferrers, where he convened the episcopal audience court in the parsonage. He is not recorded as a preacher; indeed, after his death the second earl of Bedford likened him to a dumb dog. He attended parliament in 1571, 1572, and 1575, and at Christmas 1577 broke with his usual practice by attending the quarter sessions in Exeter. He also acted as visitor of Exeter College, Oxford. But much of his time was devoted to farming; by the time of his death he owned a flock of 100 sheep and lambs and some 3 dozen horses, pigs, and cattle. Some of his lay deputies, most notoriously Henry Borough, his sub-collector of taxes, took advantage of his absences from Exeter to line their own pockets. By 1577 the bishop had begun to suspect that he was being deceived. He was reassured by Borough and his associates, to the extent that Bradbridge 'rejoicing drank to the gentlemen, and said that he would not be indebted to the queen for anything' (Heal, 'Clerical tax collection', 116), but doubts soon recurred, and he initiated inquiries once more. Such precautions came too late, however, and when he died the bishop owed $1235 to the exchequer, most of it for taxes embezzled by Borough. 
Unmarried, and consequently without the support a wife could have given him, Bradbridge appears eventually to have found the burdens of his office too much, and on 11 March 1576 he wrote to Cecil, now Lord Burghley, asking to be allowed to return to his deanery at Salisbury, which he mistakenly believed was vacant: 'If it please your lordship to send me hence, and to restore me to the place from whence I came, you could never do me such a pleasure' (Strype, 2/2.35-6). In the event Bradbridge stayed in office, and died suddenly and alone at Newton Ferrers on 27 June 1578. His poverty was such that his executors could not afford a fitting burial; he was interred on the north side of Exeter Cathedral choir. 
Bradbridge published nothing, and his episcopate aroused little enthusiasm, either at the time or later. His younger contemporary John Hooker offered the lukewarm verdict that: 'he was a professor of divinitie, but not taken to be so well grounded as he persuaded himselfe, he was zelous in religion, but not so forwarde as he was wished to be. In his latter daies he delighted to dwell in the countrie, which was not so much to his liking, as troublesome to his clergie, & to such as had anie sutes unto him. ('Holinshed's Chronicles', 3.1309)' A century later a local historian described him, with some generosity, as 'a man only memorable for this, that nothing memorable is recorded of him saving that he well governed this church about eight years' (Izacke, 135-6). 


@@@@@


doc= 3166


Bradburn, Samuel (1751-1816), Methodist minister, was born in Gibraltar on 5 October 1751, the youngest son of the thirteen children of Isaac Bradburn (1719-1794), a gardener turned army private, and his wife, a Mrs Bold (1722-1775), the daughter of Samuel Jones, a Wrexham gardener. Samuel was apprenticed to a Chester shoemaker in 1764, and despite minimal schooling later acquired some knowledge of Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. After a strict Anglican upbringing he indulged in drinking and gambling, with occasional attacks of conscience, until his conversion in 1769. After joining the Methodists in 1770 he became a travelling preacher in 1774. In 1779 he was accused of Arianism by Dr Thomas Coke but exonerated. 
In the divisions after John Wesley's death over relations with the Church of England, Bradburn supported those wishing for Methodist ordinations and sacraments. His 'The Question 'Are Methodists Dissenters?' Fairly Examined' (1792) portrayed Methodism as not fully identifiable with Anglicanism or dissent, and free to shape its own ethos. Ordained by fellow Methodists in 1792, Bradburn alienated 'Church Methodists' in Bristol that year and supported the Lichfield plan (1794) for a quasi-episcopal Methodist government. He was suspected of 'democratical' sentiments, though his 'Rights of Man' language was mainly applied to religious toleration and Methodist lay rights. From 1795, however, alarmed by government threats against Methodism, he attacked the radical Methodists led by Alexander Kilham. He was president of the Methodist conference for 1799-1800, but was suspended from the ministry during 1802-3, apparently for drunkenness, possibly aggravated by chronic inability to keep out of debt. 
Bradburn published only a few pamphlets and sermons, and an account of John Wesley's character (1791). Despite his popularity as a leading preacher ('the Methodist Demosthenes'; Stevens, 1.125) Bradburn attracted criticism for being unduly witty, satirical, and eccentric in and out of the pulpit, though he was careful of his appearance and powdered his wig. Despite these shortcomings he was a favourite of Wesley's, who engineered his first marriage on 28 June 1778 to Elizabeth Nangle of Dublin (1755/1757-1786), persuading her guardians to consent and marrying the couple forthwith in their parlour. (Praying for guidance about marriage Bradburn added 'But, O Lord, let it be Betsy'.) On 10 August 1786 he married Sophia Cooke (1758/9-1834), daughter of a Gloucester surgeon. Of his six sons, and either one or two daughters, only a daughter survived him. Bradburn's last years were clouded by physical and mental illness. He died in Long Lane, Southwark, on 26 July 1816 and was buried near Wesley's tomb in the New Chapel burial-ground, City Road, London on 2 August 1816. He was survived by his second wife, who died on 16 March 1834. 


@@@@@


doc= 3167


Bradbury, George (bap. 1643, d. 1696), judge, was baptized at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 28 August 1643, the eldest son of Henry Bradbury of St Martin's Fields, Middlesex, and Barbara Carew. He was admitted to Queen's College, Oxford, in 1659, and entered the Middle Temple on 28 June 1660. He received an MA on 28 September 1663 and was called to the bar on 17 May 1667. For some time his practice in court was inconsiderable. He is first listed as junior counsel on 3 June 1684 against Lady Ivy in a suit in which she asserted her title to lands in Shadwell. The deeds on which she relied were of doubtful authenticity, and Bradbury won commendation from Lord Chief Justice Jeffreys for pointing out that the deeds described Philip and Mary by a title which they did not assume until some years after the date which the deeds bore. When Bradbury repeated his comment, Jeffreys responded: 'Lord, sir! you must be cackling too; we told you your objection was very ingenious, but that must not make you troublesome. You cannot lay an egg but you must be cackling over it' (Foss, 'Judges', 7.311). Bradbury's name next occurs in 1681, when he was a trustee, along with the earl of Shrewsbury and Hon. Charles Bertie, of the marriage settlement of one of the Carys of Tor Abbey. 
Bradbury may have been an intermediary used by the conspirators involved in the revolution of 1688. He was certainly involved in the events in London in December 1688. According to Roger Morrice, Bradbury was one of the lawyers summoned to attend the peers on 21 December on the nomination of the earl of Dorset, 'for he does the business of that family' (Beddard, 184). When he attended -- along with Maynard, Holt, Pollexfen, and Atkins -- on the following day, he helped to draft the order for removing papists from London. He also attended on 24 December when the peers debated how to call a free parliament. He was called to the bench of his inn on 7 February 1689, and was in heavy demand in the months following the revolution as a counsel in cases before the House of Lords. These included being assigned as counsel for Sir Adam Blair and others, who were impeached for dispersing proclamations of King James. On the recommendation of Shrewsbury and the duke of Norfolk, on 12 February 1689 he was appointed cursitor baron of the exchequer. He retained his place until his death on 12 February 1696. His will contains no mention of a marriage; his house 'being the sign of the White Lyon in the Strand' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/430/28) was left to his nephews and heirs in turn, the sons of his brother, Henry. 


@@@@@


doc= 3168


Bradbury, Henry Riley (1829-1860), writer on printing, the eldest of the seven children of William Bradbury (1800-1869), co-owner of the printing and publishing firm Bradbury and Evans, and his wife, Sarah, was born on 20 September 1829 at Wingrove Place, Clerkenwell, London. He was baptized at St James's Church, Clerkenwell, on 21 October 1829, and his younger brother was William Hardwick Bradbury, with whom he later worked as a publisher. In 1850 Henry went to Vienna to study at the imperial printing office. There he became acquainted with the art of nature printing, a process whereby natural objects are impressed into metal plates, from which electrotypes are taken that can be used in relief printing. Bradbury afterwards claimed that he invented this process, but the imperial printer, Alois Auer, in 'Discovery of the Natural Printing Process' (Vienna, 1854, in English, German, Italian, and French), published six facsimile letters from Bradbury purporting to indicate that he first saw the process in Vienna. Certainly Bradbury brought the process back to Britain and there perfected it. In 1855 he produced in folio the fine 'nature-printed' plates to 'Ferns of Great Britain and Ireland', written by Thomas Moore, curator of the Chelsea Botanic Gardens, and edited by the eminent botanist John Lindley (1859). These were followed by the plates to William Grosart Johnstone's and Alexander Croall's 'Nature-Printed British Sea-Weeds' (4 vols., 1859-60), a copy of which G. H. Lewes asked John Blackwood to obtain for him. Bradbury consolidated his knowledge of nature printing first in a lecture on 11 May 1855 at the Royal Institution (London, 1856), translated badly into German by an employee of Bradbury and Evans to counteract Auer's 'Das Benehmen eines jungen Englanders namens Henry Bradbury' (Vienna, 1854) and his 'Discovery'. Bradbury's amplified disquisition, 'Autotypography, or, Art of Nature-Printing', was printed for private circulation in 1860. 
Bradbury lectured to the Royal Institution on 9 May 1856 about a different topic, the ease with which banknotes were being forged; this was published under the title 'On the Security and Manufacture of Bank Notes' by his father's firm in 1856, and illustrated with plates by John Leighton FSA. About this time Bradbury established his own firm, Bradbury and Wilkinson, in Fetter Lane, London. In 1860 he produced 'Specimens of Bank-Note Engraving' incorporating samples of banknote paper manufactured by T. H. Saunders. 
On 14 May 1858 Bradbury again addressed the Royal Institution, this time attempting 'to illustrate... the power and the spread of printing as an intellectual agent in the destinies of man' (Bigmore and Wyman, 1.77). This address, issued in 1858 as 'Printing: its Dawn, Day, and Destiny', reviewed letterpress, intaglio, chemical, photographic, siderographic, and electro processes. Over the next two years Bradbury worked up a prospectus for a folio treatise on the graphic arts of the nineteenth century. Before this could be put into production, however, on 2 September 1860 Bradbury committed suicide in Cremorne Gardens by drinking soda water laced with prussic acid. Dickens speculated to W. H. Wills that the family's 'strong influence' kept the story out of the papers; George Holsworth, employee of 'All the Year Round', believed Bradbury was depressed because one of Frederick Mullet Evans's daughters was marrying another, but Dickens doubted 'whether any blurred vision of that most undesirable female... ever crossed his drunken mind' (letter of 4 Sept 1860, 'Letters of Charles Dickens', 302-3). The firm Bradbury founded had moved about 1859 to Farringdon Street, London, and continued under the name Bradbury, Wilkinson & Co. 


@@@@@


doc= 3169


Bradbury, Thomas (1676/7-1759), Independent minister and religious controversialist, was born at Alverthorpe, near Wakefield, where his father, Peter Bradbury (1639/40-1699), a tailor, was a leading member of a dissenting meeting; his mother was Mary (died 1723). Peter Nayler, the minister at Alverthorpe, had been ejected from West Houghton in Lancashire in 1662, and it was he who began the young Bradbury's education, noting his unusually retentive memory. After attending the free school at Leeds, Bradbury entered Timothy Jollie's dissenting academy at Attercliffe. Oliver Heywood records in his diary meeting the student Bradbury and giving him books. The two later corresponded. A particular influence on Bradbury was Thomas Whitaker, minister of Call Lane, Leeds, a man of orthodox views who befriended him and took him into his home. Bradbury visited Whitaker regularly until his death in 1710 and then edited a collection of his sermons. 
Bradbury's ministry began in 1697 when he supplied the vacant pulpit at Beverley. While there, he corresponded with George Keith, the self-styled Christian Quaker, and received copies of Keith's narratives of the proceedings at Turners' Hall. In 1699 he became assistant minister at Newcastle upon Tyne, first to the elderly Dr Richard Gilpin, then to his successor, Benjamin Bennet. His popularity with the congregation led to a disagreement with Bennet, and in September 1701 he received, but did not pursue, an invitation to the church in Mark Lane in London, which then called Isaac Watts. 
Bradbury's first publication, 'Christus in coelo', was a selection of his Newcastle sermons. It appeared in 1703, and the following year Bradbury became assistant to John Galpin, minister at Stepney. Almost immediately he was invited to Yarmouth as co-minister with Samuel Wright but rejected the call. A letter to Bradbury in April 1704 from Jeremiah White, Oliver Cromwell's former chaplain, suggests that a faction of the congregation at Newcastle may have invited him to return. He remained at Stepney, however, until his public ordination as minister of the former Moravian meeting-house in Fetter Lane, London, on 10 July 1707, where he succeeded Benoni Rowe. Bradbury's 'Confession of Faith' shows him to have been a firm Calvinist. Its publication ran to five editions by 1729. 
Lively minded, with an easy way of public speaking, a good presence, and an arresting turn of phrase, Bradbury quickly attracted a large congregation and was appointed to a number of lectureships, notably at Salters' Hall and the Weigh House. He was a Merchants' lecturer at Pinners' Hall for over fifty years. 
Bradbury emerged to public notice in London at a time when the toleration of dissenters was being threatened by the preaching of Dr Henry Sacheverell and other high-churchmen, and by the incitement of the mob against them. The incoming tory ministry of 1710 intensified the pressures on dissenters through the 'Occasional Conformity Act' of 1711 and the 'Schism Act' of 1714. Bradbury became an outspoken defender of religious liberty and supporter of the Hanoverian succession. His highly political sermons every 5 November, the anniversary of King William's landing in England as well as of the Gunpowder Plot, were notorious, but popular. Typical was 'The lawfulness of resisting tyrants', preached in 1713 and published in 1714, which ran to four editions. Most of his political sermons were included in his 'Works', published posthumously in 1762. 
Some on his own side thought Bradbury too outspoken. 'A Friendly epistle by way of reproof from one of the people called Quakers, to T B, a dealer in many words' appeared in 1715 from the pen of Daniel Defoe. Bradbury's practice of resorting to a tavern after preaching each 5 November to eat, drink, and sing raucously 'The Roast Beef of Old England' attracted the criticism of both Isaac Watts and George Whitefield, who thought his behaviour unbecoming in a minister. But Bradbury, whose motto was 'Pro Christo et patria' (for Christ and country), had made his mark. Queen Anne was said to have called him Bold Bradbury and to have tried to quieten him with a bishopric. The mob burnt his meeting-house in March 1710 and threatened him, but he escaped. According to his grandson, an assassin sent to kill him was converted by one of his sermons. Bradbury, alerted by a pre-arranged signal that Queen Anne had at last died -- a handkerchief falling from the gallery as he preached -- prayed for King George and boasted afterwards that he had been the first to proclaim the new reign. When attending the new court with other dissenting ministers in their black gowns to present a loyal address, he was asked by a courtier, 'Pray sir, is this a funeral?', to which Bradbury replied, 'Yes Sir, it is the funeral of the 'Schism Act', and the resurrection of liberty'. These stories are well vouched for, if perhaps embroidered in the telling. However, the report that after Queen Anne's death he preached on the text 'Go, see now this cursed woman and bury her, for she is a king's daughter' is probably apocryphal, though he would have been capable of it. 
In 1719 Bradbury became caught up in the Salters' Hall dispute. The trustees of four dissenting meetings in Exeter had barred three of the four ministers for refusing to subscribe to the declaration concerning the divinity of Christ and then appealed to the London ministers for guidance. A gathering of ministers of the three denominations at Salters' Hall duly considered a letter of advice designed to restore peace in Exeter. The draft, however, did not address the doctrinal issue. Bradbury moved a new clause affirming belief in the Trinity. This was lost by four votes, arguably because some thought the procedure out of order. At the resumed meeting Bradbury therefore proposed that before considering the advice further those present should subscribe to a declaration of belief in the Trinity. When the moderator, Joshua Oldfield, refused to put the proposal to the meeting, upwards of sixty ministers, led by Bradbury, moved to the gallery and subscribed their signatures to the declaration, while the smaller number who remained below did not. Each side then sent separate letters to Exeter, similar in the advice offered on resolving disputes between ministers and their congregations, but with marked differences in the forthrightness of commitment to trinitarian belief. 
Bradbury's leading part in the dispute made him a target in the ensuing pamphlet war -- designed, he said, to destroy his reputation. The political charge against him was that the disunity he had caused among dissenters was of comfort only to their political enemies, and he lost a prominent whig politician, Shute Barrington, from his congregation. Barrington was thought to have written one of the highly personal attacks on Bradbury, 'A Letter of Advice to the Protestant Dissenters' (1720). The religious charge was that he was a creed-maker who did not use the language of scripture and was trying to threaten liberty of religious belief. Bradbury's defence, in 'An answer to the reproaches cast on those ministers who subscribed to their belief in the eternal Trinity' (1719), was that the original letter of advice to Exeter had been intended to be a screen for Arian ministers, and that the expression of trinitarian belief he had proposed was one to which dissenting ministers were required by law to assent, or had been drawn from the Westminster assembly's catechism. A move to exclude him from the Pinners' Hall lectures failed. The anti-Arian lectures held at Fetter Lane were an outcome of this simmering dispute. They were published as 'The Power of Christ' (1724). 
Bradbury's stand received support from outside dissent as well as within. William Wake, archbishop of Canterbury, himself beset by some prominent questioners of trinitarian doctrine, wrote to Bradbury on 5 September 1721: 'I am glad to see that amidst our other much lesser differences we all stand fast and agree in contending for the faith as it was delivered to the saints' (Wilson, 3.521). Bradbury's most considered response to the issue behind the dispute was 'The Mystery of Godliness' (1726), in which he put forward a scriptural basis for belief in the divinity of Christ. 
While many regarded Bradbury as heroic and forthright, his delight in argument and controversy, and his inability to tolerate compromise or control his wit, led to a series of disputes. Though old friends, there was a serious falling out when Bradbury criticized Isaac Watts's 'Psalms' (1719) and forbade the use of Watts's 'whims' in his services. He was scornful of Watts's essay 'The Christian Doctrine of the Trinity' (1722) and of Watts's other efforts for accommodation with the anti-trinitarians. Relations between them were not helped by Bradbury's open dislike of two of Watts's closest friends, his co-pastor, Samuel Price, and the author of 'The History of the Puritans', Daniel Neal. The correspondence between the two men on these subjects does neither credit. In 1728 Bradbury had a disagreement with his deacons over a minor money matter, and led his supporters to New Court, Carey Street, where the two congregations successfully united under his ministry. That he could still call on friends of weight is shown by the speed with which he was able to clear a substantial debt on New Court. In the same year he quarrelled with the philanthropist William Coward, who resented Bradbury's advice on his will. Coward dismissed Bradbury from the Little St Helen's lectures, to which he had been appointed in 1726, though his continuing value as a protagonist led to an invitation to take part in the famous Lime Street lectures in defence of Calvinism in 1730. Like some other Independents he criticized Philip Doddridge for his accommodating attitude to the Methodists, but -- this short-lived disagreement apart -- the two men maintained good relations throughout. Bradbury supported Doddridge's students as a member of the Congregational Fund Board and Doddridge sought him out as preacher and dining companion whenever he was in London. 
Bradbury married Mary Richmond (died 1765), reportedly a widow of means, on 1 August 1717. They had two daughters. In 1744 one daughter married John Winter, an agent for the army and brother of Bradbury's successor at New Court, Richard Winter. Their son Dr Robert Winter, also later minister at New Court, helped preserve his grandfather's memory. The other daughter was married in 1768 to George Welch, a banker, who with Thomas Wilson founded the Societas Evangelica and Hoxton Academy in 1778. Bradbury's brother, Peter, who had been his assistant minister at Fetter Lane, continued at New Court until he married money. He resigned in 1731 and retired to an estate in Yorkshire. 
Doddridge feared that an illness in 1738 had brought Bradbury 'near Eternity' ('Calendar', ed. Nuttall, 518). Another in 1743 also concerned his friends. These, however, appear to have been the only interruptions of his sixty-two years' active ministry. He remained to the end a popular, patriotic preacher and an uncompromising leading figure in orthodox dissent among the Independents. Of all his collected sermons 'The Christian's Joy in Finishing his Course' (1713), from before the years of theological controversy, was said to have given him most personal satisfaction. He preached his last sermon on 12 August 1759, the anniversary of the accession of George I, and fell ill shortly afterwards. He died, aged eighty-two, on 9 September 1759 and was buried in Bunhill Fields on 15 September. The next day, a Sunday, Richard Winter, his successor, and Thomas Hall, Independent minister at Moorfields, preached funeral sermons at New Court. His widow survived him and was buried on 28 September 1765. 


@@@@@


doc= 3170


Braddock, Edward (bap. 1695, d. 1755), army officer, was baptized at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 2 February 1695, the son and namesake of an officer (eventually a major-general) in the Coldstream Guards and his wife, Mary. The elder Edward Braddock (1664-1725) obtained an ensigncy for his son in the Coldstreams in October 1710, and he then progressed by purchase: lieutenant, 1716; captain-lieutenant, 1734; captain (line rank of lieutenant-colonel), 10 February 1736; second major, with army rank of colonel, 1743; first major, 1745; and lieutenant-colonel, 1745. Before the War of the Austrian Succession, which created opportunities for advancement, his pace of promotion was rather slow. Braddock probably did not participate in, and certainly did not command, any action during the war, but instead handled administrative assignments. Seeking advancement, in February 1753 he left the Coldstreams to become colonel of the 14th foot: he spent 1753-4 with the regiment at Gibraltar, where he also served as acting governor. Of his governorship Walpole later reported: 'he made himself adored, and where scarce any governor was endured before' (Walpole, 20.496). In April 1754 he was promoted major-general. 
During the autumn of 1754 Braddock was given command of an expedition to North America. The duke of Cumberland, captain-general and formerly colonel of the Coldstreams, seems to have been instrumental in placing him in charge. Braddock's task was twofold: he was to put the British colonies on a war footing; and, beginning with the seizure of Fort Duquesne, on the forks of the Ohio River, he was to sweep the French back into Canada and ultimately seize Quebec and Montreal. Despite the immensity of the assignment, Braddock was given only two regiments to work with, the 44th and 48th foot, both of which were undermanned. It does not appear that he had sought this position, and he is reported to have said: 'we are sent like sacrifices to the altar' (Bellamy, 1.194). 
Braddock sailed from Cork in December 1754 and disembarked at Hampton, Virginia, on 20 February 1755. His first initiative was to co-ordinate the war preparations of the various colonies, but, despite government directives that exalted his authority, he was soon complaining over a lack of co-operation. On 15 April, at a conference in Alexandria, he did win the approval of five governors for a co-ordinated offensive, but he was unsuccessful in his attempt to persuade them to establish a common fund to finance the war. While in Virginia, Braddock became convinced that he needed to have a large contingent of Native Americans to accompany his expedition, yet, when his agents succeeded in recruiting several hundred of them, Governor James Glen of South Carolina helped persuade these warriors to stay at home. 
Nor did Braddock find more co-operation after he joined his army at Fort Cumberland (Wills Creek, Maryland) on 10 May. The troops were poorly supplied and much of the food was spoiled. When he pressed contractors to fulfil their obligations they demanded extra time and raised their prices. Only in early June was this problem alleviated, as Benjamin Franklin was able to provide some wagons and provisions. Yet another problem that Braddock faced at Wills Creek was the quality of his troops. The two British regiments had been augmented by drafts and by recruitment in America, but as late as 8 June Braddock was writing to Cumberland's secretary: 'the whole of the Forces are now assembled, making about two thousand Effectives, the greatest part Virginians, very indifferent Men, this Country affording no better; it has cost infinite pains and labor to bring them to any sort of Regularity and Discipline' (Pargellis, 'Military Affairs', 54). Nevertheless, when the army finally marched, on 10 June, Braddock expressed optimism. The march proceeded slowly, and he became concerned that if the pace did not quicken Fort Duquesne would be reinforced before his army arrived (as did in fact happen). On 16 June Braddock ordered a division of his army, leaving about one-third of the men (and most of the wagons) to proceed at their own pace, under the command of Thomas Dunbar, colonel of the 48th. 
By the early afternoon of 9 July Braddock's army was within 10 miles of Fort Duquesne when it was suddenly confronted by a force of about 800 men, more than three-quarters of them Native Americans, the rest French or Canadian. The enemy force had actually intended to ambush the British as they were fording the Monongahela, but it improvised quickly, as the Native Americans raced down the flanks of Braddock's army and caught it in a crossfire, while the French held the front. Within minutes many of the officers in Braddock's vanguard were killed or incapacitated, and the men fell back. Braddock himself was with the main body of his army, and it appears that on hearing the firing in the front he sent forward a detachment, which, however, soon encountered the retreating vanguard and became enmeshed with it. The three hours that followed found Braddock's army in the same confused state, helpless in the face of enemy fire. Braddock attempted to rally his men, but to no avail, and finally he was shot in the chest -- possibly by one of his own men -- and the army retreated, two-thirds of the men having been killed or wounded. On 13 July, in Dunbar's camp at Great Meadows near Fort Necessity, some 60 miles back in the direction of Wills Creek, Braddock surrendered his command and died. He was buried there the following day on the road. His grave was discovered in 1812, and in 1913 a monument was raised over it. 
A lifelong bachelor, Braddock left his estate to a protege, the actress George Anne Bellamy, and to John Calcraft, an army agent he mistakenly believed to be her husband. Like many officers, he had for years indulged himself at the gaming tables of London and Bath, and contemporary rumour linked him with several women. Regardless of his lifestyle, however, the fortune he bequeathed was significant -- $7000, according to Bellamy -- if not large. 
Contemporaries portrayed Braddock as hot tempered. It may be that as he aged he attempted to rein in his temper, and an officer who served with him 1746-8 wrote that Braddock, 'by having been now and then taken down, is greatly reformed' ('Frankland-Russell-Astley MSS', 354). The issue of his temper is related to a second: that he was a martinet. Even among his peers he seems to have had a reputation for harshness. Bellamy recalled an incident when he, at her request, interceded for 'a poor fellow [about] to be chastised'. The officer that he spoke to asked him, 'How long since he had divested himself of brutality', to which Braddock responded, 'You never knew me insolent to my inferiors' (Bellamy, 3.55). But the characterization of Braddock as a fierce disciplinarian persisted, and it had particular consequence in America, where reports of his harshness fed a negative stereotype of British officers. 
Braddock's historical significance is tied entirely to his expedition in North America and particularly to the battle that concluded it. For the most part, the assessment by contemporaries and historians alike has been harsh. As the officer in command of an army that suffered an overwhelming and bloody defeat he must accept some responsibility, but it would be simplistic to place all the blame on him. The assignment given him by the government was wholly unreasonable, especially considering the troops and the resources he was allowed. The lack of co-operation from the governors -- which, in the case of Glen, amounted to virtual sabotage -- hampered his progress, as did the dilatoriness of the contractors. At the battle itself Braddock was undermined by the troops, who ignored his orders to re-form and move against the enemy, and by the ineptitude of some subordinate officers, particularly Lieutenant-Colonel (later Major-General) Thomas Gage, who commanded the vanguard. The image that lingers, of Braddock stubbornly attempting to fight a conventional 'European' battle in an American forest against an irregular force, may misrepresent his tactics during the engagement and certainly underestimates the obstacles that he faced. 


@@@@@


doc= 3171


Bradock, John (1655/6-1719), Church of England clergyman and theological author, was born in Shropshire; his parents' names are not known. On 6 May 1671 he was admitted as a pensioner to St Catharine's College, Cambridge. Having matriculated in 1673 he graduated BA in 1675, proceeded MA in 1678, and held a fellowship from 1680 until 1688. In 1687 the university vice-chancellor sent him, together with George Stanhope, with letters to James II's ministers petitioning the king to revoke a mandate to confer a degree of MA on a Benedictine monk without the statutory oaths being taken. 
About 1689 Bradock moved to Kent, where he became chaplain to Sir James Oxenden, bt, of Dene, and curate to John Batteley, rector of Adisham. In 1694 he was nominated by the archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Tenison, to the perpetual curacy of Folkestone, which he resigned for the vicarage of St Stephen alias Hackington, to which he was presented by Batteley, archdeacon of Canterbury, on 30 March 1699. In 1703 he was appointed one of the Six Preachers of Canterbury Cathedral. Ofspring Blackall, his friend and contemporary at St Catharine's, made him his chaplain when he became bishop of Exeter in 1708, although 'he got nothing by it, but the Title' (BL, Add. MS 5863, fol. 114'v'). He was collated to the mastership of Eastbridge Hospital, Canterbury, on 12 January 1710. 
Bradock wrote 'The doctrine of the fathers and the schools consider'd: concerning the articles of a Trinity of divine persons and the unity of God', part the first (1695). In it he defended William Sherlock's 'Vindication of the Doctrine of the Holy and Ever Blessed Trinity' (1690), against Robert South's 'Animadversions upon Dr Sherlock's Book' (1693). Examining patristic, scholastic, and later writers on the Trinity he aimed to demonstrate that ''Three Divine Persons' may be orthodoxly stiled 'Three Infinite Minds or Spirits'' (p. iv). He was answered by Thomas Holdsworth in 'Impar conatui' (1695). The proposed second part concerning the unity of God, 'Deus unus et trinus', was almost ready for publication when it was suppressed at the direction of Archbishop Tenison, who did not wish the controversy prolonged. James Bonnell wrote to John Strype in 1699 that he feared Bradock was 'warping towards Socinianism, by an Account he gave me of Something he was about to publish'. 
Bradock died at his vicarage on 14 August 1719, aged sixty-three, and was buried in the chancel of Hackington church. 


@@@@@


doc= 3172


Braddon, Laurence (d. 1724), lawyer, was the second son of William Braddon of Treworgy, in St Genny's, Cornwall. He was admitted to the Middle Temple on 20 November 1677. 
When Arthur Capel, earl of Essex, sent to the Tower of London for his part in the Rye House plot of 1682, was found dead in the Tower on 13 July 1683, Braddon decided that he had been murdered, and began to collect evidence to prove this. He was soon arrested, and on 7 February 1684 he and Hugh Speke were tried before the court of king's bench, accused of a conspiracy to spread the belief that the earl of Essex was murdered by his keepers, on the order of the court, and of attempting to suborn witnesses to testify to this. Braddon was found guilty on all the counts, was fined $2000, and kept in prison until William III landed in 1688. He was called to the bar on 24 November 1693, and in February 1695 he was appointed solicitor to the wine licence office at a salary of $100 a year. 
Most of Braddon's works concern the death of the earl of Essex. 'Enquiry into and Detection of the Barbarous Murther of the Late Earl of Essex' (1689) was probably written by him, and he was the author of 'Essex's Innocency and Honour Vindicated' (1690), 'Murther will out' (1692), 'True and Impartial Narrative of the Murder of Arthur, Earl of Essex' (1729), and 'Bishop Burnet's Late History Charg'd with Great Partiality and Misrepresentation' (1724), which claimed that Burnet's history was full of misrepresentations to make people believe that Essex committed suicide. Braddon also published 'The Constitutions of the Company of Watermen and Lightermen' (1708), and an 'Abstract of the Rules, Orders, and Constitutions' of the same company (1708). In 'The Miseries of the Poor are a National Sin, Shame, and Danger' (1717) he argued for the establishment of guardians of the poor and inspectors for the encouragement of arts and manufactures. In 1721 he brought out 'Particular Answers to the most Material Objections Made to the Proposal for Relieving the Poor'. Braddon died on 29 November 1724. 


@@@@@


doc= 3173


Brade, William (c.1560-1630), violinist and composer, spent much of his working life in Germany, where he made a considerable impact as a player, teacher, and composer. He held numerous court positions, principally in Denmark and with various members of the Brandenburg and Brunswick dynasties. Brade spent about four years at the Brandenburg court before travelling to Copenhagen to take up a position at the court chapel of Christian IV in November 1594. He remained there until September 1596, when once again he returned to Brandenburg. He was back at the Danish court from September 1599 until February 1606 (though he seems to have visited Berlin in 1603). He then moved to the court of Count Ernst III of Holstein-Schaumburg in Buckeburg. At Easter 1608 he left to join the town music ('Ratsmusik') of Hamburg. He returned to Buckeburg in 1611 for a further two years, but his threat to return to Hamburg unless he was paid a salary of 1000 thalers (more than twice what he had received during his earlier period of employment at this court) brought him into conflict with his patron. Count Ernst took steps to warn the Hamburg authorities about this 'mischievous, wanton fellow' and his disruptive wife. Brade did, however, return to Hamburg at Easter 1613 (having organized an exchange with the leader of the 'Ratsmusik'). 
Residence in Hamburg, which was a centre of music publishing, must have acted as a stimulus to Brade. He had had fifteen dances included in the first volume of the anthology 'Ausserlesener Paduanen und Galliarden' (1607) and a couple more in the second volume (1609). But during his first two periods of residence in the city he produced two books of his own instrumental music, 'Newe ausserlesene Paduanen, Galliarden, Canzonen, Allmand und Coranten' (1609) and 'Newe ausserlesene Paduanen und Galliarden' (1614), the latter a collection of six-part (and mostly paired) pavans and galliards. These are more contrapuntally sophisticated than his later dance collections. The 1609 collection was also published in Antwerp. 
Brade is next heard of in 1614 at the court of Duke Friedrich III of Schleswig-Holstein at Holstein-Gottorp, but by mid-1615 he was back in Copenhagen. Another collection of five-part dance music, 'Newe ausserlesene liebliche Branden, Intraden, Mascharaden, Balletten, All'manden, Couranten, Volten, Aufzuge und frembde Tanze', appeared in Lubeck and Hamburg in 1617. In 1618 he was in Halle as a member of the household of Christian Wilhelm von Brandenburg, where he styled himself 'kapellmeister by appointment to the prince of Magdeburg'. (He seems to have held a similar rank at Gustrow with the duke of Mecklenburg.) He moved to Berlin as court kapellmeister to the elector Johann Sigismund of Brandenburg in 1619, but in August 1620 returned to the Danish court. Brade's last collection of instrumental music, 'Newe lustige Volten, Couranten, Balletten, Padoanen, Galliarden, Masqueraden, auch allerley Arth newer frantzosischer Tantze', another set of social dances, was published in Berlin in 1621 (having perhaps been set in train during his residence there). In 1622 he took up his last court position, as director of the court kapelle of Schleswig-Holstein. As the Thirty Years' War spread to this region, Brade sought safety in Hamburg, which was neutral. He became kapellmeister of the theatre in 1625, and it seems that he may have been involved with the 'Gymnasium'. Brade died in Hamburg on 26 February 1630. Four years later the poet and theologian Johann Rist referred to him as 'the famous English string player'. 
Brade seems to have had some distinguished pupils. He taught Nicholas Bleyer at Holstein-Gottorp, and it seems likely that he taught Johann Schop and David Cramer in Hamburg. He can thus be seen as a formative influence in the development of north German violin playing. He seems to have taken some pride in his origins, styling himself 'Wilhelm Brade Englisch' on the title-pages of several publications. He clearly maintained his contacts with English musicians -- and not just with those who spent all or part of their working lives in north Germany and Denmark. The 1617 publication contains arrangements of twenty of the most popular dances from Jacobean court masques (and a number of other dances which are in a similar style and might possibly originate from the same source). 


@@@@@


doc= 3174


Bradfield, Henry Joseph Steele (1805-1852), colonial official and author, was born on 18 May 1805 in Derby Street, Westminster, London, where his father, Thomas Bradfield, was a coal merchant. In 1825 he published 'Waterloo, or, The British Minstrel: a Poem'. He had trained as a surgeon, and on 26 April 1826 left England aboard the schooner 'Unicorn' with Lord Cochrane's expedition to Greece, where he took part in several engagements on land and sea. After his return he published 'The Athenaid, or, Modern Grecians, a Poem' (1830) and 'Tales of the Cyclades, Poems' (1830), and in 1839 he edited a work entitled 'A Russian's Reply to the Marquis de Custine's 'Russia''. 
On 1 September 1832 Bradfield received a commission as 'sous-lieutenant' in the Belgian 'Bataillon etranger' and was appointed to the 1st regiment of lancers. At one time he held a commission in the Royal West Middlesex militia. He was appointed stipendiary magistrate in Tobago on 31 December 1835, and was transferred to Trinidad on 13 May 1836. He was reappointed to the southern or Cedros district on 13 April 1839, but soon returned to England following a quarrel with another colonial officer. In 1841 he returned to the West Indies as private secretary to Colonel Macdonald, lieutenant-governor of Dominica, and in 1842 he acted as colonial secretary in Barbados. Charges connected with the earlier quarrel were, however, renewed, and the government cancelled his appointment. 
From then on Bradfield lived very precariously, drawing on his moderate literary talents: among some contributions he made to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' were articles on 'The last of the Paleologi' in January 1843, and a 'Memoir of Major-General Thomas Dundas and the expedition to Gaudaloupe' later the same year. Latterly, he was almost a professional beggar; he committed suicide by swallowing prussic acid, and was found dead in the St Albans Hotel, Charles Street, Westminster, on 11 October 1852. 


@@@@@


doc= 3175


Bradford, John (c.1510-1555), evangelical preacher and martyr, was a native of the parish of Manchester. His parents are said to have been of gentle birth, but little is known for certain of his family, except that he had at least three sisters. He attended Manchester grammar school, and was grateful for the rest of his life for the education he received there. 
Between 1544 and 1547 Bradford was employed by Sir John Harington of Exton, Rutlandshire, the vice-treasurer of the English army in France, whom he may have met when Harington was serving in the north for the 1542 Scottish campaign. Harington's French responsibilities included the king's interests and properties at Boulogne, and it is probable that Bradford served as his assistant there. His employment proved far from uncontroversial, however, and he found himself suspected of peculation, at the expense of both the crown and his employer, whom he was alleged to have defrauded of $140. The details remain obscure. When the affair was brought up by Bishop Gardiner in 1553, Bradford denied any offence against Harington, whose own shady dealings complicate in their turn the issue of his employee's possible, but improbable, offence against the crown. 
Bradford does not appear to have had any particular penchant for military affairs, and it is not surprising that in 1547 he should have left Boulogne, and on 8 April enrolled at the Inner Temple. Coinciding with this change in career, and even more momentous, was his religious conversion. Crucial roles in this event were played by Thomas Sampson, who stimulated his interest in theology, and by Hugh Latimer, whose fiery preaching evidently so impressed Bradford that he voluntarily began a process of restitution with regard to his offences in France. Further underlining his personal renewal, he also sold a number of valuables and distributed the proceeds among the needy, and thereafter, as Foxe put it, 'he gave himself wholly to the study of the holy scriptures' ('Acts and Monuments', 7.143). He never married, but as far as possible remained on affectionate terms with members of his family. His sister Margaret married Roger Beswick, who became a devoted protestant, but, although his other sisters and his mother seem to have remained conservative in religion, Bradford never ceased to show himself concerned for their spiritual welfare; this is particularly apparent in letters he wrote to his mother, for instance on 24 February 1554 and 24 June 1555. 
Bradford also changed course with regard to his chosen career, as he took full advantage of the growing opportunities to study the new learning. As with others of that generation who were inclined towards humanism, his initial foray into the classics seems modest enough, being a translation of Petrus Artopoeus and John Chrysostom published in 1548 as 'The Divisyon of the Places of the Lawe and of the Gospell' (ESTC 822). In the early summer of the same year he gained admission to St Catharine's College, Cambridge, where he clearly met with approval, since on 19 October 1549 he was awarded the degree of MA, following examination by James Pilkington, future bishop of Durham. Three days later he wrote to his friend John Traves, anticipating his election to a fellowship at Pembroke College through the good offices of its master, Nicholas Ridley, who turned out to have been in disputation with Edwin Sandys, master of St Catharine's, as to which college should secure Bradford's services. By the following month he was a fellow of Pembroke, a position he claimed he had never sought, and found himself in the company of Edmund Grindal, and acted as tutor to John Whitgift when the latter arrived in Michaelmas term 1550. It is a sign of his developing eminence that he should also have formed an intimate friendship with the Strasbourg theologian Martin Bucer, who came to Cambridge in 1549. According to Sampson, Bradford kept a sort of journal during his time in Cambridge, recording the important events and thoughts of each day, as an aid to his development as a servant of Christ. 
Bucer intended that Bradford should become a preacher, while Bradford protested that he needed further study before he could take on such a role. But on 10 August 1550 Ridley, now bishop of London, ordained him deacon, gave him a preaching licence, and appointed him one of his own chaplains. On 24 August 1551 he was collated to the prebend of Kentish Town in St Paul's Cathedral, and in December following he was made one of six chaplains in ordinary to the king; it is a sign that Bradford had come to be regarded as a member of a protestant preaching elite that his colleagues should have been Grindal, John Knox, John Harley, Andrew Perne, and William Bill. It was intended that at any one time two should be serving at court, while the others travelled through the country preaching reformation. It is unclear how much time Bradford spent away from London, but he certainly preached in Lancashire and Cheshire during 1552, his own writings attesting to a ministry which centred upon Manchester but extended to such places as Liverpool, Bolton, Stockport, and Westchester. His effectiveness was greatest in southern Lancashire, where he spoke to large crowds and attracted a number of converts, though without making much impression upon the gentry of the region. Back at Westminster, he and his fellow chaplains used the Lenten season of 1553 as the occasion for a controversial pulpiteering campaign against sin in high places; Bradford himself went so far as to hold up the duke of Somerset, executed less than a year earlier, as an exemplar of unrighteousness. Sampson records this sermon as having been delivered in the presence of the king himself, and as proclaiming the imminence of divine judgment. 
This episode shows that he was not a man to be daunted by authority, and Bradford also proved himself both courageous and responsible in the immediate aftermath of Edward VI's death. On 13 August 1553, accompanied by John Rogers, he acted swiftly to calm disturbances provoked by the Catholic Gilbert Bourne in a sermon at Paul's Cross, risking his safety to the extent that a dagger thrown at Bourne grazed his own clothing. Then during the afternoon he preached in Bow church, Cheapside, and according to Foxe 'reproved the people sharply for their seditious demeanour' ('Acts and Monuments', 7.145). By temperament meek and self-effacing, neither now nor later did Bradford shrink from danger, though he and his comrades became increasingly vulnerable to the dictates of Queen Mary's government. A few days after he had assisted the authorities in the task of crowd control he was summoned before the council in the Tower, where the queen was then resident, and charged with preaching seditious sermons. Imprisoned in the Tower, he was at first incarcerated alone, but was then moved to the place known as the 'Nun's bower' with Edwin Sandys. They stayed there for five months. It was clearly government policy to keep the leading protestant prisoners on the move, however, perhaps in the hope of disorientating them, and on 6 February 1554 the two men were separated, Bradford being taken to another room in the Tower, which he shared with Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer. On 11 or 12 March the latter were removed to Oxford, and on the 24th Bradford left for Southwark and the king's bench prison there. 
The king's bench prison became something like a 'mother-house' for people charged with heresy; apart from Bradford, its inmates included Robert Ferrar, Rowland Taylor, and John Philpot. Bradford spent some ten months imprisoned here, though his sympathetic character, along with the favour of the knight marshal, Sir William Fitzwilliam, secured for him an unusual amount of freedom. Foxe records that he was given leave to preach twice daily, and even to administer the sacraments. But Bradford's acknowledged holiness of life could not prevent serious theological disputes from arising among the protestant prisoners. He was a leading representative of what was becoming the theological mainstream among Edwardian evangelicals, with a bent decidedly, if not radically, Calvinistic, and increasingly influenced by ideas from Geneva and Strasbourg adapted to English circumstances. Not everyone, however, was eager to jump on the predestinarian bandwagon, and in south-east England, in particular, there was a good deal of interest in countervailing ideas, often also of continental origins. There emerged a group of so-called 'free-willers', led by Henry Harte, who 'repudiated with violence the predestinatory doctrines of Calvin' (Dickens, 328). The result was a spirited debate on the issues of election and free will, conducted through discussions, correspondence, and writings, in and around the various gaols in which protestants had been imprisoned by Queen Mary's government. For the latter the divisions among their opponents provided a cause for satisfaction and matter for propaganda, but for the evangelical cause they were the source of much grief, as its leaders struggled to present a united front to their adversaries by reclaiming as many as possible of the people whom they regarded as their confused or ill-taught brethren. 
In these disputes Bradford played a leading part, not only by endeavouring to keep order in the prisons, where feelings sometimes ran very high, but also through his writings. He was in constant correspondence with his opponents, composing such treatises as 'To a Free-Willer' in 1554, and 'To Certain Free-Willers' on 1 January 1555, and when matters looked particularly critical he also appealed to Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer in Oxford. With Taylor, Ferrar, and Philpot he forwarded to the imprisoned bishops a text by Harte with the comment: 'The effects of salvation they so mingle and confound with the cause, that if it be not seen to more hurt will come by them, than ever came by the papists, inasmuch as their life commendeth them to the world more than the papists. ('Writings', 2.170-71)' Ridley, at least, took the matter seriously, composing a treatise (probably now preserved among the Fairhurst papers in Lambeth Palace Library) in which he took up a position identical to Bradford's own, rejecting misconceived notions of both free will and predestination in favour of the doctrine of God's election and justification by faith in Christ. It would appear that the party of moderate predestinarianism prevailed, and that a number of free-willers defected to it. Thus Bradford rejoiced over a certain Skelthrop, declaring that God 'hath given him to see his truth at the length, and to give place to it' (ibid., 2.243), but Harte remained obdurate, prompting Bradford's ally John Careless to exclaim 'God convert him or confound him shortly' ('Acts and Monuments', 8.164). 
As well as having to confront theological opposition while in prison, Bradford also had once more to face charges of financial mismanagement. Outside assistance was essential if the protestant prisoners were not to risk starvation, and since Bradford was effectively their leader it fell to him to organize the equitable distribution of the donations, whose contributors included Nicholas Ridley and a number of godly women, including Lady Vane from Holborn, Mrs Anne Warcup, and Anne Boleyn's former silkwoman, Joan Wilkinson. He was now accused not of peculation but of favouring his own supporters at the expense of the free-willers when he handed out alms. One of the latter named John Trewe brought such a charge, which Bradford denied with feeling, asserting that he had always been concerned for the well-being of his opponents, and had even devoted to it money intended for his private use. Such unfairness would certainly have been out of character for Bradford, but the allegation underlines the difficulties of his position, that he should have been responsible for the well-being of a number of fellow prisoners whose theological position he was at the same time attacking. The challenges of leadership required unlimited patience and godly wisdom. 
Another, and to him doubtless more important, aspect of Bradford's prison ministry was the pastoral one of giving comfort to people who were agonizing over their assurance of salvation. It was a ministry which extended outside the confines of prison, to members of London's godly congregations who looked to him for guidance. Their doubts stemmed largely from the same deterministic doctrines which had prompted debate between Bradford and the free-willers. Thus Margery Coke, greatly disturbed by 'temptations of election', appealed to Bradford for comfort and received a sympathetic response (23 July 1554), even though he was himself in the grip of fever at the time. Some two weeks later Joyce Hales required similar assistance as she wrestled with the same dilemma. Indeed, she became a regular correspondent of Bradford, who faithfully consoled her 'with texts and images from 'Matthew's gospel' and 'Romans'. He intended to lift her from a deep spiritual crisis, and yet find words which would be applicable to his own, or any Protestant's, plight' (Wabuda, 249). 
It was to Mistress Hales that Bradford dedicated his 'Defence of Election', a substantial treatise in which he declares confidently that 'Faith of God's election... is of all things which God requireth of us, not only most principal, but also the whole sum: so that 'without this faith' there is nothing that we do that can 'please God'' ('Writings', 1.307). In another passage he assures readers 'that election is so certain that the elect and predestinate to eternal life shall never finally perish or err to damnation finally' (ibid., 1.314), and he concludes with a firm yet moderate (or 'infralapsarian') statement of the Calvinist position: 'But they, because they cannot by their curious reason see how election should be before God, and yet follow Adam's fall to us, therefore they come with their witless, unreasonable, arrogant and very detestable 'hows'' (ibid., 1.330). He also composed two briefer works, 'A Treatise of Election and Free-will' and 'A Brief Sum of the Doctrine of Election and Predestination', again covering controversial ground: 'God's foresight is not the cause of sin or excusable necessity to him that sinneth: the damned therefore have not nor shall have any excuse, because God, forseeing their condemnation through their own sin, did not draw them, as he doth his elect, unto Christ. (ibid., 1.219)' Bradford could also assume a less partisan and more pastoral voice, however, as in his 'Sermon on Repentance', speaking as if God were appealing through himself: 'If, when we hated him and fled away from him, he sent his Son to seek us; who can think otherwise than now we loving him, and lamenting because we love him no more, but that he will for ever love us? ('Writings', 1.75)' It is not surprising that men and women anticipating a violent death for their faith should have thought much of their place in the next life. Bradford composed 'A Very Godly Prayer of one Standing at the Stake Ready to be Burnt for Christ's Gospel's Sake', and expressed the ultimate hope of his flock in his 'Meditation of the Blessed State and Felicity of the Life to Come': 'Thy angels will gather them together, and they shall meet thee in the clouds, and be always with thee. They shall hear this joyful voice, 'Come, ye blessed of my Father, possess the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning'. (ibid., 1.275)' 

The demands of prison life on Bradford's physical and emotional resources were very great, making it hard to understand how he was able to manage with only four hours' sleep a night, as Foxe records that he did. He enjoyed the companionship of his associates after his meals, but soon turned to reading and prayer. As the Marian persecution gathered momentum at the beginning of 1555, he needed all his strength. Bradford was examined three times at Winchester on 22, 29, and 30 January, and at the last of these sessions he was condemned as a heretic. But although the burning of John Rogers on 4 February might have led him to expect a quick end, he did not suffer until nearly five months later, being held first in the Clink and then in solitude in the Compter in the Poultry, in what was known as the Grocers' Hall court. The reason for the delay was undoubtedly the anxiety of the Catholic authorities to undermine his influence in his native Lancashire, either by executing him there, as was at first expected, or by securing his recantation. On 19 February the writ for his execution was withdrawn and Bradford was subjected to repeated conferences and examinations during that month, March, and April. Among the eminent churchmen and theologians who came to debate with him were Nicholas Heath, archbishop of York, George Day, bishop of Chichester, and the Spanish divines Alfonso de Castro and Bartolome Carranza. At one point he was told he could take refuge abroad if only he would recant. His importance was as apparent to his enemies as it was later to be to his protestant successors. In the words of John Strype, Bradford was a man 'of whose worth the papists themselves were so sensible, that they took more pains to bring him off from the profession of religion, than any other' (Strype, 3/1.363-4). 
Bradford held firm, and late on 30 June 1555 he was taken back to Newgate. He finally went to the stake at Smithfield on the following day, accompanied by John Leaf, a much younger man, and wearing a new shirt made for him for the occasion by one of his supporters, a Mrs Marler. Foxe describes him as 'somewhat tall and slender, spare of body, of a faint sanguine colour, with an auburn beard' ('Acts and Monuments', 7.145), a representation confirmed by his portrait (in Hampstead Public Library), which shows a sombre scholar-preacher, characteristic of the mid-sixteenth century. Before all else a godly man, he was concerned 'to make to himself a catalogue of all the grossest and most enorme sins, which in his life of ignorance he had committed' ('Writings', 1.33). But there was also a very pleasant and compassionate side to his personality, which even the Jesuit Robert Parsons acknowledged, remarking that Bradford was 'of a more soft and mild nature than many of his fellows' (Loane, 159). It was this combination of qualities which enabled Bradford to give a leadership in prison which was of fundamental importance for the evangelical cause, both at the time and later. In the words of William Haller: 'But besides being the hero and author of one of the most striking tales in the whole 'Book of Martyrs', Bradford also left materials which enabled Foxe to present him as a prototype of all the physicians of the soul who would presently be undertaking the spiritual direction of more and more of Elizabeth's subjects. (Haller, 207)' 



@@@@@


doc= 3176


Bradford, John (1706-1785), poet and antiquary, was the son of a Richard Bradford ('fl'. 'c'.1700-1750) who lived at Y Pandy, Betws Tir Iarll, in upper Glamorgan. Little definite is known of his father, but he was probably a weaver, fuller, and dyer, as his son became. A tradition existed in the family that the Bradfords, who had their own coat of arms, had moved to Betws from Bradford-on-Avon in the early seventeenth century. 
Bradford became a prominent figure among the small, cultured fraternity of bards that emerged in upper Glamorgan during the first half of the eighteenth century and played an important role in the literary renaissance that occurred in the county at that time. He appears to have applied himself diligently in his youth to studying the ancient Welsh bardic traditions and collecting Welsh manuscripts. There is some evidence that he acquired several of the manuscript volumes of the cultured Powel family of Tir Iarll. He was undoubtedly acquainted with the works of many English authors and literary critics, and it is said that some of the English volumes he had acquired were still in the possession of his descendants in the nineteenth century. However, very little of his verse is now extant, and the few surviving examples do not suggest that he was endowed with much poetic ability. A staunch nonconformist, he acquired some repute as a rationalist, and the works of some of the more prominent eighteenth-century deists made a deep impression on him. He was known to the influential Morris circle in north Wales, and he corresponded with both William Wynn (1709-1760) of Llangynhafal and Lewis Morris (1701-1765), the celebrated Welsh poet and scholar, who described Bradford, in a characteristically sarcastic manner, as 'the Prime of South Wales Poets'. He was elected a member of the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion, London. 
The most talented of his pupils was the renowned Welsh literary forger Iolo Morganwg 
(Edward Williams; 1747-1826)
, who, after Bradford's death, invented many stories about his erudition and his connection with the druidic and Unitarian bardic system which, he claimed, had uniquely persisted in Glamorgan throughout the centuries, and especially in Tir Iarll. Iolo frequently maintained that it was in Bradford's manuscripts that he had found many of the details that were later shown to be the product of his own fertile imagination. Much that was written about Bradford in the nineteenth century must, therefore, be treated with the greatest caution. 
Bradford was buried on 6 June 1785 in Betws and his will was proved at Cowbridge on 11 October that year. After specifying certain sums he bequeathed to his daughters and to his wife, Alice, he left the remainder of his possessions entirely to his son, Richard, who was blind. However, his will contained no reference to his collection of books and manuscripts. He expressed the wish to be buried 'with my ancestors in the parish church of Betws in a decent manner without any funeral pomp and with as little expense as decency will admit of'. In July 1785, approximately a month after his death, William Thomas (1727-1795), the schoolmaster of St Bride's-super-Ely, wrote in his diary, which is a valuable chronicle of events in Glamorgan in his day: 'Was lately buried at Betws near Bridgend John Bradford a fuller and a dyer of 80 yrs of age. a great disbater and a Nominated Deist or a freethinker.' Nevertheless, the Betws parish registers show that he was a churchwarden in 1767-8 and that his son, Richard, served in a similar capacity in 1787-8. 
After John Bradford's death his son, Richard, continued to work as a weaver and fuller in Betws. An employee of his, named David James, who played a prominent role in the Unitarian movement in Tir Iarll and its neighbourhood, married a niece to Richard Bradford. Their great-granddaughter became the wife of John Kyrle Fletcher, a well-known bookseller in his day in Newport, Monmouthshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 3177


Bradford, John (1750-1805), Church of England clergyman and Independent minister, was born at Hereford, the son of John Bradford, a clothier. He was brought up as an Anglican and educated at Hereford grammar school before proceeding to Wadham College, Oxford, whence he matriculated on 25 June 1767 and graduated BA in 1771. After leaving Oxford, Bradford became curate at Frelsham in Berkshire. He later confessed that he began his curacy as an avowed Arian but experienced a conversion to Trinitarianism and became decidedly Calvinistic in his religious convictions. While still an Anglican clergyman he agreed to preach in several chapels belonging to the Countess of Huntingdon's Connexion, but this was frowned on by the church authorities and in 1780 he was dismissed from his living at Frelsham. 
Bradford then joined the countess's connexion and for several years supplied various chapels in south Wales and the west midlands including Bridge Street, Walsall, and Virgin's End (later Mayers Green), West Bromwich. His most unusual supply was preaching at the old playhouse in Birmingham, which had been purchased by the countess for use as a chapel. There Bradford preached from a pulpit positioned at the front of the stage. His preaching proved very popular and the entire theatre was sometimes crammed with an appreciative audience. However, the desire for a settled ministry led him to leave the connexion and accept in 1786 charge of the independent congregation at the newly opened Paradise Chapel in Bartholomew Street, Birmingham. While there he published (1792) 'A Collection of Hymns', some of which were written by himself. This collection of 280 hymns, avowedly antinomian, proved popular at the time but very few of these hymns are in common usage today. His other notable literary work, also published in 1792, was his 'Notes to Bunyan's 'Pilgrim's Progress'', extracts from which later appeared as footnotes in volume 3 of George Offor's edition of Bunyan's works. 
Bradford, who had married about 1779 and had a family of twelve children, remained at Bartholomew Street until 1797, when financial circumstances forced him to accept the more lucrative position of minister at the City Chapel in Grub Street, London. There he 'ministered with great acceptation till his death' on 16 July 1805 (Jones, 15). He was buried in Bunhill Fields, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 3178


Bradford, Samuel (1652-1731), bishop of Rochester, was born on 20 December 1652 in St Ann Blackfriars. He was the son of William Bradford, a citizen of London and parish officer during the plague. He was educated at St Paul's School, and then, when that school closed owing to the plague and the fire of London, he went to Charterhouse. He was admitted to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, in 1669. He matriculated on 27 March 1672; however, owing to some scruples concerning subscriptions, declarations, and oaths, he did not take the BA. On leaving university he returned home and began to study medicine and then religion. After 'a free conversation with some of the best and ablest divines in London' and with the encouragement of Dr Benjamin Whichcote (Lamb, 215), Bradford reconciled his initial scruples and decided to take orders but, as he was too old to return to university, Archbishop Sancroft admitted him to the degree of MA in 1680 by royal mandate. He subsequently became a private tutor in the families of a number of gentlemen. Following the revolution of 1688, Bradford went to London and was ordained deacon on 15 June 1690, and then priest on 5 October the same year by Bishop Compton. At the beginning of 1691, on the recommendation of William Lloyd, John Tillotson, Edward Stillingfleet, Richard Kidder, John Williams, and Thomas Tenison, Bradford was elected as minister of St Thomas's, Southwark, by the governors of St Thomas's Hospital. 
Soon after, Bradford was made lecturer of St Mary-le-Bow, Southwark, and was employed at Carlisle House, Lambeth, by Archbishop Tillotson as the tutor to his two grandsons. Following the death of the incumbent of St Mary's, the parishioners, without Bradford's knowledge, attempted to persuade the archbishop to give the rectory to Bradford. Tillotson did so, although he was not happy at the parishioners' attempt to influence his decision. Bradford was installed as rector of St Mary-le-Bow in November 1693, at which time he resigned his cure of St Thomas's and his lectureship, against the wishes of his parishioners. Bradford was friendly with William Whiston. Whiston reported that as rector of St Mary-le-Bow, Bradford, with the assistance of Whiston, refused communion to Lady Caverly, as she was cohabiting with Sir John Hubern. However, as Hubern refused to marry the lady even after Bradford and Whiston had entreated him to do so, Bradford relented and allowed Lady Caverly to receive communion in the future, despite Whiston's advice to the contrary. Similarly, Bradford refused communion to Sir Charles Duncomb, as Duncomb was reported to be keeping a prostitute in his home. Bradford maintained this ban when Duncomb failed to rectify the situation. 
Soon after his appointment to St Mary-le-Bow, Bradford took up the lectureship of All Hallows, Bread Street. On 13 July 1697 Bradford was incorporated at Oxford. At some point Bradford married Jane Ellis, the daughter of Captain Ellis of Medbourne in Leicestershire. Together they had one surviving son, William ('c'.1696-1728), who became archdeacon of Rochester and vicar of Newcastle upon Tyne. They also had two daughters, Jane, who married Reuben Clarke, archdeacon of Essex, and Susanna, who married John Denne, vicar of St Leonard, Shoreditch. 
Bradford appears to have been a low-churchman. He was close friends with a number of prominent low-church divines, to whom he owed much of his career advancement. It was probably for his low-church views that he gained the favour of William III, who had a preference for moderate churchmanship. William was so impressed by a sermon which Bradford preached in front of him on 30 January 1698 that he ordered that it should be published and in March made Bradford royal chaplain-in-ordinary, a position he continued to hold under Queen Anne. Bradford continued to preach on many public occasions, often choosing to speak on the importance of Christian unity and charity. 
Whiston, a radical low-churchman and Arian, went so far as to imply in his memoirs that Bradford was sympathetic to Arianism. However, his sermons, a number of which were published, do not indicate such views and the eighteenth-century historian John Lamb records that Bradford wrote to Whiston to deny this claim, asserting 'I can as freely and honestly declare myself no Arian as you do that you are one' (Lamb, 228). Bradford's low-church connection can also be seen in his appointment as Boyle lecturer in 1699. The Boyle lectures had been set up in 1691 by the latitudinarian Robert Boyle and were financially supported by the low-church archbishop, John Tenison. Their aim was to defend Christianity from attack through the reconciliation of divine revelation and reason and, as both the historians Margaret Jacob and John Gascoigne have shown, the appointment of lecturers was subject to a strong low-church influence. As lecturer Bradford preached eight sermons on 'The credibility of the Christian revelation, from its intrinsick evidence', which were later published in 1739 in a collection of Boyle lectures. Bradford was also a whig, as well as a low-churchman, committed to both the revolution and the protestant succession. It is probably for this reason that Thomas Hearne described him as 'a most sad, dull, vile wretch' ('Remarks', 8.126). 
Bradford was created DD by Queen Anne when she visited Cambridge University on 16 April 1705, and he later received the prebend of Westminster, into which position he was installed on 23 February 1707. However, Anne's reign witnessed a revival of high-church influence in both the political and ecclesiastical establishment and Bradford's religious and political views hindered his career advancement. This was particularly true of 1710, when partisan animosity was at its height. At the beginning of 1710 Queen Anne offered Bradford the bishopric of St David's. As this was a poor bishopric, Bradford accepted on the proviso that he should be able to hold his prebend of Westminster in commendam. Following the Sacheverell trial and the subsequent growth of tory influence in the government, however, Bradford's request was refused and so he was forced to decline the offer of the bishopric. A little later he was again hindered by the tory party when he lost the position of vice-chancellor of Cambridge University to the tory Dr Gooch, by ninety-five votes to fifty-one. 
Bradford's career prospects improved with the whig ascendancy following the accession of George I. On 20 May 1716 he was elected master of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, a position he continued to hold until 1724. In April 1718 Bradford was offered the bishopric of Carlisle following the translation of William Nicolson to the Irish diocese of Derry. He was consecrated by William Wake on 1 June 1718. On 19 July 1723 he was translated to the bishopric of Rochester, where he replaced the high churchman and tory Francis Atterbury, who had been deprived and exiled for his involvement with a Jacobite plot. Atterbury, a former dean of Carlisle (1704-11), had quarrelled regularly with William Nicolson when he had been bishop. In the same year that he became bishop of Rochester, Bradford was made dean of Westminster. Bradford also held the position of dean of the honourable Order of the Bath and was a member of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts. Bradford died on 17 May 1731 and was buried, as he had requested in his will, in the north cross aisle of Westminster Abbey. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 3179


Bradford, Sir Thomas (1777-1853), army officer, the eldest son of Thomas Bradford of Woodlands, near Doncaster, and Ashdown Park, Sussex, and his wife, daughter of William Otter, of Welham, Nottinghamshire, was born on 1 December 1777. He entered the army as ensign in the 4th regiment on 20 October 1793. In 1795 he was promoted major into the Nottinghamshire fencibles, at that time stationed in Ireland. He served with the forces opposing the 1798 Irish uprising, and in 1801 was promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel and appointed assistant adjutant-general in Scotland. He was summoned to the colours as a major in 1805, and served with Auchmuty as deputy adjutant-general in 1806 in the expedition to South America. 
In June 1808 Bradford accompanied the force under Sir Arthur Wellesley to Portugal, and was present at the battles of Vimeiro and Corunna. On his return to England he became assistant adjutant-general at Canterbury, and lieutenant-colonel in succession of the 34th and 82nd regiments in 1809. In 1810 he was promoted colonel, and took command of a brigade in the Portuguese army. In this capacity he proved most successful and, during the attack on the Arapiles in the battle of Salamanca especially, directed his brigade with distinction. In 1813 he was promoted major-general and made a 'mariscal de campo' in the Portuguese service; he was then put in charge of a Portuguese division, which he commanded at Vitoria, the siege of San Sebastian, and in the battle of the Nive. In the fighting before Bayonne he was so severely wounded that he had to return to England. 
In 1814 Bradford was placed on the staff of the northern district, and in January 1815 made KCB; he was also awarded the Portuguese order of the Tower and Sword. He missed the battle of Waterloo, at which his younger brother, Lieutenant-Colonel Sir Henry Holles Bradford KCB, who had also been a staff officer in the Peninsula, was killed. He commanded the 7th division of the army of occupation in France from 1815 to 1817, and the forces in Scotland from 1819 until he was promoted lieutenant-general in May 1825. He then became commander-in-chief of the troops in the Bombay presidency, a post he retained for four years. He was colonel, 94th regiment, in 1823-9, and, on returning to England in 1829, became colonel, 30th regiment. In 1831 he was made GCH and in 1838 GCB. In November 1841 he was promoted general, and in 1846 exchanged the colonelcy of the 30th for that of the 4th regiment. Bradford was twice married. He and his first wife had two sons and three daughters who survived infancy. His second wife was the widow of Lieutenant-Colonel Philip Ainslie; they also had children. Bradford died at 13 Eaton Square, London, on 28 November 1853. 


@@@@@


doc= 3257


Robert Brandard (1805-1862), printmaker and painter, who was born at Birmingham, and baptized on 31 January 1805 at St Philip's, Birmingham, the eldest son of Thomas Brandard (died 1830), engraver and copperplate printer, of Barford Street, Deretend, Birmingham, and his wife, Ann. A member of the Birmingham school of engravers, Robert Brandard learned the rudiments of his profession from his father, and probably studied also at J. V. Barber's Great Charles Street Academy and under the engraver William Radclyffe. In 1824 he became a pupil in London of the landscape engraver Edward Goodall, and about a year later set up professionally in Islington. He joined the Artists' Annuity Fund in 1827 and signed the 1837 petition to the king on the admission of engravers to the Royal Academy. Robert is primarily known for his landscape and topographical prints after works by contemporary painters such as Clarkson Stanfield, Augustus Callcott, J. F. Herring, Richard Westall, and most notably J. M. W. Turner, whom he met through Goodall. Many of his metal-engraved prints after Turner's paintings were produced under the supervision of the artist, who considered Robert to be one of the six best contemporary engravers (Rawlinson, lxvi). One of his earliest engravings to attract attention was 'Sans souci' after Thomas Stothard, which appeared in the first volume of William Pickering's 'The Bijou' (1828). Other journals to which he contributed include the 'Literary Souvenir', 'Friendship's Offering', 'The Keepsake', the 'Landscape Annual', and 'Heath's Picturesque Annual'. His first important book illustration commission was for eight plates after William Brockedon for his 'Illustrations of the Passes of the Alps' (1828-9). Many others followed, among them twenty-one plates after William Henry Bartlett for N. P. Willis's 'American Scenery' (1840) and 'Canadian Scenery' (1842), seven after Stanfield and William Collins for Walter Scott's 'Waverley' novels, and three vignettes after George Cattermole and others for Baroness Calabrella's 'Evenings at Haddon Hall' (1846). Five engravings of pictures in the Royal Collection were included in S. C. Hall's 'The Royal Gallery' ('c'.1855). Among his wood-engraved work are illustrations to Charles Knight's 'London' (1841-2). Of his various steel- or copper-engraved reproductions of Turner's work, those for 'Picturesque Views in England and Wales' (1838), 'Rivers of France' (1837), 'The Poetical Work of Sir Walter Scott' (1834), and 'The Poetical Works of John Milton' (1835) are among the most successful, the Scott plates earning him 60 guineas each. Between 1851 and 1866 fifteen of his plates appeared in the 'Art Journal', of which the eight after Turner were subsequently published in 'The Turner Gallery' ('c'.1878), most notably 'Rain, Steam and Speed' (1860), 'The Snowstorm' (1861), and 'Whalers -- the 'Erebus'' (1861). The latter, one of Robert's last engravings, was considered by a contemporary to be 'a gem on which his reputation may well rest', while others regarded his large plate of 'Crossing the Brook' (1842), exhibited with 'The Snowstorm' at the International Exhibition of 1862, as his finest (Hunnisett, 24). From his home address in Eynsford, Kent, he jointly published with J. Hogarth 'Scraps of Nature', two volumes of etchings made between 1842 and 1851 of the coast and Weald of Kent, examples of which were included in the 'Art Journal' (1875). According to one obituary 'quiet, unobtrusive, and gentlemanly in manner' ('Art Journal'), Robert was esteemed by everyone who knew him. His pupils included his brother-in-law, Mr (possibly William) Floyd, and James Clayton Bentley. He died at his home, 2 Campden Hill Villas, Kensington, London, on 7 January 1862, survived by his wife, Elizabeth. Between 1831 and 1858 he exhibited frequently at the British Institution, Royal Academy, Society (later Royal Society) of British Artists, and New Watercolour Society. Examples of his work are held at the Victoria and Albert Museum and British Museum, London; the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge; Leicester City Museums; and Blackburn Museum Art Collection. 
Robert's brother 


@@@@@


doc= 3276


(Allen) Robert Branston (1778-1827), who was born at Lynn, in Norfolk, the son of a copperplate-engraver and heraldic painter. He was taught to engrave on wood by his father. At the age of eighteen Robert moved to Bath, before settling in London in 1799. With his wife, Harriet, he had three sons, the first of whom, George Augustus, was baptized at St Mary, Lambeth, on 3 October 1800. In London he supported himself initially by embellishing musical scores and lottery bills with wood-engravings. Later he provided many wood-engravings for well-produced books, which helped significantly to revive this art form. He also aided the cause by training several apprentices, including John and Charles Thompson; A. J. Mason and G. Watts; his nephew, George Wilmot Bonner; and his sons, Frederick William and Robert Edward Branston ['see below']. As a result of these endeavours, he has been called the leader of the London school of black-line engraving, a school which largely depended on others for its designs. He signed his work 'R. Branston sc', Branston, or RB. He died in Brompton, London, in 1827. 
According to his contemporary Samuel Redgrave, Robert Branston 'engraved the figure well, and excelled with gradations of light in indoor scenes' (Redgrave, 52). Many vignettes of human subjects were commissioned from him to illustrate books, such as Robert Bloomfield's 'Wild Flowers' (1806), George Marshall's 'Epistles in Verse' (1812), and a reprint of James Puckle's 'The Club' (1817), where he engraved figures after designs by John Thurston such as 'Critic', 'Envioso', and 'Lawyer'. Thurston's 'Cave of Despair' from Spenser's 'Faerie Queene' was also engraved by Robert for William Savage's 'Practical Hints on Decorative Printing' (1822). This is probably his most important plate, and it rivalled Charlton Nesbit's engraving of 'Rinaldo and Armida' in the same volume. By contrast, Robert's representations of animals and nature were less successful, especially when compared with the work of Thomas Bewick. Chatto and Jackson, for instance, declared that 'in the representation of trees and natural scenery Branston almost uniformly failed' (Chatto and Jackson, 536). 



@@@@@


doc= 3320


Brendan mac Nemainn (d. 565/73), whose feast day is 29 November, and who was an older contemporary of Brendan of Clonfert. In the 'West Munster Synod', Brendan of Birr swore on behalf of the Cuirigi, an exceedingly obscure group of peoples; in a genealogy he is assigned to Dal nAuluimm to whom Erc of Slane is also assigned. In the genealogies of the saints he is attributed to the widely distributed but politically weak descendants of the Ulster hero, Fergus mac Roich. No life survives, though apparently a fragmentary text still existed in the seventeenth century. Yet in spite of his undistinguished and uncertain lineage and the lack of a surviving life, Brendan of Birr came to be reckoned in the post-viking period as one of 'the twelve apostles of Ireland'. Much earlier, in Adomnan's life of Columba, Brendan was the only person to rise up as Columba approached a synod at Tailtiu (Teltown) that was all set to condemn him; Adomnan also devoted a chapter to Columba's miraculous perception of the angelic welcome given to Brendan's soul: 'in this past night I have seen the sky suddenly opened, and companies of angels coming down to meet the soul of the holy Brendan' ('Life of Columba', 3.11). The chapter demonstrates that it was the day of death and not the day of burial that was commemorated as the (celestial) birthday of the saint. 


