@@@@@


doc= 35411


Paton, John Gibson (1824-1907), missionary, was born on 24 May 1824 at Kirkmahoe, Dumfriesshire, Scotland. He was the eldest of the five sons and six daughters of James Paton, a stocking weaver, and his wife, Janet Jardine Rogerson. The family were members of the Reformed Presbyterian Church of Scotland, which upheld the ideals of the covenanters; James Paton was the dominant religious influence on his children. At Torthorwald, near Dumfries, where the family had settled about 1830, John Paton attended the parish school until the age of eleven; he then began work with his father, weaving stockings. In 1847 he went to Glasgow where he trained as a teacher at the Free Church Normal Seminary; he then taught briefly at several Free Church schools. He also attended classes at the University of Glasgow. In 1850 the Glasgow City Mission appointed Paton as a city missionary. For almost seven years he worked in Calton, one of the poorest parts of the city, where he met 'considerable opposition from Romanists and Infidels' ('Autobiography', 43). He also undertook part-time study at the Reformed Presbyterian Divinity Hall at Paisley and, in preparation for work as a foreign missionary, attended lectures in the practice of medicine and midwifery at Anderson's University, Glasgow. 
The Reformed Presbyterian church was already supporting a missionary, John Inglis, at Aneityum in the New Hebrides, in the south-west Pacific. The church's foreign missions committee was keen to extend its work in the region and in 1856 Paton offered his services. On 1 December 1857 he was licensed as a preacher and on 23 March 1858 he was ordained at Great Hamilton Street Reformed Presbyterian Church in Glasgow, where he was an elder. On 2 April 1858 he married Mary Ann Robson (1840-1859), daughter of Peter Robson of Coldstream. The couple sailed from Greenock on 16 April 1858 and reached the mission station at Aneityum on 30 August. Soon afterwards they moved to the adjacent island of Tanna, to open a new station at Port Resolution. Since 1839, when Samoan teachers of the London Missionary Society (LMS) were first sent to the island, there had been a series of attempts to convert the Tannese to Christianity, but without success. In February 1859 Mary Paton gave birth to a son; in March both she and the child died. In 1861 the introduction of measles, which killed many of the islanders, was followed by a series of hurricanes. Many of the Tannese opposed the mission, believing that the Christian God and his agents were responsible for their disasters. Their lives in danger, in February 1862 Paton and his followers fled to Aneityum. The other Presbyterian missionaries then sent Paton to the Australian colonies to promote their cause and to raise funds for a mission vessel. 
Paton proved to be an effective preacher and speaker on behalf of the New Hebrides mission. Travelling around the colonies of New South Wales, Victoria, and South Australia, he addressed meetings almost every day, and three or four gatherings each Sunday. To arouse the interest of Sunday-school children he devised a scheme by which they could become sixpenny shareholders in the new mission ship, 'Dayspring', built in Nova Scotia in 1863. Among Australian Presbyterians support for the New Hebrides mission became a popular cause, and Paton raised $5000. Later in 1863 he returned to Scotland to continue his appeal and in 1864 he was elected moderator of the Reformed Presbyterian church. On 17 June 1864 he married Margaret Whitecross ['see below']. They had five surviving sons and one daughter. Two sons, Frederick and Francis (Frank), became missionaries in the New Hebrides and their daughter, Mary Ann (Minnie), married a missionary there. 
Paton arrived back in the New Hebrides in June 1865 with his wife and two recruits for the Presbyterian mission. There he instigated an appeal by the missionaries to Commodore Sir William Wiseman of HMS 'Curacoa' to punish the Tannese for their killing of British subjects and their destruction of mission property. In August 1865 the 'Curacoa' shelled villages at Port Resolution and its sailors made an armed landing. This use of naval force to protect the mission was widely reported in the Australian colonial press and Paton was much criticized for his role. When he next arrived at Sydney he found himself, he recalled, 'probably the best-abused man in all Australia' ('Autobiography', 298). The incident remains a controversial event in the history of Tanna. 
In 1866 Paton was appointed by the Presbyterian Church of Victoria as its first missionary to the New Hebrides. After the events of 1865 it was not possible for him to return to his former field on Tanna, and he was therefore sent to the small island of Aniwa, where since 1840 LMS Polynesian teachers and Aneityumese teachers had attempted to introduce Christianity. This was to be Paton's base for the next fifteen years. For the first time his preaching was successful, so that the whole population of Aniwa, numbering about two hundred, eventually adopted Christianity. 
In 1881, having been compelled by ill health to retire from missionary work in the islands, Paton and his family went to Melbourne, where he was appointed mission agent of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria. He had lost none of his skills as a publicist and fund-raiser. In total he raised about $83,000 for the New Hebrides mission, and the John G. Paton Mission Fund was founded in Britain in 1890 to support its work. Paton became moderator of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria in 1886. In the Australian and New Zealand colonies, and on his visits to the USA, Canada, and Britain, Paton was vocal on many issues concerning the New Hebrides. He opposed the growth there of French interests, he campaigned for British annexation, and he sought to prevent the sale of arms and alcoholic liquor to the islanders. In his addresses and writings he denounced as a slave trade the practice of recruiting island labour for the sugar plantations of Queensland and Fiji. His allegations were often exaggerated and he was unwilling to admit that the great majority of islanders entered labour contracts voluntarily, but politicians and government officials found him hard to ignore. 
During a visit by Paton to Scotland in 1884, at the suggestion of his youngest brother, James, the missionary agreed to write his autobiography. James Paton, a Glasgow minister, shaped these notes into a book which, after the publication of the first two parts in 1889, played a large part in making the name of John G. Paton famous. In 1891 the University of Edinburgh conferred on him the honorary degree of doctor of divinity. 




@@@@@


doc= 35412


Paton, John Lewis Alexander (1863-1946), schoolmaster, was born at Brightside, Sheffield, on 13 August 1863, the second son of the Revd John Brown Paton (1830-1911), a Congregational minister who moved to Nottingham in that year, and his wife, Jessie, 'nee' Paton. After early education in Germany, where he attended the Halle Gymnasium, and at Nottingham high school, Paton went to Shrewsbury School, where he became head of the school. Proceeding in 1882 to St John's College, Cambridge, where he was a scholar, he was placed in the first division of the first class in part one of the classical tripos in 1886 and in the first class of part two with special distinctions in the following year when he was also second chancellor's medallist. Elected a fellow of St John's in the same year, he immediately entered upon his life vocation by joining the staff of the Leys School in Cambridge. 
In 1888 Paton became lower bench master at Rugby School, where his most famous pupil was William Temple. His friendly informality won the affection of his pupils at Rugby and especially among the day boys in Town House, whose tutor he became in 1891. 
Paton's headmastership of University College School, 1898-1903, where he succeeded H. W. Eve, gave his genius for personal influence over his boys full scope. He never forgot a name or a face. Intolerant of insincerity or slackness, he inspired his boys with his own high standards of achievement and public service. By his ruthless opposition to obscurantism he incurred opposition, but it was usually dispelled by his obvious sincerity and abundant generosity of labour and money. Ultimately frustrated by the slow progress being made to separate the school from the college, and to move the school to a site out of central London, he accepted another appointment. 
In 1903 Paton was appointed high master of Manchester grammar school. Every activity in the school felt the impact of his personality. He started holiday camps and visits abroad ranging from Norway to the Alps, and in particular Germany, with which, before 1914, he was keen to encourage friendship, and he helped to found the Old Mancunians Association. He brought distinguished men from home and abroad to lecture at the school and spent his money freely in helping the poorer boys and young masters. Often after morning prayers he would give short talks on domestic and foreign affairs; and his general-knowledge papers, which every boy had to take at the beginning of the school year, became famous. He revitalized the famous school and made it the exemplar of its kind. 
Proud of his Scottish covenanting ancestry, Paton was strongly influenced by his nonconformist background, and he brought the puritan tradition with him to his teaching posts. He abstained from alcohol and tobacco, regarded sexual impurity and gambling with horror, and disregarded formal conventions in matters of dress and manners. He favoured an open-air, cold-bath regime (he slept in a tent in his garden during the summer months). Early morning bathing parties and cross-country runs, in which he took part even as headmaster, were a feature of the school camps which he instituted; he was an early supporter of the Boy Scout movement, and a keen cyclist. Unlike many headmasters of his period, he believed in the professional training of secondary teachers. He was president of the Teachers' Guild (1907) and of the Modern Languages Association (1911), and was a member of the consultative committee of the Board of Education (1907-15). 
Paton's ideals, like those of his father, were strongly democratic and he encouraged pupils at his schools to perform acts of social service. At Rugby he organized classes for working men and led a troop of the Boys' Brigade; at University College School he helped to run the school mission, the Working Boys' Club at Clerkenwell; and at Manchester he was active in both the Hugh Oldham Lads' Club and the university settlement at Ancoats. As an early advocate of opening public schools to all classes he anticipated the recommendations of the 1944 Fleming report (which were, however, not implemented). His belief in the dignity of manual labour was strongly held: at University College School he joined the boys in painting the railings of the school grounds at Neasden; and at Manchester he took part in the physical work of levelling a patch of ground to form the playing field. 
Paton retired from Manchester in 1924 and lectured for the Canadian National Council of Education; in 1925 he became the first president of the Memorial University College in St John's, Newfoundland, where he steadily improved the teaching until he retired to Kemsing, Kent, in 1933. He studied Newfoundland's economic conditions, made friends with its people, and pressed their cause in Newfoundland and England. During the Second World War, Paton worked in a preparatory school in England in which he continued almost to the day of his death. 
Potentially one of the finest classical scholars of Europe, Paton gave himself entirely to his teaching, and his publications (apart from his life of his father, published in 1914) consist of no more than a number of papers on educational topics. His real memorials, resulting from his strenuous and selfless labours, were his influence on the development of the grammar school ideal in England, and in the achievements, in many spheres of national life, of those boys who came under his influence. The most unassuming of men, he would not sit for his portrait, and he destroyed his personal papers to ensure that no memoir of him would be written. It was said that he declined offers both of a knighthood and of the Companion of Honour. Paton had piercing blue eyes and was 'barely of middle height, sturdy of build, clean-shaven, strong-mouthed, with the fresh-complexioned, weather-beaten appearance of a sailor' (Barnard, 7). He died, unmarried, at his home, 10 Stanley Avenue, Beckenham, Kent, on 28 April 1946. 


@@@@@


doc= 35413


Paton, Sir (Joseph) Noel (1821-1901), history painter, was born on 13 December 1821 at Wooer's Alley Cottage, Wooer's Alley, Dunfermline, the second of three children of Joseph Neil Paton (1797-1874), damask designer and manufacturer, and his wife, Catherine MacDiarmid (died 1853). All three children followed their father into the business before pursuing artistic careers. Waller Hugh Paton (1828-1895) became a landscape painter, and Amelia Robertson Hill (1820-1904), a sculptor. Paton was educated at Dunfermline School and Dunfermline Art Academy, where his father was master from 1830 to 1833. In 1838 he accepted the post of director of the design department at W. Sharp & Co.'s sewed muslin factory at Paisley, where he remained for three years. In 1843 Paton left Dunfermline to become a student at the Royal Academy Schools in London. He stayed only a few months; indeed, throughout his life he seldom left Scotland, visiting Europe on only one occasion in 1863. However, though he spent only a little time at the Royal Academy Schools, throughout his career Paton remained faithful to the academic precept of heroic subject matter, particularly as expressed through the male nude. 
During his stay in London, Paton made influential contacts. He met John Everett Millais, who was to become a lifelong friend, and entered the circle of Samuel Carter Hall, editor of the 'Art-Union' and 'Art Journal', who commissioned illustrations for his 'Book of British Ballads' (1842-4) and introduced him to the work of German illustrators such as Moritz Retzch, further confirming the linearity of Paton's style. Paton's first successes were in book illustration, with designs for Shelley's 'Prometheus Unbound' (1844) and Shakespeare's 'The Tempest' (1845), and he continued to produce illustrations throughout his career, most notably his designs for Coleridge's 'Rime of the Ancient Mariner' (1863) and the collected volume of his illustrations to Shakespeare published in 1904. 
In 1845 Paton submitted a cartoon for a large allegorical design, 'The Spirit of Religion' (Dunfermline Corporation), to the Westminster Hall competition for designs to decorate the new houses of parliament, where it won a prize of 200 guineas. This design anticipated the religious and allegorical subject matter that dominated his work from the 1860s; however, his first successes as a painter came from literary and historical subjects. In 1847 'The Reconciliation of Oberon and Titania' won $300 at the second Westminster Hall competition, and was immediately bought by the Royal Scottish Academy. Two years later its pendant, 'The Quarrel of Oberon and Titania', was purchased by the Royal Association for the Promotion of Fine Arts in Scotland, and both works were given to the National Gallery of Scotland. These, together with 'The Fairy Raid' (1867; Glasgow Art Gallery), are now his best-known works, and have come to be seen as principal examples of the genre of Victorian fairy painting. Yet at the time Paton was urged by his friend David Octavius Hill, secretary of the Royal Scottish Academy, to desist from fairy painting, lest the 'asinine multitude' think 'that you can do nothing else, and that you are raving mad' (Irwin and Irwin, 292). 
During the 1850s Paton was influenced by the work of the Pre-Raphaelites, as can be seen in the minutely observed natural detail of 'The Bluidie Tryste' (1855; Glasgow Museums and Art Gallery) and in the historical accuracy of 'Dawn: Luther at Erfurt' (1861; NG Scot.). Perhaps their most striking influence was in stimulating Paton's short-lived interest in serious modern-life subjects: 'Home from the Crimea: the Soldier's Return' (exh. RA, 1856; copy, 1859, Royal Collection) was an instantly popular, sentimental treatment of a topical theme. However, his second essay in a modern subject, 'In Memoriam' (1858; priv. coll.) was widely criticized. This depicts a scene from the Indian mutiny, and shows frightened and cowering British women and children hiding in a cellar, with soldiers descending to their rescue. Originally the soldiers were sepoys, but were over-painted with a Highland regiment after intense public criticism. 'The Athenaeum', for example, thought it 'cruel and in woful ['sic'] bad taste. It should never have been hung' (8 May 1858). 
On 17 June 1858 Paton married Margaret Gourlay (died 1900), daughter of Alexander Ferrier of Bloomhill, Dunbartonshire, and moved to Edinburgh, in 1859 settling at 33 George Square, where the couple lived for the rest of their lives. They had seven sons and four daughters, who often served as models for their father; the eldest son, Diarmid Noel Paton (1859-1928), was a noted physiologist. The need to provide for his family increasingly preoccupied Paton, significantly influencing his choice of subject matter in the direction of religious paintings, from which he could earn money from the sale of prints. However, Paton's view of his own vocation as that of a religious painter is implied by his poem 'A Confession': '
Heart, mind, and soul, with reverent love confess 

The Christian Painter, sent to purify and bless. 
('Poems by a Painter', 1861, 56)' Paton's religious works were also influenced by his father's beliefs: originally a Methodist, Joseph Neil became first a Quaker and then a Swedenborgian. For example, the Swedenborgian belief in the equal reality of supernatural and material worlds found expression in allegorical works such as 'Mors janua vitae' (1866; priv. coll.). 
The popular taste for engravings of Paton's religious works formed the basis for his later success, much of which was due to the astute marketing of his work by his dealers, Henry Doig and McKenzie of George Street and Hugh Paton & Sons of Princes Street, Edinburgh, and Haydon Hare of Scarborough. These firms bought both paintings and their copyright, publicized them in the press, displayed them in touring exhibitions with special gas lighting, and finally sold engravings of the pictures. The popularity of such works as 'The Man of Sorrows' (1875; Laing Art Gallery, Newcastle upon Tyne) testifies to a widespread taste for monumental and didactic religious art diffused through engraved reproductions. The publication of several sermons using Paton's pictures as a 'text', such as the Revd Fergus Ferguson's ''The Choice': a Discourse Preached in Glasgow on Sir Noel Paton's Great Picture' (1888), shows how Paton's later work found an audience outside those who visited the annual exhibitions, and quite distinct in its preferences from the connoisseurs who formed the 'advanced' taste for aestheticism and classical subject pictures. 
In 1863 Paton spent several weeks at Windsor working on sketches of the queen and her children for a memorial to Prince Albert, but this remained unfinished, owing partly to Paton's ill health and partly to his inaptitude for portraiture. Nevertheless, in 1867 he was knighted and appointed queen's limner for Scotland. In 1881 he was awarded an honorary degree of LLD by Edinburgh University. Paton was strikingly handsome with bright red hair; his prodigious work rate was made possible by great physical strength, 'almost Herculean in breadth of shoulder and depth of chest' (Story, 127). He died at his home on 26 December 1901, and was buried in the Dean cemetery, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 35414


Paton, William (1886-1943), minister of the Presbyterian Church of England and missionary, was born on 13 November 1886 at Brixton, London, son of James Paton (died 1943), sales manager of the Singer Sewing Machine Company, and his wife, Elizabeth Dunlop. The elder brother of five sisters, his family was of Scottish Presbyterian descent. He attended Whitgift School and Pembroke College, Oxford (1904-8), gaining a second class in Greats. At Oxford, he became an active member of the Student Christian Movement (SCM) in response to the preaching of Frank Lenwood. He studied theology at Westminster College, Cambridge (1908-11), and in July 1912 married Grace Mackenzie Macdonald, eldest daughter of the Revd David Macdonald, Presbyterian minister at Bexhill. At the time of their marriage she was secretary to Ramsay MacDonald (no relation). They had two daughters and four sons, the third of whom was the pharmacologist Sir William Drummond MacDonald Paton. Paton was employed until 1921 as secretary to the SCM, and ordained as a Presbyterian minister in 1917. 
Paton's work with the SCM, at a time when the watchword of its senior department, the Student Volunteer Missionary Union, was 'The evangelisation of the World in this generation', resulted in a strong sense of calling to missionary service. After a visit to India in 1917-18, Paton returned there in 1921 as secretary of the Indian Young Men's Christian Organisation. Soon afterwards, he was appointed first secretary of the National Christian Council of India, Burma, and Ceylon. While in India he gained direct experience of Hinduism and Islam, and his considerable literary output then and in later years was primarily devoted to asserting the superiority of Christianity while admitting the importance of presenting it with cultural sensitivity. He was convinced that 'The work of the missionary is always to prepare for a self-governing Church, and when it is beginning to appear, to subordinate himself to it' (Sinclair, 67). This emphasis on helping indigenous churches to autonomy was a hallmark of his missionary endeavours throughout his career. In addition to these activities he was instrumental in alerting the League of Nations to the extent of the opium trade, and a consistent advocate of Christian education, particularly of Indian women. 
In 1927 Paton returned to England as a secretary of the International Missionary Council (IMC), the office which he held until his death. He was instrumental in the organization of the IMC's Jerusalem meeting in 1928 and the Tambarum meeting in 1938: large ecumenical gatherings for prayer and the discussion of missionary strategy. He travelled widely, undertaking several further trips to India and the United States, and a world tour in 1935-6. In 1938 he became general secretary of the provisional committee of the World Council of Churches at the invitation of William Temple, then archbishop of York, and despite his premature death in 1943 Paton has been aptly described as a 'selfless, highly efficient bureaucrat, administrator general of ecumenism' (Hastings, 304). Yet this bureaucratic efficiency was ever a means to an end; through it he sought to eliminate the institutional obstacles to the preaching of 'Christ crucified'. Paton's faith was simple, protestant, and orthodox. When Grace converted to Anglo-Catholicism in 1918, and again to Roman Catholicism in 1934, he supported her decision as 'God's will for you', but was unable to follow her: partly because of the Erastianism he detected in Anglicanism, partly because of his instinctive disinclination towards sacramentalism (Jackson, 26). Yet the ecumenical atmosphere of his own home, the zeal of his wife for social reform (see her own 'The Child and the Nation', 1915), and his enthusiastic role as father of six children were influences which complemented a public life in which immense labours were approached with apparently boundless energy and a boyish sense of humour. 
A pacifist and member of the Fellowship of Reconciliation in the First World War, Paton moved towards 'political realism' (Jackson, 61-81) in the twenties and thirties. His first-hand experience of the exploitation of emperor worship for nationalistic purposes in Japan left him with no illusions about totalitarianism, and he was one of the few British churchmen to condemn the Munich agreement in 1938. However, he continued to uphold the rights of conscientious objectors during the Second World War, and campaigned against the banning of pacifist speakers on the BBC in wartime. In co-operation with Bishop George Bell of Chichester, Paton sought the release of German refugees who were imprisoned by the British government as 'enemy aliens'. He also negotiated with the Treasury for the transmission of funds to European foreign missions deprived by war of their normal means of support. A consistent advocate of Jewish mission, he also devoted himself to fund-raising for the victims of Nazi antisemitism. 
Paton was a prolific writer, his twenty-four books focusing primarily on Christian mission in the context of other world religions. His first book, 'Jesus Christ and the World's Religions' (1916; rev. edn, 1926), was his most successful, selling more than 50,000 copies, and encapsulated his attitude to mission in the assertion that Christian scholars must 'treat other religions sympathetically but remain convinced of the supremacy of the revelation of God in Christ' ('World's Religions', 1). Other works included his biography, 'Alexander Duff' (1923), of the nineteenth-century missionary to India, the apologetic 'A Faith for the World' (1928), and 'The Faiths of Mankind' (1932). From 1927 onwards Paton was co-editor of the 'International Review of Missions'. 
Paton's sudden death on 21 August 1943, after an operation for an ulcer while on holiday in Kendal, was lamented by many beyond his own denomination; the archbishop of Canterbury, William Temple, testified at his memorial service at St Paul's that 'if any man... could be called indispensable for doing what seemed to many of us the most important tasks entrusted to the Christian people, it was he' ('DNB'). He was survived by his wife. 
Paton's eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 35415


Pattison, Andrew Seth Pringle- (1856-1931), philosopher, was born Andrew Seth on 20 December 1856 at 1 West Claremont Street, Edinburgh, the second of seven children of Smith Kinmont Seth, bank clerk, and his wife, Margaret (1830-1911), daughter of Andrew Little, farmer, of Middle Blainslie, Berwickshire. He added Pringle-Pattison to his name in 1898 as a condition of receiving a bequest. He was educated at the Royal High School in Edinburgh and at Edinburgh University (1873-8), where he graduated with firsts in classics and philosophy. 
After graduation Seth studied at Berlin, Jena, and Gottingen (1878-80), hoping to learn more of German idealist philosophy, which was becoming fashionable in Britain. In Germany, however, scientific materialism was in fashion, and he learned more of German idealism from reading the idealists than from attending German universities. At Gottingen he met Lotze, but was disappointed to find he was giving only introductory lectures. The results of his studies appeared in his first book, 'The Development from Kant to Hegel' (1882). 
On returning to Edinburgh, Seth became the assistant to his former teacher Campbell Fraser. During the three years he held this not very lucrative position he supplemented his income writing leaders and reviews for 'The Scotsman'. He also achieved philosophical prominence by compiling, with R. B. Haldane, 'Essays in Philosophical Criticism' (1883), the manifesto of the emerging neo-Hegelian movement that dominated British philosophy for the next twenty years. On the strength of this he was appointed professor of logic and philosophy at University College, Cardiff, a post which he held from 1883 to 1887. In 1884 he married Eva Stropp, whom he had met in Berlin, daughter of Albrecht Stropp, of Bogislavitz, Silesia. They had four sons (the youngest was killed in action in 1916) and three daughters (the eldest died in infancy). His wife died in 1928. 
From Cardiff Seth visited Edinburgh to give two lecture series sponsored by A. J. Balfour specifically to give Seth 'an opportunity of producing original work' (Capper, 454). Two of his most important books resulted: 'Scottish Philosophy' (1885) and 'Hegelianism and Personality' (1887). A third series, on realism, was given in 1891 (published in the 'Philosophical Review', 1892-3; repr. as 'The Balfour Lectures on Realism', 1933). Seth meanwhile had moved in 1887 to St Andrews as professor of logic, rhetoric, and metaphysics, and in 1891 back to Edinburgh, where he replaced Fraser as professor of logic and metaphysics, a post he held until 1919. (From 1898 to 1924 the Edinburgh chair in moral philosophy was held by his younger brother James.) 
In 1898 Seth inherited, from the widow of a very distant relative, a country estate, The Haining, near Selkirk, together with 7000 acres. He took his duties as a landowner seriously, which caused a long interruption in his career as an author. By mid-life he looked the part of a laird. He was a tall man, 'not very lithe' John Laird reported tactfully ('DNB'), with a magnificent white beard. Shyness prevented him from being a great debater: 'unready of speech he hugged the shelter of his manuscript, reading it beautifully to large classes which sometimes were almost openly restive' (ibid.). 
Apart from a collection of essays ('Philosophical Radicals', 1907, and 'Two Lectures on Theism', 1902) delivered at Princeton in 1896, Pringle-Pattison's subsequent books arose from his giving two double series of Gifford lectures: the first (1912-13) resulted in 'The Idea of God in the Light of Recent Philosophy' (1917); the second (1921-3) gave rise to 'The Idea of Immortality' (1922) and 'Studies in the Philosophy of Religion' (1930) -- the last more historical than philosophical. 
Pringle-Pattison's earliest writings seemed to place him in the vanguard of the British Hegelian movement. His contribution to 'Essays in Philosophical Criticism' attacked Kant for assuming that the mind was distinct from the things acting upon it, thereby admitting an unbridgeable gap between phenomena and noumena. He claimed that Hegel had shown how self-consciousness closed the gap by giving rise to ethical experience through which access to noumena was possible. 
In 'Hegelianism and Personality', however, Pringle-Pattison broke ranks with the Hegelians, not on the fundamental role of self-consciousness, but on Hegel's locating self-consciousness in the Absolute rather than in individual persons. This he condemned as excessive abstraction at the expense of concrete particularity. His philosophy was thus a form of personal idealism, in contrast to the absolute idealism of Hegel and Bradley. In his essay on Kant he wrote: 'The individual is individualised only by his relations to the totality of the intelligible world' ('Essays in Philosophical Criticism', 34). In 'Hegelianism and Personality', however, he wrote of selves in terms reminiscent of Leibniz's monads: 'Each self is a unique existence, which is perfectly 'impervious'... to other selves' ('Hegelianism and Personality', 216). 
The reasons for this change are found partly in the influence of Lotze, another idealist inclined to monadology, but more importantly in his intervening book 'Scottish Philosophy', revealingly subtitled 'A Comparison of the Scottish and German Answers to Hume'. In it he investigated the Scottish common-sense philosophy of Thomas Reid and took from it the view, 'contra' Hume, that philosophy could never challenge our 'natural beliefs' in the external world, personal identity, and God. Having admitted all three, Pringle-Pattison faced the problem of explaining their interactions: the very problem Kant had been castigated for shirking. He attempted a solution in the 'Balfour Lectures on Realism', where he added a realist element to his already doubtfully consistent collection of beliefs. This never satisfied him: he was as unable to deny idealism as he was the external world. Idealist critics complained that, by insisting both that the external world was mind-independent and that our access to it was by means of ideas, he had reverted to the then universally discredited representational realism of Locke. Ironically, it was the unresolved tensions in his work that enhanced its appeal to many late Victorian thinkers, who -- moved on the one side by the scientific materialism of the 1860s and on the other by older religious lines of thought as well as newer idealist ones -- were anxious to reconcile these. Although the 'Lectures on Realism' did not achieve the hoped-for reconciliation, they do contain some of his more interesting claims. For example, he argued that only by presupposing realism could idealism or any other philosophy be stated. 'Idealism', he says ('Balfour Lectures on Realism', 192), 'exists only as a criticism of Realism'. This anticipates, though for somewhat different reasons, a position taken by many ordinary language philosophers half a century later, for example P. F. Strawson, who argued that the existence of publicly identifiable material bodies was a necessary precondition for language. 
Pringle-Pattison's later attempts to solve the problem are less interesting. In 'The Idea of God' he blurs many of his earlier distinctions. He repents of describing selves as 'impervious' and claims that, while nature exists independently of man, it none the less exists 'for' man. Quite how the system works is 'incomprehensible' to finite minds, but that it does so is a 'primary certainty' which 'no speculative difficulties could over-ride' ('The Idea of God in the Light of Recent Philosophy', 391). 
Pringle-Pattison's philosophy 'had a distinct attraction for philosophers of a not too rigorous cast of mind, in search of a philosophy that would tread a comfortable 'via media' between naturalism and Absolutism, science and religion, the rights of personality and the demands of the community' (Passmore, 74). He was elected to the British Academy in 1904. He died at The Haining on 1 September 1931, and was buried at Morningside cemetery, Edinburgh, three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 35416


Paul, (Charles) Kegan (1828-1902), publisher and author, was born on 8 March 1828 at White Lackington, near Ilminster, Somerset, the eldest of the ten children of the Revd Charles Paul (1802-1861) and his wife, Frances Kegan Horne (1802-1848) of Bath. His father's family was Scottish and his mother's of Dutch and Irish descent; both had West Indies connections. Paul was educated first at Ilminster grammar school (1836-9), and later at Eton College, where he entered Dr Hawtrey's house in 1841. He matriculated at Exeter College, Oxford, in January 1846. At this stage he regarded himself as 'a very broad High Churchman, broad that is in doctrine, but with a strong feeling for pomp of ritual, for music in church, paintings and symbolism of all kinds' (Paul, 'Memories', 166). He hoped to model his own life's work on that of Charles Kingsley, whom he met in 1849, by combining the Anglican priesthood with social reform and literature. He graduated BA in October 1849, was ordained deacon in the Lent of 1851, and spent a year as curate of Tew, in the diocese of Oxford, and a further six months -- having been ordained priest in 1852 -- as curate of Bloxham, near Banbury, Oxfordshire. A sermon on the communion of saints was his first published work, in 1853. He developed a reputation for holding radical political opinions, and was associated with Frederick Dennison Maurice, J. M. Ludlow, and other co-operative and Christian socialist leaders. 
After a stint as tutor to pupils travelling in Germany, Paul was appointed, in November 1853, to a chaplain's post at Eton, where he remained until 1862, having discovered a vocation for teaching. On 11 December 1856 he married Margaret Agnes Colvile (1829-1905), daughter of Andrew Colvile and his wife, the Hon. Louisa Mary Eden; Margaret had just published her first two novels, 'Dorothy: a Tale' and 'DeCressy'. The first three of their five children were born at Eton. Paul contributed to 'Tracts for Priests and People', brought out by Maurice and Hughes, a piece called 'The boundaries of the church' (1861), in which he stated that the very minimum of dogma was required from lay members of the Church of England. Partly because of a controversy over this view, he left Eton in 1862 to become vicar of an Eton living at Sturminster Marshall, Dorset. As the endowment was small, he took pupils. During these years he embraced a policy of total abstinence from alcohol and also experimented with vegetarianism. He contributed twenty-three articles to the 'Theological Review' between 1865 and 1876. In 1870 he joined a unitarian society called the Free Christian Union, and in 1872 he associated himself with Joseph Arch's movement on behalf of the agricultural labourers in Dorset. He gradually found himself out of sympathy with the teaching of the Church of England, and in 1874 abandoned his living and moved to London. 
For some years Paul had been reading manuscripts for Henry Samuel King, the publisher in Cornhill who had brought out several of his books, as well as those of his wife; he now became King's manager and editor, and in 1877 he purchased the publishing business at 1 Paternoster Square, which became C. Kegan Paul & Co. and continued King's general publishing programme of theological, literary, and scientific works. Ideologically he now associated himself with Comtist positivism, and he took great pleasure in friendships with George Eliot and Thomas Hardy. He judged Hardy, Walter Pater, Cardinal Newman, and Hesba Stretton to be those living stylists who showed 'the perfection to which, in this age, our language can be wrought' (Paul, 'Faith and Unfaith', 225). He edited and published the 'New Quarterly Magazine' from January 1879 to April 1880. Alfred Chenevix Trench (1849-1938) joined the firm about 1878, and from 1881 it was styled Kegan Paul, Trench & Co. Among the publications it inherited from King were Tennyson's works (until 1883) and the 'International Scientific' series. Other important series were the 'Parchment Library of English Classics' and the 'Pulpit Commentary', both dating from 1880, as well as works by Hardy, George Meredith, and Robert Louis Stevenson. After various vicissitudes, including a fire in 1883, the firm was amalgamated as a limited company in 1889 with two others, George Redway and the heirs of Nicholas Trubner. It moved into large new premises, Paternoster House in Charing Cross Road, in 1891. Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co. Ltd, as the firm was now styled, flourished until 1895, when the profits fell with alarming abruptness, the directors resigned, and the capital was reduced. Paul at the same time lost money as director of the Hansard Printing and Publishing Company, and other enterprises. The traffic accident that occasioned his disability and retirement also occurred in that year. The business survived until 1911 when it was incorporated into George Routledge & Sons Ltd, who operated it as a separate enterprise until 1946, after which date the old name survived in the Routledge and Kegan Paul imprint until 1985. 
Paul's own literary work included translations of Goethe's 'Faust' in 1873, Blaise Pascal's 'Pensees' (as 'Thoughts', 1885), and Joris-Karl Huysmans's 'En Route' in 1896; he edited William Godwin's essays in 1873 and Mary Wollstonecraft's letters in 1879. 'William Godwin: his Friends and Contemporaries' appeared in 1876, 'Biographical Sketches' in 1883, 'Faith and Unfaith, and other Essays' in 1891, and in 1899 his collection of verse, 'On the Way Side'. 
From 1888 Paul began to attend mass, and in 1890, during a visit to France, he decided to enter the Roman Catholic church, and he made his submission at the church of the Servites at Fulham, London, on 12 August 1890. A volume, 'Memories' (1899), which is largely made up of stories of his early life at school and Eton, ends with his conversion. His new views were displayed in tracts issued by the Catholic Truth Society and in 'Confessio viatoris' (1891). Paul's friend Wilfrid Meynell recorded in an obituary that he: 'always remained in general society a great favourite: a grave man, with serenity of discretion; a general lover of his race, but with a shrewdly sharp tongue for individual weaknesses; a man indeed of prejudices as well as of more agreeable prepossessions; seemingly aloof and independent, yet possessed... by the overmastering personalities of two men [Kingsley and Newman] whose 'acolyte' he was. ('The Academy', 115)' Kegan Paul died at his home, 9 Avonmore Road, West Kensington, London, on 19 July 1902 and was buried at Kensal Green in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 35417


Paul, Herbert Woodfield (1853-1935), author and politician, was born at Finedon, Northamptonshire, on 16 January 1853, the eldest son of George Woodfield Paul, vicar of Finedon and honorary canon of Peterborough Cathedral, and his wife, Jessie Philippa, daughter of Lieutenant Herbert Mackworth RN. From Eton College he won a scholarship at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, where he was president of the Union (1875), and obtained a first class in 'literae humaniores' (1875). Called to the bar by Lincoln's Inn in 1878, he never practised, though he could be imagined as a formidable cross-examiner; but he devoted himself to literary work, largely in the political field, soon becoming a skilled leader writer for the 'Daily News'. 
In 1883 Paul married Elinor Budworth, daughter of William Ritchie, legal member of the viceroy's council in India, and sister of Sir Richmond T. W. Ritchie. She was a lady of great charm. They had a son and a daughter. 
From 1892 until 1895 Paul sat as member for South Edinburgh. A devoted follower of Gladstone, he was a strong party man and in particular a convinced free-trader, but although a capable debater, did not win in parliament the reputation merited by his exceptional talents. 
Besides 'Men and Letters' (1901) and a competent appreciation of Gladstone's career ('Life of W. E. Gladstone', 1901) -- an expansion of his memoir in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' -- Paul published in 1902 'Matthew Arnold', with whom he had many literary sympathies, as he had with a very different figure, Lord Acton, whose letters to Mary Gladstone he edited in 1904. In 1905 came a defence of Froude as a historian ('Life of Froude'). His most solid and important work was the 'History of Modern England' (5 vols., 1904-6), which was justly described as the 'Annual Register' tempered by epigrams. 'Stray Leaves', a collection of essays, was published in 1906. This book was followed by a study of the age of 'Queen Anne' (a period in which he felt completely at home) for Goupil's illustrated monographs (1906; revised without illustrations, 1912), and by 'Famous Speeches' (1910). 
Meanwhile the Liberal triumph of 1906 had returned Paul for Northampton; but in 1907 a nervous collapse foreshadowed his retirement in 1909. By 1910 he had sufficiently recovered to undertake the office of second civil service commissioner (to which he had been appointed the previous year), and for which he was perfectly suited by his gifts and attainments, and which he held until 1918. The rest of his life was spent in retirement at Cherry Orchard, Forest Row, Sussex, where he died on 4 August 1935; he was survived by his wife. 
Paul never sought or obtained popularity in the conventional sense; his comments, often sharp, but never captious or unfair, aroused the animosity of one or two fellow writers; but he was less contemptuous than he appeared to be, and recognized all work which was not slipshod or marred by prejudice. He ignored gossip and scandal, and despised those who found pleasure in discussing the weaknesses of men whom he deemed to be essentially great. He was no lettered recluse, but a pleasant companion in leisure hours. Nurtured in a county for which fox-hunting was a religious exercise, he could appreciate the points of a well-bred horse; and he thoroughly enjoyed good cheer and a glass of choice wine. He had some enemies, but was the most loyal of friends, and it is sad that he left a slighter mark on his age than some who could not claim a tithe of his ability or his acquirements. 


@@@@@


doc= 35418


Paul, William (1822-1905), horticulturist, was born at Churchgate, Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, on 16 June 1822, the second son of Adam Paul (died 1847), a nurseryman of Huguenot descent, originally from Aberdeenshire, who purchased the Cheshunt nursery in 1806. He was educated at a private school at Waltham Cross before joining his father's business. Following his father's death he and his elder brother, George, continued the business as A. Paul & Son. In 1860 this partnership was dissolved and his brother established the firm of Paul & Son at Cheshunt, while Paul himself concentrated on the Waltham Cross nursery, William Paul & Son, which he had founded in 1859. 
Paul's earliest literary work was for John Claudius Loudon (1783-1843). Following Loudon's death he wrote articles for John Lindley; his series of articles entitled 'Roses in pots', which appeared in 1843 in the 'Gardeners' Chronicle', were issued separately in the same year, and reached a ninth edition in 1908. Paul's book, 'The Rose Garden' (1848), was also immensely popular, reaching a tenth edition by 1903 and being reprinted as late as 1978. It is a practical treatise to which Paul's wide reading gave a literary character. Coloured illustrations initially made the book expensive; later editions were issued in two forms, with and without these plates. 
Paul served on the committee of the National Floricultural Society from 1851 until it was dissolved in 1858. In July 1858 he joined the newly founded National Rose Society, and in 1866 he was one of the executive committee of twenty-one members for the great International Horticultural Exhibition. He also acted as a commissioner for the Paris Exhibition of 1867. He was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1875, and received the Victoria medal of horticulture when it was first instituted in 1897. 
Although best known as a rosarian, Paul also devoted attention to the improvement of other types of plants, such as hollyhocks, asters, hyacinths, phloxes, camellias, zonal pelargoniums, hollies, ivies, shrubs, fruit trees, and Brussels sprouts. He dealt with these subjects in 'American Plants, their History and Culture' (1858), 'Lecture on the Hyacinth' (1864), and papers on hollyhocks (1851) and 'Tree scenery' (1870-72). He contributed papers on the varieties of yew and holly to the 'Proceedings of the Royal Horticultural Society' (1861, 1863). In addition to the 'Rose Annual', which he issued from 1858 to 1881, Paul was associated with his friends Dr Robert Hogg and Thomas Moore in the editorship of the 'Florist and Pomologist' from 1868 to 1874. Clear and fluent as a speaker, he proved an acceptable lecturer. One of his best lectures, 'Improvements in plants', at Manchester in 1869, was included in his 'Contributions to Horticultural Literature, 1843-1892' (1892). 
Paul died at Waltham Cross of a paralytic seizure on 31 March 1905, and was buried in the family vault at Cheshunt cemetery. His wife, Amelia Jane Harding, predeceased him. His business was carried on by his son, Arthur William Paul. His rich library of old gardening books and general literature was sold at Sothebys after his death, but many volumes were bought by his son. 


@@@@@


doc= 35419


Pauncefote, Julian, Baron Pauncefote (1828-1902), lawyer and diplomatist, was born on 13 September 1828 at Munich, Bavaria, the third and youngest son of Robert Pauncefote 
(formerly Smith; 1788-1843)
of Preston Court, Preston, Gloucestershire, and his wife, Emma Smith (died 1853), daughter of John Raphael Smith, artist and engraver. His father, who had inherited Preston Court from Sir George Pauncefote of Stoke Hall, had sufficient means for the family to spend much of their time abroad, and the young Pauncefote grew up fluent in French and able to understand both German (which he did not speak) and Italian. His first school was in Passy, France, where instruction was entirely in French; his second was the Pensionnat Janin, Geneva. However, after 1840 the family spent more time in England and in 1843 his father died. In August 1843, when he was nearly fifteen, Pauncefote was one of the first 218 pupils enrolled at Marlborough College, Marlborough, Wiltshire, the decidedly robust environment of which, in his biographer's words, 'helped to fortify his solid English character and sound common sense' (Mowat, 6). Appointed a prefect in 1844, he left in the summer of 1845, intended, like his brother Bernard, for a career in the Indian army. He was commissioned in the Madras light infantry but did not serve; the death of his eldest brother, Robert, in 1847 caused him instead to stay in London and to read for the bar at the Inner Temple. 
Pauncefote was called to the bar on 4 May 1852 and practised for some ten years, interrupted, with important consequences for his future, by three months as private secretary to Sir William Molesworth, a position which reflected his membership at that time of a circle as noted for its artistic interests as for its Benthamite reforming zeal. It was thus that he met and later married, on 19 September 1859, Selina Fitzgerald (died 1926), daughter of Major William Cubitt of Catfield Hall, Norfolk. They took up residence at 18 Chapel Street, Bedford Square, London. On 11 July 1860 a son was born, but lived for only three weeks. Almost at the same time Pauncefote lost almost all his private fortune by the collapse of a bank. He determined to repair his fortune by legal practice abroad and in 1862 sailed for Hong Kong accompanied by his wife and newborn daughter, the first of four daughters who were to survive him. 
Hong Kong in 1862 was a turbulent place, and crime and piracy were rife. In May 1866 Pauncefote was appointed acting attorney-general of the colony, and on 22 July attorney-general, a post which left him free to continue his private practice and accumulate a moderate fortune (which, however, he lost in a second crash in 1874). Over the next seven years he worked with Governor Sir Richard Graves MacDonnell to reform the police and improve the administration of justice, being himself responsible for preparation of the colony's code of civil procedure. As attorney-general Pauncefote also deputized for the chief justice of the supreme court while the latter was on leave. During his own two periods of leave, in 1867 and 1871, he visited Shanghai. On leaving Hong Kong in December 1873 he was knighted for his services. 
Pauncefote had left Hong Kong to take up the new post of chief justice of the Leeward Islands. After eighteen months at home he went out to Antigua in January 1874, leaving his family in London. His brief mission was successful though he did not enjoy it and missed his family. Fortunately he was soon able to return to the UK where he took a house for his growing family on The Green at Richmond. Lord Carnarvon, the colonial secretary, had noted his high legal reputation and wished him to succeed Sir Henry Holland as legal assistant under-secretary in the Colonial Office, which he did in September 1874. In this capacity Pauncefote helped facilitate the Disraeli ministry's purchase of the Khedive's Suez Canal Company shares. 
In 1876 a similar post was created in the Foreign Office and Pauncefote was appointed to it by the foreign secretary, Lord Derby. In January 1880 he was created KCMG and three months later CB. In 1882, in a striking breach with precedent, the foreign secretary, Lord Granville, insisted he be appointed permanent under-secretary of state in succession to Lord Tenterden, many of whose duties Pauncefote was already discharging. On 1 October 1882 Granville wrote to Gladstone about Pauncefote: 'I have the highest opinion of his abilities, character and industry. He is popular in the office and with the Corps Diplomatique, an excellent Frenchman and his knowledge of law is constantly of use' (Fitzmaurice, 2.446). 
Pauncefote's seven years as permanent under-secretary confirmed this high opinion. He had come to enjoy sunshine and found his return to London a real hardship. However, he was wholly dedicated to his work, which he enjoyed immensely; his principal and almost sole recreation being to enjoy a quiet Sunday with his family. Otherwise, according to his daughter Sibyl, he never liked being more than a brief drive from a railway station from which he could get back to work. Every working day he received the day's dispatch boxes in the morning at his home at 14 Cromwell Place and minuted the incoming correspondence, then some 60,000 items a year, for the secretary of state. He would then lunch and set off for the office at a quarter to two, remaining at his desk until seven o'clock or later. He was a member of Arthur's Club and the Wellington, but seldom went to either. 
Though the Eastern question had been temporarily resolved in 1878, many tensions remained, and it fell to Pauncefote to deal with the thorny problem of navigation of the Danube. Dilke said 'that Pauncefote was the only man in England who understood it' (Mowat, 38). The European commission which he proposed to oversee the dredging of the mouth of the Danube was to survive even the First World War. It was Pauncefote, too, who proposed the plan which resolved tension with Germany over the settlement of New Guinea (Fitzmaurice, 2.430). But the free navigation of waterways was to be a continuing theme of his diplomatic career. In 1885, together with Sir Charles Rivers Wilson, he was appointed a delegate to the international commission in Paris on the free navigation of the Suez Canal, negotiating the draft settlement on which was based the convention of Constantinople (29 October 1888) which established the right of free passage in both peace and war. He was created GCMG in the new year honours list of 1886 and KCB in 1888. 
On 2 April 1889 Lord Salisbury appointed Pauncefote minister to the United States. The post had been left vacant for some months following the recall of Sir Lionel Sackville-West, Lord Sackville, until the new president, Benjamin Harrison, had taken office. Salisbury needed to appoint someone of sufficient seniority to soothe ruffled feelings, who had not previously served as ambassador. He sounded out Pauncefote, who enthusiastically agreed, believing as he did in the prime importance to Britain of the unity of the English-speaking peoples. In 1893, congress having decided to make it possible, Britain became the first country to raise diplomatic relations with the USA to ambassadorial level. 
As a diplomatist Pauncefote showed 'solid rather than showy qualities' ('The Times', 16 May 1902). His legal training was of inestimable value, since he had to deal with men who were also lawyers, and from the beginning he recognized the need to cultivate not only the members of the administration but leading members of the senate. Though he was perhaps less sensitive to the need to cultivate public opinion, and may have missed opportunities, more importantly he never put a foot wrong. To his success his warm personality and generous nature undoubtedly contributed much; Cecil Spring Rice commented in June 1891: 'I like old Pauncefote, who is kindness itself' ('Letters and Friendships', 1.113). Pauncefote himself generously said that 'his success in Washington' (in a career lasting from 1889 to 1902) 'was due to two of his secretaries, Michael Herbert and Cecil Spring Rice', neither of whom served with him, however, after 1895 ('Letters and Friendships', 1.177). On other occasions he expressed equal appreciation of the support of his wife and eldest daughter, Maud, hostesses at the embassy on Connecticut Avenue. 
The first major issue with which Pauncefote had to deal was the pelagic seals dispute. In 1881, on behalf of the American government, Secretary Blaine, whose hostility to Canada was notorious, claimed jurisdiction over the whole Bering Sea. British policy had to steer a fine line between letting the Canadian sealers down on the one hand and arousing American demands for annexation on the other. The importance of conservation was recognized by both sides and a 'modus vivendi' established. Finally in February 1892 the issue was referred to the decision of an international commission of arbitration at Paris which in August 1893 rejected the American claim that the Bering Sea was territorial waters but confirmed the 'modus vivendi'. 
A much more serious challenge was posed by the Venezuelan boundary dispute. The dispute itself was of long standing and reflected the uncertainties of map making in the early nineteenth century, when Britain had been awarded Guiana. It erupted into public notice when on 20 July 1895 Secretary of State Robert Olney sent an intemperate note to London asserting the right of the United States to intervene in the dispute and citing the Monroe doctrine in support of his view. Unwisely as it turned out, Lord Salisbury believed that the matter was not urgent and could wait. Four months later he replied with a cool note denying the applicability of the doctrine. President Cleveland was incensed, and on 17 December sent a special message to congress. In it he stated that repeated American attempts to resolve the dispute had failed through British obduracy and that if necessary the United States should intervene to determine the correct line. 'Even Pauncefote, shrewd and experienced, very much 'persona grata' in American political and government circles, and intimate enough with Olney to have an excellent basis for judgment, underestimated the moral content of the American stand' (Campbell, 25). Fortunately, though he did not hurry to do so, in February 1896 Salisbury agreed to arbitration, effectively conceding the Americans' right to intervene while denying them the opportunity to do so. In the event the arbitral award followed the existing line of demarcation (the Schomburgk line) with only two significant deviations in favour of Venezuela: a complete vindication both of British contentions and Pauncefote's skill as a negotiator. 
In January 1897, therefore, the queen was able to announce to parliament the conclusion both of the Venezuelan arbitration agreement and of a general treaty of arbitration with the United States (the Olney-Pauncefote treaty). The latter, which reflected Pauncefote's personal commitment to the rule of law and the ideal of arbitration as a method of settling international disputes, was the first of its kind and in scope was much broader than those agreed upon later under presidents Roosevelt and Taft. The McKinley administration gave it its full support in the senate, but in the only major disappointment of Pauncefote's career it failed of ratification by forty-three votes to twenty-six, three votes short of the necessary two-thirds, on 5 May 1897. 
The explosion of the USS 'Maine' in Havana harbour on 15 February 1898 raised passions which President McKinley, who was anxious to avoid war if at all possible, worked skilfully to restrain. Secretary of State William R. Day indicated that he would be prepared to listen to a European initiative. As dean of the diplomatic corps it fell to Pauncefote to lead the group of six who presented a prearranged joint message to the president on 5 or 6 April urging restraint. Neither the message nor the reply, which claimed that the situation in Cuba had become 'insufferable', nor the statement of Spain's position composed, at Pauncefote's suggestion, by the Spanish minister in Washington, had much effect, however (Offner, 167-8). 
When McKinley finally sent his message to congress to obtain congressional authority for military intervention in Cuba, Pauncefote was deeply upset at his suggestion that the 'civilized world' approved of the American position. Given that the Spanish had agreed to all the demands presented up to that time, he believed that military force was an unjustified act of aggression and that a peaceful settlement was still possible. He was also concerned about the dangerous precedent that American seizure of Cuba would have for other European colonies in the Caribbean. Hence on 14 April he held a meeting at the embassy to urge a second European demarche, urging the American government to accept the Spanish minister's memorandum as the basis for peace, but for a variety of reasons none of the European governments concerned accepted the suggestion. During the war Pauncefote continued his efforts to bring about an early peace. The administration, however, was unwilling to take any action until both Cuba and the Philippines had been secured. Meanwhile British opinion had tended to side with the United States. A particularly enthusiastic speech by Joseph Chamberlain created problems for British diplomatists in Europe, but the overall effect of this support was further to improve the growing understanding between London and Washington. 
At the end of the war John Hay was recalled from his post as ambassador to London and replaced Day as secretary of state in September 1898. As his biographer writes: 'He had, fortunately, a warm coadjutor in the British Ambassador, Sir Julian... Pauncefote, a diplomatist, conciliatory, open-minded, very sensitive to questions of honor, ready to assume, until he had proved to the contrary, that his colleagues' intentions were as honest as his own. During nearly four years he and Secretary Hay worked together to harmonise the interests of their respective countries. (Thayer, 2.202-3)' Pauncefote was in fact due to retire in September 1898, having reached the age of seventy. However, in view of the need for continuity he was asked to stay on -- as it turned out, indefinitely. 
The main issue with which Hay and Pauncefote had to deal was that of Britain's attitude towards an isthmian canal. The voyage of the USS 'Oregon' round Cape Horn from San Francisco to Santiago de Cuba made the need for one obvious. The United States, however, by the Clayton-Bulwer treaty of 1850, had first to get Britain's agreement. To forestall the danger that congress might act unilaterally, at Hay's request in December 1898 the possibility of revising the treaty was put to Lord Salisbury by the American charge d'affaires, Henry White. Salisbury agreed, stipulating only that tolls levied should be the same for all users, and suggested that, given his special knowledge of the question, Pauncefote should conduct the negotiations with Hay in Washington. 
Negotiations were held up by the concurrent dispute about the Alaskan boundary, which after some moments of tension was resolved by treaty in 1902. Meanwhile Pauncefote was appointed senior British delegate to the first Hague conference (1899). He could not persuade the other countries to accept the principle of binding arbitration but they did agree to establish a permanent tribunal to which nations might have recourse, in recognition of which Pauncefote was appointed Britain's first member of the Permanent Court of Arbitration and raised to the peerage on 18 August 1899. On his return to Washington the Panama Canal negotiations were resumed. Britain's three main proposals -- that the new treaty merely amend that of 1850, that the canal should not be fortified (on the analogy of the Suez Canal), and that the same tolls should be charged to all nations -- were accepted and on 2 February 1900 Pauncefote was authorized to sign the resulting treaty, known in the USA as the first Hay-Pauncefote treaty. Three days later it was sent to the senate, where it immediately ran into trouble. The main bone of contention was the provision that the canal should not be fortified, and an amendment making this possible was one of three attached to the treaty when it eventually was passed in December 1900 with five votes to spare. 
Britain therefore rejected the first treaty in February 1901. Pauncefote again returned to London for instructions and on his return he and Hay drew up a draft which, while maintaining the principle of equal tolls, abrogated the Clayton-Bulwer treaty rather than amending it and allowed the United States to fortify the canal provided that free passage was allowed to the ships of neutral nations in time of war, as at Suez. This draft Hay sent to the American ambassador in London, Joseph Choate, and it was he who with Lord Lansdowne, the new foreign secretary, was mainly responsible for shaping the final form of the new agreement. This, the second Hay-Pauncefote treaty, was signed on 18 November and approved by the senate by seventy-two votes to six on 16 December 1901. 
By this time Theodore Roosevelt had succeeded McKinley as president, and Pauncefote, like his immediate successor Sir Michael Herbert, was one of those who belonged to Roosevelt's inner circle. 'He admired, liked, and trusted them, and they understood America and in turn were beloved by Americans that knew them' (Beale, 132). Pauncefote had been made an honorary doctor of laws of both Harvard and Columbia universities in 1900. He was suffering increasingly badly, however, from gout, and in April 1902 he sustained a major heart attack, believed at the time to have been precipitated by the German ambassador's allegation that in 1898 Pauncefote had been secretly working against the United States. After a short rally he died in his sleep in the embassy residence on the morning of 24 May 1902. The measure of the success of his unique mission was that there followed, in his daughter's words, a 'wonderful expression of sorrow, of esteem and even affection' (Mowat, xv). President Roosevelt broke with precedent by flying the American flag at half-mast on the White House and personally attended the official funeral ceremony organized by the American government on 28 May at St John's Episcopal Church, Washington, where Pauncefote had regularly worshipped. As a further courtesy the ambassador's body was conveyed to Southampton on the USS 'Brooklyn' for interment in the family graveyard at St Oswald's Church, Stoke, near Newark-on-Trent, Nottinghamshire, on 15 August 1902. 


@@@@@


doc= 35420


Pavy, Frederick William (1829-1911), physician and physiologist, was born at Wroughton, Wiltshire, on 29 May 1829, the son of William Pavy, a maltster, and Mary, his wife. Educated at Merchant Taylors' School in Suffolk Lane, London, which he entered in January 1840, he experienced a spartan discipline under James Bellamy, the headmaster. He proceeded to Guy's Hospital in 1847, and matriculated at the University of London where he gained honours at the intermediate examination in medicine in 1850, and the scholarship and medal in materia medica and pharmaceutical chemistry. In 1852 he graduated MB with honours in physiology and comparative anatomy, obstetric medicine and surgery, and the medal in medicine. 
Pavy then served as house surgeon and house physician at Guy's Hospital; in 1853 he graduated MD and went to Paris, where he joined the English Medical Society of Paris, of which he became a vice-president. The society met in a room near the Luxembourg Gardens and owned a small library. It was the rendezvous of the English medical students, where they met weekly to read papers and to report interesting cases. In Paris Pavy came under the influence of Claude Bernard, who was at this time giving a course of experimental lectures on the role and nature of glycogen and the phenomena of diabetes. Pavy made the study of diabetes the work of his life and imitated his master in the manner of his lectures. 
On his return to England Pavy was appointed lecturer on anatomy at Guy's Hospital in 1854 and lecturer in physiology in 1856. He married Julia (1830?-1902), daughter of William Oliver, on 25 July 1855. There were two daughters, both of whom predeceased him. His elder daughter, Florence Julia (1856-1902), married in 1881 the Revd Sir Borradaile Savory, second baronet, son of Sir William Scovell Savory, first baronet. 
Pavy lectured on comparative anatomy until 1864 and on physiology and microscopical anatomy until 1877; later he lectured on systematic medicine. He was elected assistant physician to the hospital in 1858, on the promotion of William Gull, and became full physician in 1871, when the number of physicians was increased from three to four. He was appointed consulting physician to the hospital in 1890, his tenure of office on the full staff having been prolonged for an additional year. 
At the Royal College of Physicians, Pavy was elected a fellow in 1860; he served as an examiner in 1872-3 and in 1878-9; he was a councillor from 1875 to 1877 and again from 1888 to 1890; and a censor in 1882, 1883, and 1891. He delivered the Goulstonian lectures in 1862-3, the Croonian lectures in 1878 and 1894, and the Harveian oration in 1886. He was awarded the Baly medal in 1901. 
Pavy also did good work at the medical societies of London. In 1860 he delivered the Lettsomian lectures at the Medical Society 'On certain points connected with diabetes'. He served as president of the Pathological Society from 1893 to 1895 and as president of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society from 1900 to 1902. He acted for some years as president of the Association for the Advancement of Medicine by Research, and from 1901 he served, after the death of Sir William MacCormac, as president of the national committee for Great Britain and Ireland of the International Congress of Medicine. The permanent committee of this congress, meeting at The Hague in 1909, appointed him the first chairman. 
Pavy was elected FRS in 1863; the University of Glasgow conferred on him the honorary degree of LLD in 1888, and in 1909 he was crowned laureat of the Academie de Medecine in Paris and received the Prix Godard for his physiological researches. On 26 June 1909, at a meeting held at Oxford of the Physiological Society of Great Britain and Ireland, he was presented with a silver bowl bearing an expression 'of affection and admiration'. 
Pavy was the last survivor of a line of distinguished physician-chemists who did much to lay the foundations and advance the study of metabolic disorders; at the same time he ranks as a pioneer among nineteenth-century chemical pathologists. As a pupil of Claude Bernard, he recognized that all advances in the study of disease must rest on investigations into the normal processes of the body; but as his investigations proceeded, he found himself disagreeing with the views of his master. He soon discovered that Bernard's theory of the glycogenic function of the liver was based on faulty experiments and showed that the saccharine condition of the liver was due to post-mortem changes and was absent in the living animal. He also found that arterial and venous blood contained the same proportion of dextrose, indicating that dextrose did not pass from the liver to the tissues in the free state. Pavy also suggested that the kidney acts as a filter, allowing diffusible compounds such as urea and dextrose to pass from the blood into the urine. Hence, if free dextrose passed into the blood from the liver, as Bernard's theory suggested, the urine would provide evidence of the fact. Although he later found that glycogen was broken down by enzymes into dextrose and conveyed by the blood to the tissues, he maintained that the dextrose must be combined with blood proteins. He tested his new working hypotheses by experiment, but his theories did not always meet with the approval of those who were working along similar lines; some never obtained general acceptance. He made the study of carbohydrate metabolism the work of his life, and he was the founder of the modern theory of diabetes. In this connection his name was associated with many improvements in clinical and practical medicine. 'Pavy's test', using an ammoniacal copper salt for the quantitative estimation of reducing sugars, and his use of sugar tests and albumen tests in the solid form, made his name familiar to physicians and medical students throughout the world. As a practical physician, too, he was greatly interested in the control of diabetes through the diet. He introduced almonds and other protein-rich bread substitutes. His treatment of diabetes began with the elimination of dextrose from the blood by means of a carbohydrate-free diet. He was one of the first to recognize the importance of acetone and other ketones eliminated in acute stages of diabetes, and albuminaria, often associated with the disease, also interested him. He was the first to recognize cyclic, or physiological, albuminaria. He wrote a well-known book on dietetics, 'A Treatise on Food and Dietetics Physiologically and Therapeutically Considered' (1873). 
Throughout life Pavy remained a student, and even to the last week of his life he was at work in the laboratory which he had built at the back of his consulting room in Grosvenor Street. Quiet in bearing, gentle and courteous in speech, and with a somewhat old-fashioned formality of manner, he was generous in his benefactions. At Guy's medical school he built a well-equipped gymnasium and presented it to the students' union in 1890. He also left in his will an endowment for its upkeep. 
Pavy died at his house, 35 Grosvenor Street, London, on 19 September 1911, and was buried at Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 35421


Payne, Edward John (1844-1904), historian, was born of humble origins at Easton Street, High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, on 22 July 1844; he was the son of Edward William Payne, a gardener, and his wife, Mary Welch. Payne owed his education largely to his own exertions. After receiving early training at the grammar school, High Wycombe, he was employed by a local architect and surveyor named Pontifex, and he studied architecture under William Burges. Interested in music from youth, he also acted as organist of the parish church. In 1867, at the age of twenty-three, he matriculated at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, whence he passed to Charsley's Hall. While an undergraduate he supported himself at first by pursuing his work as land surveyor and architect at High Wycombe, where he designed the Easton Street almshouses, and afterwards by coaching in classics at Oxford. In 1871 Payne graduated BA with a first class in the final classical school, and in 1872 he was elected to an open fellowship in University College. He remained a fellow until his marriage when he was re-elected to a research fellowship. 
On 5 April 1899 Payne married Emma Leonora Helena, daughter of Major Pertz and granddaughter of the historian Georg Heinrich Pertz. They had one son, the archaeologist Humfry Gilbert Garth Payne. Their life was mainly spent in London, but Payne was keenly interested in the management of the affairs of his college, and during the years of serious agricultural depression his good counsel and business aptitude proved of great service. 
On 17 November 1874 Payne was called to the bar by Lincoln's Inn, and in 1883 was appointed honorary recorder of High Wycombe, holding the office until his death. But his mature years were mainly devoted to literary work. British colonial history and exploration were the main subjects of his study. In 1875 he contributed a 'History of European Colonies' to E. A. Freeman's 'Historical Course for Schools'. In 1883 he collaborated with J. S. Cotton in 'Colonies and Dependencies' for the 'English Citizen' series, and the section on colonies which fell to Payne he later developed into his 'Colonies and Colonial Federation' (1904). He also edited Edmund Burke's 'Select Works' (1876; new edn, 1912) and 'The Voyages of Elizabethan Seamen to America' (1880; new edn, 1907). But these labours were preliminaries to a great design of a 'History of the New World called America'. The first and second volumes (published respectively in 1892 and 1899) supplied a preliminary sketch of the geographical knowledge and exploration of the middle ages, an account of the discovery of America, and the beginning of an exhaustive summing up of all available knowledge as to the ethnology, language, religion, and social and economic condition of the indigenous peoples. Nothing more was published, and an original plan to extend the survey to Australasia was untouched. Payne contributed the first two chapters on 'The Age of Discovery' and 'The New World' to volume one of the 'Cambridge Modern History' (1902). 
At the same time Payne wrote much on music. He contributed many pieces to Grove's 'Dictionary of Music and Musicians', and in particular the article on Stradivari. The history of stringed instruments had a strong attraction for him, and he was himself an accomplished amateur performer on the violin and on various ancient instruments. He helped to found the Bar Musical Society, and was its first honorary secretary. He was also a golfer. 
In his later years Payne lived at Holywell Lodge, Wendover, and suffered from heart weakness and fits of giddiness. On 26 December 1904 he was found drowned in the Wendover Canal, into which he had apparently fallen in a fit. He was survived by his wife, one son, and two daughters; his widow was given a civil-list pension of $120 in 1905. 


@@@@@


doc= 35422


Payne, Humfry Gilbert Garth (1902-1936), archaeologist, was born at Wendover, Buckinghamshire, on 19 February 1902, the only son of the historian Edward John Payne (1844-1904) and his wife, Emma Leonora Helena Pertz, granddaughter of Georg Heinrich Pertz (editor of the 'Monumenta Germaniae Historica') and of James John Garth Wilkinson, the Swedenborgian. He was educated at Westminster School and then at Christ Church, Oxford, where he held an open classical scholarship and gained firsts in classical moderations (1922) and in 'literae humaniores' (1924). In his last year at Oxford, partly under the influence of J. D. Beazley and Alan Blakeway, he became seriously interested in Greek art and found his vocation as an archaeologist. 
After taking his degree Payne continued his studies as university research scholar in Mediterranean archaeology (1924-6). In 1926 he married (Elizabeth) Dilys Powell (1901-1995), daughter of Thomas Powell, a bank manager of Bridgnorth and Bournemouth; there were no children. She had read modern languages at Somerville College, Oxford (1920-24), and retained the name Dilys Powell in her career as journalist and film and television critic. In the same year Payne was appointed as assistant in the coin room (then part of the department of antiquities) of the Ashmolean Museum, a position he held until 1928. This gave him the opportunity to work with his former teacher, Beazley, and together they published a selection of Attic black-figured pottery from earlier excavations at Naucratis in the 'Journal of Hellenic Studies' (1929). Payne was a senior scholar of Christ Church (1926-31). He was awarded the Conington prize for classical learning in 1927 based on his submission of his work on the painted pottery and other arts at Corinth. In 1931 this was to be published as 'Necrocorinthia', which placed Payne at once, as was widely acknowledged, in the front rank of classical archaeologists. It was supplemented in 1933 by 'Protokorinthische Vasenmalerei'. 
Payne was at this stage linked with excavations on Crete. He excavated in the vicinity of Knossos in 1927 and 1929, concentrating on the post-Bronze Age remains rather than the 'Minoan' period which had been the focus of the work by Sir Arthur Evans. Payne was to resume excavations in the Fortetsa cemetery in 1933, supported by funds raised in Oxford by Alan Blakeway. Excavations in the cemetery continued in 1935; the archaeological report, 'Fortetsa: Early Greek Tombs Near Knossos', was published by James Brock, one of the excavators, in 1957. Payne had been hoping to develop a major excavation of an archaic site on Crete. In June 1929 he started work at Eleutherna in central Crete, a site earlier surveyed by P. J. Dixon, but the finds were disappointing and the work abandoned. 
In the autumn of 1929 Payne took up residence as the newly appointed director of the British School of Athens. He then initiated the excavation of Perachora, a small but rich archaic site opposite Corinth, over four seasons from 1930 to 1933. The first volume of 'Perachora', edited by Thomas James Dunbabin, was published in 1940; most of it is by Payne. The second volume was to follow in 1962. One of his chief works as director was the publication of 'Archaic Marble Sculpture from the Acropolis' (1936: a volume of photographs by Gerard Mackworth Young with text by Payne). This continued the British School's involvement with the publication of material from the Athenian acropolis initiated during R. M. Dawkins's directorship. Payne's volume set many statues and fragments in fresh light: two notable identifications were the matching of the upper part of a female statue in Lyons with its base on the acropolis, and the association of a head in the Louvre with an equestrian statue also in Athens. His former teacher, Beazley, described the particular qualities of his work: 'A fine eye, deep respect for the individual object, great structural power, wealth of detail combined with breadth of vision, perfect clearness of thought and expression' ('DNB'). He died at the Evangelismos Hospital in Athens from a staphylococcic infection, which had suddenly become acute, on 9 May 1936. He was buried in the cemetery of Ayios Yeoryios at Mycenae, and his gravestone is inscribed, 'Weep not for Adonis'. 
Payne was described as '6 feet 5 inches in height, straight, slender, square-shouldered, with a small head, and small features (except the mouth), fair hair, a fresh complexion, eyes of a strong blue, and something boyish, yet resolute, in the face' ('DNB'). His widow wrote a good account of him, especially of his life in Greece, in 'The Traveller's Journey is done' (1943). 


@@@@@


doc= 35423


Payne, John Wesley Vivian (1899-1969), bandleader, was born in Leamington Spa, Warwickshire, on 22 August 1899, the only son of John Edwin Payne, music warehouse manager, and his wife, Sarah Vivian Clare Gunn, of 10 Church Street, Leamington Spa. Jack Payne, as he was always known, first became interested in dance music during his service with the Royal Flying Corps in 1918, playing the piano in various amateur bands in the service. After demobilization he took up dance music as a profession and formed a small band which secured a position in the Hotel Cecil in London in the summer of 1925. With this he made his first records for Zonophone and Aco. When the BBC began relaying dance music from the hotel, four extra musicians were added, increasing the number to ten. In February 1928 Payne was appointed director of dance music to the BBC, a position he held from 2 March 1928 until 14 March 1932. In that period he and the BBC Dance Orchestra recorded exclusively for Columbia, and made daily broadcasts of about an hour from Station 2LO, later known as the National Programme. He was the first bandleader to introduce and close each broadcast with a signature tune, in this case Irving Berlin's 'Say it with Music', and was one of the first to announce his music and sing the vocal refrains himself. In April 1930 Jack Payne and the BBC Dance Orchestra appeared at the London Palladium, and they returned there in August 1931. The full strength of the band was then sixteen, and it remained so for many years. 
On leaving the BBC Payne took his band on nationwide tours, recording for Imperial Records; the labels showed his portrait in place of the gold crown trademark, and a gold facsimile of his signature. He is the only dance-bandleader in the UK to have been accorded this honour. Late in 1932 he and the band appeared as the central figures in a film called 'Say it with Music', for which his arranger, Ray Noble, wrote the score. Towards the end of 1933 the band was reorganized, and continued to record on Rex Records, which had replaced Imperial as the principal product of the Crystalate Gramophone Record Manufacturing Company. At the end of 1935 Payne and his band made another film, 'Sunshine Ahead', on completion of which they visited South Africa very successfully during the summer of 1936. 
In May 1937 Payne gave the members of his band two weeks' notice, and retired to his Buckinghamshire farm to concentrate on stock breeding; but he returned to the popular-music business in January 1938, and resumed recording (for Decca) and touring. During the Second World War he and the band entertained the services extensively, but within a year of the end of the war Payne again withdrew from the scene and became a very popular disc jockey, a host on his own television show, an artists' manager, and, finally, the manager of a hotel in Tonbridge. The last venture was not a success, and failing health and financial difficulties contributed to his death at the age of seventy. 
Payne was also a composer. In 1930 he published two waltz ballads which were very successful -- 'Blue Pacific Moonlight' and 'Underneath the Spanish Stars' -- and in 1931 another waltz, 'Pagan Serenade', among other numbers. His band was versatile, and in the course of a single show would play all kinds of popular tunes of the day, mostly romantic but freely intermixed with rousing chorus songs in 6/8 time, 'paso dobles', pieces with African-American rhythms, comedy songs involving cameo sketches in which Payne himself would play cockney, north country, American, and Oxford-English character parts, and sometimes concert arrangements of standard classics, one of the most popular being Ravel's 'Bolero'. One of Payne's most spectacular pieces of showmanship was to simulate a huge engine, appearing to be running out of the stage backdrop into the stalls of the London Palladium, with the members of the band seated on various parts of the engine as they played a popular instrumental number of the time (1931) called 'Choo Choo'. 
Payne was a perfectionist, a disciplinarian, an obvious leader, frank and sincere to a fault. These characteristics did not always find favour with his associates, but he left an indelible mark on the pages of the history of British dance music. He was twice married: first in 1923 to Doris Aileen (died 1939), the daughter of Colonel H. H. Pengree, Royal Field Artillery; and second in 1942 to Peggy, daughter of Thomas Andrew Cochrane LLB (Edinburgh). A daughter was adopted in the second marriage. Payne died at his home in Tonbridge, Kent, on 4 December 1969. 
Brian Rust', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35424


Payne, Joseph Frank (1840-1910), physician and medical historian, was born in the parish of St Giles, Camberwell, in Surrey, on 10 January 1840, son of Joseph Payne (1808-1876), professor and a founder member of the College of Preceptors, where education was taught, and his wife, Eliza, 'nee' Dyer (died 1875), also a teacher. After education by his father he went to University College, London. In 1858 he gained a demyship at Magdalen College, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1862 with a first class in natural science. He obtained the Burdett-Coutts scholarship in geology (1863), the Radcliffe travelling fellowship (1865), which took him to Paris, Berlin, and Vienna, and a Magdalen fellowship, which he vacated on his marriage (he became an honorary fellow on 30 May 1906). He graduated BSc (London) in 1865. Payne studied medicine at St George's Hospital, London, and graduated BM at Oxford in 1867 and DM in 1880. He became a member of the Royal College of Physicians of London in 1868, and was elected a fellow in 1873. Payne settled in London and became assistant physician at the Hospital for Sick Children in Great Ormond Street, and demonstrator of morbid anatomy at St Mary's Hospital, Paddington, in 1869. He left St Mary's in 1871 to become assistant physician to St Thomas's Hospital, where he was appointed physician in 1887. He retired in 1900. He was also on the staff of the Hospital for Skin Diseases at Blackfriars. He married, on 1 September 1882, Helen, daughter of the Hon. John Macpherson of Melbourne, Victoria. They had one son and three daughters. 
Although primarily a physician, Payne made substantial contributions to pathology, epidemiology, dermatology, and the history of medicine. As pathologist he came to public prominence as expert witness for the defence in the trial of Louis Staunton and others for the murder of Staunton's wife, Harriet, at Penge in 1877. Although the jury convicted, Payne's argument that death was caused by tuberculous meningitis was eventually accepted. The home secretary commuted the death sentences on Louis Staunton, his brother, and his sister-in-law to penal servitude for life. Payne edited in 1875 'Manual of Pathological Anatomy' by Jones and Sieveking, and in 1888 he published 'A Manual of General Pathology', which in its emphasis on function and aetiology, as well as morbid anatomy, exemplified the view expressed in his presidential address to the Pathological Society of London in 1897 that 'it would be a loss rather than a gain were pathology to live like a cloistered recluse, in laboratories and museums, not breathing the common air of the whole medical world'. Between 1868 and 1891 he presented many case reports to the society. In 1891 he gave the Lumleian lectures at the Royal College of Physicians, entitled 'On cancer, especially of the internal organs'. His career as a descriptive morbid anatomist with clinical practice epitomized that of the physician-pathologist dominant in English medicine during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Sir James Goodhart in his 1912 Harveian oration ranked him with Matthew Baillie, Richard Bright, Thomas Addison, John Bristowe, Sir William Jenner, and Sir Samuel Wilks, as a great master of morbid anatomy. 
As an epidemiologist and medical historian Payne had a particular interest in plague. In 1879 he was sent to Russia by the government with Surgeon-Major Colvill to report on the epidemic of plague at Vetlyanka. He wrote articles on plague and the sweating sickness in the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (9th edn), 'St Thomas's Hospital Reports', 'Quarterly Review' (October 1901), and Allbutt's 'System of Medicine' (vol. 2, 1907). He was also the spokesman of the committee of the Royal College of Physicians in 1905, on the Indian epidemic of plague. He had printed in 1894, with an introduction on the history of the plague, the 'Loimographia' of William Boghurst, who witnessed the London plague of 1665, from the Sloane manuscript. In some of his writing on the transmission of infection, Payne pioneered a quantitative approach -- well before this became a common feature of studies on this subject. His main dermatological contributions were his 'Observations on some Rare Diseases of the Skin' (1889) and his presidency of the Dermatological Society (1892-3). 
Payne was held in high regard as a medical historian. He wrote a life of Thomas Linacre which was prefixed to a facsimile of the 1521 Cambridge edition of Linacre's Latin version of Galen, 'De temperamentis' (Cambridge, 1881). In 1896 he delivered the Harveian oration on the relation of Harvey to Galen, and in 1900 he wrote a still useful life of Thomas Sydenham. He wrote long articles on the history of medicine in the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', and in Allbutt's 'System of Medicine' (vol. 1, 1905), besides seventy-eight lives in the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. In 1904 he delivered the first FitzPatrick lectures on the history of medicine at the Royal College of Physicians. His last historical work was entitled 'History of the College Club', an account of a select dining society of the college, of which he was a member. It was privately printed in 1909. 
For the Royal College of Physicians, Payne was an examiner for the college licence, a censor in 1896-7, and senior censor in 1905. He became Harveian librarian in 1899, and had a great knowledge of bibliography and of the history of woodcuts. He gave many books to the college library. In 1896 he edited the 'Nomenclature of diseases'. He sat on the royal commission on tuberculosis (1890), on the General Medical Council representing the University of Oxford (1899-1904), and on the University of London senate (1899-1906). He was on the London Library committee, and was himself the possessor of a fine library. Except for small bequests to the college, it was sold at Sothebys after his death. The catalogues emphasize the early medical works, the numerous books and tracts on pestilence from the earliest times to the eighteenth century, the rare herbals, and a series of the first and later editions of John Milton's writings and Miltoniana. 
Payne first met William Osler in 1873, when he took him to a meeting of the Medical Microscopical Society, at which Osler read his first scientific paper. Osler held Payne in high regard; a particular interest that linked them was book collecting, one that persisted after Payne's death when Osler tried to secure the medical section of his library for the Johns Hopkins Library. The works were bought instead by Henry Wellcome -- the most dramatic example of the book-collecting rivalry between Osler and Wellcome. 
Payne was said to be ineffective in committees because he gave an opinion only when asked. Although verging on the polymathic -- he wrote an article on furniture for the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' -- he did not flaunt his learning, as illustrated by an anecdote in the 'British Medical Journal' obituary: 'One wet Sunday in Switzerland a young lady came into the salon of the hotel, and joined a semicircle around Payne, who was distributing his golden share of information to any who cared to listen. Her comment on the close was, 'To think that I sat next to him at 'table d'hote' for three nights, and all he said was 'please pass the salt''. ('BMJ', 2 (1910))' Payne was below middle height and had a curious jerky manner of expressing emphasis both in public speaking and in private conversation. He died at Lyonsdown House, New Barnet, Hertfordshire, on 16 November 1910, and was buried at Bell's Hill cemetery, Barnet. 


@@@@@


doc= 35425


Peacock, Sir Edward Robert (1871-1962), merchant banker, was born in the manse at Glengarry, Ontario, Canada, on 2 August 1871, the eldest son of the Revd William MacAllister Peacock (died 1883), Presbyterian minister and third-generation Canadian, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' McDougall. When young he almost died of typhoid fever, and on doctor's advice he was prevented from attending school. In despair, at the age of ten he used the 'Pilgrim's Progress' to teach himself to read and write; he always attributed his atrocious handwriting to his early lack of formal education. 
Peacock's father died in 1883 and his mother, in straitened circumstances, took their daughter and three sons to Almonte where Edward attended the high school. In 1890 he entered the prestigious Queen's University, Kingston, where he read English and social sciences; he graduated 'magna cum laude' in 1894, with prizes in philosophy and political economy. He then trained at the School of Pedagogy, Toronto, perhaps because teaching was commonly regarded as a stepping stone to other professions, and went on to attend Upper Canada College, a leading public school, as a teacher of English; he later became senior housemaster. Peacock's headmaster was Sir George Parkin who, along with G. M. Grant and Adam Shortt, both of Queen's University, was an apostle of imperial unity, and he strongly moulded Peacock's views. 
In 1902 Peacock left teaching to join E. R. Wood, a leading Canadian financier, as his personal assistant. Wood had established the Dominion Securities Corporation in 1901, and on discovering that Peacock's work at Upper Canada College meant that he knew many wealthy people, he appointed him a bond salesman at Dominion; about 1905 he then made him 'manager' of what had become Canada's leading securities house. In 1907 Peacock went to London to open a European office and in 1909 he settled there permanently, at the same time as other Canadian financiers such as Max Aitken (Lord Beaverbrook) and Sir James Hamet Dunn (1874-1956) were also making London their home. In London, Dominion issued and placed Canadian industrial securities at a time when Britain's portfolio investment in Canada had peaked. Initially Dominion worked closely with Speyer Brothers. Peacock established himself surprisingly quickly, meeting Montagu Collet Norman (1871-1950) in 1907, with whom he became great friends, and leading figures such as Lord Milner and Arthur Steel-Maitland. He was closely connected with the 'round table' movement, which was concerned with imperial affairs. 
On 15 July 1912 Peacock was married in New York to Katherine (died 1948), daughter of John Coates of Ottawa and widow of Frederick J. Campbell, and they brought up two adopted daughters. Coates was a civil engineer who in 1880 had formed John Coates & Co. in London and who later spent time in Canada and Australia, where he established local businesses connected with London. For some years Peacock was a director of John Coates & Co. 
By 1915 Peacock had achieved wide recognition within London's financial community. Dominion had financed the Brazilian Traction Light and Power Company Ltd, which controlled subsidiary companies in Barcelona and Mexico, and following the outbreak of war, when the Barcelona company experienced severe funding difficulties, Peacock negotiated a refinancing on behalf of its bondholders. However, when the company's president, Dr F. S. Pearson, perished in the 'Lusitania' disaster of 1915, Peacock left Dominion to succeed him as president. He subsequently became president of the Mexican company, when it too ran into difficulties, and financial vice-president of the Brazilian company. For almost a decade Peacock nursed the Barcelona and Mexican companies back to good health, travelling widely and becoming well known in the business communities of Spain and Mexico, and of Paris and Brussels. Gaspard Farrer, a senior partner of Barings, the leading London merchant bankers, in 1922 urged a colleague 'to make tracks for him. He is well worth knowing. He took up Dr Pearson's interests... all in the same state of utter impecuniosity and brought them through in a wonderful way' (ING Baring Archives, DEP33.21). Peacock formalized his Barings' connection in 1920, when the firm underwrote a $1.05 million debenture issue for the Barcelona company. 
In 1920 Peacock's old friend Montagu Norman became governor of the Bank of England, and in 1921 he 'exercised a good deal of influence' (ING Baring Archives, DEP200, 26) in arranging for Peacock's appointment to the bank's court. Norman, as well as wanting to introduce to the bank forward-thinking directors who understood the realities of Britain's post-war economy, also sought a representative from the dominions to encourage the introduction of central banking. As at other stages in his career the rise in Peacock's authority was meteoric. By 1922 he had joined the important committee of Treasury and had attended the Paris conference on Mexican debts and the International Economic Conference at Genoa. 
On the Treasury committee Peacock worked closely with John Baring, second Baron Revelstoke, Barings' senior partner, who in 1923 invited him to join Barings as a partner. Initially Peacock declined, as it would have required him to leave the court, where tradition dictated that no one house could provide more than one director. However, he relented when the invitation was reissued a year later and joined Barings in early 1924. Revelstoke was now seeking a successor to his ageing deputy, Gaspard Farrer; he also sought his own successor, as he was now sixty years old and premature deaths had already removed potential successors from Barings' partners. The press described Peacock's as an 'interesting appointment' ('Morning Post'); certainly Revelstoke and Peacock were markedly different in both culture and temperament. It is hard to think that the hand of Norman was not at work, appointing a like-minded ally to an influential house, where Peacock could work at arm's length from the Bank of England but still take the lead in promoting Norman's ambitious plans for international monetary reconstruction and industrial reorganization. Farrer felt obliged to explain the appointment to Barings' correspondents: 'He is absolutely straight', he told Hopes of Amsterdam, 'and without any pretence to special brilliance, has one of the wisest heads I know' (ING Baring Archives, DEP33.22). 
At that time Barings, a limited company, was controlled and largely owned by a partnership, and in this Peacock was given a 10/113ths interest. After Revelstoke's death in 1929 his interest was extended to 24/68ths, but by 1946 this had diminished to 14/68ths. Although not senior in name, his leadership was undisputed and he underlined it by taking over Revelstoke's suite of offices outside the partners' room at Barings and appointing his own expert team. He fitted well into the culture, but strains persisted. Cecil Baring dubbed him 'the paycock' (D. Pollen, 229), and Revelstoke's rather stilted correspondence with him betrayed the lack of intimacy which he enjoyed with Farrer. 
Peacock's experience of Canadian industry, influenced by American technology and management practices, qualified him well to work with Norman for the rationalization and reconstruction of Britain's staple industries. In doing this he was responsible for the immensely successful transition of Barings from specialization in debt issues for foreign governments and businesses to the provision of corporate finance services to British industry. In this he differed greatly from Revelstoke, and in 1927 he seemingly over-stressed his viewpoint to this banker moulded by Edwardian international finance. Norman, Peacock's weekend guest, had stressed 'the importance of bringing about closer relationships and a much better understanding between the City of London and the great industries of England'. He told Revelstoke that on this point he found a sympathetic listener and felt that it was a matter of vital importance to Britain that there should be a 'much better understanding and more active intervention by the financial people, not merely the rather passive assistance afforded in the form of overdrafts by joint stock banks' (ING Baring Archives, 202040). His outlook was far removed from that of other pre-war London merchant bankers. 
By this time Peacock had also had his skills tested by the great engineering company, Sir W. G. Armstrong Whitworth & Co. Ltd, which had run into severe difficulties following rapid yet unsustainable wartime expansion and poorly planned peacetime diversification. Armstrongs was heavily indebted to its bankers, the Bank of England, and its management was unequal to the task. Doubtless under pressure from Norman, the company appointed Barings its advisers in early 1924, and Peacock soon installed James Frater Taylor, a 'company doctor', who eventually took complete charge of its affairs. Peacock arranged a series of refinancings and reconstructions, and he backed Taylor in such measures as merging parts of the company with those of competitors, reorganizing the company structure, and introducing new management and controls. 'The Economist' described the outcome as 'the greatest achievement of financial salvage ever attempted' though Armstrongs emerged as a shadow of its former self, with holders of shares and debentures having lost much of their capital through ruthless write-downs. 
Norman and Peacock, with Taylor as their workhorse, became leading proponents of rationalization. 'Rationalisation means higher wages and a higher standard of living in spite of the fact that there may [be] short intervals of less employment', Peacock told Steel-Maitland in 1929 for the benefit of tory electioneering (ING Baring Archives, 202040). Its justification was that larger corporations, better managed and more able to afford capital expenditure, would achieve the economies of scale required in order to defeat foreign competition. 
Whether correct or otherwise, Peacock's philosophy had a profound influence on the face of Britain's staple industries, and no more so than in Lancashire, where a large part of the cotton textile industry was reshaped. The industry was in severe difficulties due to foreign competition, and it risked dragging down those clearing banks which had over-lent to it. Peacock, again working closely with Norman, became involved in this area in 1928, and he devised a scheme to reorganize many of the industry's components into a single entity, the Lancashire Cotton Corporation. By 1933 the corporation had acquired more than 100 mills, and it closed down many -- concentrating production at large plant with modern equipment. However, progress was not smooth, and it necessitated further schemes of reconstruction and the injection of new management, which eventually transformed the corporation into a viable unit. 
Most of Barings' activities were far more conventional. In the 1920s its issuing business comprised largely the marketing of bonds of overseas sovereign entities, now frequently handled jointly with Rothschilds and Schroders, but with one house having management control. At Barings, Revelstoke played a leading part, but Peacock's role was increasingly important. One of his first initiatives was to create a large international bond issue in 1926 for the Belgium government; this was brought out simultaneously in London, New York, Amsterdam, Stockholm, and Switzerland. Its organization was centred upon Barings, and Peacock wrote that 'it gave me my first opportunity [at Barings] to show what I could do... as it fell to me to take on the supervision of the whole thing.... It all went very satisfactorily' (ING Baring Archives, DEP200, 27-8). Peacock's other major work in this area was the refinancing of large parts of Brazil's and Argentina's external debt in the late 1920s and 1930s, and he also was concerned with the London issuing houses' response to Germany's default in 1934. However, embargoes on the issue of foreign securities in London also meant the shifting of Barings' business to debt issues for British business. 
In the 1920s and 1930s Peacock oversaw issues for, 'inter alia', the North Metropolitan Power Station Company, the Charing Cross Electricity Supply Company, the British Tanker Company, Goodyear Tyre and Rubber (Great Britain) Ltd, and the Southern Railway -- modern industries forming the economy's dynamic sector. Of major importance were issues to finance the extension of the London Underground. In a notable break with practice, in 1926 Peacock joined as a preliminary the board of the Underground Electric Railway Company of London, his presence being insisted upon by Jimmy Speyer, an American investment banker and a major shareholder who would otherwise have blocked the underground's expansion plans. Another company to which Peacock led Barings was the Pressed Steel Company (Great Britain), established to use pioneering American technology and management to make motor-car bodies. Peacock, who was close to this business culture and whose passionate desire was for a buoyant and internationally competitive British motor industry (in part as a counterpoise to the declining staples), persuaded his fellow partners to join those of Schroders in subscribing for a major interest in the company's share and loan capital. He placed Frater Taylor on its board to watch over this interest. 
Peacock retired from Barings' partnership in 1946; his directorship continued until the end of 1954, but by then he had stayed for too long. Although increasingly detached from day-to-day leadership, however, his high status as the City's elder statesman meant that his advice was still eagerly sought outside Barings. Two issues much concerned him after 1945, namely the nationalization of industry under the Labour Party, which he strongly opposed, and the consolidation of family control of private businesses which were converted to public companies. Little could be done to hold back the tide of nationalization but Peacock's role was central in early discussions between industry leaders, the Bank of England, and the out-of-office tories, for iron and steel denationalization. 
Peacock's major interest outside Barings was unquestionably the Bank of England. He returned to the court in 1929, on Revelstoke's death, but in the interim he had been Norman's continuing confidant. Norman's initial idea of promoting central banking in Canada (and the other dominions) by taking in 'the best Canadian we can get... [so that] we are most likely to influence Canadian opinion without offending their susceptibilities' (Sayers, 203) in the short term came to nothing. But Peacock soon asserted himself in areas other than rationalization and became immensely powerful. 'Because I was the favourite of the Governor', he was later to write, 'it came to be recognised [by the court] that if things were to be got through with the Governor I had better make the approach and that happened very often' (ING Baring Archives, DEP200, 30). 
Rationalization apart, until his retirement in 1946 Peacock had an important say in most vital matters, such as the conversion in 1932 of war loan stock as a step to cheaper money; the rescue from collapse of the Anglo-South American Bank at the time of the 1931 crisis, when it fell to him to plead for clearing bank support; and the chairmanship of a committee -- the so-called Peacock committee -- to review the administration of the bank, which made, in Peacock's words, 'revolutionary suggestions, all of which were accepted by our colleagues' (ING Baring Archives, DEP200, 40-41). In 1943 Norman sent him in secret to Canada to sound out Graham Towers, governor of the Bank of Canada, on his willingness to succeed Norman as governor of the Bank of England. As 'commander royal' Peacock travelled in the belly of a bomber aircraft, packed like a sardine alongside fellow passengers. In 1953, at the bank's behest, he was a somewhat reluctant midwife of the Commonwealth Development Finance Corporation, realizing that it would make little impact and that it would fail to attract high-quality proposals. However, he subsequently sat on the corporation's board. 
Above all else, at the time of the 1931 economic crisis, which caused the government to fall and eventually drove the country from the gold standard, Peacock emerged alongside Sir Ernest Harvey, deputy governor, as the bank's natural leader in the prolonged absence of Norman due to sickness. From the end of July until about October, he and Harvey worked without a break, taking part in 'all the consultations that were almost continuous. We saw the Prime Minister and the Chancellor... every day, and with the permission of the Prime Minister we also kept the leaders of the two other parties informed' (ING Baring Archives, DEP200, 34). 
On the evening of the government's fall and with the nation tottering on the precipice of economic collapse, Peacock was summoned to dine with George V (who knew him well) in order to brief the king on the impending crisis. As they dined the prime minister, Ramsay MacDonald, fled from a cabinet meeting in uproar and drove to Buckingham Palace to offer his resignation. There, after a telephone briefing from Harvey at Downing Street, Peacock found MacDonald 'dishevelled and wild' but ahead of him in his return to the king's presence. 'I rushed up one stairway as I saw MacDonald going up the other', Peacock later recounted, 'and managed to get in to see the King and tell that much and I added: 'I am afraid, Sir, it is all up to you now''. Counselled and placated by the king, who doubtless followed Peacock's advice, MacDonald returned to Downing Street with Peacock, and entered by the garden gate in order to avoid the press. There Peacock and Harvey spent the night encouraging MacDonald's acceptance of the king's wish for the formation of a government of national unity, as opposition party leaders arrived for discussions. They pointed to the prime minister's chief asset, namely his chancellor, Philip Snowden: he 'had been the sturdy, admirably courageous man throughout the trouble', wrote Peacock later, 'a realist who did not allow his theories to interfere with the facts' (ING Baring Archives, DEP200, 36-7). 
In 1929 Peacock took up the chairmanship of the channel tunnel committee at the request of prime minister, Stanley Baldwin, and in 1934 he was appointed a member of the royal commission on tithes. However, his most significant work in the service of the crown was as a Treasury representative, when he was charged in 1941 with the disposal of direct British investments in the United States. A powerful American lobby was then clamouring for Britain to do more to help itself in funding its war effort by selling direct investments at inevitable bargain prices. Over several months, by use of delaying tactics and calling upon the services of his old banking and political friends, Peacock staved off these emergency sales and eventually played a central role in negotiating loans totalling $425 million. However, it was not before the controversial sale of Britain's most valuable American asset, Courtaulds' American Viscose Corporation, was forced upon him so as not to imperil the passing of vital 'lend-lease' legislation. 
Peacock's charitable interests were extensive. He succeeded Revelstoke as treasurer of the King Edward's Hospital Fund, the influential and wealthy London hospital charity, and he remained so until 1954. He was chairman of the trustees of the Imperial War Graves Commission; chairman of the board of management of the Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851; a trustee of the King George's Jubilee Fund from 1935; and, not least, a Rhodes trustee from 1925. At the behest of the prince of Wales he played a prominent part in the foundation of the National Council of Social Service, where he was important in ensuring the continuation and development of the Citizens' Advice Bureau service when its future was in doubt after the war. 
Peacock succeeded Revelstoke as receiver-general of the duchy of Cornwall, and he also played a general role as financial adviser to many members of the royal family. At the time of the abdication crisis of 1936 he stood alongside Edward VIII and 'was more nearly in his confidence than anyone except Monckton and Allen' (Ziegler, 311). He offered advice well beyond financial matters and helped to thrash out the subsequent financial settlement, when his clarity of thought and directness of delivery again shone through. 'The discussions tended to become heated... so I intervened... and removed the technicalities', he later wrote, 'and stated directly and simply [to the King] what I thought would be his desire' (ibid., 328). His standing with other members of the king's family remained uncompromised and he served them until his death. For his services to the crown, George V appointed him GCVO in 1934. 
Canada remained close to Peacock's heart throughout his life, and he had intended to live there in retirement. He was European director of the Canadian Pacific Railway Company from 1926 to 1961, and was on the board of the Hudson's Bay Company from 1931 to 1952. He continued as a director of Brazilian Traction, notably in the mid-1920s, dealing with the controversial Belgian financier Alfred Loewenstein, who had taken a large shareholding in the company; he subsequently took charge of Loewenstein's financial affairs when he ran into difficulties and disposed of this interest. He helped to supervise the finances of welfare agencies for Canadian forces abroad during the Second World War. In 1952 he took the initiative in Barings' formation, with Morgan Grenfell and Canadian interests, of the securities house Harris & Partners of Toronto, of which he was first chairman. He was a trustee of Queen's University from 1912 to 1947, and also a benefactor, in particular endowing two chairs. 
Contemporaries remember Peacock's immense presence and clear, penetrating eyes, his clarity of thought, his directness and decisiveness of approach, and his lack of affectation and pomposity. His capacity for, and speed of, work was immense and others had to maintain his pace. Fools were suffered with difficulty and mistakes not easily forgiven. His words were few and demanded brevity in others; his dictation went at a furious pace. 'The more difficult the matter, the faster he would dictate', his secretary later recalled. 'I sometimes wondered if I could get the page over in time to keep up'. His English and its construction would be 'faultless -- short, clear, no superfluous words, simplicity in choice of words, never 'pompous' or 'clever'. He was on top of the world when at his busiest' (ING Baring Archives, DEP237). While he could become furiously angry with his staff, all of whom were devoted to him and he to them, no disaster or crisis ever shook his calm. For all his greatness, he was self-effacing and unassuming. He died in the Royal London Homoeopathic Hospital on 19 November 1962, and was cremated at Woking, Surrey, on 22 November. 
Peacock was one of the City's most distinguished merchant bankers of the first half of the twentieth century. He dominated Barings in the 1930s and 1940s, and among other things he was responsible for the firm's immensely successful transition into a modern merchant bank focused on providing services, especially of corporate finance, to domestic industry. But his role at the Bank of England meant that, in the 1930s at least, his influence in the City was exceeded only by that of Norman. In particular he was an extremely important proponent of industrial rationalization, in which he called on his experience of large North American businesses. During the 1931 financial crisis, arguably the most serious to affect twentieth-century Britain, he outshone all his rivals in both the City and Whitehall. In reality there were few areas of British financial policy from the 1920s to the 1940s in which his contribution was not substantial. This achievement by Peacock, who was born far from the British establishment but who absorbed its values and won its acceptance without compromise to his Canadian culture and the humbleness of his origins, serves to underline the true remarkableness of his personal qualities. 


@@@@@


doc= 35426


Peacocke, Joseph Ferguson (1835-1916), archbishop of Dublin, was born at Abbeyleix, Queen's county, on 5 November 1835. He was the youngest son of George Peacocke MD of Longford and his wife, Catherine Ferguson. He was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated as senior moderator in history and English literature in 1857, also gaining a first-class divinity 'testimonium' and winning the political economy prize for his year. Ordained deacon in 1858 and priest in 1859, he held his first curacy at St Mary's, Kilkenny, where he served from 1858 until 1861. He then became secretary of the Hibernian Church Missionary Society, a position which he held for two years. A strong evangelical, he was a firm supporter of foreign missions and of the Church Missionary Society in particular. In 1863 he went to Monkstown, co. Dublin, as curate of the parish church. In 1865 he married Caroline Sophia ('nee' Irvine); they had one daughter and four sons, the eldest of whom was bishop of Derry from 1916 until 1945. Peacocke stayed in Monkstown until 1873, when he was appointed rector of St George's, Dublin, an important city parish. In 1878 he was recalled to Monkstown, where he had made himself popular with the parishioners, and remained as rector there until he was raised to a bishopric. Along with his benefice he held for a few months in 1894 the professorship of pastoral theology in Trinity College, Dublin, a post to which he was well suited. 
In 1894 Peacocke, who had proceeded DD in 1883, was elected to the diocese of Meath, succeeding Charles Parsons Reichel as bishop. In 1897 he was translated to the archbishopric of Dublin, a post which he took over from William Conyngham, fourth Baron Plunket. No archbishop of Dublin for 200 years had previously held a cure of souls in the diocese; and Peacocke's reputation among the clergy for tolerance, holiness, and varied pastoral experience had preceded him. He presided with dignity over the dioceses of Dublin, Glendalough, and Kildare, publishing some charges and occasional sermons, and serving as a select preacher at Dublin and Cambridge, until 1915, when he resigned his see owing to ill health. He died at Hastings, Blackrock, co. Dublin, on 26 May 1916; his memorial tablet in Kildare Cathedral declared him to have served faithfully, humbly and with holiness ('Pastor fidelis, humilis, et sanctus corde'). Peacocke was said to have been a man of fine presence, who commanded respectful attention in synod and at the pulpit. A portrait by P. A. de Laszlo, presented by the diocese, was later housed in the palace at Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 35427


Peake, Arthur Samuel (1865-1929), theologian and biblical scholar, was born at Leek, Staffordshire, on 24 November 1865, the second son and third child in a family of seven of the Revd Samuel Peake (1830-1914), a Primitive Methodist minister, and his wife, Rosabella Smith (died 1875), the daughter of a Herefordshire farmer. In accordance with the custom of the Methodist ministry, his father moved frequently from one circuit to another, and Peake was educated at various day schools, including Ludlow grammar school (1874), and a school in Stratford upon Avon (1876). From 1877 he attended King Henry VIII Grammar School, Coventry, before going up to St John's College, Oxford, in 1883, with a classical scholarship. After classical honour moderations he read for the honour school of theology, with a view to ordination in the Church of England. He obtained a first class in 1887, and continued to reside after graduation, winning the Denyer and Johnson scholarship in 1889 and the Ellerton essay prize in 1890. He was not, however, ordained, remaining a Methodist layman for the rest of his life. 
In 1890 Peake was elected to a theological fellowship at Merton College, a position which he held for seven years. Earlier in the same year he had begun teaching at Mansfield College, which had been established at Oxford in 1886 for the training of candidates for the ministry of the free churches. His work here was mainly in the field of the 'Old Testament', though he was also interested in the 'New Testament' and in early church history, especially in the Gnostics, Manichaeans, and Montanists. His distinctive contribution to biblical studies was possible only to one who was a master of more than one field. 
Peake's future career, however, was soon decided by a call from his own church. The Primitive Methodists had been slow to make provision for the theological training of their ministry. A group of reformers, with the financial backing of William Hartley, a wealthy manufacturer from Aintree, decided to turn the existing Theological Institute at Manchester into a college with a full and modern theological curriculum. On the foundation of Hartley Primitive Methodist College at Manchester, Peake was asked to take responsibility for the curriculum, with the position of tutor in the college. After some hesitation, and against the advice of some of his friends, he accepted the post. He went to Manchester in 1892, and for the remaining thirty-seven years of his life he was identified with Hartley College. Initially his theological position was regarded with suspicion as dangerously 'advanced': already as a student he had made himself familiar with German theological works and had been particularly influenced by the writings of W. Robertson Smith. But by the time of his death he held a position of almost unique authority in his church, and the higher intellectual standard of its ministry, and the broader outlook of its members in general, were largely the result of Peake's teaching and influence. 
Peake's work at Manchester was not confined to a denominational college. In 1904 it was decided to form a faculty of theology in the University of Manchester. The first theological faculty to be established in any of the 'secular' universities, it had from the outset an interdenominational character. Peake played a leading part in the establishment of the faculty, and became the first occupant of the Rylands chair of biblical criticism and exegesis, while retaining his appointment at Hartley College. 
In addition to his academic work, Peake served as chairman of the council of the John Rylands Library, from its foundation in 1899 until his death. He edited the 'Holborn Review' from 1919 until his death, and took an active part in the ecclesiastical affairs of his own church, and of the free churches in general, strongly supporting the movement for reunion, both among the Methodist bodies and outside them. These numerous activities were carried out under the handicap of uncertain health: in 1902, he underwent a serious operation for the removal of a cyst attached to his liver, which permanently affected his health. A severe breakdown from overwork followed in 1915, and his health was very poor from 1921. 
Peake's knowledge of current literature, both British and foreign, in the field of biblical studies, was exhaustive. His original contributions to biblical learning were marked by accurate scholarship and balanced and cautious judgement. He saw the 'Bible' as the record of God's progressive self-revelation in history and held that the 'Old Testament' witnessed to a developing system of belief and practice. He was thus able to reconcile Christian faith with historical criticism and with the Victorian belief in progress. Such books as 'The Bible: its Origin, its Significance, and its Abiding Worth' (1913), and 'The Problem of Suffering in the Old Testament' (1904), together with a 'Commentary on the Bible' (1919) which he planned and edited, had a wide circulation and very great influence, helping many conservative Christians to come to terms with the consequences of recent biblical criticism. He also did much to save the free churches of Great Britain from the baneful effects of 'fundamentalist' controversies. 
Peake married on 29 June 1892 Harriet Mary ('b'. 1867/8), daughter of John Sillman, of Oxford, who survived him together with their three sons. He received the honorary degree of DD from the University of Aberdeen in 1907, and from the University of Oxford in 1920. He died at the Royal Infirmary, Manchester, on 19 August 1929, and was buried in the southern cemetery, Manchester. 


@@@@@


doc= 35428


Peake, Sir Charles Brinsley Pemberton (1897-1958), diplomatist, was born on 2 January 1897 in Leicester, the third child and only son of Colonel William Pemberton Peake, surgeon and medical officer, of Hildenborough, Kent, and his wife, Alice Ambrosing Bucknell. Educated at Wyggeston School, Leicester, he took a commission as a captain in the Leicestershire regiment in 1914. During the war he was badly wounded in the leg and suffered from the effects for the remainder of his life. He was mentioned in dispatches and awarded the MC. 
In 1919 Peake entered Magdalen College, Oxford, where he took a shortened course as a war service candidate, and emerged with a degree in French in 1921. He entered the diplomatic service as a third secretary in February 1922 and served in the British legation in Sofia from April 1922 to April 1924, when he returned to the Foreign Office in London. He was promoted second secretary in July 1925, and was briefly attached to the embassy in Constantinople, from October to December 1925. On 3 July 1926 he married Catherine Marie, daughter of William George Knight, of the Indian educational service. They had four sons. 
In October 1926 Peake was transferred to the British embassy in Tokyo; he was granted an allowance for knowledge of Japanese in May 1928. From June 1929 until February 1933 he served in Bern, where at various points he acted as charge d'affaires. He then served in Paris, where he was promoted first secretary in July 1934. He 'profited greatly from the opportunities offered by what was at that time the most important and stimulating post in the service' ('The Times', 11 April 1958), but in October 1936, at his own request, he was transferred to the news department of the Foreign Office which was then headed by Rex Leeper. This combination became known affectionately as 'Leak and Peeper' and by the time Peake succeeded Leeper in 1939 it was not a secret that he had become deeply convinced of the unwisdom of appeasement and of the need to galvanize the nation to the task of confronting Nazism. Contemporaries record that his dislike of the then prime minister, Neville Chamberlain, was considerable, so it is ironic that his next appointment, in January 1941, should have been that of personal assistant to the new ambassador to Washington, Lord Halifax, who had maintained a faith in appeasement which rivalled Chamberlain's. However, both men shared a deep commitment to Anglo-Catholicism, and despite the brevity of the appointment this period cemented a personal and lifelong friendship. Peake was appointed CMG in January 1941 and promoted counsellor in October the same year. On his return from Washington in February 1942, he was appointed British representative with the French national committee, where his considerable skills at personal diplomacy were amply tested and admirably deployed in smoothing the often fractious and capricious General de Gaulle. Between October 1943 and May 1945 he was political adviser to the supreme commander, Allied Expeditionary Force, with the personal rank of minister. In May 1945 he was appointed consul-general in Tangier where, despite his post, he was largely engaged in political work. 
By temperament and ability, Peake preferred dealing with people rather than official papers, and these skills proved invaluable during his posting as ambassador to Belgrade between August 1946 and October 1951. The Balkans provided a rich background for Peake's innate flamboyancy and he established good working relations with several of the region's politicians, most notably Anna Pauker, then Romania's foreign minister. Sensitive to the nuances of the Soviet Union's relations with its satellites, he was among the first western observers to grasp the significance of rising tension in Yugoslav-Soviet relations during the spring of 1948. Following Yugoslavia's expulsion from the Cominform, he capitalized on the opportunity to smooth the Anglo-Yugoslav relationship which had been strained since the war, and to establish closer relations with Marshal Tito than would otherwise have been possible. He was advanced to KCMG in June 1948. In October 1951 he was appointed ambassador to Athens where he was equally successful until Anglo-Greek relations became overshadowed by the bitterness of the dispute over Cyprus. Peake retired from the foreign service in April 1957 and acted for a time as special adviser to the Colonial Office on Cyprus. 
Peake was gifted with an imaginative mind and an excellent memory which he cultivated through wide reading. These qualities combined with a sharp wit and dramatic sense to form a brilliant raconteur who was widely regarded as delightful company: 'He loved expounding the intricacies of a given problem, and he would do it always in a way that was both lucid and agreeably flattering to his hearer, as though there was nothing really new in it all, but a reminder of known facts might be useful. ('The Times', 11 April 1958)' Openly and sincerely religious, he was fondly remembered as a generous host and a loyal friend. Throughout his career he was ably assisted by his wife. He died in London on 10 April 1958. 


@@@@@


doc= 35429


Peake, Frederick Gerard (1886-1970), army officer, was born on 12 June 1886 at Ashtead, Surrey, the only son of Lieutenant-Colonel Walter Ancell Peake DSO, of Burrough on the Hill, Leicestershire, and his wife, Grace Elizabeth Ann Fenwicke. Peake was educated first at Stubbington House, Fareham. Originally intended for the Royal Navy, he eventually entered the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, and in 1906 was commissioned in the Duke of Wellington's regiment. Later that year he was posted to India where he did not much enjoy the social life but studied the local languages and followed the local hunt. 
Early in 1914 Peake was seconded to the Egyptian army and posted to the 4th infantry battalion in the Sudan. On the outbreak of war he applied to rejoin his British regiment, but his request was ignored. When the Darfur rebellion broke out in 1916 he transferred to the camel company; he had been promoted captain in 1915. Though due for home leave Peake asked to go to Salonika for action against the Bulgarians. He was temporarily posted to 17 squadron, Royal Flying Corps. Although he outstayed his leave of absence he was saved from court martial by General Milne, who sent him back to Darfur with no more than a reprimand. 
On the last lap of his journey south Peake was thrown from his camel and severely dislocated his neck. A specialist told him his case was incurable. Later, walking in the hospital gardens and unable to raise his head from his chest, Peake crashed blindly into a tree. The jolt restored his neck to normal and there were no subsequent ill effects. He had no sooner returned to his unit than he developed a liver abscess and was sent home on sick leave. On the return voyage his ship was torpedoed near Alexandria. Peake jumped overboard with a bottle of beer and a packet of sandwiches and was picked up none the worse. 
Early in 1918 Peake was sent to Sinai to command a company of the Egyptian camel corps. In April they joined T. E. Lawrence and Sharif Feisal's Arab army at 'Aqabah. Lawrence's task in the final phase of the Palestine campaign was to cut off and contain the large numbers of Turks defending the Hejaz railway and garrisoning the towns from Medina to Damascus. The Egyptian camel corps provided great assistance to Lawrence's guerrilla campaign northwards. The camels' mobility over ground inaccessible to armoured cars proved invaluable on occasions. The camel corps also proved adept as sappers, developing the 'tulip' technique for blowing up stretches of railway. Their last task before the final decisive battle of Megiddo was to cut the Dera'a-Damascus railway in order to disrupt the Turkish communications and hinder their retreat. The Turkish surrender soon followed and Peake's camel company returned to Egypt. 
Transjordan, as the land lying to the east of the River Jordan came to be called, was in chaos as the Turks hastened for home. The area had formerly been part of the Turkish province of Syria, and such administration as the Turks had previously exercised there had completely collapsed. The Arab inhabitants were warlike and intensely tribal, both nomadic and settled. The British government, recently awarded League of Nations mandates for Iraq, Transjordan, and Palestine, was determined not to be landed with the administration of Transjordan, and was particularly opposed to the involvement of British troops. Here the politicians and the generals were as one, despite the urging to the contrary by the high commissioner for Palestine, Sir Herbert Samuel. 
British involvement was limited to the provision of six 'representatives' located at Irbid, Salt, Jerash, Kerak, and Amman, their function being wholly advisory. Amman was then no more than a village populated mainly by Circassians, and Captain C. D. Brunton began work there at the end of August 1920. In the following month Peake, then a lieutenant-colonel, joined the Palestine administration officially as district commandant, Palestine police, Galilee, but seconded for duty in Transjordan as from 12 September 1920 as inspector of gendarmerie. In fact the previous Turkish gendarmerie had disintegrated but Brunton had begun to collect a 'reserve force' to reinforce the ordinary gendarmerie when necessary. They totalled no more than 70 to 80 men but the target was more ambitious. However, there was no money with which to pay anyone. 
There were plenty of swords for hire, including a large number of Syrians taking refuge from the French. Although Sharif Feisal had been proclaimed king of Syria on 8 March 1920, the French, who had been given mandates in Syria and Lebanon, defeated Feisal at Maysalum on 24 July 1920 and drove him into exile. Many Syrians took refuge in Transjordan and the French complained of raids launched across the border from Transjordan. 
To complicate matters even further, Sharif Abdullah, second son of Sharif al-Hussein of Mecca, who had proclaimed himself king of Hejaz, turned up in November 1920 at Ma'an, which was then in Hejaz. With him was a force of tribesmen and former soldiers from the Turkish army, who had the proclaimed intention of restoring his brother Feisal to the Syrian throne. On 28 February 1921 Abdullah left Ma'an and on 2 March he entered Amman to receive a rapturous welcome from high and low. 
It happened that the newly appointed colonial secretary, Winston Churchill, had called a conference in Cairo on 12 March 1921 to consider Britain's role in the Middle East. Peake was one of those present. He was now commanding the reserve force because Brunton had abruptly resigned in December 1920. Peake was much senior to Brunton. He had the local rank of 'quaim-aqam' (colonel) and the honorific 'bey'. The future of Transjordan was among the matters discussed. Samuel, the high commissioner, wanted to link it with Palestine. The Arabs were bitterly opposed. This was principally on account of the Balfour declaration. They wanted no Jewish immigration east of the River Jordan. And there was also the problem of Sharif Abdullah, now located in Amman, his brother Feisal having been offered the throne in Iraq, which had been originally intended for Abdullah. 
Churchill invited Abdullah to meet him in Jerusalem where he had a boisterous welcome. They met on 28, 29, and 30 March. Abdullah was persuaded to take on the governorship of Transjordan on the understanding that it would not be included in the Palestine administrative system. The Balfour declaration would not apply. The Transjordan government would not be expected to promote Jewish immigration and colonization. Churchill suggested a trial period of six months and Abdullah after some hesitation agreed. The reserve force was to be increased to one thousand men and British financial aid was promised. 
Peake reorganized the gendarmerie from top to bottom. He soon found, however, that he had to serve two masters. First was the amir, with whom he got on well on the whole. Then there was the chief British representative (CBR) -- H. St J. Philby (1921-4) and Lieutenant-Colonel H. H. F. Cox (1924-39) -- who controlled the purse strings and much else besides. Philby was an erratic genius and Cox an administrator pure and simple. Cox did not get on well with Abdullah and neither man was easy to serve. 
'One of the first acts of the Amir on his return [from London in 1923] was to amalgamate the Reserve Force and the police, and to call it the Arab legion', wrote Peake. 'The present writer was appointed to command the legion, and became responsible to the Amir for public security'. The Arabic title was 'al-jaysh al-Arabi' (the Arab army). This was inherited from the force of Arab regulars which fought under Feisal. It was Peake who suggested the change of English title from reserve mobile force to Arab Legion. This was readily agreed by Philby. 'The strange thing is that nobody noticed the change', commented Peake (Peake's autobiography). 
There were not many British involved for many years. From 1923 to 1930 there were only two or three, including Peake, who not only founded the Arab Legion on sound lines but who also played an important part in establishing the Hashemite kingdom of Jordan. Peake was a typical British officer of the pre-1914 army, a stern disciplinarian and a stickler for military conventions. The amir promoted him major-general ('amir liwa') in 1923 and later gave him the honorific title 'pasha'. A bachelor until almost the end of his service in the Arab Legion, he followed an Edwardian lifestyle, never failing to change for dinner, which he normally ate in solitary state. He affected to believe that it behoved senior officers to appear angry, and as he flew round his extensive parish -- having been taught to fly at the age of forty-four -- he was preceded by the codewords 'thunder cloud'. Peake's rages were legendary but he was really a kind-hearted man. 
Peake's deputy was an Arab -- Brigadier Abdel Quadir al-Jundi. The fact that Peake was British undoubtedly led to criticism and he had some narrow escapes. Once he was kidnapped by Sheikh Mithqal al-Fayiz of the Bani Sakhr tribe and held in a barley store for two or three days before being released. Over the years, with patience and insistence on high standards, he made the Arab Legion into an effective force, but its recruits were from the villages and towns only. Peake had no use for the Bedouin who roamed the desert east of the Hejaz Railway. Nor was he under any illusion regarding his own position. In 1924, in a report to Cox, Peake wrote: 'It cannot be too well known that the Amir, the Government except the new Prime Minister, and the Istaqlal [Independence Party] hate the Arab Legion. Their hatred is caused by different reasons, but they all agree on one point and that is the presence of a British officer' (Ma'an Abu Nowar 1.128). 
Peake's prejudice against the Bedouin, originating in his experience of Feisal's tribal warriors in the advance to Damascus in 1918, was, to say the least, unfortunate. Although the Arab Legion established law and order in the settled areas, it could do little in the desert where the tribes acknowledged no master. In the 1920s the desert was much plagued by raids by Ibn Sa'ud's fanatical wahabis (al-ikhwan, the brotherhood) who killed all males regardless of age. The Arab Legion was no match for these savage warriors although it did play some part in defeating a massive raid on 14 August 1924 which came as close as 10 miles to Amman. It was chiefly defeated by the Bani Sakhr and other tribes in co-operation with the RAF planes and armoured cars, but the Arab Legion was also involved and had 21 killed. In 1926 Lord Plumer, high commissioner in Palestine and Transjordan, disbanded the Palestine gendarmerie and reduced the British garrison in Palestine. At the same time he reduced the Arab Legion from 1472 officers and men to 855 and abolished the artillery troop, machine gun platoon, and wireless section of the signals platoon. The Arab Legion became a police force pure and simple. 
In its place Plumer formed the Transjordan frontier force (TJFF), an 'imperial' force, recruited mostly in Palestine and commanded and led by British officers. The TJFF was to be responsible for the defence of Transjordan in co-operation with the RAF. This was strongly opposed by the Amir Abdullah who had hoped the Arab Legion would be transformed into a proper military force. However, it would appear that Peake welcomed the new arrangement, in which he had no place. 'The defences of the country were strengthened by the formation of the TJFF', he wrote. Transjordan was to find a sixth of the new force's cost, and its main base was to be Zarqa, not far from Amman. Peake's support for the TJFF neither brought about good relations with the amir, nor added to his popularity in the Arab Legion. 
The TJFF proved to be extremely successful in preventing Transjordan Bedouin from raiding Saudi Arabia and recouping the camels lifted by the Saudis, but it was hopeless in preventing the Saudi raiders from raiding the Transjordan tribes -- so much so that the Transjordan Bedouin assumed their government was operating against them. Conditions were so bad in 1927-30 that Captain John Bagot Glubb, who had been very successful in pacifying the southern desert in Iraq, was invited to Amman and subsequently offered the appointment of deputy to Peake pasha to pacify Transjordan's desert. The offer was made by the amir and Cox. Peake was on leave at the time and was not consulted. Peake's great fear was that the British officers should be withdrawn from the Arab Legion leaving the tribal sheikhs with a military force with which they could dominate the settled areas, the age old struggle between the desert and the town. However much he disliked the recruitment of Bedouin and the militarization of the Arab Legion, Peake left his deputy to get on with it in the desert -- and Glubb was amazingly successful. 
Gradually Glubb built up his Bedouin force. They were to become the strike force of the Arab Legion during the Second World War as the desert patrol. In a surprisingly short time the Bedouin raiding ceased and the Jordan desert became safer for the traveller (and tourist) than many a European city. This may not have been appreciated by Peake but it certainly was by Amir Abdullah who had a special empathy for the Bedouin. It was therefore no surprise, on Peake's retirement in March 1939, that Glubb was appointed to succeed him in command of the Arab Legion. 
Peake had held the local rank of lieutenant-colonel since 1921; in the Arab Legion he held successively the ranks of brigadier (1920-2) and major-general (1922-39), and was made pasha in 1926. He was made CBE in 1926 and CMG in 1939. He also had Transjordanian decorations. On 12 January 1937 he married Elspeth Maclean, younger daughter of Norman Ritchie, of St Boswell's, Roxburghshire; they had one daughter. The couple retired to Elspeth's home in Kelso, Roxburghshire, where Peake served in civil defence throughout the Second World War. Elspeth died in 1967. Peake died at the Cottage Hospital, Kelso, on 30 March 1970, and was buried in Kelso. 
Peake and Glubb were very different in character. Peake was an archetypal British officer of his period -- an excellent organizer, brave, determined and upright -- but he lacked Glubb's imaginative approach. Glubb could think like a Bedouin. Peake was always British. Glubb's loyalty to Amir Abdullah was absolute. Peake's was more ambivalent. He shared Cox's view that Abdullah was financially irresponsible and had to be kept under strict control. Nevertheless he built the Arab Legion on firm foundations and established a tradition of loyalty and efficient discipline which withstood many shocks both within and without the kingdom. 


@@@@@


doc= 35430


Peake, Harold John Edward (1867-1946), archaeologist, was born on 27 September 1867 at Ellesmere, Shropshire, the son of John Peake, vicar of Ellesmere, and his wife, Matilda Ann Marshall. Early training in estate management at Leicester gave him insight into the historical significance of changes of land tenure and land use and led to a valuable article on prehistoric roads in Alice Dryden, ed., 'Memorials of Old Leicestershire' (1911). 
In 1897 Peake married Charlotte Mary Augusta (died 1934), daughter of Captain Richard Lane Bayliff, of the Royal Marine light infantry. There were no children. For their honeymoon the couple went round the world, spending some time on a ranch in British Columbia, where Peake gained an understanding of prehistoric pastoralism. They also studied art and ceramics in Japan and China. 
On their return to England the Peakes kept an open house, on modest means, at their home at Boxford, Berkshire. From 1899 Westbrook House became a centre of leadership in archaeological and artistic efforts, the latter the special concern of Charlotte Peake, or Carli, as she was known. Francis Toye, a frequent visitor at Westbrook, remembered her as being 'interested in everything around her': 'she was a big woman in every sense, in stature, emotion, and sympathy, thus forming a perfect complement to her thin, very precise, and wholly cerebral husband. A more happy union of the arts and the sciences it would be difficult to conceive. (Toye, 44)' Peake became the honorary curator of Newbury Museum, and developed a selected series of implements, pots, potsherds, and maps; in exhibiting these he allocated each century from 3000 BC equal space. The Newbury Museum became well known for its pottery and the series of exhibits were the basis of a published chronological work by Peake, issued soon after 1920. 
In addition to serving on a number of local committees, Peake was the motive power behind the Newbury District Field Club and superintended its archaeological investigations. In a wider field he served as a member of the council, and from 1926 to 1928 as president, of the Royal Anthropological Institute, which awarded him its Huxley memorial medal in 1940. He also presided over the section on anthropology of the British Association in 1922, and from 1928 to 1930 he served as a member of the council of the Society of Antiquaries of London. 
Peake studied intensely the distribution of evidences of the human past, always in relation to the environment of the place and the time, and the peoples concerned. In the opinion of O. G. S. Crawford, whose early career was strongly influenced by Peake, the latter had a 'rather too fertile' imagination and was prone to 'theorizing and wild-cat schemes' (O. G. S. Crawford, 'Said and Done', 1955, 39, 64). But Peake's approach to the ancient past was essentially multidisciplinary, and he 'persistently upheld the need for emphasis on the unity of the various studies of man' ('The Times', 24 Sept 1946). His catalogue of British prehistoric bronze implements, including some 17,000 entries, with measured drawings and data of location and so on, is in the care of the British Museum. His Gregynog lectures, published in 1922 as 'The Bronze Age and the Celtic World', attempted to relate archaeology and linguistics. In the same year he published 'The English Village', a stimulating study of social evolution. With Professor H. J. Fleure he collaborated in a series of books entitled 'The Corridors of Time' (1927-36, tenth and final volume, 1956), which attempted to synthesize approaches to the interpretation of archaeological data in terms of human evolution. In this study Peake pioneered research into the beginnings of cereal cultivation which, he held, occurred in Syria-Palestine and northern Mesopotamia. His papers in the 'Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute' have lasting value. He also made an important contribution to the medieval section of the 'Victoria county history' of Berkshire. He died at his home, Westbrook House, on 22 September 1946. 


@@@@@


doc= 35431


Peake, Mervyn Laurence (1911-1968), artist and writer, was born at Kuling (Guling), in the province of Kiang-Hsi, China, on 9 July 1911, the younger son of Ernest Cromwell Peake MD (1874-1949), Congregational missionary doctor, of Tientsin (Tianjin), and his wife, Amanda Elizabeth Powell (1875-1939), a missionary nurse. In 1899 Ernest Peake had travelled to China to establish the first European medical district in Kiang-Hsi province and he took over the Mackenzie Memorial Hospital in Tientsin in 1912, when an uprising against the Manchu dynasty forced the family to flee to Hengchow (Hengyang). Peake was educated at the grammar school in the British Concession in Tientsin. At ten he wrote and illustrated 'Ways of travelling', which was published in the London Missionary Society's magazine 'News from Afar'. 
The family returned to England in 1923 and Peake attended Eltham College, formerly the School for Sons of Missionaries, Kent, from 1923 to 1929, where despite poor academic progress he impressed with his artistic gifts, nurtured by his teacher Eric Drake. Peake attended Croydon School of Art for a few months and then the Royal Academy Schools, where he won the Hacker prize (1931) and had his still life 'Cactus' accepted by the Royal Academy. During this period Peake collaborated with his friend Gordon Smith on illustrated books, became a stage set designer, and exhibited work with the Soho group and the Twenties group. 
With Peake's lack of interest in formal study it was not surprising that in the summer of 1933 he failed his examinations. The Royal Academy terminated Peake's studentship and he was enticed to the isle of Sark by Eric Drake, who had set up an artists' colony there. The first exhibition of the Sark group, in August 1933, attracted much attention and Peake was well represented. During this period in Sark he wore his hair long, had his right ear pierced, and wore a cape, and became briefly engaged to Janice Thomson, an art student from Boston. On the strength of his work he was offered a position at the Westminster School of Art in 1935, where he taught life drawing until 1939. At Westminster, he met Maeve Patricia Mary Theresa Gilmore (1917-1983), artist, then a student, youngest of the six children of Owen Eugene Gilmore MD FRCS; they married on 1 December 1937, and had two sons and a daughter. A solo exhibition of Peake's work in March 1938, which included oils, sketches, and watercolours, and macabre drawings, attracted much attention. In 1939 both Peake and Maeve exhibited in London, and Peake published a book intended for children, 'Captain Slaughterboard Drops Anchor' (1939), the illustrations for which, in their characteristic grotesqueness, the 'Punch' critic considered 'unsuitable for sensitive children'. He was also writing poetry, notably 'Epstein's Adam' and 'Rhondda Valley', the latter inspired by a visit to the coalmines of south Wales. 
In the Second World War Peake served in England in the Royal Artillery (by all accounts he was a hopeless gunner), being later transferred to the Royal Engineers as a bomb expert (he was put on light duties after accidentally setting fire to his barracks). He was invalided out in 1943 after a nervous breakdown. During the early stages of the war Peake worked on 'Titus Groan', a book that 'grew under duress' (Gilmore), and Chatto and Windus published 'Shapes and Sounds' (1941), a volume of his poetry. He also provided the much-admired illustrations for 'Ride-a-Cock-Horse and other Nursery Rhymes' (1940), which drew out the darkest implications of the stories, and, on the strength of those, for Lewis Carroll's 'The Hunting of the Snark' (1941), where Peake found an absurdist spirit to rival his own. Recovering from his breakdown, he illustrated 'The Rime of the Ancient Mariner' (1943); this is considered to be his greatest achievement as an illustrator and he was praised for adding a new spiritual dimension to the work. Other notable illustrations of this period included those for 'All This and Bevin Too' (1943) for Quentin Crisp. After a year which had been dominated by writing and illustrating Peake was painting again. He thought of himself primarily as a painter even though this is the medium in which he was probably the least visionary. 
After the birth of their second son the Peakes settled in Chelsea, London, where they socialized with Dylan Thomas, and Peake was able to consult Graham Greene, then a working director of Eyre and Spottiswoode, over 'Titus Groan'. Towards the end of the war Eyre and Spottiswoode published 'Rhymes without Reason', a small volume of Peake's nonsense verse. While working for the Ministry of Information from 1943 to 1945 he was inspired by glass-blowers making cathode-ray tubes and produced a series of work which was exhibited at the National Gallery. But it was not until just after the end of the war that Peake, after several failed applications, was finally appointed war artist with the rank of captain. On the basis of a caricature of Hitler, and his connection with 'Lilliput' magazine, for which he regularly illustrated, he was commissioned by 'The Leader' magazine to tour western Europe with the journalist Tom Pocock. They witnessed the first war crimes trial at Bad Neuenahr in June 1945 and Peake sent back haunting drawings of Bergen-Belsen concentration camp and composed a poem, analysing his guilty intrusion on suffering, which was later published as 'The Consumptive, Belsen, 1945'. The memories of the two weeks spent in Germany had a profound effect upon Peake; his wife recalled that 'he was quieter, more inward-looking, as if he had lost... his confidence in life itself' (Watney, 127). 

'Titus Groan' was published in 1946. It was the first in a projected series in which Titus, the seventy-seventh earl of Groan, rebels against his ancestral home Gormenghast Castle and its restrictive duties, and attempts to find a new identity for himself in another land. Although showing the influence of Dickens, Lewis Carroll, and Kafka, the Titus books defy ready classification. The term 'fantasy' is perhaps the least inadequate, although Peake's work has nothing of the lightweight or evasive commonly implied by the word: but it is fantasy in being the creation of a fully realized 'other' world, ontologically separate from our own. Peake, who was agnostic and apolitical, distanced himself from moral, religious, political, and psychoanalytic interpretations of his work; as Anthony Burgess has commented, Peake's novels 'nourish the private imagination' (Burgess). The strength of 'Titus Groan' is the thoroughness with which it is imagined (he sometimes drew the characters before writing about them), and the dialectical play throughout of the static, unchanging nature of the castle against the dynamic of the enemies within it. In Gormenghast Peake found the perfect literary expression for his interests as an artist: the arcane diction, the slow, heavily descriptive method of the style, and the delight in the individualities of people and objects are paralleled in the unmoving character of the castle (which has been interpreted as a symbolization of the 'labyrinthine human mind'; Irwin) -- the obsessive preoccupation with minutiae which epitomizes the ritual laws which govern it, and the eccentric personalities it produces (such as the bloated cook Swelter, the predatory Steerpike, the camp intellectual Prunesquallor, and the power-starved enantiomorphous sisters Cora and Clarice). Gormenghast Castle is the natural home of Peake's imagination, a home to which he was irresistibly drawn, even while as a man and an artist he wished to escape it and explore new worlds. The undertow of Gormenghast drains the life from the portrayal of Titus's rebellion, and the imaginative unity and power of 'Titus Groan' is increasingly lost in the succeeding volumes. Yet, considered as a whole, the Titus books (which include 'Boy in Darkness', a disturbing novella full of menace), remain a massive achievement. 
In 1946 Grimm's 'Household Tales' and Lewis Carroll's Alice books (1946; 1954) were published with Peake's unsentimental illustrations. In the same year Peake returned to Sark with his family, where they spent three serenely happy years in a house that had been the former headquarters of the German occupation, and where Peake wrote a children's book, 'Letters from a Lost Uncle from Polar Regions' (1948), illustrated 'Treasure Island' (1949), a book close to his heart, and otherwise devoted himself to 'Gormenghast' (1950), the second Titus book. But a retainer from his publisher and a few commissions could not continue to meet the needs of a growing family, and in 1949 they came back to England, where Peake secured a part-time teaching post in London at the Central School of Arts and Crafts, Holborn; this, together with commissioned paintings and illustrations for books, and to a lesser extent his writing, formed the often uneven ground on which he supported his family. 'The Drawings of Mervyn Peake' (1949) revealed that Peake's primary concern as an artist was with the human figure, rather than with landscape: of Gormenghast he has left us scarcely a pictorial trace. One of the most frequent and powerful of his effects is the portrayal of the frail verticality of his figures struggling against a dense and crushing atmosphere, or else bent or deformed by it. 
In 1951 'Gormenghast', which confounded critics who described it as 'wonderfully weird' and the 'finest imaginative feat in the English novel since 'Ulysses'' ('Punch'), and 'The Glassblowers' (a collection of poetry based on Peake's war work) won the W. H. Heinemann Foundation prize of $100 and Peake was awarded an honorary fellowship of the Royal Society of Literature. Peake does not have a clearly defined place in the development of poetry, belonging to neither the Romantic tradition nor to the anti-Romantic. But it was arguably poetry that for Peake was the most moving form of human expression, and he is at his best when an experience and its significance for him are fused, as for instance in 'The Glassblowers' or the frightening 'Heads Float About Me', rather than when he reflects on or self-consciously tries to proportion his feelings to his experience. A recurrent motif in his poetry is the idea of a face or body as a building or city, and vice versa: this transference is also seen in the interrelations of Gormenghast and its inhabitants. Peake's poetic voice was, however, largely silent after 'The Glassblowers'. 
After the novel 'Mr Pye' (1953), about a self-appointed missionary to Sark who grows angel's wings, was ignored or slighted by the critics, Peake developed further interest in the theatre during the 1950s; he wrote at least five plays of which only 'The Wit to Woo' and 'The Connoisseurs' were performed. In 1956 he wrote dramatic versions of 'Titus Groan' and 'Mr Pye' and a Christmas play for radio. 'The Wit to Woo', which was staged at the Arts Theatre Club in London in 1957 and starred Kenneth Williams as Kite, was supposed to solve Peake's financial problems (he had taken on an unmanageable mortgage for a house in Kent), but it was received lukewarmly by the critics (perceived as a light 'drawing-room' comedy, it suffered in the wake of the iconoclastic 'Look Back in Anger' and 'Waiting for Godot') and was a commercial failure. The disappointment induced a nervous breakdown. From this point Peake became increasingly incapacitated by what was eventually diagnosed as a form of Parkinson's disease (it has been conjectured that as a child Peake may have contracted encephalitis lethargica during the 'sleeping sickness' epidemic of 1917). He underwent treatment in the Holloway Hospital at Virginia Water for six months in 1958, and was able to complete 'Titus Alone' (1959). Some critics have read the pared-down and more diffuse style of this final work as a symptom of Peake's progressive degeneration (the novel was revised in 1970 by the science-fiction writer Langdon Jones). But by 1960 he was obliged to give up teaching. There were occasional bursts of creativity: he began 'Titus Awakes', the projected fourth volume of the series, and with the help of his wife painstakingly supplied illustrations for his poem 'The Rhyme of the Flying Bomb', which when broadcast on BBC radio was received with ecstatic reviews. This marked the beginning of a new spark of interest in Peake's work, in both Britain and America, after years of utter neglect, although by this time Peake was unable to appreciate it. After an operation at the end of 1960 to alleviate his tremors failed in the long term, Peake had spells in various hospitals and nursing homes, and was eventually admitted to The Priory in Roehampton in 1964. He was transferred to a home run by his wife's eldest brother, The Close, near Abingdon in Berkshire, and died there during the night of 16/17 November 1968. He was buried in Burpham churchyard, Sussex. 
Tall, thin, dark, and cadaverous, even before the illness which dramatically aged him, Peake was a romantic figure, with a 'face that belonged to another age' (Gilmore, 53), whose passionate and intense nature exhausted him: he lived always on 'this desperate edge of now', and wrote to pour himself forth, to empty himself of all his 'golden gall'. In some ways shy and reserved, he was innocently open and generous to all who asked for his help and, despite occasional indiscretions, unremittingly uxorious. In his wife's memoir he emerges as gentle, gracious, prankish, unworldly, and unpractical. He lived in many ways outside convention, behaving in a gently whimsical fashion which puzzled the ordinary. He did not care for 'arrangements' in life: he would gather materials for drawings simply by walking the streets of central London and stopping interesting subjects for on-the-spot sketches; and he would write amid his family circle. It was in part Peake's very proximity to and delight in life which produced his fantasy, and his sense of the individual his art of exaggeration: 'Anything', he once said, 'seen without prejudice, is enormous.' 
Peake left a massive amount of unpublished material and a great deal of work in need of republication. The Penguin editions of the Titus books began to sell immediately to a new, appreciative generation, and his short stories, war poems, radio plays, and nonsense verse were collected in 'Peake's Progress' (1979). Peake became the subject of theses, a Titus Groan pop group was formed, and in 1975 a Mervyn Peake Society. 'Mr Pye' was reissued and hailed as a 'witty debate about good and evil' (Watney, 243) and was dramatized on television in 1986. A television series based on the first two Titus books was broadcast by the BBC as their prestige millennium drama in January 2000, and this in turn stimulated renewed interest in Peake as both artist and writer. 


@@@@@


doc= 35432


Pearce, Ernest Harold (1865-1930), bishop of Worcester, was born on 23 July 1865 at 48 Great Marlborough Street, London, the eldest son of James Pearce and his wife, Jane Courtenay Edmonds. His place of birth then housed the west branch of the Young Men's Christian Association, of which his father was the secretary. His mother was the eldest daughter of Walter Edmonds, of Penzance, and sister of the Revd Walter John Edmonds, chancellor of Exeter Cathedral. A severe attack of rheumatic fever at the age of seven seriously affected Pearce's heart and left him fearful of over-exertion for the rest of his life. 
In 1874, on the presentation of the banker F. A. Bevan, Pearce was admitted to Christ's Hospital, and began a lifetime connection with the school: he was exhibitioner, assistant master, governor, almoner, chairman of the education committee, and vice-chairman of the council of almoners. He also became its historian in 'The Annals of Christ's Hospital' (1901). In 1884 Pearce, who was a Grecian at Christ's Hospital, entered Peterhouse, Cambridge, as a classical scholar and choral exhibitioner, and obtained second classes in the first division of the classical tripos (1887) and in the second part of the theological tripos (1888), graduating BA in 1887 and MA in 1891. He was ordained deacon in 1889 and priest in 1890 by Archbishop Benson, and went as an assistant master to the South Eastern College, Ramsgate. In 1891 he returned to Christ's Hospital as an assistant master, but in 1892 accepted the post of metropolitan district secretary of the British and Foreign Bible Society, of which he ultimately became a life governor, and vice-president in 1914. 
In 1895 Pearce was appointed to the vacancy in the living of Christ Church Greyfriars, London, where the boys of Christ's Hospital attended the Sunday morning service: he soon re-seated the church and brought the boys down from uncomfortable galleries to the floor of the building. Pearce's appointment to the living led to his becoming chaplain in 1896-7 to the lord mayor of London, Sir George Faudel-Phillips, the alderman of his ward, and to a close association for many years with the Mansion House and the life of the City. During this time he became a freeman on the roll of the Musicians' Company and served as its chaplain; he was professor of biblical history at Queen's College, Harley Street (1899-1905); for four years he was secretary of the London Diocesan Church Reading Union; he was elected on to the court of Sion College, became treasurer and president, and in 1913 published its history, 'Sion College and Library'; he was a member of the court of assistants of the Corporation of the Sons of the Clergy, was twenty-nine times a steward of its festival, and for ten years a treasurer, and wrote an account of the charity, 'The Sons of the Clergy' (1904). 
In 1899 Pearce joined the staff of 'The Times' as its ecclesiastical correspondent and was in Printing House Square every night, except Saturday, in order to write up the news and to provide obituaries and editorials as appropriate. About this time he came into close contact with the prime minister's office and became an unofficial adviser in the allocation of ecclesiastical patronage, a position of influence he retained for much of the rest of his life. Interestingly, he was later criticized for his bias in the distribution of his own patronage as bishop and responded frankly: 'My business is to keep 'advanced' men out of the diocese. You must look to my successor to redress the balance' ('The Times', 29 Oct 1930, 16). 
In 1911 Pearce was appointed by the prime minister, H. H. Asquith, to a canonry at Westminster Abbey, where he later became treasurer (1912-16), archdeacon (1916-18), and subdean (1918-19). Pearce spent a large amount of time in the abbey's archives and produced a significant work of ecclesiastical and monastic history, a register entitled 'The Monks of Westminster' (1916). He also wrote two lives, 'William de Colchester, Abbot of Westminster' (1915), and 'Walter de Wenlok, Abbot of Westminster' (1920). Through this research he qualified for the Cambridge degrees of LittD (1917), BD (1920), and DD (1924). 
In the First World War Pearce was appointed assistant chaplain-general (1915-19), with the substantive rank of brigadier, and greatly improved the organization and efficiency of the chaplain's department of the War Office. He was a chaplain to George V in 1918 and 1919, and in 1919, at the close of the war, was made CBE. 
In 1919 Pearce was nominated by Lloyd George to the bishopric of Worcester, and was consecrated in Westminster Abbey on 24 February. It was as an 'able and modest administrator' rather than as a 'profound thinker' or a great preacher that Pearce left an impression as bishop ('The Times', 29 Oct 1930). Although often overly stubborn in his views, Pearce won respect for his business skills in running the diocese. But his ability not to take himself too seriously was shown in a disagreement with the theologian H. D. A. Major over whether a nominee for a particular post needed more parochial experience. Major provided a list of 'first-class bishops' who had little such experience. Pearce admitted the point and added, 'If you had made a list of bishops of the second or third class it might have included myself' (Stephenson, 139). In the controversies over the prayer book in 1927-8, Pearce always took the conservative side, and he spoke and voted in the House of Lords against the approval of the 'deposited book'. 
His antiquarian interests (he was elected FSA in 1918) led Pearce to work upon the Worcester Cathedral archives and to edit for the Worcestershire Historical Society 'The Register of Thomas de Cobham, 1317-1327' (1930); and from his knowledge of the register he had already published, 'Thomas de Cobham, Bishop of Worcester' (1923). Other works included studies of early Christianity (1908) and the laws of the earliest gospel (1913). 
Pearce's own college, Peterhouse, elected him an honorary fellow in 1919 and, after incorporating at Oxford and proceeding to the degree of DLitt in 1929, Worcester College, Oxford, paid him the same honour. Pearce never married. He served as a director of the London Life Association Ltd (which had absorbed the clergy mutual office). He was declared dead at Westminster Hospital, London, on 28 October 1930, after collapsing in Old Palace Yard, near St Margaret's Church, while on his way to attend the opening of parliament. He was cremated at Golders Green on 31 October and his ashes are buried in Worcester Cathedral at the foot of the monument of Bishop Hurd. Pearce's edition of the correspondence of Hurd with William Mason was published in 1930 posthumously. 


@@@@@


doc= 35433


Pearce, Sir George Foster (1870-1952), politician, was born at Mount Barker, South Australia, on 13 January 1870, the fourth son of ten children of English emigrants James Pearce (died 1919), blacksmith, born at Altarnun, Cornwall, and his wife, Jane Foster (died 1880), born in London. He attended Redhill public school until the age of eleven, which provided him with his only formal education. When his father moved to Maitland on Yorke peninsula he worked for three years on a farm and then, after serving an apprenticeship as a carpenter, gained employment at Port Adelaide, where he witnessed at first hand the great national maritime strike of 1891. In the ensuing depression he was laid off and decided to try his luck in Western Australia. There, following a brief adventure on the Coolgardie goldfields, he became foreman at Whittaker Brothers' joinery at Subiaco. Simultaneously he had taken a key role in the burgeoning labour movement; by 1899 he was president of the Carpenters' Union and the Trades and Labour Council and was a leading figure in the newly established Labor Party. In all these activities the qualities which marked his subsequent political career were already apparent. 
On 23 April 1897 Pearce married Eliza Maude (died 1947), daughter of Richard Barnett, a french polisher, of Perth, Western Australia; they had two sons and two daughters. Neatly handsome, somewhat reserved and a lifelong teetotaller, Pearce was in public life conscientious, industrious, even-tempered, and pragmatic. He was a sound administrator and served four prime ministers in high cabinet office loyally and competently. He was brought up a Congregationalist, but in later life worshipped at Presbyterian churches. 
A strong advocate of federation, Pearce was elected as a Western Australian senator to the first commonwealth parliament, a seat he held through various political vicissitudes until 1937. He initially supported free trade, favoured moderate social reform, opposed militarism and the South African War, and stood unequivocally for a 'white Australia'. Of all these the most important and enduring was the last. In speaking to the 1901 'Immigration Restriction Bill' he stated that his 'chief objection [to] coloured [peoples was] entirely racial' ('Commonwealth Parliamentary Debates', 5, 7160, 13 Nov 1901). With Japan's defeat of Russia in 1905 Pearce, even more than most Australian political leaders, came to fear not only a migratory but also a military invasion from the north. Consequently, it was his view that Labor's ideals could only be attained if Australians were willing to fight for them: 'We have that danger to face. I allude to the rise of Japan, the possibility of aggression by that power, and of her expansion in the Pacific' (ibid., 31, 635, 22 June 1906). Neither the Anglo-Japanese alliance nor the British navy, anchored in the North Sea to ward off the German threat, could be depended upon. Thus as minister of defence in Andrew Fisher's Labor governments of 1908-9 and 1910-13 Pearce extended the compulsory military training of youths aged between fourteen and twenty-five, backed the move to establish an Australian navy, created a munitions industry, and founded an officer training college and a central flying school. 
Pearce was minister of defence in Fisher's government elected to office in September 1914, in W. M. Hughes's Labor government of 1915-16, and in the successive Hughes National Party governments, 1917-21. While remaining anxious about Japan's intentions, he endorsed Australia's giving all aid to the mother country for both sentimental and national interests reasons: 'The 'White Australia Act' would not have been worth a snap of the finger but for the might of the British Navy... the shortest way to Australia's safety was to win this war as speedily as possible' ('West Australian', 25 Oct 1916). Holding this view, Pearce backed Hughes's call in 1916 for conscription to reinforce the Australian Imperial Force on the western front, which resulted in Hughes and his followers, including Pearce, being forced out of the Labor Party and into government with the Liberals. Pearce represented Australia at the Washington conference in 1921-2 which encouraged him to believe that Japan was no longer a threat. It was in presiding over the raising, training, transporting, and demobilizing of the 350,000 strong Australian Imperial Force that Pearce made his greatest contribution to national life. 
From 1923 to 1937, with the brief exception of 1929-31, when Labor was in office, Pearce held portfolios in conservative administrations, as minister for home and territories (1923-6) and vice-president of the executive council (1926-9) in S. M. Bruce's National-Country Party government and as minister of defence (1931-4) and minister for external affairs (1934-7) in J. B. Lyons's United Australia Party government. Following Japan's military seizure of Manchuria and the rise of the Nazis to power in Germany Pearce recognized that the British empire might have to fight a war on two fronts and in this case Australia would once again be vulnerable. To meet this crisis he made a rather muddled effort to build up Australia's defence forces, which had been greatly reduced in the previous decade, and he moved cautiously to prepare Australia for a more active role in foreign affairs. Amid the great depression Western Australia, disillusioned with a remote Canberra-based and eastern-dominated federal government, had in April 1933 voted overwhelmingly for secession from the commonwealth and in the 1937 election the secessionists urged voters to 'Put Pearce last' and he was defeated. On retirement he was appointed to directorships on the Commonwealth Grants Commission and during the Second World War on the Board of Business Administration, where both conservative and Labor governments drew upon his valuable experience. 
Pearce was sworn of the privy council in 1921 and created KCVO in 1927. He died at his home in Elwood, Melbourne, on 24 June 1952 and was given a state funeral, the service for which was held at John Knox Presbyterian Church, Gardenvale. 


@@@@@


doc= 35434


Pearce, Sir (Standen) Leonard (1873-1947), electrical engineer, was born at Chapel House, Crewkerne, Somerset, on 28 September 1873, the only child of the Revd Standen Pearce, a Baptist minister, and his wife, Sarah Young. He was educated at Bishop's Stortford College and the Finsbury Technical College, subsequently serving his apprenticeship with the Electrical Engineering Corporation, of West Drayton, and with Thomas Richardson & Sons, of Hartlepool. After a year as an engineer at sea he returned to work for the Metropolitan Electric Supply Company. Two years later, in 1899, he joined the British Thomson-Houston Company, and took part in the construction of electrical equipment for the Central London Railway. In the following year he became assistant, then shortly afterwards superintendent engineer of the railway's Shepherd's Bush power station. In 1901 he returned to the electricity supply industry as deputy chief electrical engineer to the Manchester corporation. Also in 1901, on 18 July, he married Susannah (Susie) Kate (died 1938), daughter of George R. Cockhead, of Crouch End, London, a dealer in rare books; they had one daughter. Three years later Pearce became chief electrical engineer, and then general manager of the electricity department and consulting electrical engineer to the corporation, a post which he held until 1925. During this period he was engaged in much development and constructional work, which culminated in the design and erection of Barton power station. In 1916, at the request of the Board of Trade, he formed a committee to consider the electrical supply resources of Lancashire and Cheshire, and in 1920 he played a leading part in the inception of the south-east Lancashire electricity scheme. The advisory board, of which he was chairman, was the first to function in any of the districts into which the country was divided under the 'Electricity (Supply) Act' of 1919. 
In 1924 Pearce spent six months in Australia at the invitation of the municipality of Sydney, to advise on various matters in connection with the electrical developments in that country. In the following year he was appointed an electricity commissioner, but in 1926 he became, and remained until his death, engineer-in-chief of the London Power Company, formed to co-ordinate and develop the generation of electricity in the metropolis. Of his valuable work in this capacity the most notable was the design and construction of the Deptford West and Battersea power stations. His association with Sir Giles Gilbert Scott in designing the latter marked the beginning of a close collaboration between engineers and architects in the building of power stations. At Battersea, Pearce also initiated, and successfully carried through, the design and construction of a flue-washing plant to eliminate fumes. For many years, power-stations of his design headed the list for efficiency, and his leadership in this field may be attributed not only to his own high standards but also to his emphasis on the importance of avoiding fixed ideas and of maintaining a breadth of view able to take account of progress in other spheres of knowledge. 
Pearce was a valued member -- in some cases an honorary member -- of the institutions connected with his profession, which he served in various capacities. He was awarded the Constantine gold medal of the Manchester Association, the Watt gold medal of the Institution of Civil Engineers, and finally, in 1947, the Faraday medal of the Institution of Electrical Engineers. He was an honorary DSc of Manchester University (1926), was appointed CBE in 1919, and knighted in 1935. These honours he received with his customary reserved and modest attitude towards his own achievements, and a generous acknowledgement of the work of colleagues. 
To his recreations, as to his profession, Pearce brought the same unassuming sincerity of purpose. He was a keen musician and, when living in Manchester, played the organ at the Baptist chapel which he attended. He was an enthusiastic mountain climber, in summer and winter, with more than 150 first-class ascents in the Alps to his credit. He planned methodically, was very safe, and always considerate of his guides. He regarded skiing as an aid to winter mountaineering, and he was also an expert skater. In his home and office were pictures of the mountains, which he loved and greatly missed during the war years of 1939-45, when he added the work of an electricity commissioner to his other tasks. In 1935 he had accompanied Sir William Ellis when he ascended the Jungfrau in celebration of his seventy-fifth birthday, but Pearce did not live, as he had hoped, to do the same, for he died aged seventy-four, on 20 October 1947, at his home, Crewkerne, 8 Park Hill, Bickley, Kent. 
C. E. H. Verity', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35435


Pearce, Stephen (1819-1904), portrait and equestrian painter, was born on 16 November 1819 in London at the King's Mews, Charing Cross, to Stephen Pearce and his wife, Ann Whittington. Pearce's father was an official in the department of the master of the horse. In 1840 Pearce attended Henry Sass's academy in Charlotte Street and in the same year was admitted to the Royal Academy Schools. There he became a pupil of Sir Martin Shee in 1841. From 1842 to 1846 he acted as amanuensis to the novelist Charles Lever. After this employment, Pearce travelled to Italy, presumably as part of his artistic training. 
Pearce exhibited his first work at the Royal Academy in 1839. The work, a portrait of one of his favourite horses (Tartar) in Queen Victoria's stables, set the tone for his career, and he became known for his equestrian portraits and groups, such as 'Coursing at Ashdown Park' from 1869. Many of Pearce's early works were pictures of the queen's horses; as he recalled: 'Living at the Royal Mews, in the midst of the Queen's horses, I was always making sketches and paintings of them' (Pearce, 21). Colonel John Barrow, keeper of the Admiralty records and a friend of Pearce, brought him the commission for his painting 'The Arctic Council Discussing a Plan of Search for Sir John Franklin', a work that highlighted another important genre in Pearce's artistic output: portraiture. Completed in 1851, the work was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1853 and sparked public interest in Franklin's fate. The work was sent to Buckingham Palace for viewing by Queen Victoria and Prince Albert and an engraving by James Scott after Pearce's canvas furthered its circulation and popularity. Lady Franklin commissioned Pearce to paint the portraits of other Arctic explorers. All of these portraits are now at the National Portrait Gallery, London. In the midst of these commissions, Pearce married Matilda Jane Cheswright on 13 April 1858, and they had five sons. Throughout his career, Pearce exhibited regularly at the Royal Academy, the British Institution, the Suffolk Street Gallery, and the Grosvenor Gallery. His works were regularly engraved and were praised at the time for being well-drawn, accurate likenesses. 
Pearce retired from painting in 1885, and the contents of his studio were sold by Christies on 5 February 1886. In 1903 Pearce published his autobiographical 'Memories of the Past'. He died on 31 January 1904 at his home, 44 Sussex Gardens, Bayswater, London, and was buried at the Old Town cemetery in Eastbourne, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 35436


Pearce, Sir William George, second baronet (1861-1907), shipbuilder and philanthropist, was born at Chatham, Kent, on 23 July 1861, the only child of Sir William Pearce, first baronet (1833-1888), and his wife, Dinah Elizabeth, daughter of Robert Socoter of Gravesend, Kent. He was educated at Rugby School (1876-8) and went in 1881 to Trinity College, Cambridge, graduating BA and LLB in 1884. He was called to the bar at the Inner Temple in 1885. 
On the death of his father in December 1888 Pearce succeeded him as chairman of the Fairfield Shipbuilding and Engineering Company of Glasgow, an undertaking the development of which had been the principal work of his father's life. Under Pearce's chairmanship, which lasted until his death, the company maintained its high reputation. He was also a chairman of the Scottish Oriental Steamship Company. 
Pearce was returned to parliament in 1892 as Conservative member for Plymouth along with Sir Edward Clarke, but did not seek re-election in 1895. He was honorary colonel of the 2nd Devon volunteers Royal Garrison Artillery. He was a keen country sportsman, and his estate of Chilton Lodge, Hungerford, Berkshire, was noted for its shooting. 
Pearce married Caroline Eva, daughter of Robert Coote, on 18 March 1905. They had no children. He died after a short illness on 2 November 1907 at his London home, 2 Deanery Street, Park Lane, and was buried at Chilton Foliat, near Hungerford. By his will he left the residue of his property, estimated at over $150,000, subject to his wife's life interest, to Trinity College, Cambridge, though he had had no close association with the college since his graduation. Lady Pearce survived her husband by only a few weeks, and the college thus acquired probably the most valuable of the many accessions which have been made to its endowments since its foundation by Henry VIII in 1546. 


@@@@@


doc= 35437


Pears, Sir Edwin (1835-1919), barrister, publicist, and historian, was born in York on 18 March 1835, the son of Robert Pears, a descendant of a younger branch of the Piers family of Piers Hall, Ingleton, Yorkshire, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Barnett. After being educated privately, he graduated from London University with distinction in Roman law and jurisprudence. On a voyage to Australasia in 1857 he married Mary, daughter of John Ritchie Hall, surgeon in the Royal Navy. They had four sons and three daughters. 
In 1870 Pears was called to the bar at the Middle Temple, and began to practise as a barrister in London. In addition he undertook literary and administrative work and was for a time private secretary to Frederic Temple, then bishop of Exeter. He was also general secretary of the Social Science Association from 1868 to 1872 and of the International Prison Congress in 1872, and edited the journals of both organizations. In 1872 he became editor of the 'Law Magazine'. Overwork began to tell on his health, and when, in January 1873, he heard that the practice of Sir Charles Parker Butt at the Constantinople bar was vacant, he decided to try his hand at the job. This decision was to determine his future career. Settling as a permanent resident in Turkey, he rose to become president of the European bar in Constantinople in 1881, and made a name for himself as a newspaper correspondent and historian of the city. 
Pears's political attitudes and activities in the Levant were influenced by his arriving in the country in middle age, when he had already made political and personal connections in England. Although he rapidly rose to be one of the leaders of the British colony, he retained an independent and critical point of view with regard to local affairs and to the Eastern question. Holding, as he did, liberal convictions, he did not adopt the complacent attitude towards the Turks characteristic of many western Europeans living in the region. He had no illusions as to the intelligence and character of Sultan Abdul Hamid, and he expressed his views in the 'Life of Abdul Hamid' (1917). He also wrote 'Turkey and its People' (1911). Pears became interested in the more remote history of the Ottoman empire, and published two monographs which became standard texts, 'The Fall of Constantinople' (1885) and 'The Destruction of the Greek Empire' (1903). 
Pears came to general prominence in 1876 through his reporting for the 'Daily News' of the atrocities against Christian Bulgarians. His dispatches of 12 May, 23 June, and 7 August, particularly, played a major role in launching the subsequent 'Bulgarian agitation'. Pears's reports were confirmed by other observers and were taken up by the rest of the Liberal press; by September a full-scale campaign, led by W. E. Gladstone, was in progress. Despite this, Pears remained on fair terms with the Turks, though his role as a barrister required him to be cautious. 
Pears was knighted in June 1909. He left Turkey in December 1914, as a result of the outbreak of war, but he returned in April 1919. He died after an accident at sea at the Zammit-Clapp Hospital, Malta, on 27 November 1919. 


@@@@@


doc= 35438


Pearsall, William Harold (1891-1964), ecologist and botanist, was born at Stourbridge, Worcestershire, on 23 July 1891, the only son and second of the three children of William Harrison Pearsall, schoolmaster and Methodist lay preacher, and his wife, Mary Elizabeth Green, of Earl Shilton, Leicester. The family moved to Dalton in Furness when Pearsall was quite young; his father had been appointed headmaster of Broughton Road School in that town. Pearsall attended his father's school until 1905 and then went to Ulverston grammar school. In 1909 he was admitted to the University of Manchester to read chemistry. However, after his first year he changed to botany, graduating with first-class honours in 1913. From his earliest days he had accompanied his father, a keen amateur naturalist with whom he later co-authored several scientific papers, on frequent excursions into the Lake District, where they had searched for water plants using a home-made boat launched dredger. A university graduate scholarship enabled him to devote himself to a systematic study of the distribution of aquatic plants in the English lakes. He was awarded his MSc in 1915 and in the following year he joined the Royal Garrison Artillery and saw active service in France, returning to civilian life in 1919 with troublesome hearing loss. 
During the war, in 1917, Pearsall married Marjory Stewart, second child of Robert Peter George Williamson, director of education, of Stoke-on-Trent. She was herself a first-class honours graduate in botany of Manchester, where she was a fellow student of Pearsall's, and later lecturer in botany at Birmingham and then at Leeds. There were two sons, Alan William Halliday Pearsall (1925-2006), naval historian, and Ian Stewart Pearsall (1928-1982), engineer. 
In 1919 Pearsall became an assistant lecturer under Professor J. H. Priestley at Leeds University. In the following year he was promoted to a full lectureship and was awarded a DSc by Manchester University for his researches on the English lakes. In 1922 he was made reader in botany at Leeds and in 1938 he was appointed professor of botany at Sheffield University. He was elected FRS in 1940 and in 1944 succeeded E. J. Salisbury in the Quain chair of botany at University College, London, retaining it until his retirement in 1957. He was well regarded at University College for both his teaching and his administrative flair, and many of his students acquired from his field excursions a lasting interest in the countryside. 
Pearsall's earliest scientific publications (1917-21) related to his postgraduate studies of lakes and their vegetation. Consideration of the mode of erosion of wave exposed shores, and of the redeposition of the removed material, enabled him to explain the distribution of plant communities in and around Esthwaite Water. The shore vegetation at the north end of the lake was of special interest because it changed with distance from the mouth of the inflow stream which carried most of the incoming silt. Pearsall carefully mapped the plant communities, showing their relation to the water margin and to the fineness and chemical content of the accumulating sediments. When he remapped the area in 1929 all the zones had advanced into or towards the open water. The general interest aroused by this direct demonstration of plant succession led to the declaration of the North Fen as a national nature reserve in 1954 and to a further mapping in 1967-9 by a group from Lancaster University. 
Pearsall next looked at the lakes as a whole in an attempt to account for differences between them. Since all occupy ice deepened rock basins which became ice free at much the same time, he argued that their present differences must have arisen from differing rates of subsequent change. The rocky lakes like Wastwater and Ennerdale must be relatively primitive, the much silted lakes like Windermere and Esthwaite must therefore be more advanced. The rocky lakes have very clear water, poor in dissolved substances, scanty vegetation, and trout as the most abundant fish. The silted lakes have water less clear but richer in plant nutrients, much more vegetation, and perch, pike, and eels as the typical fish. The publication in 1921 reporting these findings is typical of both the boldness of Pearsall's inferences from a large body of fieldwork and the simplicity of his resulting synthesis. Pearsall's work stimulated much further research, but doubts arose later when the analysis of deep lake sediments showed that there had in fact been great variations in rates of change and some reversals of direction. However, these ultimately proved explicable in the light of ideas largely suggested by Pearsall himself, resulting in a less simple, but more ecologically interesting, story. 
From 1937 Pearsall's research included work on the ecological significance of the electric potentials of natural soils, which he interpreted as oxidation-reduction potentials. There were further valuable contributions on soils and studies on bogs. In his presidential address to section K of the British Association in 1954 he drew attention to the increasingly urgent problems of world food production. There followed a series of papers by himself and former pupils on production ecology which undoubtedly influenced the choice of biological productivity as one of two major topics for the International Biological Programme. 
In 1950 Pearsall published 'Mountains and Moorlands', a work in which he drew on all his vast knowledge of Britain's highland zone and on his capacity for creative imagination and lucid writing. Although written primarily for the amateur naturalist, it nevertheless provided the university student with an unrivalled introduction to the scientific analysis of familiar ecological phenomena. His 'Report on an Ecological Survey of Serengeti National Park, Tanganyika' (1956) was a classic of ecological literature. 
Pearsall was one of three biologists principally involved in seeking to establish a British centre for lake research, efforts which led to the foundation of the Freshwater Biological Association in 1929. Pearsall was closely involved from the start in the development of the association's research, playing a very active role in guiding, encouraging, and inspiring the research workers until the end of his life. 
Pearsall joined the British Ecological Society soon after its foundation and began his term as president in 1936. From 1937 to 1947 he edited the society's 'Journal of Ecology'. His presidential address on 'The soil complex in relation to plant communities' was one of his most lauded achievements. He was editor of 'Annals of Botany' from 1948 to 1961 and at the time of his death he was secretary of the Annals of Botany Company. He had a vision of the need for the conservation of nature long before it became fashionable and, with other prominent naturalists, played an important part in the creation of the Nature Conservancy, which was established in 1949, becoming a charter member. He was chairman of its scientific policy committee from 1953 to 1963. This enabled him to exert a powerful influence for the application of critical scientific thought to problems of nature conservation. 
A number of academic and other honours came to Pearsall. He was honorary DSc of Durham (1958) and Birmingham (1963) universities and received the Linnean Society's gold medal for botany in 1963. He was made an honorary member of the British Ecological Society and the Society for Experimental Biology, and a foreign member of the Swedish Phytogeographical Society. He was a fellow of the Institute of Biology and its president in 1957-8. 
Pearsall was of tall and slender but athletic build and, with a small close clipped moustache, had something of the military in his aspect. He was blue eyed, with fair hair and a pale skin. He always appeared vigorous and purposeful, most so, perhaps, when he was striding with obvious enjoyment across a moor or up a mountain, his companions trailing behind him. Those who met him for the first time were at once impressed by his wide knowledge and capacity for penetrating analysis, but they soon discovered his modesty and humanity and an endearing gaiety of spirit. He enjoyed fly-fishing, drawing in pen and ink or watercolour, and golf. 
Pearsall died at the Victoria Hospital, Morecambe and Heysham, on 14 October 1964 of a brain tumour. His wife and sons survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35439


Pearson, Alfred Chilton (1861-1935), classical scholar, was born at 23 Campden Hill Square, London, on 8 October 1861, the only child of Robert Henry Pearson (died 1893), merchant, of London, and his wife, Georgina Boswood, who died when Pearson was still a schoolboy. He was educated at Highgate and King's College schools, and at Christ's College, Cambridge, which he entered as a scholar in 1879. He was fortunate in being taught by John Peile, soon to be university reader in comparative philology, who introduced Pearson to Sanskrit and gave him 'a solid foundation for the linguistic studies of later life' (Richards, 3). After obtaining a first class in both parts of the classical tripos (1881 and 1883) he read for the bar and was called by Lincoln's Inn in 1885; in the same year he married Edith Maud, fourth daughter of Reuben Green, solicitor and town clerk, of Kensington, and they settled in London. 
In 1890 Pearson became a schoolmaster: after two years at Bury St Edmunds and one at Ipswich he passed in 1893 to Dulwich College, which he left in 1900, in order to enter his late father's London business, moving at the same time to Warlingham in Surrey. He joined the National Liberal Club, which gave him a base in London, and maintained his links with teaching by examining, from 1900, for the Oxford and Cambridge schools examination board. 
Pearson's publications began in 1887 with a note on the 'Androtion' of Demosthenes in the 'Classical Review', which had just begun, and to which he continued to contribute articles and reviews on many Greek subjects: his first book was 'The Fragments of Zeno and Cleanthes' (1891), an admirable work which had won him the Hare prize at Cambridge two years before. All his later books were editions of works of the Greek tragedians, although between 1908 and 1921 he contributed more than twenty articles to Hastings's 'Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics'. He began with a series of school editions of Euripides ('Helena', 1903; 'Heraclidae', 1907; 'Phoenissae', 1909) and with an abridgement (1907) of the 'Ajax' of Sophocles edited by Sir Richard Jebb. Next, at the invitation of the syndics of the Cambridge University Press, he prepared for posthumous publication (1910) the verse translation and incomplete commentary on Aeschylus's 'Agamemnon' left by W. G. Headlam, and also undertook the completion of the editing of the 'Fragments' of Sophocles, a task begun by Jebb and continued by Headlam. Pearson spent several years on this difficult task, and in 1917 produced a masterly edition in three volumes, which established his reputation. The notes to this work ensure its lasting value to scholars. 
In 1919 Pearson was elected Gladstone professor of Greek at Liverpool University, where he had the support of J. P. Postgate, professor of Latin. Pearson feigned surprise at his appointment: 'Rather a ridiculous adventure at my time of life! I did not even know the post was advertised' (Richards, 9). But he revitalized the department there and in 1921 succeeded Henry Jackson as regius professor of Greek at Cambridge, becoming thereupon a fellow of Trinity College. His chief remaining work was the Sophocles which he added to the 'Oxford Classical Texts' series in 1924. Soon after this his health failed. He resigned his chair in 1928, and lived from 1932 to 1934 at Hunstanton before moving to London, where he died at his home, 61 Queen's Gate, Kensington, on 2 January 1935 after five years of total incapacity. His wife had died in 1930. They had a son and two daughters, the elder of whom predeceased her father. 
Pearson was an active man, an oar and a cricketer in youth, and a keen golfer and walker in later life. Intensely loyal and generous, he combined deep modesty with strong opinions, carefully formed and not easily shaken. He did, though, resign his National Liberal Club membership and wrote in 1923 that, having ceased to be a Liberal, he expected 'to end as a crusted Tory' (Richards, 14). His scholarship was of a very high order, especially on the linguistic and grammatical side. All his books were models in their kind, and his masterpiece, 'The Fragments of Sophocles', shows a vast range of knowledge at the service of an acute and sober judgement. He was elected an honorary fellow of Christ's College in 1922 and a fellow of the British Academy in 1924. 


@@@@@


doc= 35440


Pearson, Sir Charles John, Lord Pearson (1843-1910), judge, born at Edinburgh on 6 November 1843, was the second son of Charles Pearson, chartered accountant, of Edinburgh, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of John Dalziel, solicitor, of Earlston, Berwickshire. After attending Edinburgh Academy he proceeded to the University of St Andrews, and then to Corpus Christi College, Oxford, where he distinguished himself in classics, winning the Gaisford Greek prizes for prose (1862) and verse (1863). He graduated BA with a first class in the final classical school in 1865. He afterwards attended law lectures in Edinburgh and became a member of the Juridical Society, of which he was librarian in 1872-3, and of the Speculative Society. He was called to the English bar (from the Inner Temple) on 10 June 1870, and on 19 July 1870 he passed to the Scottish bar, where he rapidly obtained a large practice. On 23 July 1873 he married Elizabeth, daughter of M. Grayhurst Hewat of St Cuthbert's, Norwood, with whom he had three sons. 
Although Pearson was not one of the crown counsel for Scotland, he was specially retained for the prosecution at the trial of the directors of the City of Glasgow Bank in 1879. He became sheriff of Chancery in 1885, and procurator and cashier for the Church of Scotland in 1886. In 1887 he was knighted, and he was appointed sheriff of Renfrew and Bute in 1888, and of Perthshire in 1889. He was a Conservative in politics, and in 1890 he was appointed solicitor-general for Scotland in Lord Salisbury's second administration: concomitantly, he was elected unopposed as MP for Edinburgh and St Andrews universities, and in the same year he became a QC. In 1891 he succeeded James Patrick Bannerman Robertson, Lord Robertson, as lord advocate. At the general election of 1892 he was again returned unopposed for Edinburgh and St Andrews universities, but after the subsequent fall of Lord Salisbury's ministry he ceased to be lord advocate, and was chosen dean of the Faculty of Advocates. 
Pearson received the honorary degree of LLD from Edinburgh University in 1894, and on the return of the Conservatives to power in the following year he became again lord advocate, and resigned the deanship. In 1896 he was appointed to the bench, from which he retired, owing to bad health, in 1909. He died at Edinburgh on 15 August 1910, and was buried in the Dean cemetery there. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35441


Pearson, Sir (Cyril) Arthur, first baronet (1866-1921), newspaper proprietor and philanthropist, was born on 24 February 1866 at Wookey near Wells, the eldest child and only son among the four children of the Revd Arthur Cyril Pearson (1838-1916) and his wife, Philippa Massingberd Maxwell Lyte (1846-1909). His great-grandfather was the hymnologist the Revd Henry Francis Lyte. He was educated from the age of ten at Eagle House School, Wimbledon, going on after four years there to Winchester College. Straitened family circumstances forced his departure at the age of sixteen, and he returned home to be taught by his father. In 1884 he won a general knowledge quiz in Sir George Newnes's journal 'Tit-Bits'; the prize was a clerkship at the 'Tit-Bits' London office at a salary of $100 a year. By the following year he had pushed himself into the position of manager. 
When in 1890 Newnes and W. T. Stead devised the monthly digest 'Review of Reviews' Pearson was made business manager, but finding his position now constrictive and unremunerative Pearson broke away in July 1890 to found his own journal. As the first number of 'Pearson's Weekly' proclaimed on 26 July, it was intended 'to interest, to elevate, to amuse', and its amalgam of light instruction and entertainment ultimately proved extraordinarily attractive to an aspiring late Victorian middle- and respectable working-class readership. 'Pearson's Weekly' struggled initially, however, until Pearson hit upon the key to his fortune, the 'Missing Word' competition. First announced in December 1891, its rapid popularity made him a rich man. Sales reached a peak of one and a quarter million in 1897, and 'Pearson's Weekly' established a significant share of the popular magazine market. Wealth fuelled Pearson's philanthropy, and in 1892 he established the Fresh Air Fund in Britain, a means of sending children from city slums on annual trips to the countryside. Pearson also provided the initial funding for Robert Baden-Powell's Boy Scout movement. 
Pearson subsequently founded the 'Royal Magazine' and other titles and was able to go into semi-retirement in 1897. This soon palled with the energetic Pearson, and in 1899 he was teamed with Newnes once more on the board of the British Mutoscope and Biograph Company, the premier British film company of the period, with the bold but ultimately mistaken aim of providing illustrated journalism through motion picture devices for the home. He then turned to the launch of a daily newspaper. 24 April 1900 saw the first edition of the 'Daily Express', price halfpence, eight broadsheet pages with news innovatively featured on the outside. Pearson's main political passion at this time was tariff reform, and in 1903 he and Joseph Chamberlain formed the Tariff Reform League. During the period 1903-5 Pearson directed the operations of the Tariff Reform League as executive chairman and also served as vice-chairman of the tariff commission. His involvement undoubtedly led to his neglect of the 'Daily Express'. 
In 1905 Pearson acquired 'The Standard' and 'Evening Standard', and made a failed bid for 'The Times' in 1907-8, but he began to lose interest in his newspapers just as he lost interest in tariff reform after the general election of 1905. Partly this was Pearson's nature, always dropping an enthusiasm once the challenge was over, but the onset of blindness was no doubt the determining factor. He sold 'The Standard', along with the mildly profitable 'Evening Standard', in 1910, having despaired of 'a publication which showed no signs of becoming a genuine financial proposition' (Porter, 576). 
Characteristically, Pearson did not dwell on his loss of sight, but set out to discover what was most positive about it. Having disposed of his newspaper holdings by 1912, he became president of the National Institute for the Blind. At the outbreak of war Pearson found fresh outlet for his energies by establishing a hostel for blinded soldiers, first in Bayswater in February 1915, but moving the following month to spacious accommodation at St Dunstan's in Regent's Park. Initially treating sixteen soldiers, by the end of the war St Dunstan's and other hostels had cared for over 1500. More than just treating blindness Pearson oversaw a whole policy of re-education and readjustment into society, doing remarkable work in the process to change public perception of blind people. 
In recognition of these public services Pearson was created a baronet in 1916 and GBE in 1917. He was twice married: first, on 3 December 1887, to Isobel Sarah, daughter of the Revd F. Bennett, with whom he had three daughters; second, on 3 June 1897, to Ethel Maud (died 1959), daughter of W. J. Fraser, with whom he had one son. Pearson died on 9 December 1921 at his London home, 15 Devonshire Street: he drowned after hitting his head on a bath tap. He was buried on 13 December in Hampstead cemetery. His only son, Neville Arthur Pearson, succeeded to the baronetcy. 
Possessing an extraordinary enthusiasm for life, Sir Arthur Pearson revolutionized people's attitude towards blind people. His energy was intimidating to some, and Joseph Chamberlain paid him a double-edged compliment in calling him 'the greatest hustler I have ever known' (Dark, 104); but a man whose opinions were mostly caprice and whose thoughts were shallow could never be a great newspaperman. He was popularly mourned as the 'Blind leader of the blind'. 


@@@@@


doc= 35442


Pearson, Karl (1857-1936), statistician and eugenicist, was born at 14 Albion Road, Holloway Road, Islington, London, on 27 March 1857, the second of three children of William Pearson (died 1907), a barrister of the Inner Temple, and his wife, Fanny Smith (died 1905), both of Yorkshire descent. He had an older brother, Arthur, and a younger sister, Amy, was born in 1859. 
From 1863 to 1866 Karl and Arthur both boarded at William Penn's small school in Harrow. Then, for a short time in 1866, they received tuition from Penn at their family home, which allowed them to be closer to a mother who provided the emotional sustenance denied them by their stern and hard-working father. In the autumn of 1866 Karl was sent to University College School, London. He withdrew in 1873 owing to poor health and then went up to Cambridge to study with several private tutors. In April 1875 he obtained a scholarship at King's College, Cambridge, placing second on the list. 
While at King's, Pearson gained notoriety when he rebelled against the required divinity lectures and chapel attendance, a campaign that resulted in the abolition of this system in March 1878. Although Pearson's rebellion was directed more against the requirements than against religion itself (after being released from compulsory chapel he shocked the tutors and deans by continuing to attend whenever the spirit moved him), it was nevertheless indicative of his early loss of Christian faith. He considered himself fortunate to have been raised by Quaker parents who did not encourage dogmatic belief in the biblical story of creation. By the time he was in his early twenties he had absorbed Darwinism and taken a special interest in Spinozism as an intellectual religion, thereafter identifying himself as a freethinker and an agnostic. 
Pearson graduated BA in 1879 as third wrangler in the prestigious mathematical tripos. He was next awarded a King's College fellowship that allowed him financial independence for several years and an opportunity to travel to Heidelberg and Berlin, where he spent about eighteen months studying mathematics, physics, and philosophy. His first two publications (both anonymous) arose from his wide reading in philosophy, religious thought, and German history: 'The New Werther' (1880) was a work of fiction written in the form of letters from a young man wandering in Germany seeking a creed of life, and 'The Trinity: a Nineteenth Century Passion Play' (1882) attacked orthodox Christianity from the point of view of modern science and culture. Some of his essays and lectures dating from this period and covering a similarly broad range of topics were published in his 'Ethic of Freethought' (1888). 
Pearson's father had always intended that his sons follow him into the law, and so upon his return to London in November 1880 Karl entered Lincoln's Inn to prepare for a legal career and ensure himself a future livelihood. He was called to the bar at the end of 1881 but practised only a short time, apparently having been persuaded by the civil engineer Sir Alexander Kennedy to abandon law and return to mathematics, the subject at which he had excelled in his undergraduate studies. 
Pearson next worked as a substitute lecturer in mathematics at both King's and University colleges in London, and published work on elasticity and the motions of bodies in fluid media. In June 1884 he received his first academic appointment as Goldsmid professor of applied mathematics and mechanics at University College. He was reported to have been an effective and charismatic teacher, devoting considerable time and energy to these duties while also producing an impressive output of original work in applied mathematics, including the laborious task of completing Isaac Todhunter's 'History of the Theory of Elasticity' (2 vols., 1886-93). 
Pearson's major accomplishment of this early period was his 'Grammar of Science' (1892), later widely recognized as a significant contribution to positivist and phenomenalist philosophy of science. Pearson held that all knowledge was based on sense perceptions and that the task of science was to summarize the routines of experience by means of laws expressed in mathematical form. Theoretical terms such as 'atom' or 'gene' were allowable only when they served as instruments for economically describing phenomena, not when they were interpreted as referring to invisible entities. Thus for example he criticized certain evolutionists for seeking the hidden causes of biological variability rather than just trying to provide a quantitative description: 'the 'why' of it is as much a mystery as the 'why' of the law of gravitation' (Pearson, 'The Grammar of Science', 2nd edn, 1900, 451). 
Pearson's phenomenalist stance was also articulated in a series of lectures he gave as holder of the Gresham College chair of geometry from 1891 to 1893. His Gresham lectures 'The geometry of statistics' and 'The laws of chance', in which audiences of as many as 300 students witnessed him use dice, roulette results, and 10,000 pennies scattered on the floor to demonstrate the laws of probability, marked a significant turning point in his career: they represented his earliest forays into statistical theory, the branch of mathematics in which he would soon make his scientific reputation. Pearson was responsible for almost single-handedly establishing the modern discipline of mathematical statistics, including the invention of a number of essential statistical techniques, most notably the chi-square test for goodness of fit and the product moment method of calculating the correlation coefficient. 
Pearson's interest in statistics was stimulated by Sir Francis Galton (1822-1911), the father of eugenics, and by W. F. R. Weldon, the zoologist who subsequently co-founded with Pearson the discipline called biometry, or the application of mathematical methods to the biological sciences. In the early 1890s Weldon sought out Pearson's assistance with the mathematical analysis of morphological variations in crab populations. His research involved determining whether a double humped frequency distribution for a given trait could be broken down into two normal curves representing a dimorphic population undergoing speciation. In the course of addressing such problems in evolutionary theory Pearson introduced powerful new statistical tools, especially his method of moments and system of frequency curves. Between 1894 and 1901 he communicated this work on curve fitting in a series of important papers in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society'. By 1906 he had already published over a hundred articles on statistical theory and applications. 
Correlation theory constituted Pearson's other key line of research in mathematical statistics. The history of correlation began with Galton's work on inheritance, anthropometrics, and criminal identification carried out between 1876 and 1889. Thereafter the methods he invented for measuring variation and correlation were applied and extended mainly by his disciples Weldon and Pearson. Pearson recounted that Galton's 'Natural Inheritance' (1889) had opened his eyes to the potential uses of statistical analysis for obtaining valid knowledge about living forms and human behaviour. After his initial success with speciation, Pearson went on to develop further statistical innovations particularly useful for the study of heredity and eugenics. For instance, in his very first correlation paper of 1896 he illustrated the practical value of these new tools by calculating regressions of offspring under selection pressures and by confirming the high degree of association between excessive fertility and undesirable traits. Later he utilized correlation coefficients and family pedigrees in his attempts to demonstrate that heredity was more important than environment in determining numerous human attributes and pathologies. Most of this material appeared in the multi-volume 'Treasury of Human Inheritance' (1909-33). This research seemed to confirm the eugenic assumption that social reforms were powerless to remedy the crisis of racial degeneration: if health and ability were principally inborn traits, then only programmes for selective breeding could improve the biological fitness of the population. 
Several of Pearson's essays dating from the 1880s and 1890s, published in his 'Chances of Death, and other Studies in Evolution' (2 vols., 1897), show that he had already begun to explore scientific ideas that would become central components of his eugenic creed, such as Darwinism, the inheritance of physical and mental characteristics, and the differential fertility of fit and unfit stocks. His conversion to socialism during his year in Germany also influenced his thinking on the questions of national efficiency and racial health. Upon returning to London in 1881 he became associated with radical clubs where he lectured on Marx and Lassalle and wrote hymns for the socialist songbook. However, Pearson's version of socialism was reformist rather than revolutionary, defined in terms of ensuring a stable society and a strong state. His politics most closely resembled Fabian socialism, with its emphasis on replacing 'laissez-faire' capitalism with state planning and technocratic management. He theorized that the way to regenerate the vitality of the British populace was by minimizing the struggle for existence between individuals through social welfare legislation and eugenics, while keeping up the intense competition between nations in the military and commercial realms. 
Pearson's eugenics must also be considered in relation to his keen interest in the 'woman question'. In 1885 he had founded the Men and Women's Club as a forum for dispassionate discussion of questions pertaining to sexual relations. While the female members of the club were most concerned to voice their anxieties about such concrete problems as prostitution, coercive sex, and birth control, Pearson read papers on sexual passion and the eugenic significance of feminism. He considered himself a supporter of equal rights and opportunities for women (later in his capacity as a laboratory director he hired many female assistants), yet he also expressed a willingness to subordinate these ideals to the greater good of the race. Eugenic feminists such as Pearson still expected liberated women to sacrifice their individual development in order to fulfil their duties as race mothers. The Men and Women's Club further served as an opportunity for the rather shy Pearson to realize his courtship ambitions. After rebuffing the sexual overtures of the South African feminist Olive Schreiner, on 30 June 1890 he married another fellow club member, Maria Sharpe (1853-1928). They had one son and two daughters. After Maria's death Pearson married, on 22 March 1929, one of his long-time biometrical co-workers, Margaret Victoria Child. 
By 1901 Pearson was devoting his full time to research and teaching in the new mathematical field of statistics, work for which he was awarded a grant from the Worshipful Company of Drapers that enabled him to establish a biometric laboratory at University College, London. He closely supervised all the projects undertaken by his staff and students, which ranged from further advances in statistical methodology to the analysis of data on heredity and physical anthropology. He also published on some non-biological topics such as astronomy and dam construction, thereby demonstrating the wide applicability of his new analytical techniques. He and Weldon founded the journal 'Biometrika' in 1901 as a publication outlet for their original work in both mathematics and biology. 
Eugenics came to occupy an especially prominent place on Pearson's research agenda after the death of his close friend and collaborator Weldon in 1906. Pearson took over the directorship of the Eugenics Record Office at the behest of its benefactor Francis Galton in 1907, changing the name of this institution to the Galton Laboratory for National Eugenics. In this role he gave public lectures expounding the new science and with the help of a dedicated staff carried out painstaking statistical studies of various social ills. In 1911 he was appointed the first Galton professor of eugenics at University College. The eugenics and biometric laboratories were incorporated into a single department of applied statistics, which survived until Pearson's retirement in 1933 when separate departments of eugenics (later human genetics) and statistics were set up against his express wishes that the connection between these two sciences be maintained. R. A. Fisher subsequently held the chair in eugenics while Pearson's son Egon Pearson became the new professor of statistics. 
Over the course of three decades Karl Pearson published some fifty papers on eugenics, constituting almost 10 per cent of his remarkably prolific scientific output. His publications and joint laboratories laid the intellectual and institutional foundations of modern statistics. From the 1890s until the 1920s the biometrical school at University College represented the only place in Britain that offered advanced training in statistical methods. It attracted postgraduates and visitors from many disciplines and from around the world. The first generation of professional medical and biostatisticians were all Pearson's pupils, including Major Greenwood in Britain and Raymond Pearl in the United States. Statistics soon achieved recognition as a scientific speciality in its own right, with statistical workers in demand in academia, government, and industry. But Pearson's second goal, of establishing a eugenics laboratory in every British university, was never realized, since public interest in eugenics waned after the First World War and most of the biometricians he trained did not go on to help him spread the gospel of eugenics along with the new techniques of correlation. 
Pearson disparaged old-school statisticians such as the members of the Royal Statistical Society (an organization he himself never joined) for employing a crude style of vital statistics that consisted simply of comparing percentages in order to make inferences about the causes of diseases and social problems. He insisted that only his biometricians were competent to analyse data collected in the laboratory, clinic, and social survey on such critical issues as alcoholism, tuberculosis, and infant mortality. His eugenics writings were marked by an extreme scepticism towards the investigations carried out by physicians and experimentalists, an attitude that on numerous occasions incited controversies with these reigning experts. The biometrical school is best known in the history of biology for its opposition to the Mendelian theory of heredity, which seemed to be inconsistent with Pearson's phenomenalism and evolutionary gradualism. Pearson similarly engaged in a fierce dispute with temperance advocates and fellow eugenicists over the question of whether parental alcoholism produced degeneracy in offspring. 
In an autobiographical sketch written in 1934 Pearson accounted for his scientific achievements and success in founding a new academic discipline in terms of two purportedly inherited qualities: 'a capacity for hard work and a capacity for roving into other people's preserves' (quoted in Pearson, 'Karl Pearson', 2). He was an energetic teacher and researcher, as well as an inspirational if domineering leader of his research institute. Although always extremely generous with his co-workers, Pearson was also reportedly prone to angry outbursts. He engaged in intellectual disputes that often descended into personal bitterness, even with some of his former pupils and friends. He tended to be impatient and even insulting towards outsiders who were unable or unwilling to see his point of view, especially those who objected to his uncompromising hereditarianism. Pearson was sometimes labelled a proponent of the 'better-dead school' of eugenics, owing to his apparent lack of sympathy for the sick and the poor and his endorsement of brutal competition between nations or racial groups as the means of achieving evolutionary progress. He championed further statistical studies as the prerequisite for an effective programme of race regeneration, yet his own proposals for positive and negative eugenics were based more on social class prejudices than on sound scientific deductions. 
For his fundamental contributions to statistics and evolutionary theory, Pearson was elected FRS in 1896 and awarded the society's Darwin medal in 1898. In 1903 he was awarded the Huxley medal of the Royal Anthropological Institute and in 1932 the Rudolf Virchow medal by the Anthropological Society of Berlin. He accepted the honorary degree of LLD from the University of St Andrews and of DSc from the University of London, and he was elected an honorary fellow of King's College, Cambridge, of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and of University College, London. Pearson died suddenly while on holiday at his cottage, the Old School House, Coldharbour, Dorking, Surrey, on 27 April 1936. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35443


Pearson, Weetman Dickinson, first Viscount Cowdray (1856-1927), building contractor and oil producer, was born on 15 July 1856 at Woodfield House, Shelley, Kirkburton, near Huddersfield, eldest son among the eight children of George Pearson (died 1899), of Brickendonbury, near Hertford, and his wife, Sarah (died 1911), daughter of Weetman Dickinson, of High Hoyland, Yorkshire. Pearson attended a private school, Hallfield, in Bowling, Bradford, and at the age of thirteen went to Pannal College, near Harrogate. He left school at sixteen, and was apprenticed to the family firm of builders and contractors, S. Pearson & Son, founded by his grandfather, Samuel Pearson. 
This marked the beginning of a remarkable and highly successful business career. In 1875, three years after joining the family business, Pearson was sent on a tour to the United States to seek new business, especially orders for the bricks, tiles, and piping whose manufacture was a major concern of the Bradford firm. He was very impressed by the energy and dynamism of the United States and, in turn, his visit was so successful that he was given growing responsibilities at S. Pearson & Son. In 1879 his grandfather retired from the business and gave him his share in it, making him his father's sole partner. Subsequently Pearson aggressively expanded the firm's business outside the north of England, especially in London, to which city he moved the headquarters in 1884. After the move to London, Pearson effectively ran the business, and in 1894 he became the sole partner. On 22 June 1881 he married Annie (1862-1932), daughter of Sir John Cass, of Bradford, Yorkshire; they had three sons, the youngest of whom was killed in action during the First World War, and one daughter, Gertrude Mary Denman, Lady Denman. 
Under Pearson's leadership the company rapidly emerged as one of Britain's leading contractors. During the 1880s the firm undertook major construction works in Britain and overseas. These included major dock construction projects at Milford Haven (1885-90), Southampton (1886-91), and Halifax in Nova Scotia (1886-9). In 1889 Pearson won two major contracts in the United States and Mexico which secured his leading role as a British contractor. The former was to build the Hudson River tunnel to connect New York with Jersey City, and the latter was construction of the Grand Canal designed to drain the swampy plateau on which stood Mexico City. The successful completion of these projects was followed by the construction of the Blackwall Tunnel under the Thames between 1891 and 1897, the building of the four East River tunnels connecting New York with Long Island for the Pennsylvania, New York, and Long Island Railroad Company in the 1900s, and a considerable number of railways, port and other infrastructure projects in Mexico. 
Pearson's personality and business skills lay at the heart of his firm's success. He had immense personal magnetism, an urge to achieve and to succeed, and a capacity for hard work. He was motivated neither by money nor by social prestige, but rather by a restless search for new challenges. He had a notable ability to accept mistakes and to learn from failures which stood him in good stead, though in practice the number of failures were few, both because of good judgement and because he appeared to be unusually lucky. Contemporaries referred often to 'Pearson luck'. 
Pearson possessed an unusual combination of entrepreneurial vision and the technical skills of an engineer. He had an extraordinary ability to perceive new opportunities and a willingness to take risks. Endowed with considerable technical knowledge and a profound understanding of both the engineering and strategic dimensions of the contracting business, Pearson was also noted for his considerable financial acumen. He costed many major contracts personally, or else relied on a trusted group of associates. He skilfully employed bank overdrafts, using his clients' securities as collateral, to finance large contracts, which made the work virtually self-financing. 
Pearson's entrepreneurial spirit led him to become the pioneer of the Mexican oil industry. This remarkable development grew out of S. Pearson & Son's extensive construction work in Mexico, during which oil seepages had been discovered while looking for rock for harbour works. In April 1901 Pearson, because of a missed train connection, spent a night at Laredo on the Mexico-United States border, which was close to a large oil discovery in the Texan oilfields. Although entirely ignorant of the petroleum industry, he glimpsed the commercial opportunities if oil could also be discovered in Mexico, and began to acquire oil concessions, a process facilitated by his close relations with the Mexican dictator, Diaz. By 1907 the firm owned 600,000 acres of land in that country. There followed a considerable business drama and a vivid demonstration of 'Pearson luck'. Pearson invested heavily in refining facilities and shipping, but his drillers found comparatively little oil. He was forced to buy oil in Texas to meet his marketing commitments, and by 1908 things looked desperate as his personal fortune had been pledged to support the oil business. He also became embroiled in a vicious trade war with the American company which had formerly dominated the Mexican market. But in 1910 Pearson's drillers struck oil on an enormous scale. By 1914 Mexico had become the third largest oil producing country in the world, after the United States and Russia, and Pearson controlled about 60 per cent of this production. He created a large, vertically integrated business which controlled oil production, refining, distribution, and selling. 
Pearson pursued a rather reluctant political career. He was elected a Liberal MP for Colchester in 1895, after failing to win the seat three years earlier, and retired in 1910. He appears never to have spoken in the House of Commons and he was so frequently absent that his critics called him the 'member for Mexico'. Nevertheless, he had strong political beliefs, advocating old-age pensions and other welfare measures, supporting the principle of home rule for Ireland, and -- together with his wife -- actively advocating female suffrage. For his various services Pearson was created baronet in 1894 and raised to the peerage in 1910 as Baron Cowdray, of Midhurst, Sussex. During the First World War Cowdray served as president of the Air Board in 1917. The output of aircraft increased significantly during his appointment, but he resigned in November of that year on learning that the prime minister, Lloyd George, had offered the newly created Air Ministry to Lord Northcliffe rather than to himself. Cowdray was created a viscount in 1917. 
Cowdray maintained an active business career after the end of the war. Concerned about the deteriorating political situation in Mexico and anxious to pursue new business activities, in 1919 he sold the majority of his equity in the Mexican oil business to the Shell group. The deal was a further manifestation of 'Pearson luck', for by 1922 the most prolific Mexican oil well had been infiltrated by salt water, and in 1938 all foreign-owned oil properties in Mexico were nationalized. However, Cowdray continued to be involved in the oil business, and his drillers searched for oil in a range of countries, including Britain, where they had discovered oil in Derbyshire in 1917. The only long-term and commercially viable discoveries were made in the United States, where in 1919 Cowdray participated in the formation of the Amerada Petroleum Corporation. He also continued to be closely involved with contracting, especially the huge Sennar Dam project in the Sudan, designed to irrigate the Gezira plain which lay in the triangle between the Blue and White Niles to the south of Khartoum. 
Cowdray was a generous benefactor to good causes. He gave $325,000 to establish the Royal Air Force Club after the end of the First World War, and made substantial donations to a number of universities, including Aberdeen, Birmingham, Cambridge, and University College, London. He owned extensive estates in Aberdeenshire and Kincardineshire, and made substantial donations to various causes in Aberdeen. In 1920 he was unanimously elected lord rector of Aberdeen University. 
Cowdray was made GCVO in 1925. On 1 May 1927, two days before he was due to become a freeman of Aberdeen, he died in his sleep at his home, Dunecht House, Dunecht, Aberdeenshire, having suffered for some time from heart disease. He was buried at Echt on 3 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 35444


Pease, Sir Arthur Francis, first baronet (1866-1927), coal owner and industrialist, was born at Hummersknott, Darlington, on 11 March 1866, the eldest son of Arthur Pease, coal owner and MP, and his wife, Mary Lecky, daughter of Ebenezer Pike of Bessborough, co. Cork. He came from a Quaker family which had long been associated with industrial development in Durham and Yorkshire. He was the great-grandson of Edward Pease, railway projector; grandson of Joseph Pease ['see under 'Pease, Edward], also a railway projector, and the first Quaker to sit in parliament; and nephew of Sir Joseph Whitwell Pease, first baronet, of Hutton Lowcross and Pinchinthorpe, who for nearly forty years represented a Durham constituency in the House of Commons. Pease was educated at Brighton College, and at Trinity College, Cambridge, and received a business training in Darlington with the family colliery concern, Pease & Partners. 
Pease was fortunate to avoid the financial catastrophe which afflicted the family bank, J. and J. W. Pease, in 1902, when negotiations for a takeover by Barclay & Co. revealed the bank to be insolvent. Pease had earlier sold his interest in the business to his uncle, Sir Joseph Whitwell Pease, whose estate was forfeited to meet liabilities in excess of $400,000. A portion of this sum was owed to Pease & Partners and it was owing to Arthur Francis Pease's acknowledged non-involvement in the bank's collapse that he was able to become chairman and managing director of that concern in 1906. In the course of time Pease became associated as chairman or director with numerous coalmining and other industrial undertakings in the north of England; he was also a director of Lloyds Bank and of the London and North Eastern Railway Company. In 1889 he married Laura Matilda Ethelwyn, daughter of Charles Peter Allix, of Swaffham Prior House, Cambridgeshire, who survived him; they had a son and three daughters. 
Pease became known to the public as a prominent negotiator when an organized demand arose among miners for a minimum wage. He was one of three representatives of the Durham owners who served on the committee of coal owners which was appointed in 1912 to meet the government and the Miners' Federation. Subsequently, when the joint district board for Durham was set up under the 'Minimum Wage Act' of 1912, Pease was called upon to state the case for the owners. After the outbreak of the First World War in 1914, Pease's great experience of industrial affairs was at once available for the government, and during the years 1914-21 he was an active member of many government committees. He held office as second civil lord of the Admiralty from 1918 to 1919, and was created a baronet in 1920. 
In the conduct of labour relations Pease departed from the principles of conciliation and arbitration which had informed Sir Joseph Whitwell Pease's stance as a negotiator in the Durham coal industry in the two decades before 1900. These were the years of 'Lib-Labism' when organized labour accepted a subordinate position in the hierarchy of liberal capitalism. As a unionist, Pease rejected this philosophy, especially in the years after 1906 when employers and trade unionists in the coal industry began to mobilize on a national basis in the face of declining productivity and profitability. In the great disputes of the 1920s Pease was a firm advocate of the view that, in the event of trade union opposition to wage reductions in response to trade depression, employers should resort to the tactics of the lock-out. 
Pease devoted much time to the affairs of his native county. He was elected chairman of the Durham county council in 1922 and took an especial interest in education. He was a JP and a deputy lieutenant for the county of Durham, and in 1920 he served as high sheriff. During the First World War he helped to raise the 18th battalion of the Durham light infantry. Preoccupation with business affairs prevented him from seeking election to the House of Commons, but his strong political sympathies induced him to act as president of the Durham Unionist Association from the time of its formation in 1910. He was devoted to all forms of sport and was a regular follower of the Zetland hounds. Pease's health eventually became precarious as a result of overwork, and he died at his home, Middleton Lodge, Middleton Tyas, near Darlington, on 23 November 1927, after a cerebral haemorrhage during a meeting of directors. His son, Richard Arthur Pease, succeeded to the baronetcy. 


@@@@@


doc= 35445


Pease, Edward Reynolds (1857-1955), secretary of the Fabian Society, was born on 23 December 1857 at Henbury Hill, near Bristol, the eldest son of Thomas Pease (died 1884), retired wool-comber, and his third wife, Susanna Anne Fry, of the Quaker family of cocoa manufacturers. His father also came from a prominent Quaker family, being a son of the railway promoter and cousin of the more famous Peases of Darlington. Edward Pease was educated at home by two tutors, the latter of whom, Theodore Neild, held progressive views, being a teetotaller and supporter of women's suffrage. Aged seventeen, Pease went to London to work as a clerk in the firm of silk merchants in which his brother-in-law Sir Thomas Hanbury was senior partner. He also became secretary to a debating society at the Friends' Institute, thus, as he said, beginning his habit of becoming secretary of everything he became connected with. He relinquished his job rather than accept a posting to China, but a year later acquired, through Sir Thomas Hanbury, a partnership in a stockbroker's office. Pease never felt at home in the City and when his father died in 1884, leaving him $3000, he left. 
Pease was raised as a Quaker but soon entered the realm of Victorian doubt. In London, his cousin Emily Ford took him to spiritualist seances, where he met Frank Podmore, who introduced him to the Society for Psychical Research. Pease became secretary of the haunted-houses committee, but his enthusiasm waned. In 1882 he attended meetings of the Democratic Federation, a socialist group run by the tory Marxist H. M. Hyndman. However, Pease favoured moral reform among the well-off leading to their abdicating wealth, rather than agitation among the workers leading to their seizing wealth. Hence he joined Percival Chubb in forming the Fellowship of the New Life around the wandering scholar Thomas Davidson. The fellowship advocated moral reform of the individual and society. Almost immediately a split developed between those who concentrated on personal regeneration and those who favoured social activism. On 4 January 1884 the latter group, led by Podmore, formed the Fabian Society. 
The Fabians, who then numbered about twenty, met on alternate Friday evenings in Pease's lodgings at 17 Osnaburgh Street. They held diverse beliefs, including tory socialism, communal anarchism, and the ethical positivism of Pease and Podmore. For Pease, positivism solved various problems, religious and social, by stressing social duty. His socialism drew also on evangelical morality and biblical allusions, with socialism being defined as a practical economic expression of the injunction to 'love thy neighbour'. Pease argued that socialism was inevitable, so the main question was whether the upper and middle classes would oppose it, thereby causing bloodshed and confusion, or promote it, thereby ensuring peace and harmony. Hubert Bland, a fellow Fabian, satirized this ethical socialism in 'Something wrong' ('Weekly Dispatch', 1886), a 'roman-a-clef' in which Pease appears as the hero. Sydney Olivier, Graham Wallas, and Sidney Webb joined the Fabians in the mid-1880s, and although they started out as ethical positivists, they established, with George Bernard Shaw, a distinctive Fabian socialism committed to parliamentary gradualism, efficient administration, taxation, and collectivism. 
We should not distinguish too sharply between the spiritualism, Marxism, personal regeneration, and ethical positivism that attracted Pease. London at that time was full of alternative bohemian schemes for the improvement of self and society, all of which looked forward to a time of fulfilment and harmony. William Morris, designer and socialist, occupied a prominent place in this bohemian world. Influenced by Morris, Pease decided, after his father's death, to become a craftsman. He trained as a cabinet-maker, and in 1886, having failed to get work in Morris's firm, joined a furnishing workshop in Newcastle upon Tyne. The workshop was nominally a co-operative, but in practice was privately owned and kept afloat by loans from Pease, amounting to half his capital, that were paid back only years later. While in Newcastle, Pease became engaged to a schoolteacher and Fabian, Mary Gammell (Marjory), the daughter of the Revd George Smyttan Davidson, minister of the parish of Kinfauns near Perth. The couple married in 1889, after Pease returned from a year's tour of the United States with Sidney Webb, and soon afterwards, they moved to Limpsfield on the North Downs, where they had two sons. 
Olivier took over as secretary of the Fabian Society while Pease was in Newcastle. But when Pease returned to London, he had difficulty finding work, and the success of the 'Fabian Essays in Socialism' (1889) enabled the Fabian Society to take on employed staff. So, in 1889, Pease was appointed as part-time secretary, becoming full-time a year later. Initially he was paid $50 a year and a similar sum nominally as secretary to Sidney Webb but really on Fabian duties. The post was an onerous one. In January 1891 alone he wrote over 600 letters, organized nine lecture courses as well as ordinary meetings, and managed the society's publishing business, including sales of the 'Essays'. Soon after, the society set him up in its first formal office at 276 Strand. The staff still consisted solely of Pease, a typist, and an office boy -- only in 1907 was a telephone installed as a labour-saving device. As secretary Pease sided with Sidney Webb, whom he admired greatly, through a series of disputes in the society. During the South African War, the quarrel with H. G. Wells, and debates with guild socialists, he defended the society's commitments to parliamentary politics and collectivism. Even antagonists admired his abilities: Wells observed that Pease 'did the work of a cabinet minister for the salary of a clerk' ('DNB'). Although Pease's principal contribution was administrative, he also updated Thomas Kirkup's 'History of Socialism' (1913), and wrote 'The Case for Municipal Drink Trade' (1904), several Fabian tracts, and various articles and reviews; most importantly, he wrote the official 'History of the Fabian Society' (1916). 
The Fabians played a vital role in establishing socialist ideas in Britain. Their role in establishing the Labour Party remains a matter of dispute, though it surely was not as great as they suggested. As secretary Pease acted as the main link between the Fabians and other socialist bodies. He was the society's delegate to the conference that formed the Labour Representation Committee and later its representative on the Labour Party's national executive committee (1900-13). He generally kept to his watching brief -- benevolent but with no real involvement save the occasional attempt to promote more socialist policies. In 1916 he persuaded Sidney Webb to become the society's representative on the executive of the Labour Party, thereby bringing the two organizations closer. 
In 1913 Pease retired as secretary of the Fabian Society after inheriting a capital sum from his uncle, Joseph Storrs Fry. The parting gift of the society was a set of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', appropriate, Shaw quipped, since Pease no longer had daily access to Sidney Webb. Pease took over as general secretary again from 1915 to 1918 while his successor, W. Stephen Sanders, was in the army. Otherwise he acted as honorary secretary and kept his seat on the executive committee until the society was reconstructed in 1939, though partial deafness restricted his involvement. 
Pease was a shy man with a gruff manner but natural kindness who disliked ceremony. Retirement enabled him to give more time to his pleasures, including gardening and Norse sagas. His wife, a magistrate and local councillor, who stood unsuccessfully as Labour candidate for East Surrey in the 1922 general election, died in 1950. He died at his home, the Pendicle, Limpsfield, on 5 January 1955. 


@@@@@


doc= 35446


Pease, Joseph Albert, first Baron Gainford (1860-1943), politician, was born at Woodlands, Darlington, on 17 January 1860, the younger son of Sir Joseph Whitwell Pease, bt (1828-1903), industrialist and banker, and his wife, Mary Fox (died 1892). Jack Pease, as he was known, enjoyed an early life of wealth and privilege in one of Britain's most prominent Quaker industrial and political dynasties. Like his older brother, Alfred Edward Pease, he was educated at Grove House, Tottenham, a Quaker school. He was afterwards privately tutored by Mandell Creighton before following Alfred to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1878. He took an undistinguished BA in 1882, but shone as secretary of the amateur dramatic club, was master of the university drag hounds, and represented the university at polo, rugby, and putting the weight. He captained the Trinity cricket eleven, was twelfth man for the university, and was then a founder member and captain of the Durham county side. 'Wisden' records that he continued to play until, at the age of seventy-four, his inability to take quick singles persuaded him it was time to retire. 
Cambridge friends such as J. M. (Harry) Paulton and Eddie Tennant (later Lord Glenconner) shared enduring interests in sport and politics. Tennant's sister Margot, whose passion for riding to hounds matched Pease's, was also to become a lifelong friend. Her marriage to H. H. Asquith drew Pease into the upper social circles of the Liberal Party. Comfortable berths in the family coal and banking enterprises had afforded him sufficient leisure to embark on a career in politics. A Durham county councillor from 1887 until 1902, Pease was mayor of Darlington during 1888-9 (Britain's youngest mayor). Elected MP for Tynemouth in 1892, he was parliamentary private secretary (1893-5) to John Morley as chief secretary for Ireland, a post to which he aspired himself in the latter years of Asquith's premiership. 
Made a whip in 1897, Pease faithfully understudied Herbert Gladstone. In opposition he made well-publicized noises about not being a pro-Boer without ever aligning himself unequivocally with the Liberal Imperialists. A more serious impediment to his advancement when Campbell-Bannerman came to power was the collapse of the Pease fortunes (1902), a calamity largely attributable to his father's improvident management of the family businesses. Generous friends rescued him from the brink of bankruptcy, but Pease's reduced circumstances were to make personal financial concerns a continuing distraction thereafter. 
Pease's formidable wife Ethel 
(Elsie; died 1941)
, whom he had married on 18 October 1886, was particularly irked at the curb on her social ambitions. The daughter of Sir Henry Marshman Havelock-Allan, bt, and granddaughter of the hero of Lucknow, Sir Henry Havelock, Elsie's hopes for her son and two daughters were as undisguised as her ambition for her husband. His elevation as Asquith's patronage secretary to the Treasury in 1908 brought limited satisfaction. Successful reorganization of the Liberal Party machinery and unobtrusively effective parliamentary management during the budget turbulence of 1909 impressed the prime minister. Asquith brought him into the cabinet as chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster notwithstanding the loss of his Saffron Walden seat in January 1910. A move to Rotherham gave him a constituency that was safe as long as the local miners did not unite behind a Labour candidate. 
Pease's promotion to the cabinet mystified colleagues such as Walter Runciman, Edwin Montagu, and Lloyd George (who blamed him for the Liberals' poor showing in the January 1910 election). But Asquith, appreciating his loyalty, saw him as the man to carry forward the government's programme of franchise and electoral reform. When Pease's 'Franchise Bill' foundered on the rocks of women's suffrage in January 1913, his dismay, like Asquith's, was tempered by relief that votes for women had been thwarted without splitting the government. A bigger disappointment was his failure as president of the Board of Education to enact major educational reforms. His appointment in October 1911 coincided with the departure of the permanent secretary, Sir Robert Morant. Pease reshuffled the senior staff of the ministry, choosing a team led by L. A. Selby-Bigge that responded well to a competent, congenial, and considerate chief. With George Newman, Pease greatly expanded school medical services. He strengthened the board's relations with teachers and improved professional training. When war came he encouraged his new parliamentary secretary, Christopher Addison, in mobilizing the nation's scientific and industrial research resources. 
Remaining in the cabinet which made the decisions for war with Germany in 1914 was deeply troubling for Pease. He tried unavailingly to dissuade his son from enlisting, and was an early supporter of the Friends' Ambulance Unit. But he resigned from the presidency of the Peace Society and thenceforth publicly defended the government's position. Pushed to the margins of high policy making, he undertook relief co-ordination tasks and introduced educational and leisure activities in army training camps, overcoming ill-judged resistance from Lord Kitchener. A casualty of the May 1915 coalition, Pease served as an unpaid member of the War Claims Commission in France. He was embarrassed by the need to seek a political pension, but by late 1915 he had secured a $2000 a year consultancy by placing his coal industry expertise and political connections at the disposal of his old friend Christopher Furness. 
An invitation to rejoin the government as postmaster-general (outside the cabinet), following Sir John Simon's resignation and Herbert Samuel's promotion in January 1916, delayed Pease's return to active business life. But revived hopes of political advancement were effectively extinguished by the formation of the Lloyd George coalition. Ennobled (3 January 1917) as Baron Gainford in the Asquith resignation honours, Pease became a leading figure in the post-war industrial world. He spoke for the Mining Association of Great Britain before the coal industry commission in 1919 and was elected president of the Federation of British Industries for 1927-8. As a 'prominent public man unconnected with any of the constituent companies' (Gainford MSS) he was asked to chair the infant British Broadcasting Company in 1922. He became a radio enthusiast, and was deputy chairman and a governor of the corporation from 1927 to 1932. 
Well known in his retirement for his fishing (and a related concern for water conservation), hunting, shooting, and embroidery, Pease made faltering attempts to write his memoirs. His journals from 1908 to 1915, unknown to scholars for fifty years, are a revealing chronicle of Liberal politics. He died at his home, Headlam Hall, Gainford, co. Durham, on 15 February 1943. 


@@@@@


doc= 35447


Pease, Sir Joseph Whitwell, first baronet (1828-1903), industrialist and banker, born at Darlington on 23 June 1828, was the elder son of Joseph Pease (1799-1872), railway company promoter and industrialist ['see under 'Pease, Edward], and his wife, Emma (died 1860), daughter of Joseph Gurney of Norwich. Edward Pease was his grandfather. In January 1839 he went to the Friends' school, York, under John Ford. Entering the Pease banking partnership at Darlington in 1845, he became largely engaged in the projection of railway enterprise and in the management of the woollen mills, collieries, and iron trade with which the firm was associated. He was soon either director or chairman of the Stockton and Darlington Railway, the Owners of the Middlesbrough Estate Ltd, Robert Stephenson & Co. Ltd, Pease & Partners Ltd, and J. and J. W. Pease, bankers. In 1894 he was elected chairman of the North Eastern Railway, after serving as deputy chairman for many years. He also farmed extensively, having purchased a 3000 acre estate at Hutton Lowcross in the North Riding of Yorkshire in 1867. He read a paper, entitled 'The meat supply of Great Britain', at the South Durham and North Yorkshire chamber of agriculture, on 26 January 1878. 
He married in 1854 Mary, daughter of Alfred Fox of Falmouth. She died on 3 August 1892. They had two sons and six daughters. The elder son, Sir Alfred Edward Pease, second baronet, MP for York (1885-92), and for the Cleveland division of Yorkshire (1897-1902), was resident magistrate in the Transvaal in 1903. The second son was Joseph Albert Pease, Lord Gainford, the Liberal cabinet minister. 
In 1865 Pease was returned as Liberal MP for South Durham, which he represented for twenty years. After the 'Redistribution Act' of 1885 he sat for the Barnard Castle division of Durham county, until his death. He strongly supported Gladstone on all questions, including Irish home rule, and rendered useful service to the House of Commons in matters of trade, particularly in regard to the coal and iron industries of the north of England. He was president of the Peace Society and of the Society for the Suppression of the Opium Traffic, and a champion of both interests in parliament. On 22 June 1881 he moved the second reading of a bill to abolish capital punishment, and his speech was separately printed. In 1882 Gladstone created him a baronet (18 May). No Quaker had previously accepted such a distinction, although Sir John Rodes (1693-1743) inherited one. In 1886 Pease unsuccessfully attempted to persuade Gladstone to defer his first government of Ireland act. 
During the course of 1902 the family banking partnership, J. and J. W. Pease, became insolvent, the product in large measure of a court settlement against Pease in the matter of the administration of the estate of his niece (the countess of Portsmouth), for which he had acted as trustee for many years. Drained of capital, and dependent on secured and unsecured loans to meet the dividend payments of leading industrial concerns, including the Consett Iron Company, Pease & Partners Ltd, and the North Eastern Railway, the bank was absorbed by Barclay & Co. on disadvantageous terms. Although Pease and his sons were saved from bankruptcy proceedings by the receipt of generous financial support from business associates both in London and in the north-east of England, the settlement with Barclay & Co. entailed the forfeiture of the bulk of their estates. Pease died at Kerris Vean, his Falmouth home, of heart failure, on 23 June 1903, his seventy-fifth birthday, and was buried at Darlington. 


@@@@@


doc= 35448


Peat, Stanley (1902-1969), chemist, was born at South Shields, co. Durham, on 23 August 1902, the eldest in the family of two sons and one daughter of John Peat, mining engineer of East Boldon, and his wife, Ada Bradford. He was a delicate infant, and was nursed through a serious illness (which left him with permanent curvature of the spine) by his maternal aunt, Alice Gibson. She was devoted to young Stanley, and for long periods she and her husband took care of the boy. Both the Gibsons were staunch Salvationists and it seems probable that Peat's ethics and lifelong love of music were a direct result of their influence. Peat's sickly childhood delayed his formal schooling until he was eight, when he attended Tyne Dock School and later Tyne Dock grammar school, but an active and fertile brain compensated for physical weaknesses and enabled him, in 1915, to win a scholarship to Rutherford College, Newcastle. There he was taught by several dedicated science teachers, including the chemistry master, William Carr, whose love of the subject fired Peat's imagination. In 1921 he won a state exhibition, an entrance exhibition, and an Earl Grey memorial scholarship to study at Armstrong College, Newcastle (later the University of Newcastle upon Tyne), where he read chemistry, and thus came under the influence of Professor W. N. Haworth. Peat graduated in 1924 with first-class honours, being awarded the Freire-Marreco medal and prize, and was invited to join Haworth's research school. At that time Haworth was carrying out fundamental studies on the structures of simple sugars, and Peat was soon involved in studies on the ring forms of glucose and on the structure of maltose. When Haworth moved to the Mason chair of chemistry at Birmingham in 1925, he took with him an enthusiastic group of workers, including Peat as his personal assistant. 
Peat, who was awarded his PhD in 1928, was appointed lecturer in biochemistry in the medical school at Birmingham but he returned to the chemistry department six years later. This brief excursion into biochemistry was to influence much of his later research. During the next fourteen years, and in spite of the advent of the war, Peat collaborated with Haworth to investigate the chemistry of sugars and important polysaccharides such as starch, cellulose, and agar, which resulted in the publication of over forty original papers in, mainly, the 'Journal of the Chemical Society'. 
In the summer of 1939 Peat married Elsie Florence, younger daughter of Henry H. V. Barnes, a dental surgeon who, with his family, had shared a house with Peat for some years. The couple had two daughters, Gillian ('b'. 1940) and Wendy ('b'. 1942). With the outbreak of hostilities Haworth turned his laboratories over to projects for the war effort, the start of an anxious period for Peat. He carried out work for the Admiralty and, for a time, worked on uranium compounds as part of the project leading ultimately to the atom bomb, but he was never happy in this work. He also served on the cellulose and cordite panel of the Ministry of Supply, and on a committee which was seeking alternatives to Japanese agar for microbiological work. During 1940 he became interested in work by C. S. Haines, which described the synthesis of starch using a plant enzyme. Haworth and Peat secured a sample of this starch and from this initial study stemmed an interest in the biological synthesis and breakdown of starch which continued for the rest of Peat's life. At the end of the war Peat was awarded the DSc and promoted to a readership. 
In 1948 Peat was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, and in the same year he was appointed to the chair of chemistry at the University College of North Wales, Bangor, where he quickly established a research school. With W. J. Whelan as his able collaborator, he began to publish widely on starch and a variety of other plant polysaccharides, gaining worldwide recognition for his work. In honour of his research achievements, the Chemical Society invited him to give the Hugo Muller lecture in 1959, but a serious illness prevented him from doing so. 
In addition to his activities in research, Peat was a dedicated teacher, who took enormous pains over the teaching of organic chemistry to first-year students; he considered this the most important of the undergraduate courses. His clear and concise introduction to modern theories of chemical reactions was a revelation to generations of students. He also served in a wider sphere as dean of the faculty of science at Bangor, on the council and committees of the Chemical Society, and as a consultant to several research associations. From 1959 repeated illnesses prevented him from taking an active part in research, but he was always ready to give advice and encouragement to his colleagues until his death at Bangor on 22 February 1969, from a stroke. He was survived by his widow and daughters. 
J. R. Turvey', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35449


Peek, Sir Cuthbert Edgar, second baronet (1855-1901), astronomer and meteorologist, born at Wimbledon, Surrey, on 30 January 1855, was the only child of Sir Henry William Peek (1825-1898), first baronet (created 1874), of Wimbledon House, Wimbledon, a partner in the firm of Messrs Peek Brothers & Co., colonial merchants, of East Cheap, and MP for East Surrey from 1868 to 1884. His mother was Margaret Maria (1828-1884), the second daughter of the haberdasher William Edgar of Eagle House, Clapham Common. He was educated at Eton College and entered Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1876; he graduated BA in 1879 and proceeded MA in 1884. After leaving Cambridge he went through a course of astronomy and surveying, and put his knowledge to practical use in two journeys, made in 1881, into unfrequented parts of Iceland, where he took regular observations of latitude and longitude and dip of the magnetic needle. On his return he set up a small observatory in the grounds of his father's house at Wimbledon, where he observed with a 3 inch equatorial. In 1882 Peek spent six weeks at Jimbour, Queensland, to observe the transit of Venus across the sun's disc in December of that year. With his principal instrument, an equatorially mounted telescope of 6.4 inches by Merz, he observed, in the days preceding the transit, double stars and star clusters. He paid special attention to the nebula in the constellation of Argus, one of the wonders of the southern sky, which he described in a memoir. Observations of the transit, however, were prevented by cloud. Peek travelled extensively in Australia and New Zealand, and brought back to England many items to add to a museum created by his father at Rousdon, Devon. 
On 3 January 1884 Peek married Augusta Louisa, the eldest daughter of William Brodrick, eighth Viscount Midleton. 
In 1883 he had established, on his father's estate at Rousdon, a meteorological station of the second order, and in 1884 he set up there an astronomical observatory to contain the Merz telescope and a transit instrument with other accessories. Assisted by Charles Grover, he began a systematic observation of the variation of brightness of long-period variable stars, by Argelander's method, and following the same plan as the Harvard College observatory. Annual reports were sent to the Royal Astronomical Society, which Peek joined on 11 January 1884, and short sets of observations were occasionally published in pamphlet form. The complete series of the observations of twenty-two stars extending over sixteen years was collected at Peek's request by Professor Herbert Hall Turner of Oxford and published by him after Peek's death in the 'Memoirs of the Royal Astronomical Society'. The introduction to the volume contains a section written by Peek in 1896 explaining his astronomical methods. The regular observations of his meteorological instruments were also collected and published in annual volumes. 
Peek succeeded to the baronetcy and to the estates that his father had bought in Surrey and Devon on the latter's death on 26 August 1898. He was elected FSA on 6 March 1890, was honorary secretary of the Anthropological Society, and often served on the council or as a vice-president of the Royal Meteorological Society from 1884 until his death. He endowed the Royal Geographical Society, of whose council he was a member, with a medal for the advancement of geographical knowledge. Interested in shooting, he presented a challenge cup and an annual prize to be shot for by members of the Cambridge University volunteer corps. He had been staying at Brighton for six months when he died, at 9 Eastern Terrace, Kemp Town, on 6 July 1901 of a brain tumour. He was buried at Rousdon. He was survived by his wife and their two sons and four daughters; his elder son, Wilfrid (1884-1927), succeeded to the baronetcy. 


@@@@@


doc= 35450


Peel, Arthur Wellesley, first Viscount Peel (1829-1912), speaker of the House of Commons, was born in London on 3 August 1829, the youngest of the five sons of Sir Robert Peel, second baronet (1788-1850), prime minister, and his wife, Julia (1795-1859), daughter of General Sir John Floyd, first baronet. He was named after his godfather, the first duke of Wellington. Among his brothers were Sir Robert Peel, third baronet, Sir Frederick Peel, and Sir William Peel. Peel figures as a boy in 'The Private Letters of Sir Robert Peel' (1920). His early years were spent at the family home, Drayton Manor, Tamworth, and he was educated at Hatfield, Eton College (1841-8), and Balliol College, Oxford, taking second-class honours in 'literae humaniores' in 1852. His education was thus a departure from the Harrow-Christ Church tradition of the family. 
In 1862 Peel married Adelaide (died 1890), daughter of William Stratford Dugdale, of Merevale, Warwickshire, and his wife, Harriet Ella, 'nee' Portman. They had four sons, including the soldier and financier Sir Sidney Cornwallis Peel, and three daughters. Peel followed his father politically, though they were not in personal terms particularly close, and Peel-Gladstone politics defined his early career, though he was always more a Peelite than a Gladstonian. In 1863 he stood as a Liberal at a by-election in Coventry but was defeated. In 1865 he was returned as one of the two members for Warwick, splitting the two tory candidates. In 1868 he held the seat comfortably, and in 1874 and 1880 marginally. In 1885, when Warwick was joined to Leamington, Peel held the seat; unopposed as speaker in 1886 and 1892, he was then described as a Liberal Unionist. 
In Gladstone's first ministry, Peel was parliamentary secretary to the poor-law board (1868-71) and then, from 1871 to 1873, secretary to the Board of Trade. From 1873 to 1874 he was Liberal chief whip, with the awkward task of reviving the party after its disintegration on the Irish universities question. He resigned as chief whip following the Liberal Party's defeat in the general election of 1874 and played no significant part in the crusades and campaigns of the opposition years. On his return to the premiership in April 1880, Gladstone made Peel under-secretary at the Home Office, but ill health required his resignation in December 1880. Peel was uneasy about the government's Irish policy and voted against its 'Crimes Bill' in July 1882. In 1883 H. B. W. Brand told Gladstone, as prime minister, of his intention to retire as speaker. Gladstone invited Sir Francis Herschell and then G. J. Goshen, both of whom declined the invitation. Gladstone then turned to Peel (like Brand a former Liberal chief whip) despite his ill health and on the rather curious ground that he had never known a speaker 'whose health gave way under the pressure of his duties' (Gladstone, 'Diaries', 11.69). The Conservatives resented another former Liberal chief whip in the chair and on 26 February 1884 both Peel's nominators were Liberals (Northcote, as tory leader in the Commons, appearing to threaten opposition to Peel's subsequent re-election). He was elected unanimously, however, in 1884 (being also sworn of the privy council) and was re-elected unanimously on 12 January 1886, 5 August 1886, and 4 August 1892. 
Despite the fact that he was hitherto well known for reticence in the Commons, Peel proved to be a formidable speaker, both physically and morally. He took office at a time of considerable animosity between the two main parties and held it during the years of Irish MPs' 'obstruction'. Peel's chief achievement was to maintain the dignity of the house despite these difficulties. His opening statement as speaker produced a memorable effect and his stern discipline was felt impartially by all members. He: 'removed the Speaker's office to a lofty and impregnable isolation. His appearance accorded with his demeanour. He was tall and lean, his face grave and unsmiling, the nose sharp, the lips thin, the austerity of the countenance emphasised by an iron-grey beard. (Laundy, 323)' On 13 January 1884 he cut through the muddle which Speaker Brand had allowed to develop with respect to Charles Bradlaugh's oath of allegiance, by simply allowing Bradlaugh to take the oath and ruling Sir Michael Hicks Beach out of order in his objections as having not yet himself taken the oath. Peel's stern demeanour may, of course, have provoked as well as quietened Irish MPs, but his moral effect was famously seen on the night of 27 July 1893 when during the committee stage of the second 'Home Rule Bill' a serious fight broke out on the floor of the house. The chairman of committees summoned the speaker, whose arrival in the house, like that of 'a parent, wise as well as fond', at once restored order. 
The closure rule introduced in 1882 to speed the progress of government business depended on the speaker's initiative. Peel exercised it first on 24 February 1885, and again on 18 February 1887, after which the initiative was transferred from the speaker to the house, the speaker retaining, however, a veto on the introduction of the closure. Peel's willingness to allow the government to initiate closure was criticized on several occasions, and on 2 April 1887 Gladstone opposed what he saw as 'the mischievious Closure under the Speaker's authority' (Gladstone, 'Diaries', 12.22). The new standing orders of 1888, providing for an automatic interruption of business at midnight, were less contentious than the closure but the exceptions to the rule placed a burden on the speaker. Peel's authority helped the house through this period of adjustment. 'The Times' noted in its obituary: 'Theoretically Peel was the servant of the House. There were occasions when a stranger might almost have regarded him as its master' ('The Times', 25 Oct 1912). 
Peel's wife died in 1890. In the autumn of 1894 he decided, for reasons of ill health, to retire as speaker. The Liberal government being in a minority, this posed problems for it and the retiral was several times delayed. At the end of February 1895 Peel declined to delay further, provoking a wrangle among the various candidates for his successor. On 4 April 1895 the cabinet agreed to the candidacy of W. C. Gully. Peel's resignation was announced on 8 April, leading to the first contest for the speakership since 1839. Peel was created Viscount Peel and accepted the speaker's pension. 
Peel remained active in public life. He chaired the royal commission on the licensing laws (1896-9), leading the minority on the commission in producing a minority report opposing the creation of a perpetual interest in a terminable licence and favouring the rapid reduction of licences by a compensation fund levied on the drink trade. 
Peel was visitor of Balliol College (1894-1912), chairman of the trustees of the National Portrait Gallery (1898-1908), and an active trustee of the British Museum from 1898 until 1908. He was also president of the Temperance Legislation League, first chairman of the State Children's Aid Association, chairman of the council of Toynbee Hall, a governor of Harrow School, and vice-chairman of the Bedfordshire county council. He received the honorary DCL at Oxford in 1887. Peel died on 24 October 1912 at Sandy, Bedfordshire, where he had lived for many years. He was succeeded as second viscount by his eldest son, William Robert Wellesley Peel (1867-1937), also a politician. 


@@@@@


doc= 35451


Peel, Sir Frederick (1823-1906), politician and railway commissioner, born in Stanhope Street, London, on 26 October 1823, was the second son of Sir Robert Peel, second baronet (1788-1850), prime minister, and his wife, Julia (1795-1859), daughter of General Sir John Floyd, first baronet. His elder brother was Sir Robert Peel, third baronet; his younger brothers were Sir William Peel, naval captain, and Arthur Wellesley (afterwards first Viscount) Peel, speaker of the House of Commons. 
Frederick Peel was educated at Harrow School (1836-41), and then at Trinity College, Cambridge (his father disapproving of the decline of discipline at Christ Church, Oxford, his own college). He graduated BA in 1845 as a junior optime and with a first class in the classical tripos, and proceeded MA in 1849. He was the ablest intellectually of the Peel children, and, from his father's viewpoint, the most dependable. On leaving Cambridge he became a student at the Inner Temple on 5 May 1845, and was called to the bar on 2 February 1849. In the same month he entered the House of Commons, being returned unopposed as Liberal member for Leominster; his choice of party was seen by many as confirmation of his father's inclinations. His maiden speech (11 May 1849) supported the removal of Jewish disabilities, and seemed to suggest a promising political career. Peel was a staunch supporter of free trade and of the extension of the franchise, but being distrustful of secret voting he was not in favour of the ballot. Despite his outspoken criticism of the Liberal government's 'Ecclesiastical Titles Bill' (14 February 1851), Lord John Russell recognized his ability by appointing him under-secretary for the colonies. After the general election of 1852, when Peel successfully contested Bury, he resumed the post of under-secretary for the colonies in Lord Aberdeen's coalition ministry. On 15 February 1853 he introduced the 'Clergy Reserves Bill', designed to give the government of Canada effective control over the churches there and to end the use of Canadian land to subsidize the protestant clergy. Under Peel's auspices the bill passed the House of Commons, despite violent opposition from the Conservatives, and received the royal assent on 9 May 1853. 
On the fall of the Aberdeen ministry in January 1855 Peel became Palmerston's under-secretary for war. In view of the popular outcry against the mismanagement of the Crimean War the post involved heavy responsibilities. Peel's chief, Lord Panmure, sat in the House of Lords, but Peel was responsible minister in the House of Commons. It was he who consequently bore the brunt of the criticism of the war and its inept handling. In 1857 he lost his seat at Bury and resigned office. In recognition of his services he was made a privy councillor. He was once more returned for Bury in 1859 and was appointed by Palmerston to the financial secretaryship of the Treasury, a post which he held until 1865, working with W. E. Gladstone, who was chancellor of the exchequer. In 1865 he was again defeated at Bury at the general election and lost his office. Peel then tired somewhat of the rough-and-tumble of political life. He unsuccessfully contested South-East Lancashire in 1868, and never re-entered the House of Commons. He was created KCMG in 1869, and turned to law and administration. 
In 1873, on the passing of the 'Regulation of Railways Act', Peel was appointed a member of the railway and canal commission, on which he served until his death. The tribunal was constituted as a court of arbitration to settle disagreements between railways and their customers which lay beyond the scope of ordinary litigation. The commission rapidly developed in importance, and was reorganized by the 'Railway and Canal Act' of 1888, a judge of the High Court being added to its members. Peel and his colleagues rendered useful service to the farming and commercial interests by reducing preferential rates on many railways. In 'Ford & Co. v. London and South Western Railway' they decided that the existence of a favoured list of passengers constituted an undue preference ('The Times', 3 Nov 1890). The decisions of the commissioners were seldom reversed on appeal. In the case of 'Sowerby & Co. v. Great Northern Railway', Peel dissented from the judgment of his colleagues, Mr Justice Wills and Mr Price, to the effect that the railway company was entitled to make charges in addition to the maximum in respect of station accommodation and expenses, but the view of the majority was upheld by the Court of Appeal (21 March 1891). As senior commissioner, Peel became the most influential member of the tribunal. He had his father's judicial mind and cautious, equable temper, but his reticence, aloofness, and lack of ambition militated against his success in public life. 
Peel married first, on 12 August 1857, Elizabeth Emily (died 1865), daughter of John Shelley of Avington House, Hampshire, and niece of Percy Bysshe Shelley, the poet; and second, on 3 September 1879, Janet (died 1925), daughter of Philip Pleydell Bouverie of Brymore, Somerset, who survived him. There were no children by either marriage. Peel lived at the manor house of Hampton in Arden, Warwickshire, which his father bought for him and bequeathed to him. He died at his London house, 32 Chesham Place, on 6 June 1906 and was buried at Hampton in Arden. 


@@@@@


doc= 35452


Peel, James (1811-1906), landscape painter, born on 1 July 1811 in Westgate Road, Newcastle upon Tyne, was the son of Thomas Peel (died 1822), a woollen draper and partner in the firm of Fenwick, Reid & Co., dealers in wine and woollen cloths. He was educated at Dr Bruce's school in Newcastle upon Tyne alongside Sir Charles Mark Palmer, later a shipbuilder, and John Collingwood Bruce, who became a noted antiquary. He then studied drawing with the painter Edward Dalziel, father of the wood-engravers the Dalziel brothers. In 1840 he went to London to paint portraits and continue his studies by making copies in the National Gallery. 
Eventually Peel concentrated on painting landscapes, finding inspiration especially in Derbyshire, Yorkshire, and Wales. His pictures were remarkable for a truthful feeling for nature; he was praised for his treatment of running water and cloud-laden skies. Three of his paintings, 'A Lane in Berwickshire', 'Cotherstone, Yorkshire', and 'Pont-y-Pant, Wales', were acquired by the Laing Art Gallery in Newcastle upon Tyne, where a loan exhibition of his works was held in 1907. Others were bought by galleries in Glasgow, Leeds, and Sunderland, and for private collectors in Newcastle. On 30 May 1849, in Darlington, co. Durham, he married Sarah Martha Blyth, eldest daughter of Thomas Blyth; two sons and three daughters survived them. He lived in Darlington for a while, but in 1860 he returned to London with his family. 
From 1843 to 1888 Peel exhibited regularly at the Royal Academy. He was also a leading supporter of the Society (later Royal Society) of British Artists, exhibiting there from 1845; he was elected as a member in 1871. With Ford Madox Brown, William Bell Scott, and other artists he organized 'free' exhibitions, including ones at the Dudley Gallery and the ill-fated Portland Gallery in London. James Peel continued to work well into his nineties and died at his home, Western Elms Lodge, Oxford Road, Reading, Berkshire, on 28 January 1906. 


@@@@@


doc= 35453


Peel, William Robert Wellesley, first Earl Peel (1867-1937), politician, was born in London on 7 January 1867, the eldest of the four sons and three daughters of Arthur Wellesley Peel, first Viscount Peel (1829-1912), and his wife, Adelaide (died 1890), daughter of William Stratford Dugdale, of Merevale Hall, Warwickshire. His paternal grandfather was the prime minister Sir Robert Peel. His early years were spent in London and at The Lodge, Sandy, Bedfordshire; he was educated at Harrow School (1880?-1885) and at Balliol College, Oxford (1885-9). A contemporary recalled his youthful 'impression of high abilities, coupled with a relative indifference to school or university successes' ('The Times', 30 Sept 1937, 14c). He gained second classes in classical moderations and 'literae humaniores', and was secretary of the Oxford Union and a member of the university dramatic society. In 1893 Peel was called to the bar by the Inner Temple and for the next few years went on circuit, sometimes acting as marshal to Roland Vaughan Williams. In 1897 he was a special correspondent for the 'Daily Telegraph' in the Graeco-Turkish war; this gave him his first experience of foreign affairs, which remained a lifelong interest. On 11 April 1899 he married the Hon. Eleanor (Ella), elder daughter of James Williamson, first Baron Ashton. They had a son and a daughter. 
Peel gained his first experience of public affairs as a member of the royal commission on the port of London, which reported in June 1902. In 1900 he began a long connection with London county council, sitting from 1900 to 1904 as a Municipal Reform Party member for Woolwich, from 1907 to 1910 for Westminster, and from 1913 to 1919 for Kennington. He was leader of the Municipal Reform Party from 1908 to 1910, and chairman of the county council from 1914 to 1916. Meanwhile he entered parliament as Liberal Unionist member for Manchester South following a by-election on 25 May 1900. In January 1906 he unsuccessfully contested Harrow, but he returned to parliament as member for Taunton following a by-election on 23 February 1909, and held his seat through both elections of 1910. He was elevated to the House of Lords following the death of his father on 24 October 1912. 
Peel was appointed lieutenant-colonel of the Bedfordshire yeomanry in 1912. He served with his regiment in France in 1914-15 and was mentioned in dispatches, but he was obliged to relinquish this post in 1915 owing to ill health. He entered office as joint parliamentary secretary to Sir Auckland Geddes at the national service department, on 15 April 1918. On 10 October the following year he became under-secretary of state for war under Winston Churchill, and was sworn of the privy council. On 1 April 1921 he became chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, to which post was added that of minister of transport on 7 November 1921. 
On 19 March 1922 Peel entered the cabinet as secretary of state for India, a position he held until January 1924; he served initially under Lloyd George in his coalition government and then, having been one of those tories who in October 1922 had indicated a willingness to join a purely tory government, held office under Bonar Law and Baldwin. He owed his appointment to Austen Chamberlain's recommendation, and to the back-bench Conservative demand for a period of calm at the India Office, following the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms, the first non-co-operation movement, and Gandhi's imprisonment. One of Peel's first published dispatches set out his reasons for rejecting any further inquiry into constitutional reform. In other respects his tenure was characterized by a policy of 'safety first', although it was also noted for the appointment of the commission on the superior services in India under Lord Lee of Fareham, which led to a significant increase in the number of Indians employed in the Indian Civil Service. 
Peel was appointed first commissioner of works in Baldwin's second government, on 10 November 1924, and served in that post for almost four years. During his years at that department he pursued established policies. On 10 October 1928 Peel again became secretary of state for India, following the resignation of Lord Birkenhead. His second term lasted only seven months, and was marked by a determination to maintain a steady course while the commission under Lord Simon was still in progress. In opposition after June 1929 he led an unsuccessful attempt to persuade Baldwin to oppose the declaration made by Lord Irwin on 31 October 1929, and as one of the Conservative delegates at the first Indian round-table conference in 1930-31 he fought a rearguard action in favour of the proposals of the Simon report. From 1931 to 1932 he was chairman of the more congenial Burma round-table conference, his skills as chairman bringing praise from all quarters. In 1933 he was to have chaired the joint select committee on Indian constitutional reforms, but illness prevented him, and he served only briefly as a member. Although he was increasingly out of favour with the Indian policy of the National Government, he dissociated himself from Churchill's campaign against the 1935 reforms. 
Peel last held major office as lord privy seal, from 3 September to 5 November 1931. In May 1932 he was appointed chairman of the wheat commission, and in November 1934 he was appointed chairman of the royal commission on the dispatch of business at common law. His last public service was as chairman of the royal commission on Palestine, appointed in July 1936. After investigations on the spot, which put great strain on Peel's ailing health, the commission unanimously recommended cutting the Gordian knot of Arab-Jewish conflict by the drastic means of partition, leaving Jerusalem, the Holy Places, and Haifa as a buffer zone under British control. The commission's report, published in July 1937, met with a chorus of approval from the British press, but with hostility from both Arabs and Jews. Its recommendations were quietly dropped. 
Although politics and public life were his overriding concerns, Peel also had extensive business interests. He succeeded as chairman of James Williamson & Co. on the death of his father-in-law in 1929; he was also a director of Barclays Bank and of the Great Northern Railway. He was created Earl Peel and Viscount Clanfield on 10 July 1929. For his services in the First World War he was awarded the American Distinguished Service Medal. He was appointed GBE in 1919 and GCSI in 1932. Peel was described as 'a big man, his most conspicuous features being his bright blue eyes and his thick moustache, which became the joy of the caricaturist' ('DNB'). His shrewdness, geniality, and sense of humour were appreciated by his contemporaries. Lord Lytton described him in 1925 as 'a good fellow with plenty of common sense' (Bridge, 12). 
Peel died at his home, Leydene, East Meon, Petersfield, Hampshire, on 28 September 1937, and was buried on 2 October at East Meon church. His wife died in 1949. He was succeeded in his titles by his son. 


@@@@@


doc= 35454


Peers, Sir Charles Reed (1868-1952), architect and archaeologist, was born on 22 September 1868 at Westerham, Kent, the eldest son of the Revd William Henry Peers (1839-1921), then curate at Westerham and later vicar of Harrow Weald, Middlesex, and lord of the manor of Chiselhampton, Oxfordshire, and his wife, Dora Patience, daughter of William Carr of Dene Park, Tonbridge, Kent. Peers was educated at Charterhouse School and in 1887 went to King's College, Cambridge, where he gained second classes in both parts of the classical tripos (1890, 1891), after which he studied briefly at Dresden and Berlin. In 1893 he became a pupil in the office of Thomas Graham Jackson, who encouraged his interest in medieval architecture. After three years with Jackson Peers spent a season in Egypt, working with George Somers Clarke at al-Qab and elsewhere before practising as an architect on his own account for six years, including a return visit to Egypt in 1902. 
In 1903 Peers was appointed architectural editor to the recently founded 'Victoria History of the Counties of England' and helped to develop its approach to the recording of historic buildings. Responsible for supervising a team of architects working on the topographical volumes, Peers produced phased period plans and concise descriptions of the buildings surveyed for the 'Victoria History of the Counties of England'. These set the standard for the methodology adopted by the Royal Commission on Historical Monuments after its creation in 1908. For the 'Victoria History of the Counties of England' Peers himself wrote the descriptions and drew the plans of a number of major buildings, including Winchester Cathedral and St Albans Abbey. 
From 1900 to 1903 Peers was editor of the 'Archaeological Journal' and in 1901 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. In 1908 he became its secretary, a position he held until becoming director in 1921. These honorary posts undoubtedly strengthened his candidacy for the post of inspector of ancient monuments in HM office (later Ministry) of Works, to which he was appointed in 1910, being promoted to the post of chief inspector following the 'Ancient Monuments Act' of 1913. This act, in the preparation of which Peers played a leading role, consolidated those of 1882 and 1900 and was prompted in part by the threatened dismantling and export of Tattershall Castle, Lincolnshire, to the United States in 1911. Although still excluding from protection churches in use and private houses, the act reflected increasing public concern over the proper preservation of ancient monuments and was the first to introduce an element of legal compulsion, making it necessary for owners of a scheduled monument to apply for permission from the state before altering or demolishing their property. It also empowered the government to assume guardianship of nationally important monuments and to maintain them at public expense. 
It was in this official capacity that Peers was able to develop his own approach to the physical preservation of ruined medieval buildings. Rejecting equally the highly speculative and extensive restorations associated with Viollet-le-Duc in France and the conservative repairs advocated by the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings (founded in 1877), he transformed 'the mouldering ivy-clad ruin(s) of the Romantic tradition' (Ralegh Radford, 365) into well-managed and informative, if often somewhat clinically presented, archaeological sites. While careful not to add new masonry unless necessary to support historic fabric, the scale of work undertaken was frequently vast, exemplified by the extensive 'clearance' during the 1920s of post-medieval building phases at monastic sites like Byland and Rievaulx in Yorkshire. Here fallen masonry was removed by labourers (many of them First World War veterans) along temporary light railway lines expressly constructed for the purpose. If many buildings were as a result robbed of their picturesque quality and much of their post-medieval construction history, the ministry's involvement ensured that still more was protected from further decay or deliberate vandalism. Indeed, the principles of repair and consolidation adopted by Peers and his colleagues remained largely unchallenged on guardianship sites until the late 1970s. 
The stern puritanism with which Peers laid bare the ground plans and masonry footings of the abbeys and castles set in the manicured lawns, which became the hallmark of ministry sites, is matched in the many official guidebooks he wrote, their spare and economical texts recording the essential events in a site's history and concisely describing its architectural remains. These, along with his many excavation reports and earlier accounts of buildings for the 'Victoria History of the Counties of England', represent Peers's main written output, as he never wrote a major book. 
Peers's retirement from the ministry in 1933 was preceded by the 'Ancient Monuments Act' of 1931, which in the wake of quarrying immediately around Hadrian's Wall established the concept of protecting the setting of ancient monuments as well as their physical fabric. During his retirement, when according to his own assessment he was busier and better off than he had ever been as a civil servant, Peers was in much demand as a consultant architect, becoming surveyor to Westminster Abbey in 1935. He held similar posts at York and Durham, where as architect-in-charge he was responsible too for pinning the castle to the rock from which it was slipping. Seneschal of Canterbury Cathedral, he also advised the dean and chapter at Winchester, sat on the Oxford diocesan committee, and carried out work for New College. 
Numerous honours were bestowed on Peers, both before and after his retirement: he was made CBE in 1924 and was knighted in 1931 during his presidency of the Society of Antiquaries, a position he held between 1929 and 1934, being awarded its gold medal in 1938. The holder of honorary doctorates from Leeds and London universities (1933 and 1936 respectively), he was a governor of Charterhouse and an honorary fellow of King's College, Cambridge. In 1930 he was made a trustee of the London Museum and from 1933 a trustee of the British Museum. Antiquary to the Royal Academy from 1933 to 1952, he was also a fellow of the British Academy from 1926 and of the Royal Institute of British Architects, receiving its gold medal in 1933. In 1932 he was elected president of the first session of the Congress of Prehistoric and Protohistoric Sciences and during its second session at Oslo in 1936 was made a knight commander of St Olaf. Of the many committees on which he sat he was a particularly active member of the Royal Commission on Historical Monuments, for which he was a commissioner from 1921. 
On 13 April 1899 Peers married Gertrude Katherine (died 1953), daughter of the late Francis Shepherd, vicar of Stoke-sub-Hamdon, Somerset, with whom he had three sons. Gertrude was an art historian and actively interested in his work. Inheriting the eighteenth-century Chiselhampton House in Oxfordshire from his father, Peers and Gertrude moved there in 1924 where in his spare time he tended the gardens and entertained his friends. Among these was George Hill, whom Peers had first met when they both applied for the same position at the British Museum in 1893; later Hill was to be director of the museum at the same time as Peers was one of its trustees. Peers got on well with many younger than himself and Mortimer Wheeler was among those he encouraged at an early stage of their careers. 
A man of quick-witted charm, wide interests, and tremendous energy, Peers never suffered fools gladly but was usually prepared to listen to constructive criticism. Dogged by illness for the last seven years of his life, he maintained his antiquarian interests to the end, James Mann recalling that when he last visited him in the nursing home at Coulsdon, Surrey, he was reading the latest volume of the 'Antiquaries Journal'. Peers died at Woodcote Grove House, Coulsdon, Surrey, on 16 November 1952 and at a funeral service conducted by the dean of Westminster on 21 November his ashes were placed in the abbey's Islip chapel. 
Evaluations of Peers's contribution to the excavation and public presentation of medieval military and monastic sites, the area of work for which he is best remembered, have altered significantly in the past half-century. At the time of his death it appears that for his own contemporaries and the two succeeding generations of archaeologists, many of whom he had directly influenced, the standards he established as chief inspector of ancient monuments were beyond dispute. To them the perceived benefits of the wholesale clearance of vegetation and post-medieval deposits and accretions from medieval fabric were irrefutable: as James Mann commented in one obituary notice, Peers 'founded a school of conservation which was a model to the world and one earnestly hopes will long survive him' (Mann, 149). Similarly, in another obituary, while acknowledging that Peers's approach and methods had aroused some controversy when first introduced, Ralegh Radford felt that this was 'now a matter of historical rather than practical interest' (Ralegh Radford, 365). 
Today's archaeologists are, however, generally less sympathetic, several strongly criticizing the way in which the extensive clearance of monastic sites in particular destroyed much evidence for their post-medieval use. Others have lamented the way in which the sites in Peers's care, characterized by their ruthlessly mown lawns and herbaceous borders, were stripped of their former romanticism and recently there has been a conscious effort to reconcile the sometimes conflicting interests of nature and building conservation in the public presentation of state-owned archaeological sites and monuments. Academically, too, Peers has been attacked, appearing in one recent work merely as one of a long list of 'male historians of male monasticism [who] claimed that sources for religious women were simply not available or adequate' (R. Gilchrist, 'Gender & Material Culture: the Archaeology of Religious Women', 1994, 23). Others, though, such as Glyn Coppack, have been less severe and while regretting the damage caused by Peers's 'clearance' policy on many sites, have acknowledged the pivotal role played by him in the preservation of monastic and other ruins and in their display and interpretation to a wide public. 


@@@@@


doc= 35455


Peers, Edgar Allison (1891-1952), Hispanic scholar and educationist, was born at Leighton Buzzard on 7 May 1891, the only son and elder child of John Thomas Peers (1860-1944), civil servant, and his wife, Jessie Dale (1865-1951), daughter of Charles Allison. In the years 1892 to 1903 his father made frequent moves, and Edgar Allison attended several elementary schools, at the last of which he was drawn to the study of Spanish. At fourteen he went to Dartford grammar school, and after study abroad proceeded to Christ's College, Cambridge, of which he was a scholar and prizeman, his first interests being English and French literature. In 1910 he obtained an external BA degree at London, with second-class honours in English and French, and in 1912 at Cambridge a first class in the medieval and modern languages tripos. He shared the Winchester reading prize (1912), and won the Harness (1913) and the Members' English essay (1914) prizes. He obtained a first class with double distinction in the teacher's diploma at Cambridge in 1913. From 1913 to 1919 he taught successively at Mill Hill, Felsted, Essex (for five years), and Wellington as modern languages master. His first publications still concerned English and French literature ('Elizabethan Drama and its Mad Folk', 1914, and 'The Origins of French Romanticism', with M. B. Finch, 1920), but his attraction to Spain deepened, and in 1920 he was appointed (despite internal opposition) to the Gilmour chair of Spanish at Liverpool, where he remained thereafter. On 19 March 1924 he married Marion ('b'. 1895/6), daughter of James Frederic Young, secretary to the Devon education committee. They had no children. 
Peers was among the first to realize the importance and the potentialities of Spanish studies in Great Britain after the First World War. Through lectures, visits to schools, teachers' conferences, vacation courses in England and in Spain, and the editing of a steady stream of textbooks, anthologies, and study aids (notably 'Spain, a Companion to Spanish Studies', 1929; 'A Handbook to the Study and Teaching of Spanish', 1938; 'A Critical Anthology of Spanish Verse', 1948) he laboured indefatigably and with great effect to further them at both school and university level. 
Peers was always keenly interested in the methods and aims not merely of modern language teaching but of higher studies in general, and he wrote under the pseudonym of Bruce Truscot three books: 'Redbrick University' (1943), 'Redbrick and these Vital Days' (1945), and 'First Year at the University' (1946). Until his death their authorship was a well-kept secret. They popularized the terms 'Redbrick' and 'Oxbridge', urged the primacy of research, and made a major contribution to the discussion of university problems and policies at the close of the Second World War. 
Peers's talent for organizing was expressed in many ways. He founded the Modern Humanities Research Association in 1918, and was its honorary secretary for eleven years and its president in 1931-2; founded in 1923 and edited until his death the quarterly 'Bulletin of Spanish Studies' (from 1949 'Bulletin of Hispanic Studies'); founded in 1934 at Liverpool the Institute of Hispanic Studies; and was educational director from 1943 to 1946 of the Hispanic Council. 
These manifold activities were matched by a record in scholarship impressive both in its scope and in its originality. Two fields in Spanish letters, nineteenth-century Romanticism and the sixteenth-century mystics, Peers made particularly his own while they were still comparatively little known and studied, even in Spain. Especially ground-breaking was his 'History of the Romantic Movement in Spain' (2 vols., 1940) and his 'Studies of the Spanish Mystics' (2 vols., 1927-30). The latter, along with the masterly translations of the complete works of St John of the Cross (3 vols., 1934-5) and of St Teresa of Avila (3 vols., 1946, and her 'Letters', 2 vols., 1951), caused Spanish mysticism to be known and appreciated by English readers as never before. His achievement here, which received the imprimatur of the Roman Catholic church, was the more remarkable in one who was neither a Roman Catholic by persuasion nor a theologian by training. A number of his critical works on Romanticism and the mystics were republished in Spanish translation in Spain. Peers's other great enthusiasm was Catalonia and its medieval splendours: of Ramon Lull he translated much, including 'Blanquerna' (1926), and wrote a full-scale biography (1929), while in 'Catalonia infelix' (1937) he traced a sympathetic picture of the Catalan people and their history. 
Peers's interest in Spain was always warm and personal. There over many years he spent some four months out of every twelve, and he produced a number of travel volumes, chief among them 'Spain, a Companion to Spanish Travel' (1930) and 'The Pyrenees, French and Spanish' (1932). A close student no less of contemporary events, he analysed these for nearly a quarter of a century in 'Spain week by week', a regular feature of the 'Bulletin of Spanish Studies'. The outbreak of the Spanish Civil War in July 1936 thus found him admirably equipped to interpret to the English-speaking world its underlying causes. This he did in 'The Spanish Tragedy' which, written with striking prescience, appeared within three months of the outbreak of the conflict, and was many times reprinted. 'The Spanish Dilemma' (1940) and 'Spain in Eclipse' (1943) provided a similarly penetrating guide to the war's aftermath. Himself an Anglican of deep religious conviction, he wrote in 'Spain, the Church and the Orders' (1939) a warm defence of the record of the Roman Catholic church in Spain. 
Peers received the honorary degree of LLD from Glasgow University in 1947. Foreign distinctions included visiting professorships of English literature at Madrid University (1928 and 1929), of modern comparative literature at Columbia University (1929-30), and of Spanish at the universities of New Mexico and California (1930). He was Rede lecturer at Cambridge (1932), Centennial lecturer at New York University (1932), and Taylorian lecturer at Oxford (1939), and was a member and medallist of the Hispanic Society of America, and honorary member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and of the Institute d'Estudis Catalans. 
Peers lived single-mindedly for his subject, and in part accomplished so much through meticulous planning and use of his time, down to the shortest train journey. Apart from a keen delight in music (in his early years he played the organ) he confessed to no recreations; he could seem brusque, though he was affable and a good mimic when with intimate friends. Peers died of congestive heart failure on 21 December 1952, at the Northern Hospital, Liverpool. 


@@@@@


doc= 35456


Peet, (Thomas) Eric (1882-1934), Egyptologist, was born in Liverpool on 12 August 1882, the eldest son of at least three children of Thomas Peet, corn merchant, of that city, and his wife, Salome Fowler. He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School, Liverpool, from 1893 and in 1901 obtained a Jodrell mathematics scholarship at the Queen's College, Oxford, where he was awarded a second class in classical and in mathematical moderations (both 1903) and in 'literae humaniores' (1905). He then spent a term as a schoolteacher in Walsall. During his last year at Oxford David Randall-MacIver interested him in the then unexploited Italian prehistoric period; on a small grant from the Craven fund he made a brief reconnaissance in Italy, and in 1906 easily gained a Craven fellowship. During the next three years he explored early Italian and Maltese sites and wrote 'The Stone and Bronze Ages in Italy and Sicily' (1909), which became the standard work on the subject. He was Pelham student at the British School of Archaeology in Rome in 1909. But, Italian archaeology offering no permanent livelihood, Peet turned to Egypt. In 1909 he excavated at Abydos, first under John Garstang for the Liverpool Institute of Archaeology, and afterwards for the Egypt Exploration Fund (later Society) from 1909 to 1913 under Edouard Naville and then independently; the results of his work for the fund are contained in 'The Cemeteries of Abydos', parts 1-3 (1913-14). He married in autumn 1910 Mary Florence, daughter of Richard Johnson Lawton, civil engineer, of Chiswick; they had a daughter, Patricia Mary. 
From 1913 to 1928 Peet was lecturer in Egyptology at Manchester University. His next book was 'The Inscriptions of Sinai', part 1 (edited in collaboration with Alan Henderson Gardiner, 1917). In 1915 he obtained a commission in the Royal Army Service Corps, and showed great ability at Salonika, where he and one other man supervised the whole of the landing of supplies in 1916-17. By the summer of 1918 he was serving in France as a lieutenant in the 14th battalion of the King's Liverpool regiment. 
Demobilized early in 1919, Peet was elected in the following year to the Brunner chair of Egyptology at Liverpool University, which Percy Edward Newberry had resigned in his favour. Early in 1921 he directed a season's excavations at Tell al-Amarna for the Egypt Exploration Society. In 1923 he became Laycock student of Egyptology at Worcester College, Oxford. At the outset of his Egyptological career Peet realized the importance of a good knowledge of the Egyptian language and writing, for which he had a remarkable gift, and these became his chief interest in later life; in several of his most important works (for example, 'The Mayer Papyri', 1920; 'The Rhind Mathematical Papyrus', 1923; and 'The Great Tomb-Robberies of the Twentieth Egyptian Dynasty', 1930) he dealt with important texts in the often very difficult hieratic or cursive script, of which he had exceptional mastery. His 'Egypt and the Old Testament' (1922) discussed with rare critical skill the biblical records of Egyptian contacts. In 1929 his Schweich lectures (published in 1931 as 'A Comparative Study of the Literature of Egypt, Palestine and Mesopotamia') broke fresh ground. Among his many activities he found time to edit the University of Liverpool's 'Annals of Archaeology and Anthropology' from 1921 (from 1925 jointly), and the 'Journal of Egyptian Archaeology' from 1923 until his death. He remained in the Brunner chair until 1933, when he was elected reader in Egyptology at Oxford and a fellow of Queen's. His tenure of these positions was short-lived, for shortly before the readership had been definitely converted into a chair he died unexpectedly on 22 February 1934 in the Acland Nursing Home, Oxford, after an operation to treat a throat condition. He was buried two days later in Wolvercote cemetery, Oxford. His wife survived him. 
Peet's services to his science were many, and he was perhaps the best example that England has produced of an all-round Egyptologist, equally able in the field, the study, and the lecture theatre, in archaeology and philology, in the historic and prehistoric periods. Two areas in which he excelled were Egyptian history (he contributed largely to the 'Cambridge Ancient History') and mathematics. His other main interests were cricket (he captained for his school), tennis, swimming, walking, and music. In appearance he could be solemn or even glum until his interest was caught, but he nevertheless enjoyed the company of his friends; he was remembered for his modesty, kindness, and sense of responsibility. 


@@@@@


doc= 35457


Peile, Sir James Braithwaite (1833-1906), administrator in India, born at Liverpool on 27 April 1833, was the second son of Thomas Williamson Peile (1806-1882) and his wife, Mary (died 1890), daughter of James Braithwaite. He was educated at Repton School, where his father was headmaster, winning a scholarship to Oriel College, Oxford, in 1852. In 1855 he received a first class in classics, and in the same year joined the Indian Civil Service. 
Peile went out to India in 1856, beginning work in Bombay presidency as an assistant collector in the districts of Thana, Surat, and Ahmadabad. While in the latter two districts he mastered the Gujarati language, making good use of this skill in his subsequent career. He was in Ahmadabad during the revolt of 1857, and he described the events of the time in a graphic manner in private letters to friends, which were published in 'The Times' on 3 December 1857. On 7 December 1859 he married, in Bombay, Louisa Elizabeth Bruce, daughter of General Sackville Hamilton Berkeley. 
While in Ahmadabad district Peile became sympathetic to the problems of the 'garasias' and 'talukdars', petty chiefs who had been granted landlord rights by the British. By the late 1850s they had fallen deep into debt to usurers, and the colonial civil courts were selling off their estates, often at very low prices, to repay these debts. Peile argued that if the British allowed this formerly warlike class to be ruined, they could cause difficulties in future. Largely as a result of his efforts, the 'Ahmedabad Talukdars Relief Act' was passed in 1862, which enabled the state to take over and run badly indebted estates until the debts were paid off. Peile took an active role in implementing the legislation, in the process saving many of these landlords from destitution. As a class, however, they continued to be indebted, never becoming efficient estate managers. In April 1866 Peile was selected as commissioner for revising subordinate civil establishments throughout Bombay presidency, and then, during a wave of financial speculation, took an active part in compelling companies to furnish accounts. From 1869 to 1873 he served as director of public instruction in Bombay, being involved in extending primary education in the presidency. In 1872 he was appointed municipal commissioner of Bombay to sort out the financial problems of the city. 
In 1873, and then from November 1874 to May 1878, Peile served as political agent in the peninsula of Kathiawar. This important agency covered 23,500 square miles, with a population of about 21/2 million. The territorial sovereignty was divided between the Maharaja Gaikwar of Baroda and about 200 chiefs, some of whom, notably Bhaunagar, Jamnagar, and Junagarh, had extensive territories, while others ruled little more than a single village. There was little co-ordinated policing of the region, and Peile persuaded the chiefs to co-operate more in maintaining order, putting forward a scheme for reforming the system of village police which had considerable success. He helped improve the railways and roads of the region and gave his full support to educational reforms. He took an active role in organizing relief during the famine of 1877. With his knowledge of Gujarati and feel for local conditions, Peile won the respect of the chiefs of Kathiawar. In later years he asserted the rights of these chiefs to retain their salt and opium revenues and he encouraged them to send representatives to Bombay to discuss their problems with him and others. 
Peile served a few months in Sind in 1878, but declined the offer of the commissionership there. He was a member of the famine commission in 1878-80, accompanying it on its tour of inquiry, and in the course of it was made CSI. In October 1879 he went to London to help in the writing of the famine report. From 1879 to 1882 he was secretary and acting chief secretary to the Bombay government. In December 1882 he became a member of council at Bombay and played a leading role in implementing Lord Ripon's policy of extending self-government at the provincial and local levels. Peile sought to dilute these reforms so as to prevent the emerging Indian middle class from gaining significant new powers. As a result of his insistence, considerable power in these bodies was retained in official hands. Peile was also active in educational affairs, being appointed vice-chancellor of Bombay University in 1864. In 1886 he was appointed to the supreme council by the new viceroy, Lord Dufferin. 
In 1887 Peile left India on being nominated to the Council of India in London, and was made KCSI in 1888. He served for fifteen years, playing a very active role in the government of India. He became an advocate of greater devolution of power at provincial level, and sought to prevent Indian revenue being used too freely for overall imperial needs. He also objected to tariffs which discriminated against Indian cotton in favour of British cotton goods. Although he favoured a greater degree of Indianization of the civil service, he opposed the resolution of the House of Commons of 1893 for simultaneous examinations in Britain and India. He declined the offer of chairmanship of the second famine commission, but he served on the royal commission on the administration of the expenditure of India in 1895, and recorded the reservations with which he assented to their report of 1900. He retired from the Council of India in 1902 and died suddenly on 25 April 1906 at his home, 28 Campden House Court, Kensington, London. He was buried at the Kensington Hanwell cemetery, Ealing. He was survived by his wife, a daughter, and two sons, one of whom, James Hamilton Francis, was archdeacon of Warwick. 


@@@@@


doc= 35458


Peile, John (1838-1910), college head and philologist, born at Whitehaven, Cumberland, on 24 April 1838, was the only son of Williamson Peile FGS and his wife, Elizabeth Hodgson. Sir James Braithwaite Peile was his first cousin. His father died when he was five, and in 1848 he was sent to Repton School, of which his uncle, Thomas Williamson Peile, was then headmaster. He remained at Repton until his uncle's retirement in 1854. During the next two years he attended the school at St Bees, and in 1856 was entered at Christ's College, Cambridge. In 1859 he won the Craven scholarship, and in 1860 was bracketed with two others as senior classic, and with one of them as chancellor's medallist. He graduated BA in 1860 and proceeded MA in 1863. Having been elected a fellow of Christ's in 1860, and appointed assistant tutor and composition lecturer, he settled down to college and university work, which occupied him almost until his death. He took up the study of Sanskrit and comparative philology, and in 1865, and again in 1866, spent some time working with Professor Theodor Benfey at Gottingen. On 26 July 1866 he married Annette (1835-1920), daughter of William Cripps Kitchener and cousin of Lord Kitchener. He was obliged to vacate his fellowship on marriage but was re-elected in 1867. 
Until the appointment of Professor Edward Byles Cowell in 1867, Peile was teacher of Sanskrit in the university; he had declined to stand for the chair so that another student of the subject might come to Cambridge. When Sanskrit became a subject in the classical tripos, he published a volume of 'Notes on the Tale of Nala' (1881) to accompany the edition of the text by Professor Thomas Jarrett. He also corrected that edition, which in consequence of a difficult method of transliteration was very inaccurately printed. In 1869 appeared his book 'An Introduction to Greek and Latin Etymology' of which there were two further editions. Later the point of view of comparative philologists changed to a marked degree, and Peile, who by this time was becoming more immersed in college and university business, allowed the book to go out of print. A little primer of 'Philology' (1877) had for long a very wide circulation. To the ninth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' he contributed the article on the alphabet and also articles on the individual letters. He was for many years a contributor to 'The Athenaeum', reviewing classical and philological publications. In 1904 he was elected a member of the British Academy. 
Peile was tutor of his college from 1870 to 1884, when, on his appointment to the newly constituted post of university reader in comparative philology, which was not tenable with a college tutorship, he resigned, but remained a college lecturer. On the death of Dr Swainson in 1887 he was elected the first lay master of Christ's; it is supposed that he would have been elected in 1881, had the statutes then allowed it. He continued to lecture for the university until his election as vice-chancellor in 1891. 
Peile's two years' tenure of the vice-chancellorship (1891-3) was unusually eventful. The most important incident was the passing of an act of parliament, by which the perennial conflict of jurisdictions between 'town and gown' was brought to an end satisfactory to both parties, the university surrendering its jurisdiction over persons not belonging to its own body and receiving representation on the town council. The controversy had reached an acute stage over a case of proctorial discipline, and the new arrangement was mainly due to Peile's broadmindedness and statesmanship. Henceforward he became more prominent than ever in the affairs of the university. While he was vice-chancellor a new chancellor -- Spencer Compton Cavendish, the eighth duke of Devonshire -- was installed; and Peile visited Dublin on the occasion of the tercentenary of Trinity College, which conferred upon him the honorary degree of LittD in 1892 (he had been one of the early recipients of the degree of LittD on its establishment at Cambridge in 1884). 
In 1874 Peile had been elected a member of the council of the senate, a position which he held uninterruptedly for thirty-two years. With Professor Henry Sidgwick and Coutts Trotter he represented in the university the liberalizing movement then perhaps at the zenith of its influence. He was long an active supporter of women's education and a member of the council of Newnham College, and in the university controversy of 1897 on the question of 'women's degrees' he advocated the opening to women of university degrees. 'His wisdom in giving advice in difficulties was equalled by his courage in defending the College in aspersions and attacks' (Gardner, 110). After the death of Professor Arthur Cayley in 1895 Peile became president of the council, and a new block of college buildings at Newnham was named after him. He was in favour of making Greek no longer compulsory on all candidates for admission to the university when the question was debated in 1891, and again in 1905 and 1906. He also took an active part in the university extension movement. 
Although Peile never ceased to take an interest in comparative philology, and remained for many years an active and influential member of the special board for classics, most of his leisure, after he ceased to be vice-chancellor in 1893, was devoted to compiling a biographical register of the members of his college and of its forerunner, God's House, a work which entailed a great amount of research. In connection with this undertaking he wrote in 1900 a history of the college for Robinson's series of college histories. The first volume of his register (1448-1665) was completed before Peile's death, which took place at the college, after a long illness, on 9 October 1910. He was buried on 12 October in the churchyard of Trumpington, the parish in which he lived before becoming master of Christ's College. He had, besides two children who died in infancy, two sons (for whom see Venn), and a daughter, Hester Mary, who married, in 1890, John Augustine Kempthorne, afterwards bishop of Lichfield. 
Peile was a man of moderate views who had the faculty of remaining on good terms with his most active opponents. He was an effective speaker and a good chairman. As a college officer he was very popular, and the college prospered under him. As a lecturer on classical subjects (most frequently on Theocritus, Homer, Plautus, and Lucretius), and on comparative philology, he was able to put his views clearly and interestingly, and, like Charles Lamb, he sometimes found the slight hesitation in his speech a help in emphasizing a point. To him as much as anyone was due the successful study of comparative philology in Cambridge for a generation. 


@@@@@


doc= 35459


Pelham, Henry Francis (1846-1907), historian, was grandson of Thomas Pelham, second earl of Chichester (1756-1826), and eldest of the five children of John Thomas Pelham (1811-1894), bishop of Norwich, and his wife, Henrietta (died 31 December 1893), second daughter of Thomas William Tatton of Wythenshawe Hall, Cheshire. Of his three brothers, John Barrington (1848-1941) was vicar of Thundridge, Hertfordshire (1908-14), and Sidney (1849-1926) was archdeacon of Norfolk (1901-16). Pelham was born on 19 September 1846 at Bergh Apton, Norfolk, then his father's parish. He attended Miss Hodgson's school, Brighton, and the Revd F. Storr's school in Kent. Entering Harrow School (Brooke Foss Westcott's house) in May 1860, he moved rapidly up the school, was three years in the sixth form, and left in December 1864. He was quiet, reserved, and apparently somewhat delicate in health. He was coached by a well-known scholar, the Revd North Pinder, rector of Rotherfield Greys, Oxfordshire, and formerly fellow of Trinity College, Oxford, in 1865. He won an open classical scholarship at Trinity College, Oxford (matriculating on 22 April 1865); he went into residence in October. At Oxford he was prominent in the Claret Club, played in the cricket eleven, and was a fine walker. He gained firsts in classical moderations and 'literae humaniores' (BA, 1869; MA, 1872) and was elected fellow of Exeter College in 1869. In 1870 he won the chancellor's English essay prize with a dissertation on the reciprocal influence of national character and national language. He was classical tutor and lecturer at Exeter College from 1870 until 1889, and proctor in 1879. Losing his fellowship on his marriage in 1873, he was re-elected in 1882, under the statutes of the second university commission. 
From school onwards Pelham's principal subject was ancient and especially Roman history. He published articles on this (first in the 'Journal of Philology', 1876), while his Exeter intercollegiate lectures attracted increasingly large audiences. He also planned, with the Clarendon Press, a detailed history of the Roman empire, which he was not destined to complete. In 1887 he succeeded William Wolfe Capes as common fund reader in ancient history, and in 1889 became Camden professor of ancient history in succession to George Rawlinson, a post to which a Brasenose fellowship was attached. As professor he attracted even larger audiences. His research was stopped by cataracts in both eyes (1890), and though an operation subsequently restored most of his eyesight, he had to limit his reading. A few specimen paragraphs of his 'History' were set up in type in 1888, but he completed in manuscript only three and a half chapters, on 35-15 BC, and never resumed the work after 1890; his other research, too, was thereafter limited to detached points in Roman imperial history. However, he joined actively in administration, for which his strong personality and clear sense fitted him. He helped to found the school of geography: he served on many Oxford committees -- including those of the Bodleian Library, Ashmolean Museum and geography school -- and was a member of the hebdomadal council, with two brief intervals, from 1879 to 1905. A reformer, he urged the use of college revenues for university purposes. Pelham was a prominent Liberal, active as such in the university and in the city. One of the few academic Liberals to support home rule for Ireland, he helped to organize Gladstone's visit to Oxford in 1890. 
Pelham supported women's education in Oxford. In 1879, with Professor T. H. Green, A. H. Acland, and other Liberal dons, he was a member of the committee for a non-denominational women's hall which that year founded Somerville Hall (later Somerville College), then a member of its council -- fund-raising within the university -- its vice-president (1886-93), and second president (1893-1907). A benefactor of its library and an occasional tutor to some of its best students, he was a familiar figure at Somerville (his contribution, minimized in the 1996 college history, was acknowledged in its predecessor of 1922). He pressed for women's admission to Oxford lectures, examinations, and degrees. In 1886, unlike most Oxford Liberal dons, he did not become Liberal Unionist, and he long presided over the Oxford City Liberal Association. When president of Trinity he was especially concerned with its mission at Stratford, east London. In 1897 he became president of Trinity. He was elected FSA in 1890, and honorary fellow of Exeter in 1895, was an original FBA in 1902 and received an honorary LLD from Aberdeen in 1906. He was a governor of Harrow and other schools. 
On 30 July 1873 Pelham married Laura Priscilla (died 2 Nov 1918), third daughter of Sir Edward North Buxton, second baronet, and granddaughter of Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton, first baronet (1786-1845). They had three sons and two daughters, of whom one son and one daughter died young. 
Pelham was both a scholar and a practical man, forceful, direct, sometimes showing 'aristocratic impatience' (Haverfield, xxii), and overstating his case, he disliked opposition, but was also warm and sympathetic to undergraduates. An excellent teacher, lecturing at a time when Oxford was widening its outlook and Theodor Mommsen and his school were recreating Roman history, he helped to revolutionize the study of ancient history in Oxford, and so in England. Moreover, combining organizing skills with an understanding of the needs of learning and the character of scientific research, he did much to develop Oxford as a place of research, while conserving its educational role. He was prominent in providing endowments for higher study and research, in introducing archaeology and geography to Oxford's ancient historical work, and in founding the British Schools at Rome and Athens. He helped to put natural science, English, and foreign languages on a more adequate basis in Oxford, and to give women educational opportunities there. 
Pelham wrote little. His chief publications were 'Outlines of Roman History' (1893), enlarged from his article in 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (1887), and essays and articles on Roman history, of which the chief, with part of his unfinished 'History', were published in a posthumous volume of 'Essays' (1911). Both books were considered to exhibit high historical powers. Pelham died in the president's lodgings at Trinity on 12 February 1907, and was buried in St Sepulchre's cemetery, Oxford. After his death his widow gave his library of works on Roman history and archaeology to Brasenose College, and his friends founded in his memory a Pelham studentship for Oxford men or women at the British School at Rome. His son, Sir Edward Henry Pelham (1876-1949), was permanent secretary of the Board of Education (1931-7). 


@@@@@


doc= 35460


Pelissier, Harry Gabriel (1874-1913), comedian, composer, and producer, was born at Elm House, Church End, Finchley, Middlesex, on 27 April 1874, the second son of Frederic Antoine Pelissier (died 1914), a French diamond merchant, and his wife, Jennie, 'nee' Kean. In 1894, after an unhappy six months in the family business in Berwick Street, Soho, London, he joined a small entertainment party run by the Baddeley brothers. They performed at charities and similar events around south London and were turned into a professional troupe by Sherrington Chinn. Pelissier bought him out and the renamed Follies opened as a pierrot show on Worthing pier on 7 August 1896. 
While weak burlesques of Shakespeare and other serious dramas had been done before, Pelissier and his troupe broke new ground. Under his direction the Follies parodied not only the plots but the music of grand opera, musical comedy, the current rage for patriotic and sentimental songs, and every topic of the moment. Aspirants for a music-hall engagement were satirized in 'The Voice Trial', Germany's rearming produced the song 'Yes, I Don't Think', and Lloyd George's election promises were mocked in 'Back to the Land'. Pelissier's pastiches of patriotic songs and ballads were so accurate that it is difficult for modern readers to distinguish them from the originals. Making full use of his musical inventiveness, topicality, wit, and a carefully chosen cast of artistes, the Follies became known up and down the country and achieved success in London with a brilliant satire of the pantomime 'Bill Bailey' at the Palace Theatre in 1904. 
The following year Pelissier's reputation was confirmed with a command performance at Sandringham, especially when it became known that Edward VII had particularly enjoyed his brilliant parodies of Wagner's operas. In March 1907 he took the bold step of taking the Royalty Theatre in London for a season, filling each evening with his own burlesques. The experiment proved a success and in 1908 he took the Apollo, where the Follies appeared for the next four years. 
On 16 September 1911 Pelissier married Fay Compton (1894-1978), a member of his troupe, daughter of the theatrical manager Edward Compton, and sister of the author Compton Mackenzie, and the same year it became clear that he was ill. Seeking ever more extravagant stage effects, his last three Follies seasons were unsuccessful; he died at his father-in-law's home, 1 Nevern Square, Earls Court, London, on 25 September 1913 from cirrhosis of the liver, leaving an infant son. After cremation at Golders Green his ashes were placed in his mother's grave at Marylebone cemetery, on 29 September. 
Generous and open-handed, Pelissier was a huge roly-poly of a man with a highly developed sense of the ridiculous. Although he gave an impression of utter irresponsibility he had an amazing capacity for work. When an injunction stopped his parody of 'The Merry Widow', then London's most popular musical comedy, Pelissier produced new music and words for 'The Deceased Wife's Sister' in two hours in a style different enough to avoid legal problems but sufficiently similar to enrage the complainant and delight the public. Some of his sketches, published in 1913 as 'Potted Pelissier', give an indication of the wit and observation that made him the leading satirist of his time. 


@@@@@


doc= 35461


Pell, Albert (1820-1907), agriculturist and politician, was born on 12 March 1820, in Montagu Place, Bloomsbury, London, the eldest of the three sons of Sir Albert Pell (1768-1832), of Pinner Hill, Middlesex, and his wife, Margaret Letitia Matilda (1786-1868), third daughter and coheir of Henry Beauchamp St John, twelfth Lord St John of Bletso. Sir Albert Pell was serjeant-at-law in 1808. He retired in 1825 but in 1831 became a judge of the court of bankruptcy. 
Albert Pell was brought up at his father's houses at Pinner Hill and in Harley Street, and he was educated at Rugby School under Thomas Arnold (1832-8). In 1839 he matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he described himself as 'idle and unstudious', though he helped to introduce Rugby football to Cambridge. He took the degree of MA in 1842, and was admitted to the Inner Temple in 1843, but he decided to abandon plans for reading for the bar, and took a farm in Harrow Vale, 12 miles from London. 
In 1846 Pell married his cousin, Elizabeth Barbara, daughter of Sir Henry Halford, second baronet, MP for South Leicestershire, of Wistow Hall, Leicestershire. They had no children. In 1848 they settled at Hazelbeach, Northamptonshire, between Northampton and Market Harborough, in a house which Pell rented from his wife's relative Sir Charles Isham. He found his farm at Hazelbeach to be 'dreadfully out of order, foul, wet and exhausted', but he set to work on its improvement. 
The outbreak of cattle plague in 1865 led Pell to campaign for the slaughter of animals to wipe out the disease, and he organized a meeting of agriculturists in London. One result of this was the establishment of the central chamber of agriculture, and Pell became its first chairman in 1866. He was chosen as Conservative candidate for the by-election for South Leicestershire in 1867 because of his work to eliminate the cattle plague, but he was beaten by a small majority. In 1868 he was returned, and he represented the constituency until his retirement in 1885. Although a tory, he always remained a radical at heart. 
Pell was an authority on the poor law. He was guardian for his own parish of Hazelbeach as early as 1853. In 1873, at his own board of guardians (Brixworth), he moved for a committee to inquire into the methods of administration of outdoor relief, and following the committee's report outdoor relief was virtually abolished in the Brixworth union. In 1876 Pell carried an amendment on Lord Sandon's 'Education Bill', providing for the abolition of school boards in districts where there were only voluntary schools. From 1876 to 1889 Pell had a seat as a nominated guardian for St George-in-the-East, London, where he had property, and there he tried to enforce his views on outdoor relief. He failed to persuade the House of Commons to consider his proposals, but in 1884 he carried by 208 votes to 197 a motion against the government, which criticized the postponement of further measures of relief acknowledged to be due to ratepayers in counties and boroughs in respect of local charges imposed on them for national services. On this occasion he made his longest speech in the house, speaking for an hour and a half ('Hansard 3', 286, 1884, 1023). 
Pell was a prominent figure at poor-law conferences, and was chairman of the central conference from 1877 to 1898. He was also an active member of the Northamptonshire county council from its establishment in 1889. In June 1879 he and his friend Clare Sewell Read (1826-1905) went to America and Canada as assistant commissioners to the duke of Richmond's royal commission on agriculture to study agricultural questions. Pell was also a member of the royal commissions on the City guilds, the City parochial charities, and the aged poor. 
In 1886, shortly after his retirement from parliament, Pell became a member of the council of the Royal Agricultural Society, and worked on its 'Journal', and on its chemical and education committees. He contributed to the 'Journal' two significant articles, 'The making of the land in England' (1887 and 1889) and a biography of Arthur Young (1893), as well as other minor articles and notes. He was a member of the Farmers' Club, which he joined in February 1867; he became a member of its committee in 1881 and its chairman in 1888. He was one of the pioneers of the teaching of agriculture at the University of Cambridge, and was made honorary LLD there when the Royal Agricultural Society met at Cambridge in 1894. 
At the end of his life poor health led Pell to spend the winters at Torquay, in Devon. He died on 7 April 1907 at Longwood, Torquay, and was buried at Hazelbeach in Northamptonshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 35462


Pember, Edward Henry (1833-1911), barrister, the eldest son of John Edward Ross Pember of Clapham Park, Surrey, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Arthur Robson, was born at his parents' house on 28 May 1833. He was educated at Harrow School and briefly taught by T. Elwin, headmaster of Charterhouse School. He matriculated on 23 May 1850 at Christ Church, Oxford, where he was elected a student in 1854. He took a first class in classical moderations in 1852, and in 1854 he gained a first class in 'literae humaniores', and a third class in law and modern history. He entered Lincoln's Inn on 2 May 1855, reading in the chambers first of the conveyancer Joseph Burrell and then of George Markham Giffard. Called to the bar on 26 January 1858, he chose the midland circuit, and sought common-law practice. On 28 August 1861 he married Fanny, only daughter of William Richardson of Sydney, New South Wales, who survived him. His eldest and only surviving son, Francis William, became fellow of All Souls in 1884 and bursar in 1911. 
Briefs were slow in coming when a fortunate accident introduced Pember to the parliamentary bar. For that class of work and tribunal Pember was well equipped. His presence, his command of English, together with his quickness of comprehension and his readiness in repartee, soon made him a prime favourite with the committees of both houses. Perhaps the most notable achievement in his career was his conduct of the bill for creating the Manchester Ship Canal, which was passed in July 1885 in the face of fierce opposition. His speeches were well prepared and literary. His treatment of witnesses was not always adroit, and he was over-prone to argument with experts. But his straightforwardness was admired. In April 1897 he appeared as counsel for Cecil Rhodes before the parliamentary committee appointed to investigate the origin and attendant circumstances of the Jameson raid. Pember took silk in 1874, was made a bencher of his inn in 1876, and served the office of treasurer in 1906-7. He retired from practice in 1903 in good health. 
Pember was throughout his life a prominent figure in the social and literary life of London. He was an accomplished musician, having studied singing under Perugini, and possessed considerable technical theoretical knowledge. In 1910 he was elected perpetual secretary of the newly formed academic committee of the Royal Society of Literature. He was a constant contributor to the weekly press. He also produced a considerable amount of private writing, particularly classical translations from Greek and Latin and, later, classical plays in English produced for private audiences. He contributed 'Lives of early Italian musicians' to George Grove's 'Dictionary of Music' (1878-90). 
Pember died after a short illness on 5 April 1911, at his Hampshire home, Vicar's Hill, Lymington, and was buried at Boldre church, Brockenhurst. 


@@@@@


doc= 35463


Pemberton, Thomas Edgar (1849-1905), theatre historian and playwright, born at Heath Green Cottage, Birmingham Heath, on 1 July 1849, was the eldest son of Thomas Pemberton, the head of an old-established firm of brass founders in Livery Street, Birmingham, and his wife, Lucy Johnston. The novelist Sir Max Pemberton was his younger brother. He was educated at the Edgbaston proprietary schools, and at the age of nineteen entered his father's counting-house. In due course he gained control of the business, with which he remained active until 1900. Of literary taste from his youth, Pemberton began his career in writing with two indifferent novels, 'Charles Lysaght' (1873) and 'Under Pressure' (1874), but showed more promise in 'A Very Old Question' (3 vols., 1877). 'Born to Blush Unseen' (1879) was praised, and was followed by an allegorical fairy tale, 'Fairbrass', written for his children. He married, on 11 March 1873, Mary Elizabeth, the second daughter of Edward Richard Patie Townley of Edgbaston; they had two sons and three daughters. 
In his youth at his father's house, Pemberton met E. A. Sothern, Madge Robertson (Mrs Kendal), and other actors on visits to Birmingham, and was inspired to write for the stage. His first comedietta, 'Weeds', was written for the Kendals, and produced at the Prince of Wales's Theatre, Birmingham, on 16 November 1874. Although his most popular farce, 'Freezing-a-Mother-in-Law', originally given at the Birmingham Theatre Royal, was later produced in New York by Sothern, most of his plays were rarely seen outside provincial theatres. He came to know the American author Bret Harte, and with his collaboration wrote the highly successful play 'Sue', produced in America in 1896 and at the Garrick in 1898. The partnership continued until Harte's death in 1902, upon which Pemberton wrote 'Bret Harte: a Treatise and a Tribute'. Pemberton also dramatized novels, such as Thackeray's 'The History of Henry Esmond' and Dickens's 'A Tale of Two Cities', adapted as 'Sidney Carton'. 
Pemberton succeeded his friend Sam Timmins as the drama critic of the 'Birmingham Daily Post' in 1882. He retired to the country, at Broadway, Worcestershire, in 1900. He also contributed to the 'Birmingham Daily Mail' a weekly column of dramatic gossip, entitled 'Flashes from the footlights'. But he made his widest reputation as a theatrical biographer, and wrote memoirs of Sothern (1889), the Kendals (1891), T. W. Robertson (1892), John Hare (1895), Ellen Terry and her sisters (1902), and Sir Charles Wyndham (1905). He frequently lectured on theatrical subjects, and was an excellent amateur actor. In 1889 he was elected a governor of the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre, Stratford upon Avon, and was for many years the honorary secretary of Our Shakespeare Club. He died after a long illness at his residence, Pye Corner, Broadway, on 28 September 1905, and was buried in the churchyard at Broadway. 


@@@@@


doc= 35464


Pembrey, Marcus Seymour (1868-1934), physiologist, was born at Oxford on 28 May 1868, the second son of John Crips Pembrey, a proof-reader in oriental languages at the Oxford University Press, and his wife, Annie Coster Tanner. He was educated at Oxford high school and from 1885 at Christ Church, Oxford, where he became a Fell exhibitioner in 1888 and graduated in natural science (physiology) in 1889. The award of the Radcliffe travelling fellowship in 1890 enabled him to visit the physiological laboratories at Kiel and Wurzburg. However, Sir Henry Acland influenced Pembrey towards a career in medicine. After qualifying in medicine in 1892 from University College Hospital, London, he became a demonstrator in physiology at Oxford under J. S. Burdon-Sanderson. In 1895 he qualified MD and was appointed lecturer in physiology at Charing Cross Hospital medical school. He vacated this post in 1900 for a similar position at Guy's Hospital medical school, becoming professor in 1920. Pembrey was elected FRS in 1922. 
Pembrey's first research on the respiratory exchange of mammals was soon coupled with an investigation of the regulation of body temperature, and experiments on the developing chick and newly born mammals did much to explain the characteristic difference between warm- and cold-blooded animals. This led him to investigate the respiratory process in hibernating mammals, which resemble cold-blooded animals during their winter sleep. After serving from 1906 to 1909 on a War Office committee which inquired into the physiological effects of food, training, and clothing on the soldier, he devoted much attention to the problem of general physical fitness and to the effects of muscular exercise on respiration, circulation, body temperature, and the kidneys. Pembrey himself took part in some of the long experimental marches, carrying full military equipment. 
Working in co-operation with the physicians at Guy's Hospital, Pembrey showed how the physiologist could help the clinician and, with a quick appreciation of the significance of the discoveries of J. S. Haldane, he made important observations on clinical cases of periodic or Cheyne-Stokes breathing, on the respiratory phenomena associated with diabetes and cardiac disability, on changes of temperature resulting from lesions of the spinal cord, and on the elimination of water by the kidneys and skin. He contributed many papers to the 'Journal of Physiology' and 'Guy's Hospital Reports'; he edited 'A Textbook on General Pathology' (1913) in collaboration with James Ritchie and was joint author of the textbooks 'Physiological Action of Drugs' (1901) and 'Practical Physiology' (1902). He was elected a member of the Physiological Society in 1893, and became treasurer in 1925. 
Pembrey was a stimulating and original teacher, always ready to debate scientific problems, forthright in argument but never bitter. In 1895 he married Bessie Cecily Crake, daughter of Edward Ebenezer Crake, rector of Jevington, Sussex, and they had five sons and five daughters. He enjoyed country life and farmed on a small scale at his home in Sussex while working at Guy's, and on his retirement moved to a farm at Ramsden in Oxfordshire. Pembrey died unexpectedly in the Acland Nursing Home, Oxford, on 23 July 1934. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35465


Penley, William Sydney (1852-1912), actor and theatre manager, born at St Peter's, Ramsgate, on 19 November 1852, was the only son of William George Robinson Penley, a schoolmaster, and his first wife, Emily Ann Wooton, the widow of Walter Pilcher. His great-uncle was Aaron Edwin Penley, watercolour painter to William IV. The family had old theatrical associations: his great-grandfather William (1773-1838) had been a comedian at Drury Lane; the elder William's nephews included Sampson (1792-1838) and Thomas Turpin Belville (1805-1893), respectively actor-manager at the Theatre Royal, Windsor, and theatre manager in Bath. Penley attended his father's school, Grove House Academy, initially at St Peter's, and later at Charles Street, Westminster, when his father moved there. In his youth he sang as a chorister at the Chapel Royal, St James's, Westminster Abbey, Bedford Chapel, Bloomsbury, and finally the Russian embassy chapel. After an apprenticeship with a City firm of milliners and fancy-goods manufacturers, he joined the staff of Copestake, Moore, Crampton & Co. 
Through the introduction of William Terriss, Penley obtained an engagement at the old Court Theatre under the management of Marie Litton, and made his debut on 26 December 1871 as Tim in the farce 'My Wife's Second Floor' by John Maddison Morton. The following October he played in T. F. Plowman's 'Zampa', and later performed at the Holborn Theatre in 'Doctor Faust'. In 1875 he appeared at the Royalty Theatre in his first successful role, as the Foreman in 'Trial by Jury' by W. S. Gilbert and Arthur Sullivan. After touring in comic opera, he returned to London to appear at the Strand Theatre (October 1876) in the comic opera 'Princess Toto' by W. S. Gilbert and Alfred Cellier. He remained at the Strand Theatre for three years under the management of Ada Swanborough, and appeared principally in burlesque. On 22 March 1879 Penley married Mary Ann, the daughter of James Ricketts, a cattle salesman; they had three sons and three daughters. In April 1879 he transferred to the Royalty, and later that year he toured the provinces as Sir Joseph Porter in Gilbert and Sullivan's 'HMS Pinafore'. In March 1880 he appeared at the Gaiety as Popperton in 'La voyage en Suisse' with the Hanlon-Lees, a well-known troupe of pantomimists, and accompanied them to the United States. He reappeared in London at the Globe Theatre (July 1882) in 'The Vicar of Bray', and at the Comedy Theatre (September 1882) in Robert Planquette's 'Rip Van Winkle'. 
Penley made the first notable advance in his profession when he appeared as Lay Brother Pelican in Chassaigne's 'Falka' at the Comedy (October 1883), an exceedingly droll performance. A greater opportunity followed when he was chosen by Charles Hawtrey to succeed Herbert Beerbohm Tree in the title role of the Revd Robert Spalding in 'The Private Secretary' when that play was transferred to the Globe Theatre in May 1884: he played this part for two years and firmly established his reputation. Penley remained with Hawtrey for some years at the Globe, at the Comedy, and at the Strand, appearing in many plays of varied merit. After this long engagement with Hawtrey had terminated he was seen at Terry's Theatre (1890) in Jerome K. Jerome's 'New Lamps for Old' and Arthur Law's 'The Judge'; the following January at Toole's Theatre in Henry Hamilton's 'Our Regiment', and later at the Savoy Theatre in the comic opera 'The Nautch Girl'. In 1891 he returned to the Comedy Theatre for a short time. 
In 'Charley's Aunt' by Brandon Thomas -- the famous farce first produced at the Royalty Theatre on 21 December 1892 -- Penley's remarkable impersonation of the part of Lord Fancourt Babberley became the talk of the town. The play, transferred to the Globe Theatre early in 1893, settled down to a record-breaking run for a farce, and was played continuously over a period of four years in 1466 consecutive performances. In 1898 Penley produced 'A Little Ray of Sunshine', by Mark Ambient and Wilton Heriot, first in the provinces and later at the Royalty Theatre (December 1898). He then acquired the lease of the Novelty Theatre, which he renamed the Great Queen Street Theatre, and opened on 24 May 1900 with the same play. At this house he also revived 'The Private Secretary' and 'Charley's Aunt', but without much success, and his acting career ended with the run of the last-mentioned play in 1901. He retired to Woking, then to Farnham and St Leonards where he lived a quiet country life until his death, at 7 Grand Parade, St Leonards, on 11 November 1912. His funeral took place on the 13th, at the Hastings borough cemetery. Most of the large fortune which he had made from the success of 'Charley's Aunt' was believed to have been lost in his later years, but he left more than $15,000 on his death. 
Penley's face was his fortune. He had a great sense of humour; but it was the expression of his countenance and the dry, metallic quality of his voice which had such irresistible effect on his audience. He was keenly interested in charitable institutions, was an active churchman, one of the proprietors of the 'Church Family Newspaper', and also a prominent freemason. He was the author of 'Penley on himself', published in 1884. 


@@@@@


doc= 35466


Penrose, Dame Emily (1858-1942), college head, was born in London on 18 September 1858, the second of five children and eldest of four daughters of Francis Cranmer Penrose (1817-1903), architect and archaeologist, and his wife, Harriette Gibbes (died 1903), and was baptized at Coleby, Lincolnshire, where her great-uncle, the Revd Thomas Trevenen Penrose, was vicar. Her paternal grandmother, Elizabeth Penrose, was the writer Mrs Markham; she was related to the Arnolds by the marriage of her grandfather's sister, Mary Penrose, to Dr Thomas Arnold of Rugby. Her education at Conway House, Wimbledon, placed more stress on deportment than book learning, but was supplemented in the course of long family visits to the continent, which enabled her to study languages and the arts at Versailles, Paris, Dresden, and Berlin. In England, she borrowed books from friends, and was an enthusiastic attender of university extension lectures. She shared the scientific interests of her brother, Francis George Penrose (1857-1932), and was taught drawing and painting by her father, whom she accompanied to Athens in 1886 on his appointment as first director of the British School of Archaeology. While there, she took charge of the family business and learned modern Greek. The following year she returned to England and taught literature, languages, and drawing at Miss White's school in Brighton. 
Her father's friendship with Henry Francis Pelham, professor of ancient history at Oxford and a leader of the Liberals in the university, determined the course of Emily Penrose's future career. At his suggestion she entered Somerville College, Oxford, as a scholar in 1889, at the age of thirty-one, to read 'literae humaniores' (Greats). Starting with no Latin and only modern Greek, and choosing an archaeological special subject for which she could draw on her experience in Athens, she became in 1892 the first woman to be placed in the first class in Greats. Ineligible, as a woman, for an Oxford degree, she was to be one of the first to present herself for a Trinity College, Dublin, MA under the provisional 'ad eundem' arrangements of 1904. She worked briefly as an extension lecturer in Oxford and London before being appointed in 1893 to the principalship of Bedford College, London, a post which she combined with that of professor in ancient history. In 1898 she moved to the Royal Holloway College, returning to Somerville, as principal, in 1907, at the invitation of the college council, on the death in office of Agnes Maitland. 
To all three colleges, at different stages in their development, Emily Penrose brought a heightened sense of academic purpose and integration into a wider academic community. In London, she prepared the ground for Bedford and Holloway to be admitted in 1900 as schools of the university, and herself served as chairman of the classical board and as a member of the university senate. In Oxford, where in the early years of her principalship she also taught Somerville's Greats' students, she was immediately drawn into the negotiations which led to the establishment in 1910 of a university delegacy for women students, on which she served as an elected member, and ten years later to the admission of women to full membership of the university. During the First World War, when Somerville's buildings were requisitioned for use as a military hospital, she guided the college through an unsettling period of temporary accommodation in Oriel, while organizing -- according to press reports, with unique efficiency -- the national registration for Oxford, work for which the OBE was conferred on her in 1918. 
Emily Penrose's standing in the university was enhanced by her experience of the larger world of academic politics and finance. She served in 1911 as a member of the advisory committee on university grants, and in 1916 as the only woman member of the royal commission on university education in Wales. In 1919 she was appointed to the royal commission on the universities of Oxford and Cambridge, becoming a statutory commissioner for Oxford in 1923. These public duties were combined with a heavy post-war burden of college business, as Somerville launched an appeal for funds, planned a new building (later named after her), and embarked on a series of major constitutional changes leading to its incorporation under royal charter in 1926. 
Pressure of these various commitments obliged Emily Penrose to decline to serve in 1920 as one of the first women magistrates. It also told on her health, which had never been strong; and it was on her doctor's advice that in 1925 she tendered her resignation to the Somerville council. The university marked her retirement in 1926 by conferring on her the honorary degree of DCL -- the first woman apart from Queen Mary to be so honoured. Sheffield followed with an honorary LLD, and in 1927 her work for education received national recognition when she was made a DBE. A modest person, she accepted these honours, as she said, 'for the college'. The large sum collected as a farewell present was used, at her request, to establish a students' loan fund. She retired to London, moving on the outbreak of war (by which time she was an almost complete invalid) to Bournemouth, where she died, unmarried, at 11 Dean Park Road on 26 January 1942. 
Emily Penrose possessed a combination of scholarship with high administrative ability which was unusual at that date and which made her an important role model for the rising generation of women academics. The unexpectedly generous terms of the 1920 statute by which Oxford eventually conceded membership of the university to women owed much to her patient diplomacy, and hardly less to her personal example: in her presence it was not easy to make out a convincing case for the intellectual inferiority of women or their unfittedness for university business. A person of many accomplishments (a fine needlewoman, talented actress, and intrepid mountaineer), she was markedly lacking in certain social skills: stories abounded among undergraduates of her terrifying attempts at small talk. Her height, an embarrassment to her in adolescence, reinforced in later life a somewhat Olympian presence. Deeply reserved in all personal matters, she was a devout, but undemonstrative, Anglican, and a firm, but unmilitant, suffragist. She enjoyed the company of children, and was terrified of cats. 


@@@@@


doc= 35467


Penrose, Francis Cranmer (1817-1903), architect, classical archaeologist, and astronomer, was born on 29 October 1817 at Bracebridge, near Lincoln, the youngest son of the Revd John Penrose (1778-1859). His mother was Elizabeth Penrose, nee Cartwright (c.1779-1837), a children's writer under the pseudonym of Mrs Markham, and Francis was the original of the Mary in her 'History of England'. Penrose's second name was a claim to direct descent through his mother from the sister of Archbishop Cranmer presaging his life-long protestant evangelical Anglican beliefs. His aunt Mary Penrose was the wife of Thomas Arnold, headmaster of Rugby School. He was educated at Bedford modern school (1825-9) and was a scholar at Winchester College (1829-35). His early drawing skills led him (1835-9) to the office of the architect Edward Blore. But instead of starting architectural practice, at the age of twenty-two he became an undergraduate at Magdalene College, Cambridge, graduating in mathematics as tenth senior optime in 1842. A noted athlete, he more than once walked in one day from Cambridge to London, and skated from Ely to the Wash. He rowed against Oxford, in 1840, 1841, and 1842, and was captain of the Cambridge University Boat Club in 1841. As captain of his college boat, he brought it to nearly head of the river. He was the inventor of the system of charts in the bumping races, which are still in use for registering the relative positions of crews. Among his friends while an undergraduate were the novelist and clergyman Charles Kingsley, almost a contemporary at Magdalene, through whom he came to know the theologian Frederick Denison Maurice, the chemist Charles Blachford Mansfield, the social activist John Malcolm Ludlow, and the astronomer John Couch Adams, who with George Peacock awakened an interest in astronomy. As a young man he saw much of his first cousin Matthew Arnold at Rugby, where his brother was a schoolmaster. 
In 1842 Penrose was appointed travelling bachelor of the University of Cambridge and began an important European architectural tour (1842-5). Already a skilled draughtsman, he learnt the art of watercolour from Peter DeWint. He made his first prolonged halt at Paris, where he visited the observatory, as well as architectural scenes. At Paris, and subsequently at Chartres, Fontainebleau, Sens, Auxerre, Bourges, Avignon, Nimes, and Arles, he sketched and studied industriously. At Rome in 1843 his keen eye criticized the pitch of the pediment of the Pantheon as being 'steeper than I quite like', a comment subsequently justified by further research. Fifty-two years later M. Chedanne of Paris read a paper in London (at a meeting over which Penrose presided) and proved that the pitch of the pediment in fact had been altered. Penrose stayed six months at Rome, and thence wrote the stipulated Latin letter as travelling bachelor to the University of Cambridge. He chose as his theme the (Gothic) cathedral of Bourges. 
Between June 1843 and spring 1844 Penrose visited the chief cities of Italy. He later started somewhat reluctantly for Greece, describing Athens as 'by far the most miserable town of its size I have ever seen' (9 January 1845). But he soon fell under the spell of the 'Pericleian Monuments', to which his initial enthusiasm for Gothic architecture quickly gave way. In August 1845 he made his way home through Switzerland, Augsburg, Munich, and Cologne. 
Already Penrose realized the importance of exact mensuration to a critical study of Greek architecture. The pamphlet on the subject by John Pennethorne had already attracted his attention on its publication in 1844. On his arrival in England, the Society of Dilettanti had determined to test thoroughly Pennethorne's theories as to the measurements of Greek classical buildings, and they commissioned Penrose to undertake the task on their behalf. In 1846 Penrose was again at Athens. His principal collaborator in the work of measurement there was Thomas Willson of Lincoln. Their work was completed in May 1847. Despite corrections in detail Penrose confirmed in essentials Pennethorne's theories. When in 1878 Pennethorne brought out his 'Geometry and Optics of Ancient Architecture' he adopted with due acknowledgement Penrose's mass of indisputable material. 

'Anomalies in the Construction of the Parthenon', which the Society of Dilettanti published in 1847, was the first result of Penrose's labours, but it was in 1851 that there appeared his monumental work, 'Principles of Athenian Architecture', of which a more complete edition was issued in 1888 on which his international reputation as a classical archaeologist is based. Penrose's exhaustive and minutely accurate measurements finally established that what is apparently parallel or straight in Greek architecture of the Periclean period is generally neither straight nor parallel but curved or inclined. He therefore solved the puzzle which all commentators on Vitruvius had found insoluble by identifying the 'scamilli impares' with those top and bottom blocks of the columns which, by virtue of the inclination of the column or the curvature of stylobate and architrave, are 'unequal' (i.e. they have their upper and lower faces out of parallel). Some important conclusions relating to the Roman temple of Jupiter Olympius at Athens, Penrose laid before the Institute of British Architects in 1888. 
In 1852 Penrose succeeded C. R. Cockerell (who recommended him) as surveyor of St Paul's Cathedral. The appointment, technically with a view to the completion of the interior decoration in accordance with the intentions of Wren, was made impossible by the religious and artistic factionalism of the day, as shown in the attempts to restore the interior after various appeals. William Burges was even appointed as joint architect (1872-8) for one of these. As surveyor of St Paul's, Penrose was one of the few British architects to adhere to the classical style in the second half of the nineteenth century. He began to introduce Munich stained glass (des.), 'Roman' mosaic pavements, and furniture such as the large early Christian style pulpit (1860; dem. 1954). He demolished Wren's choir screen, divided the organ into two, and provided new choir stalls and desks. Of the two internal porches made from Wren's woodwork, only that at the south transept survives. Externally, he restored (1872) the square plan and divided layout of Wren's west-front steps and made the setting of the Queen Anne statue (1886). He defended the sculptor Alfred Stevens's proposal for the Wellington monument, for which he claimed 'general superintendence' (1858-79) finally erecting it in the nave (1893). Penrose had married in 1856 Harriette (died 1903), daughter of Francis Gibbes, surgeon, of Harewood, Yorkshire. 
Like Wren himself Penrose found relief from disappointment at St Paul's in astronomical study, which had already attracted him at Cambridge and in Paris. He was adept at mechanical inventions, and an instrument for drawing spirals won him a prize at the Great Exhibition of 1851. A theodolite which he had bought in 1852 primarily for use in measurement of buildings, he applied at the suggestion of Dr G. Boole to such astronomical purposes as accurate determination of orientation and time in connection, for example, with the fixing of sundials. In 1862 came the purchase of a small astronomical telescope which was soon superseded by a larger one with a 51/2 inch object-glass (Steinheil), equatorially mounted by Troughton and Simms. In 1866 Penrose, finding the prediction of the time of an occultation of Saturn in the 'Nautical Almanac' inadequate for his purpose, endeavoured with success 'to obtain by graphical construction a more exact correspondence suited to the site' of the observer. He published his results in 1869 in 'The Prediction and Reduction of Occultations and Eclipses', and the work reached a second edition in 1902. 
In 1870 Penrose visited Jerez in the south of Spain to view the total eclipse of the sun with his smaller (21/4 inch) instrument. The observation was spoilt by a cloud, but Penrose made the acquaintance of Professor Charles A. Young of America, whom he met again at Denver in 1878. Penrose's observations on the eclipse of 29 July 1878 in Denver, when his principal object was to draw the corona, were published in the 'Monthly Notices, Royal Astronomical Society', 39 (1878-9), 48-51. He afterwards extended to comets the graphical method of prediction that he had applied to the moon (cf. his paper before the Royal Astronomical Society, December 1881, and chapter 6 in G. F. Chambers's 'Handbook of Astronomy', 4th edn, 3 vols., 1889). 
Penrose's last astronomical work was a study of the orientation of temples, to which Sir Norman Lockyer directed his attention. Presuming that 'the object sought by the ancients in orienting their temples was to obtain from the stars at their rising or setting, as the case might be, a sufficient warning of the approach of dawn for preparation for the critical moment of sacrifice', he perceived the importance of calculating the places of certain stars at distant epochs, and the possibility of estimating the age of certain temples by assuming an orientation and calculating the period of variation or apparent movement in the stars due to the precession of the equinoxes. Penrose applied his theory to certain Greek temples (see 'Proceedings' and 'Philosophic Transactions of the Royal Society'), and with Lockyer he worked out a calculation on this basis in relation to Stonehenge (see also 'Journal of Proceedings of the Royal Institute of British Architects', 25 Jan 1902). He joined the Royal Astronomical Society in 1867, and in 1894 his astronomical researches were recognized by his election as a fellow of the Royal Society. 
Penrose's practice as an architect was small, largely church-based. It did not reflect his obvious ability. At Magdalene College, Cambridge, he restored the west front (1873-4; unpicked 1954) and built the river court gate; he built a wing -- the Penrose -- at St John's College, Cambridge (1885-6); and at Rugby School he erected the sanatorium (1867). His many vicarages began with Burleigh, Somerset (1846); typically a vicarage might be related to a church restoration as at Escribe, Yorkshire (1849; church 1850). He designed a private house in Wimbledon to be shared by Thomas Hughes and Ian Ludlow (1852-3; dem.) and one in Colebyfield (1861-2) for himself. Alford House, Somerset ('c'.1877), was his only commission of country-house scale. His neo-baroque staircase projects (1860-88) for Ickworth House, Suffolk, were not executed; his garden terrace and stairs at Powerscourt House, co. Wicklow, Ireland (1874-5), are related. At Ickworth he was responsible finally for the Pompeian room (1878-9) painted by J. D. Crace. The town hall, Castle Cary, Somerset (1834-5), in a rationalist neo-Tudor Gothic, shows where his practice might have developed otherwise. 
When in 1882 the foundation of the British School at Athens was projected, Penrose generously designed the building (a Graeco-Roman villa, 1885-6) without fee. It was completed in 1886, when Penrose accepted the directorate (1886-7 and 1890-91). At St Paul's, from where he practised, he designed the choir school (1873-5), Italianate, decorated externally in neo-Renaissance sgraffitto and polychromy. His surviving contribution is the massive Cornish porphyry sarcophagus on a granite plinth tomb of the duke of Wellington (1857) 'based on a small sketch by Cockerell, but I had complete charge of the detail and execution', he wrote. Also his are the Roman mosaic floor here and under the crossing around Nelson's tomb, the marble alterations, and wall tablet (1891) to Lord Napier of Magdala. 
Penrose was an associate (1846), fellow (1848), and president (1894-6) of the Royal Institute of British Architects and he received the royal gold medal of the institute in 1883. Many of his office drawings and his own manuscript list of works were presented to RIBA in 1938. He became a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1898, when he was elected antiquary to the Royal Academy, where he had often exhibited. He was made in 1884 one of the first honorary fellows of Magdalene College, Cambridge, and in 1898 he became a LittD of his university as well as an honorary DCL of Oxford. He was a knight of the order St Saviour of Greece. Penrose's portrait at the Royal Institute of British Architects is one of the most characteristic works of J. S. Sargent RA (a copy is at Magdalene College). 
Penrose died at Colebyfield, Wimbledon, after forty years' residence on 15 February 1903. He was buried at Wimbledon. His wife predeceased him by twelve days. He left a son, Dr Francis G. Penrose, and four daughters, the eldest of whom, Emily Penrose (1858-1942), became successively principal of Bedford College, Royal Holloway College, and Somerville College, Oxford. A lettered memorial tablet was placed in the crypt of St Paul's Cathedral by his architectural admirers. 


@@@@@


doc= 35468


Penson, Dame Lillian Margery (1896-1963), historian, was born in Islington, London, on 18 July 1896, the eldest daughter, but not the eldest child, of Arthur Austin Penson, wholesale dairy manager, and his wife, Lillian Alice Martha, 'nee' Brown. After private education she went to the University of London, first at Birkbeck College, then at University College. In 1917 she graduated BA with a first in history and in 1921 she became one of the earliest PhDs. She served as a junior administrative officer (1917-18) in the Ministry of National Service; then in 1918-19 worked in the war trade intelligence department. She taught as a lecturer at Birkbeck College from 1921 to 1930, and also part-time (1923-5) at East London (later Queen Mary) College. 
In 1930 Lillian Penson was appointed to the chair of modern history held at Bedford College for Women. There she had as colleagues, besides some distinguished men, some remarkable women, who helped to give the college a distinctive quality, marked by a high degree of civilization. Among these were Susan Stebbing and Edna Purdie, who became her trusted friends. She opposed the introduction of male undergraduates to Bedford College, a proposal agitated during her later years, but not fulfilled until 1965. 
Under the leadership of Lillian Penson the department of history flourished. Her lectures were immensely enjoyed. They were as carefully prepared as if they had been ceremonial performances for distinguished occasions: polished, lucid, not overloaded with detail, imaginative, at times witty or humorous, beautifully balanced, and economically worded, reflecting deep insight into issues and personalities. For many years her seminar at the Institute of Historical Research was a Mecca for diplomatic historians. In classes and seminars she had little patience with the shiftless; but for the serious she had generosity, patience, and helpfulness. A common epithet of disapproval, uttered in a certain tone of voice, was 'glib'. Eccentric but intelligent undergraduates, who seemed unusually incapable of a reasonable degree of conformity, she was inclined to defend, calling them 'my funnies'. 
Lillian Penson's first researches were in colonial history, and bore fruit in 'The Colonial Agents of the British West Indies' (1924) and other publications. Her commitment to diplomatic history seems to have begun with her appointment in 1918 as an editor of the peace handbooks prepared for the Paris peace conference. From this she went on to assist G. P. Gooch and H. W. V. Temperley on 'British Documents on the Origins of the War, 1898-1914' (11 vols., 1926-38), being credited with assistant editorship on the title-pages of the later volumes. Temperley's influence on her was profound. He was for her what a historian should be. She stressed, as he did, the need for adequate linguistic equipment; the usefulness of knowing the folklores, literatures, and geography of the European countries; the need for careful study of private as well as public papers; and the value to the historian of some experience of affairs. With Temperley she produced 'Foundations of British Foreign Policy' (1938) and 'A Century of Diplomatic Blue Books' (1938). The planning of these projects and the business affairs connected with them provided excellent training for the administrator of later years. Had time allowed, she would have produced a magisterial work on Lord Salisbury's diplomacy. Papers in the 'Cambridge Historical Journal' (1935), 'The new course in British foreign policy, 1892-1902' in the 'Transactions of the Royal Historical Society' (1943) -- a minor classic -- and the Creighton lecture for 1960 (which by illness she could not deliver) give some idea of the directions the 'magnum opus' would have taken. 
Before war came in 1939 Lillian Penson was a person of importance in the university, not without hostile critics and anti-feminist opposition. Dean of the faculty of arts (1938-44), a member of the senate from 1940, in 1945 elected chairman of the academic council (a strategic position), and in 1946 a member of the court, she reached the peak of her career when in 1948 she became vice-chancellor, the first woman known to hold such an office. She had a unique knowledge of the university machine; she was clear-headed, generally tactful, and adept at conciliation, although some persons found her too trenchant for their liking. She was succeeded in 1951 by an old friend, H. Hale Bellot. 
In two areas she took a special interest: the Fulbright scheme and colonial higher education. She was a founder member of the United States educational commission in the United Kingdom (1948) and acting chairman in 1953 and 1954. She did more than any other British academic to secure the co-operation of British scholars in this excellent scheme, so rewarding to British and Americans alike. The policy for higher education in the colonies, as worked out in 1943-5 by the commission under Sir Cyril Asquith, of which she was a member, involved the establishment of colonial university colleges, brought into 'special relationship' with the University of London, whereby curricula and examinations were conducted jointly by university and colleges. This was intended as a means whereby good standards would be established, preparatory to the colleges becoming independent universities. While ready to adjust London rules to meet colonial circumstances, she resisted in this, as in other connections, 'liberal' pressures for relaxation of standards. She made numerous laborious journeys to the colleges. She had a particular devotion to Khartoum. She became in 1955 a member of the council of the college at Salisbury, Southern Rhodesia. Her view of these developments she set forth, in historical perspective, in a Montague Burton lecture at Glasgow in 1954, 'Educational Partnership in Africa and the West Indies'. 
In 1951 Lillian Penson was appointed DBE. In 1949, the year following the admission of women to degrees there, Cambridge made her an honorary LLD, one of the first two women, after Queen Elizabeth, to be so honoured. Oxford made her an honorary DCL in 1956. Among the other seven honorary degrees which she received was the LLD of Southampton (1953), which had also enjoyed a special relationship with London. In 1959, in recognition of what she had done for medical studies, the Royal College of Surgeons made her an honorary fellow. She served three terms as a member of the council of the Royal Historical Society and as a vice-president, and was honorary vice-president from 1959 until her death. 
Of middle height, as a younger woman Lillian Penson was slim, of a light and brisk step, and with black hair of rich texture, carefully groomed. In later years she was of heavier build, of heavier gait, and her hair touched with grey; her face fuller, of complexion somewhat more florid. Generally of kindly expression, she could, as she put it, 'look repressive'. Her eyes were singularly eloquent. She was not loquacious, but when she spoke, she spoke with authority. Early in her career she adopted, and maintained to the end, a professional costume of a two-piece dark suit, with white blouse, its front flounced, and over some thirty years of the same pattern. For social occasions, her dresses were of unobtrusive elegance. She held it important for herself and others to dress suitably to the occasion. 
Marks of a puritanical upbringing were never effaced: a belief in work and duty, uneasiness with flippant talk about serious subjects, and integrity of a certain type. Moderately conservative in most ways, Lillian Penson hated the appeasement of the thirties, and admired Churchill. While many saw the public figure -- 'tres autoritaire', said a Frenchman -- only a few saw the other Penson, who believed that the last thing to do with your dignity was to stand on it; the compassionate person given to doing good by stealth; an excellent cook, judge of wines, and raconteur; a connoisseur of detective fiction; fond of country walks and fishing; excellent as hostess or guest; and a good listener. After two years in which she was gravely incapacitated, she died, unmarried, at her home, 54 Marine Parade, Brighton, on 17 April 1963. 
Robert Greaves', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35469


Pepler, Sir George Lionel (1882-1959), town planner, was born at Croydon, Surrey, on 24 February 1882, the third child and second son of George Henry Pepler (1849-1884), brewer, and his wife, Emma Florence Mills (1853-1935); Harry Douglas Clarke Pepler (known as Hilary) was his brother. Educated at Bootham School, York, and the Leys School, Cambridge, he was articled to Walter Hooker, a surveyor in Croydon. On 24 July 1903, at Clifton, he married Edith Amy (1877/8-1942), daughter of Alfred E. Bobbett, solicitor, of Bristol; the couple had two daughters and one son. 
From 1905 until 1914, in partnership with Ernest G. Allen, Pepler carried on a practice in surveying and the then emerging vocation of town planning. The partners were awarded three gold medals at housing exhibitions in 1908 and 1910 and were among the first to specialize in laying out new villages and housing estates for landowners, among others at Fallings Park near Wolverhampton and at Knebworth, Hertfordshire. During that period Pepler became a member of the Garden City (later Town and Country Planning) Association, and was active in the advocacy of the garden city concept and of the operation by local authorities of their permissive planning powers under the first 'Town Planning Act', of 1909. In 1914 John Burns, president of the Local Government Board from 1905 to 1914 and the 'father' of the act, called Pepler into the planning administration of the board, where he succeeded Thomas Adams as chief technical planning officer, a position which he retained, through several changes of his designation and that of the department, until 1946. 
Pepler's qualities proved admirably suited to the task of inducing local authorities to adopt town planning powers and guiding them in putting these into practice. Having a passionate belief in the necessity of planning, as well as persuasiveness, patience, and tact, he was allowed by successive ministers (or perhaps quietly assumed) exceptional freedom and scope in what was essentially propaganda. He was a major influence in the conversion of public and official opinion to acceptance of a new, contentious, and difficult governmental process. The experience and authority which he gained in this key position enabled him, just before his retirement, to make a weighty contribution to the formulation of the 'Town and Country Planning Act' of 1947, which established the planning of all land as a normal function of central and local government. 
Pepler's work and influence in planning extended far outside his official position. He was one of the founders in 1913 of the Town Planning Institute, its honorary secretary and treasurer until his death, twice president (1919-20, 1949-50), and first gold medallist (1953). Keenly interested in the training of planners, he was unfailingly helpful in encouragement and advice to students and young members of the profession, and was chairman (1930-59) of the Town Planning Joint Examination Board. He attended regularly the annual sessions of the town and country planning summer school from its foundation in 1933, and was its president in 1943-59. Pepler was also active in the work of the International Federation for Housing and Town Planning, of which he was president in 1935-8 and 1947-52, and thereafter honorary president for life. The survival of the federation despite the disruption of the Second World War was due mainly to his devotion and that of the honorary secretary, Elizabeth Evelyn Halton, during the war years. On 31 January 1947 Elizabeth (1900/01-1998), the daughter of a merchant, Eldred Halton, became Pepler's second wife. She was a Conservative member of the London county council from 1946 to 1965 and deputy chairman of the council in 1956-7. 
Pepler was a member of the regional survey committee for south Wales (1920), of the unhealthy areas committee over which Neville Chamberlain presided (1921), and of the royal commission on common land (1955-8); chairman of the Institution of Professional Civil Servants (1937-42), of the inter-allied committee for physical planning and reconstruction (1942-5), and for many years an active influence in the Council for the Preservation of Rural England and the National Playing Fields Association. With P. W. Macfarlane he prepared the outline plan for the north-east development area (1949) and in 1950-54 he was planning adviser to Singapore. 
Pepler was elected an honorary associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1937, appointed CB in 1944, and knighted in 1948. His recreations were mainly out of doors and included golf and other games, swimming, gardening, and bonfires. He had a cottage at Lulworth, Dorset, where, with his family, for nearly fifty years he spent happy holidays by the sea. He died at Moffatt House, Weymouth, on 13 April 1959 and was buried at West Lulworth church. In 1960 the headland previously known as East Point, Lulworth Cove, was renamed Pepler's Point. In 1963 the George Pepler international award was established to enable young people to travel abroad to study chosen aspects of town and country planning. 


@@@@@


doc= 35470


Peppiatt, Sir Leslie Ernest (1891-1968), lawyer, was born on 7 November 1891 at West Hackney, London, the eldest son of William Robert Peppiatt, a railway clerk, and his wife, Emily Elizabeth Giles. He was educated, along with his two brothers, at Bancroft's School, Woodford, Essex. Emily Peppiatt was ambitious for her sons, but her husband's early death left the family struggling financially and Peppiatt left school at sixteen and took employment in a solicitors' office. He was, however, able to secure articles and, on his admission to the profession in July 1913, joined the firm of Ince, Colt, Ince, and Roscoe. On the outbreak of the First World War, Peppiatt joined the 7th London regiment, serving with distinction until 1918; he reached the rank of major, was twice mentioned in dispatches, and was awarded the MC and bar. Of his two brothers, both on active service, Kenneth Oswald Peppiatt (1893-1983), who was awarded the MC and bar, rejoined the Bank of England, where he had been a junior clerk before the war, in 1918, but the younger brother, Will, was killed. 
Peppiatt returned to Ince, Colt, Ince, and Roscoe and in 1921 joined the British American Tobacco Company (BAT) as a legal adviser. On 16 June 1927 he married Cicely Mallyn, daughter of George Edward Howse, a director of the travel firm Thomas Cook. The Peppiatts bought a small house in Beaconsfield, moving later to a larger one they had built also in Beaconsfield. There were two sons of the marriage, Hugh and Martin. Both were educated, like their cousins (Kenneth's sons), who were of a similar age, at Winchester College; Martin became a clergyman and Hugh, after Oxford, joined Freshfields and became a City lawyer. 
Peppiatt's work for BAT involved a great deal of travel and lengthy periods away from home, and in 1935 he accepted an invitation to become a partner with a City firm of solicitors, Freshfields. No doubt his brother Kenneth, who had risen rapidly in the Bank of England hierarchy, becoming in 1934 chief cashier, (and being knighted in 1941), effected the introduction. 
Since early in the eighteenth century the firm, known in 1935 as Freshfields, Leese, and Munns -- it became Freshfields in 1945 -- had held the appointment as solicitors to the Bank of England; it had other distinguished corporate clients as well as a large private client practice. Two years after Peppiatt joined Freshfields, the firm's senior partner, Sir William Leese, died suddenly. Peppiatt took over his role in managing the Bank of England's work, and although he did not become senior partner until 1953, he was increasingly in control of the firm during the war and immediately afterwards. These were difficult times, particularly when the firm's offices in Old Jewry were completely destroyed by bombing in 1944. In the immediate post-war years the firm was smaller than its competitors such as Slaughter and May and Linklaters and Paines, while its image as solicitors to the establishment could sometimes discourage new clients as much as attract them. 
As senior partner of Freshfields from 1953 to 1962, Peppiatt inaugurated a period of growth in the firm, necessary if it was to keep pace with the competition from other leading City law firms. The firm's connection with the Bank of England had always brought it other clients but had also led the firm sometimes to decline what it saw as unsuitable business. Peppiatt sought to redefine what might be seen as unsuitable in changing times as well as to extend the firm's financial and commercial practice at a time when the City's international financial business was expanding rapidly. A shrewd solicitor, he noted the growing importance of American investment in the sterling area and developed useful connections for the firm in the USA. At the same time he zealously protected the firm's connection with the bank and its reputation in the City. He represented the Bank's interests in the 'cause celebre' of the 1950s, the bank rate tribunal chaired by Sir Hubert Parker, charged with investigating whether information about a coming change in bank rate had been leaked. 
Senior partners of City law firms were traditionally autocrats, but not all were, as Peppiatt was, also benevolent and charming. The strict formality within the office began to be relaxed in his time. Peppiatt's interest in people, combined with his personal belief that solicitors ought to play a part in public life, were both evidenced in his activities outside the firm. He served on a number of committees, including the Spens committee on the remuneration of medical specialists and dental practitioners in 1947 and the disciplinary committee of the Architects' Registration Council from 1949 to 1955. He chaired the departmental committee on betting on horse-racing in 1960. He helped to manage several charities, including the George VI Memorial Fund, the 1930 Fund for the Benefit of Trained District Nurses, the Solicitors' Benevolent Fund, and the Lord Mayor of London's Appeal Fund. 
With his busy practice and public life Peppiatt had little time for his favourite leisure pursuit of fishing. Moreover he was from 1940 a member of the council of the Law Society, and president of the society in 1958-9. He was awarded the then customary knighthood in 1959. Peppiatt retired in 1962 and died on 15 November 1968 at his home, Cleve Cottage, Wisborough Green, Sussex, survived by his wife. Building on the post-war foundations he had laid, Freshfields continued to grow, not least when his son Hugh was senior partner (1982-90), becoming one of London's leading international law firms. 


@@@@@


doc= 35471


Percival, John (1834-1918), headmaster and bishop of Hereford, was born at Brough Sowerby, Westmorland, on 27 September 1834, the eldest son of William Percival, a 'statesman' (that is, a farmer who owned his own land), and his wife, Jane (died 1838), daughter of William Longmire (also a farmer) of Bolton, Westmorland. His boyhood was tough. Following the death of his mother he was brought up by her relatives, helping his uncle on the farm. He attended village schools at Winton and Hackthorpe before going to Appleby grammar school (1846-54), trudging to and from school in his studded clogs with a blue linen bag over his shoulder. To the end of his life he retained his broad Westmorland accent. 
In 1854 Percival won an open scholarship to Queen's College, Oxford, where his intellectual qualities were quickly recognized. He gained the university junior mathematical scholarship and took firsts in classics and mathematics before being elected a fellow of Queen's in 1858. Long periods of intense study led to a breakdown in his health, and he spent the winter of 1858-9 recuperating at Pau in the south of France. There he met Louisa, daughter of James Holland. They married in 1862 and subsequently had a family of six children. In 1860 he was ordained deacon and accepted Frederick Temple's offer of a mastership at Rugby School. This began a lifelong friendship with the Temple family, especially with William Temple, Percival's godson and later his biographer. 
On Frederick Temple's recommendation Percival was appointed in 1862 as the first headmaster of the newly founded Clifton College, Bristol. A born leader and pioneer he made Clifton into one of the leading public schools, largely because of his shrewd choice of masters. His sermons at Clifton, 'Some Helps for School Life', were published in 1880. Bristol gave him the opportunity to engage in other educational developments. He promoted a ragged school in the city, gave active support to the ideals and implementation of the 'Elementary Education Act' of 1870, and with his wife was one of the organizers in 1868 of a committee to promote the higher education of women. In 1877 he helped to found Clifton High School for Girls and subsequently became president of the girls' high school at Redland. In his influential pamphlet, 'The Connection of the Universities and the Great Towns' (1873), he urged Oxford and Cambridge to provide university teaching in provincial towns and cities, and with Gilbert Elliot, dean of Bristol, he was a leader in the movement to establish University College, Bristol, which opened in 1877. 
In January 1879 Percival left Clifton College to become president of Trinity College, Oxford, where he remained until 1886. His time at Trinity was not the happiest of his life, largely because his manner and temperament suited that of a headmaster of a school more than head of a college. However, his work outside the college gave him the greatest satisfaction and opportunity. He was chairman of the committee which in 1879 founded Somerville Hall, Oxford, the non-denominational college for women, and he was instrumental in recruiting Madeleine Shaw Lefevre as its first principal. He was also a vigorous promoter of the university adult education movement and played an influential part in Michael Sadler's appointment as secretary of the Oxford Extension Delegacy. From 1882 to 1887 he was a canon of Bristol Cathedral, residing there in university vacations, where he started Sunday evening services. 
In May 1887 Percival became headmaster of Rugby School. There was a feeling that the school had slackened under his cultivated predecessor, Jex-Blake, and he set about a moral crusade with a relentless and puritanical fervour. He terrified new boys by his dour warning, 'There are many bad boys here, there is a lot of evil in the place. Eh, I shall be watching you every day of your lives' (Temple, 113). He attacked 'idleness' and 'loafing', while signifying his anxiety about 'impurity' by his insistence that boys' football shorts should be worn below the knee and secured by elastic (hence his nickname, 'Percival of the Knees'). Within a short time the prestige of the school rose under his stern moral, spiritual, and intellectual leadership. 
In January 1895 Lord Rosebery, the Liberal prime minister, nominated Percival to the bishopric of Hereford. The queen attempted to resist the recommendation on the ground that Percival, a strong Liberal in politics, was a known supporter of disestablishment of the Welsh church (having written to 'The Times' on the subject in May 1894). Rosebery prevailed, insisting that he could not appoint a supporter of the establishment to a diocese which included thirteen Welsh parishes. The Hereford years were lonely ones for Percival, who lost his wife in 1896. He missed the fellowship of school and university life, though his marriage in 1899 to an old family friend, Mary Georgina, daughter of Frederick Symonds, brought him solace and affection. He found the large sprawling rural diocese difficult to administer; nor was it easy to create a sense of fellowship within it. He appointed distinguished scholars to the cathedral canonries, but they were largely out of touch with the parishes. In an agricultural and predominantly Conservative region Percival's radical views on social and political issues did not always go down well; he chaired the 1897 Lambeth conference's committee on industrial problems, supported the Liberal government's 1906 'Education Bill', and attacked slum landlords in 1909. He was a broad-churchman, suspicious of ritualists. His invitation to nonconformists to join holy communion at Hereford Cathedral to mark the coronation of George V attracted strong protests from Lord Halifax and the English Church Union. 
His successor, Hensley Henson, commented that Percival's 'interest and his influence were national rather than diocesan, educational rather than ecclesiastical' (H. H. Henson, 'Retrospect of an Unimportant Life', 1, 1942, 273). The early years of the twentieth century saw Percival once more involved in movements concerned with educational development and reform. He chaired the founding meeting of the Workers' Educational Association at Oxford in 1903 and gave its founder, Albert Mansbridge, unstinting help in its early years. He saw the development of working-class adult education as one of the great pioneering achievements of the time. In 1907 he spoke in the House of Lords in favour of Bishop Gore's motion for reforming the ancient universities, voicing the demand that Oxford should play a full part in the working-class educational movements then developing. His vision of education was to develop the faculties of all children as a matter of Christian love and social justice, believing that it was through education that men and women of all classes could rise and reach their fulfilment. This vision Percival shared with Albert Mansbridge, William Temple, R. H. Tawney (the two latter having been pupils under him at Rugby), and others who pioneered the course of national and adult education in the twentieth century. 
Percival announced his retirement from Hereford in 1917. He retired to Oxford, where he died at his home, 64 Banbury Road, on 3 December 1918. He was buried in the crypt of the chapel of Clifton College, Bristol. Memorial services were held in Hereford Cathedral, at Trinity College, Oxford, and in St James's, Piccadilly, where William Temple, the rector, spoke of him as 'one of the pre-eminent figures of the nineteenth century, a century rich in educators'. 


@@@@@


doc= 35472


Percy, Alan Ian, eighth duke of Northumberland (1880-1930), politician and propagandist, was born on 17 April 1880 in London, the seventh of the thirteen children and fourth of the seven sons of Henry George Percy, Earl Percy (1846-1918), from 1899 seventh duke of Northumberland, and his wife, Lady Edith Campbell (died 1913), eldest daughter of George Campbell, eighth duke of Argyll. Although born into privilege and acquiring a great inheritance, his childhood was austere and his mature life one of relentless activity and commitment -- products of a family tradition not just of public service but also the stern evangelistic faith of the Irvingite Catholic Apostolic church, a sect within the Church of England. He was educated at Eton College (1893-7) and at Christ Church, Oxford (1897-9), though with an aristocratic younger son's intention of making his career in the army. He joined the Grenadier Guards in 1900, saw active service in the South African War (1901-2), and was promoted to lieutenant in 1903. From 1907 to 1910 he served in the Egyptian army, in 1908 as captain of a company of Arab camel corps during the Kordofan campaign in the Sudan. After returning to the British army he was in 1910-11 an additional aide-de-camp to the fourth Earl Grey, governor-general of Canada, before retiring in 1912 with the rank of major and with his prospects transformed. His eldest brother, Henry, Earl Percy, MP, had died in 1909, and as his second and third brothers died in childhood he succeeded as heir to the dukedom, and to the courtesy title of Earl Percy. In 1911 he married Lady Helen Magdalen Gordon-Lennox (1886-1965), youngest daughter of Charles, seventh duke of Richmond and Gordon. They had four sons and two daughters. 
Percy's military interests now found a new outlet, which gradually developed into an unusual career for one of his lineage and status: that of publicist, controversialist, and publisher. In essays and articles during 1911 and 1913 he forecast war with Germany, criticized the Haldane army reforms, argued that the proposed expeditionary force was far too small, and supported Lord Roberts's calls for military conscription. Events from 1914 no doubt confirmed the sense of prophetic power which so imbued his subsequent writings. On the outbreak of the First World War he rejoined his regiment and was for two years an official eye-witness, supplying battle-front descriptions to newspapers. The resulting journalistic experience and contacts with editors was put to less official uses after his appointment in 1916 to the directorate of military operations, attached as a lieutenant-colonel to the general staff in London. A vigorous partisan of the army command during the great debates from 1916 to 1918 with opposition politicians and government ministers over strategy and logistics, he supplied sympathetic journalists, particularly H. A. Gwynne, editor of the 'Morning Post', with inside information and counter-arguments to support the generals' cause. By 1918 he had a deep distrust of the political elite, and an especial loathing for Lloyd George. 
On his father's death in May 1918, and after a second retirement from the army at the end of the war, Northumberland entered into the large possessions and numerous public, institutional, and social duties of the Northumberland dukedom. To these he added still further involvements. Rarely content with merely honorific status he became a man of many causes -- agricultural, industrial, historical, archaeological, scientific, ecclesiastical. A long list of positions includes lord lieutenant of Northumberland, president of the Northumberland Territorial Army Association and the Newcastle Society of Antiquaries, master of the Percy hunt, chancellor of Durham University, and president of the Institution of Naval Architects. He was both president of the Royal Institution, in succession to his grandfather and father, and an active lay churchman, as chairman of the house of laymen of York diocese and from 1919 to 1923 vice-chairman of the national church assembly's house of laity. Two of his short stories were published posthumously: 'The Shadow on the Moor' (1930) and 'La salamandre' (1934). 
Northumberland's kindly interest in the concerns of his tenants and organizational associates attracted affection, in striking contrast to the enmities he paraded and provoked in his politics. His inheritance included his father's diehard Conservatism, which he characteristically turned into yet more extravagantly reactionary opinions. The owner of three great houses and some 180,000 acres spread across Northumberland, Middlesex, and Surrey, there was nothing apologetic about his defence of property. A robust justification of his huge coal royalties in evidence to the Sankey coal commission of 1919, against the miners' union and socialist criticisms of Robert Smillie, Frank Hodges, Sidney Webb, and Richard Tawney, gave him a notoriety which encouraged him to offer a wider political lead. The 'Times' obituarist described him as 'a strong Tory, militant and uncompromising' ('The Times', 25 Aug 1930); less friendly commentators thought him either a dangerous fanatic or a useful example of reactionary absurdity. Yet in the tense post-war public atmosphere his views had real purchase among discontented Conservatives, and from 1920 he became important as a leader of the diehard movement against the Lloyd George coalition government. He joined the fourth marquess of Salisbury's Association of Independent Unionist Peers, and had a small following among Conservative back-bench MPs. But his main contribution lay in a rare talent for written invective, in numerous intemperate yet penetrating articles in the 'Morning Post' and the 'National Review', and in his books, 'International Revolutionary Propaganda' (1920), 'Conspiracy Against the British Empire' (1921), 'The Passing of Liberalism' (1925), and the posthumously published 'The History of World Revolution' (1954). He created further outlets for this peculiarly ferocious style of propaganda in founding the Boswell Press (1921) and the 'Patriot' (1922). His anti-Liberalism was nearly as strong as his anti-socialism, and his anti-communism was obsessive: for him Liberalism represented the start of a slippery descent into the atheistic and expropriatory horrors of Bolshevism. No less obsessive were his British chauvinism, contempt for the League of Nations, hatred of anti-imperialist movements, and his antisemitism. Everywhere he saw danger, betrayal, and plots: wittingly or not Indian and Egyptian nationalists, Irish republicans, and the British Labour Party were all members of an international revolutionary movement against British power directed by Bolshevik-Jewish adventurers in Moscow. From such a perspective, a coalition government led by and including Liberal ministers was manifestly incapable of defending anything of value. In autumn 1921 he tried unsuccessfully to mount a party revolt against the Conservative leadership over the government's treaty with Irish republicans; his alternative solution was the military reconquest of Ireland. In March 1922 he was a co-signatory to the diehard manifesto which announced a combined rebellion of various elements of the Conservative right, and in June he used the honours scandal for a particularly bitter attack on Lloyd George. For the rest of the decade he persistently sought to expose Lloyd George's political fund as a source of public corruption. 
After the collapse of the coalition government in October 1922 Northumberland was reconciled to a Conservative leadership now formally freed of Liberal pollution, even, surprisingly, tolerating Stanley Baldwin's Conservatism. He was president of the Conservative National Union in 1924, and by the time he succeeded Lord Salisbury as chairman of the Association of Independent Unionist Peers this had mellowed from a group of rebels into the back-bench Conservative organization in the House of Lords. Also during 1924, under Conservative central office prompting, he led a consortium to buy the 'Morning Post', securing it from the unfriendly clutches of Lord Rothermere. After withdrawing from the Boswell Press and the 'Patriot' he became an active newspaper proprietor, commenting regularly on editorial policy and continuing to publish articles on causes dear to the Conservative right. He thought the labour disputes of 1925-6 'a vast conspiracy to ruin the country, to starve the workers & destroy civilisation' (to Gwynne, 26 Sept 1925, H. A. Gwynne MSS), and again defended coal royalty owners during the Samuel coal commission hearings. However, his inflammatory brand of reactionary politics had now lost much of their force and following. He died on 23 August 1930 at his home, 17 Princes Gate, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 35473


Percy, Eustace Sutherland Campbell, Baron Percy of Newcastle (1887-1958), politician and educationist, was born in London on 21 March 1887, the twelfth of the thirteen children and youngest of the seven sons of Henry George Percy, Earl Percy (1846-1918), from 1899 seventh duke of Northumberland, and his wife, Lady Edith Campbell (died 1913), eldest daughter of George Campbell, eighth duke of Argyll. From his family he derived a commitment to public service and an attachment to the evangelical Catholic Apostolic sect within the Church of England, which gave him an ascetic, even pious (some thought prim) temperament. He also retained his family's allegiance to the Conservative Party, although his education, early career, and foreign experience removed him from the diehard and chauvinist instincts of both his father and his elder brother, Alan Percy, eighth duke of Northumberland. Lord Eustace Percy, as he was styled from 1899, was educated at Eton College and at Christ Church, Oxford (1904-7), where he took a fashionable interest in social reform issues, obtained a first class in modern history, and acquired an academic cast of mind. 
After several months in Paris learning French, and brilliant success in the entrance examination, Percy joined the diplomatic service in 1909. From May 1910 to June 1914 he was a secretary at the British embassy in Washington, where the ambassador, James Bryce, became an intellectual mentor. He studied American institutions, travelled widely, and made influential friends, establishing an enduring reputation as an American expert. After the outbreak of the First World War he served successively in the Foreign Office's western, war, and contraband departments. He returned twice to Washington on official business, the second time in April 1917 as a member of the Balfour mission, prolonged to twelve months as representative of the ministry of blockade. Then, as an assistant to Lord Robert Cecil and from January to March 1919 a Foreign Office representative at the Versailles peace conference, he helped draft the League of Nations covenant and was a joint secretary of the inter-allied commission on the league. 
On 4 December 1918 Percy married Stella Katherine (1895-1982), eldest daughter of Major-General Laurence Drummond; they had two daughters. A settled family life contributed to Percy's decision to leave the diplomatic service and enter domestic politics. He stood as Conservative candidate at the Kingston upon Hull by-election in March 1919, but was defeated by the Labour candidate. Subsequently elected to the London county council, he became vice-chairman of its housing committee and during 1920 supervised a novel housing bond campaign, an only partially successful scheme to raise funds by popular subscription for relieving the city's housing problems. Meanwhile he earned his living by part-time work for the Shell-Royal Dutch oil group, responsible for its Anglo-Egyptian oilfields and visiting Egypt, Sudan, and Palestine. 
In May 1921 Percy won the parliamentary by-election at Hastings, a seat he held until 1937. He became an able critic of the coalition government, but from a quite different direction to that of his elder brother -- as a sympathizer with Cecil's brand of Conservative social idealism and support for the League of Nations, having published 'The Responsibilities of the League' (1920) and serving on the League of Nations union executive into the 1930s. After the coalition's collapse he received rapid political advancement. He was appointed parliamentary secretary at the Board of Education from March to May 1923 and the Board of Health from May 1923 to January 1924, then as a protege of Baldwin became, in November 1924, an unusually young cabinet minister as president of the Board of Education. Yet, although he made important contributions to educational policy, this early political promise was largely dissipated. He retained the first Labour government's commitment to renovating elementary schools, reducing class sizes, and expanding secondary education. He presided over the separation of elementary schools into junior and secondary branches at age eleven, and the reorganization of secondary schools as recommended in the 1926 Hadow report. He was especially concerned to promote technical education, for this purpose abolishing the restrictive compulsory state curriculum. But he resisted the more radical reformers' desire to raise the school-leaving age, also recommended in the Hadow report, and became a target for Conservatives who disliked his progressive views and wanted financial retrenchment. Under Treasury pressure in November 1925 he issued board circular 1371, which threatened to cut expenditure on schools and incurred the enduring wrath of teachers, educational administrators, and Labour politicians, even after its withdrawal in March 1926. Moreover, in the House of Commons and cabinet he seemed aloof, superior, portentous, and pedantic, always ready to magnify small differences. By 1928 Baldwin thought of removing him to the ambassadorship in Washington, a post Percy himself coveted but which the Conservative government's defeat at the 1929 election denied him. Nor did Baldwin recommend him for ministerial office in the 1931 National Government. 
Out of office Percy continued to contribute to educational debates, publishing 'Education and the Crossroads' (1930) and editing 'The Yearbook of Education' from 1932 to 1935. He organized the formation of the Conservative Party's research department during the winter of 1929-30, and created a reputation as a progressive Conservative intellectual with a series of writings -- most notably 'Democracy on Trial' (1931) and 'Government in Transition' (1934) -- arguing for national modernization not just of policies but also of institutions, including a reorganization of government and parliament along corporatist lines. As a senior ex-minister he was appointed chairman of the Indian federal finance committee (involving investigations in India itself) from December 1931 to March 1932, and a member of the parliamentary joint select committee on Indian constitutional reform in 1933 and 1934, drafting the introduction to its report -- an important restatement of the principles of imperial rule. Percy's prominent part in defending the National Government's Indian policy in the House of Commons against Churchill and other Conservative critics restored his claim to ministerial office, but not Baldwin's confidence in his capacity to head a department. Percy later considered his period as minister without portfolio from June 1935 to March 1936 as a 'suicidal ten months' (Percy, 152) because with a cabinet seat yet no staff and no clear responsibilities he could do little, and was widely criticized for doing nothing. 
Disillusioned with political life, Percy spent a few months in 1936-7 as chairman of the British Council, negotiating its grant from the Treasury in October 1937. After fulfilling a religious interest by publishing 'John Knox' (1937), he resigned his parliamentary seat in order to become the first rector of King's College, Newcastle. Here he thought he did his best, as well as personally most congenial, work. He turned a newly created amalgamation of colleges, formed as a division of the University of Durham, into an effective institution and planned a successful post-war expansion in scientific and technical departments; this gave it the impetus to become, after his death, the independent University of Newcastle. In 1944 he chaired the Ministry of Education's committee on higher technological education, recommending closer ties with industry. After retiring as rector in October 1952, he was created Baron Percy of Newcastle (on 12 February 1953). He chaired the Burnham committee on teachers' salaries from 1953 to 1956 and the royal commission on the law relating to mental illness and mental deficiency from 1954 to 1957, the basis for the 1959 'Mental Health Act'. He also resumed his reflections on government in 'The Heresy of Democracy' (1954), and published one of the most intelligent, interesting, and self-critical political autobiographies, 'Some Memories' (1958). He died at his home, the Old Rectory, Etchingham, Sussex, on 3 April 1958, when his title became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 35474


Percy, Henry Algernon George, Earl Percy (1871-1909), politician and traveller, was born at 25 Grosvenor Square, London, on 21 January 1871, the eldest of the six sons of Henry George Percy, Earl Percy (1846-1918), who became the seventh duke of Northumberland, and his wife, Lady Edith Campbell (1849-1913), daughter of the eighth duke of Argyll. Until 1899 he was known as Lord Warkworth. From 1884 to 1889 he attended Eton College, where he won the prize for English verse, and then Christ Church, Oxford, obtaining first-class honours in classical moderations in 1891 and in 'literae humaniores' in 1893. At Oxford he also won the Newdigate prize for English verse in 1892, writing on the subject of St Francis of Assisi. 
In the 1895 general election Warkworth stood unsuccessfully as the Conservative candidate for Berwick upon Tweed. But later in that year he was successful at a by-election in South Kensington, and he represented this constituency until his death. In 1895 he also first visited Turkey and the other areas of the Near East which were to form an abiding personal and political interest for him. He travelled to the area again in 1897, and wrote of his experiences in 'Notes of a Diary in Asiatic Turkey' (1898), in which he stated that he had 'no desire to conceal my sympathy with the Turks' (p. xii). He visited again in 1899, subsequently writing 'The Highlands of Asiatic Turkey' (1901), in which he began to expound more fully his views on the political situation in the region, concluding his work with the chapter 'Wanted, a policy'. Earl Percy (as he was known from 1899, when his father succeeded to the dukedom) promoted an alliance between Germany and Britain over Turkey to promote stability and stem Russian influence. 
By the time Percy was invited, in July 1902, by the new prime minister, Balfour, to become parliamentary under-secretary for India, he was acknowledged as 'a well-known expert on Middle Eastern problems... [and] one of the leading Turcophiles on the conservative side' (Steiner, 59). He moved much more effectively into his area of interest when he was appointed under-secretary to the foreign secretary, Lord Lansdowne, the following year. In this role Percy was unusually independent of his chief, particularly in connection with issues related to the Near East. With his perhaps excessive sympathy for Turkey, Percy regarded the issue of Macedonia as 'one of the most important with which he had to deal' and he took a 'rather different' standpoint on this matter from that being promoted generally within government ('The Times', 31 Dec 1909, 11). 
Despite disagreements on policy, Percy's talents were well recognized by party leaders. He has been widely credited as the author of the proposal to renew and strengthen the Anglo-Japanese alliance, which resulted in this 'decisive step' being taken by the government in 1905 (Monger, 180). After losing office with the fall of the Conservative government in 1905, Percy contributed forcefully to the debates concerning Indian reform; he was particularly concerned to see that Muslims in India were not disadvantaged by proposed electoral arrangements. The committee of the London branch of the All-India Muslim League later expressed their thanks to Percy 'whose consistent friendship towards the Musulman subjects of his Majesty had won their grateful regard and esteem' ('The Times', 13 Jan 1910, 11). 
Percy's abilities and his political potential were highly respected both within the Conservative Party and more broadly across the parliament. Balfour said of his 'dear friend' that he was 'destined to play a very great and leading part in the history of his country' ('The Times', 31 Dec 1909, 7), while the Liberal Asquith described Percy as 'one of the most distinguished of the younger men amongst our opponents... in the first rank as a public and parliamentary speaker. He had shown in office great administrative talents' ('The Times', 4 Jan 1910, 5). Percy became a trustee of the National Gallery in 1901 and in 1907 received the degree of DCL from the University of Durham. While travelling through France he contracted pneumonia, and he died on 30 December 1909 at the Gare du Nord Hotel, Paris. He was buried in the Lesbury churchyard, near Alnwick, Northumberland, on 4 January 1910. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 35475


Pereira, George Edward (1865-1923), army officer and explorer, was born on 26 January 1865, at 4 Upper Portland Place, Marylebone, London. He was the second of four children and eldest son of Edward Pereira (1817-1872), gentleman, of 23 Grosvenor Square, and his wife, the Hon. Margaret Anne Stonor (1839-1894), eighth daughter of Thomas Stonor, third Baron Camoys, and his wife, Frances. 
Educated at the Oratory School, Edgbaston (1876-83) under Cardinal Newman, and at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst (1883-4) where he was a contemporary of Leslie Napier Younghusband, brother of Sir Francis Younghusband, Pereira was commissioned in the 3rd battalion of the Grenadier Guards on 23 August 1884. A hunting accident in January 1885 left him with a permanent limp which threatened his two great ambitions -- to see active service and to explore unknown lands. Hoping to be selected for the expeditionary force to the Sudan, he went to Cairo to learn Arabic, but his lameness was against him and he remained on home service until 1899. 
In April 1899 Captain Pereira was seconded for service with the Chinese regiment of infantry recently formed at Weihaiwei. In 1900 he took part in the fighting at Tientsin (Tianjin) where he was slightly wounded and in the relief of the legations at Peking (Beijing). He was awarded the DSO 'in recognition of services during the recent operations in China'. After spending much of 1901 touring the provinces of north-east China, Major Pereira in May 1902 rejoined his battalion in South Africa for the campaigns in the Transvaal and Cape Colony. Late in 1903 he went to Korea, and in January 1904 he was appointed temporary military attache to the British minister at Seoul in Korea. In 1905, as military attache with the Japanese army, he witnessed the Manchurian campaign, and at its close became military attache at Peking, a post he held until 1910. He was made a CMG in March 1906. 
As military attache Pereira made a series of long journeys in every part of China during 1906-8, visiting various units of the Chinese army. His tact and understanding and his conversational ability enabled him to make many personal friends among high officials. The knowledge he gained of Chinese people from the soldiers of his Weihaiwei regiment to the highest levels of officialdom was of great value for his later travels. He came back to Europe in 1909, but peacetime soldiering held no attractions and he resigned his commission in July of that year. 
In the following year Pereira returned to China and journeyed from Peking through Chihli (Zhili) and Shansi, across the Ordos to Ninghsia. In 1911 he spent nine months exploring and shooting in the Altai and T'ien Shan. In 1912 he visited the Kumbun and Labrang monasteries in south-western Kansu before moving south along the upper reaches of the Salween and Mekong rivers and crossing briefly into the Shan states in Burma. He then moved across country to Foochow (Fuzhou) and by steamer to Shanghai. During these years he travelled 11,000 miles on foot. 
In September 1913 Pereira became a lieutenant-colonel in the reserve officers list, and being at home on the outbreak of war in 1914 he rejoined the service. He was posted to the staff of the 47th London division and went to France with them. In June 1915 he took command of the 4th Royal Welch Fusiliers and led them in the battle of Loos, where he was slightly wounded. From January 1916 until November 1917 he commanded the 47th brigade of the 16th division. In 1918 he commanded the 43rd brigade during the final advance of the allies. He was made CB in January 1917. He always won the absolute confidence of his troops by his complete disregard for danger. He retired at the end of the war with the rank of brigadier-general and in 1919 joined General Knox's mission to Admiral Kolchak in Siberia. 
Pereira returned to China in 1920, over fifty-four years old, lame, in indifferent health, and with the goal of Lhasa in mind. As a schoolboy he had read the account by two French Lazarist missionaries, Evariste Huc and Joseph Gabet, of their journey to Lhasa in 1846, an achievement which had never been repeated by Europeans. He left Peking in January 1921 crossing the famine-stricken provinces of Chihli, Shensi (Shanxi), and Honan (Henan). He went to Honan Fu (Loyang) at the invitation of General Wu P'ei-fu in order to visit his model army. From July to October Pereira undertook three most arduous shooting trips in the wild mountainous district of Muping in Szechwan (Sichuan), hoping to shoot a giant panda, a rare animal that few Europeans had seen. He failed to get one but did shoot a pandar cat or red panda, equally rare, which was sent to the Natural History Museum at South Kensington. Because of the constant need to ford streams and climb slippery surfaces he discarded his boots and tried native sandals, but these gave his feet little protection and he was laid up in one town for seven weeks with a poisoned foot. In his last camp at 10,000 feet the cold and wet forced him to return to town, walking 48 miles in sandals through deep snow. He was again laid up, suffering from frost-bitten feet. 
Pereira left Tangar in Kansu in May 1922, and reached Jyekundo on 23 June, after crossing an area with little food or grazing, and waterless in places. During this journey he lost most of his transport animals, but was fortunate in obtaining assistance from passing caravans. Chamdo was reached on 28 July after eighteen days of difficult travelling. On 3 September he received permission to proceed to Lhasa. The next six weeks were spent in a succession of journeys following valleys and crossing numerous passes, varying in height from 14,500 to 16,800 feet, scrambling over tracks covered with large boulders where the height above sea level made every step an exertion. Pereira arrived at Lhasa on 17 October, completely exhausted and suffering from thrombosis in his left leg. There he was comfortably housed by the Tibetan commander-in-chief, and had an interview with Tubten Gyatso, the great thirteenth Dalai Lama. He returned through Gyantse and Darjeeling, reaching Calcutta early in December, where he was treated in hospital for thrombosis. 
In January 1923 Pereira left Calcutta for Bhamo in Burma, crossing into Yunnan, visiting Lolo and Miao areas, and then travelling down the Yangtze (Yangzi) to Shanghai which he reached on 13 May. He returned through Indo-China to Yunnan where he was joined by Dr H. G. Thompson and together they made their way to Batang in Szechwan. On the next stage of their journey to Kantze, Pereira became seriously ill and died from gastric ulcers on 20 October 1923. He was buried in the Chinese cemetery in the shadow of the Great Kantze Lamasery about 30 miles from the Tibetan border. His remains were later transferred to consecrated ground in the Roman Catholic mission at Tatsienlu (Dajianlu). 
Pereira kept detailed diaries recording his travels and the people whom he met. Some of this material appeared in his articles written for the 'Geographical Journal'. These diaries are now in the Royal Geographical Society together with his photographs. An account of his journey from Peking to Lhasa was printed as an official report in 1923, but it was his friend Francis Younghusband who compiled 'Peking to Lhasa: narrative of journeys in the Chinese empire made by the late Brigadier-General George Pereira' (1925). 
Pereira was 5 feet 9 inches tall, lame, and not physically strong. He had, however, great energy, a genius for leadership, and an absolute determination to carry out his plans combined with an indifference to danger, discomfort, and fatigue. He was ready to talk about his journeys but in a purely impersonal manner. Although he had a very proper sense of self-respect, and was not a man to be trifled with, he had great charm and was modest with an innate courtesy and a dry sense of humour. 'It is lucky therefore that the brigands are so utterly ignorant of brigandage as a fine art'. His experiences of brigands he described as 'a regular Gilbert and Sullivan opera'. He spoke Mandarin Chinese and had some knowledge of dialects which made him independent of interpreters for all but Tibetan conversations. He was deeply religious and a devout Catholic, but with a broad sympathy for people of all kinds. Army life coupled with a restless spirit made him disinclined to a settled life and he never married though he remained devoted to his family. 
Pereira's journeys, mostly on foot, through areas of eastern Tibet and western China rarely if ever crossed by Europeans covered almost 45,000 miles. They were made in unsettled times, frequently verging on civil war, and produced much new topographical and ethnographical information, including the first accounts of Mount Amne Machin. His reports confirmed the belief that the Himalayas end in Assam and Burma rather than extending into China. Had he lived he would have been recommended for the gold medal of the Royal Geographical Society. 


@@@@@


doc= 35476


Perkin, Arthur George (1861-1937), organic chemist, was born on 13 December 1861 at Sudbury, Middlesex, the younger son of Sir William Henry Perkin (1838-1907), manufacturing chemist, and his first wife, Jemima Harriet (died 1862), youngest daughter of John Lissett. His elder brother, also William Henry Perkin (1860-1929), became the leading British organic chemist of his generation, ending his career as Waynflete professor of chemistry, University of Oxford. Arthur's delicate health did not prevent his being sent in the late 1860s to a boarding-school at Margate. In 1872 he joined his brother at the City of London School, chosen by their father, himself an old boy, for its good science teaching. During the holidays the boys, who were dedicated to chemical research, experimented in a hut fitted as a laboratory in the garden of their home. They were also excellent musicians: Arthur played the flute in the nine-strong family orchestra. 
In 1878 Perkin entered the Royal College of Chemistry, London, where he studied under Edward Frankland and Frederick Guthrie. Having spent the year 1880-81 working under E. J. Mills at Anderson's College, Glasgow, he won a Clothworkers' Company scholarship tenable in the newly opened colour chemistry and dyeing department of the Yorkshire College of Science, Leeds (later Leeds University), where he researched with J. J. Hummell from whom he derived a lifelong interest in natural dyes. 
In 1882 Perkin became chemist and in 1888 manager at the alizarin works of Hardman and Holden in Manchester. In 1887 he married Annie Florence, daughter of James E. Bedford of Leeds; he had met her through an acquaintance with her brother, Charles Bedford, a fellow researcher at Leeds. Indeed, the centrality of Leeds in Perkin's life was confirmed in 1892 when he returned there as a lecturer and research assistant (retitled to research chemist in 1907) in the colour chemistry and dyeing department of Yorkshire College. Aided by a light teaching load and the Clothworkers' Research Laboratory, opened in 1900, he enjoyed twenty-two years of intense research and incessant publication on the structure and properties of natural dyes. Though he mainly left it to others to confirm by synthesis his postulated structures, he was so skilful in exploiting degradative methods that he was elected a fellow of the royal societies of Edinburgh (1893) and London (1903) and attracted research students from abroad, especially from India and Japan. 
In 1916 Perkin succeeded A. G. Green as professor of colour chemistry and dyeing at Leeds. He contributed to the chemists' war by researching for the Ministry of Munitions and leading the Leeds colony of British Dyes' research chemists. With A. E. Everest he published in 1918 a classic text, 'The Natural Organic Colouring Matters'; he received the accolade of the Royal Society's Davy medal in 1924, and retired officially in 1926 but continued to research in his department until February 1937 when he was taken ill. He died at home, Grosvenor Lodge, Grosvenor Road, Headingley, Leeds, on 30 May 1937 and was buried at Adel, Leeds, on 2 June 1937. He was survived by his wife. 
Both Perkin and his brother had childless marriages; both earned the nickname 'Pa Perkin' from their students, and, again like his brother, Perkin was a dab hand at the research bench where he thrived on noxious vapours. He maintained his interest in music, as first bassoon in amateur orchestras in Yorkshire. Unlike his brother, he was neither a discipline builder nor an activist in national scientific affairs. Gentle and unambitious, he was happy to spend thirty-four years at Leeds (which conferred an honorary DSc on him in 1927), enjoying research in his laboratory, where he chain-smoked, summer holidays always taken in the Isle of Man, and his domestic pets. 


@@@@@


doc= 35477


Perkin, Sir William Henry (1838-1907), chemist, was born on 12 March 1838 at King David's Lane, Shadwell, London, youngest of the three sons of George Fowler Perkin (1802-1865), a builder and contractor, and his wife, Sarah Cuthbert. With his two brothers and three sisters he inherited a pronounced musical talent from his father. He also inherited a strong Anglican faith, and religion played an extremely important role in his life. After early education at a private school Perkin was sent in 1851 to the City of London School, where his aptitude for chemistry was encouraged by his teacher, Thomas Hall. In 1853 he entered the Royal College of Chemistry as a student under August Wilhelm Hofmann. By the end of the second year he had, under Hofmann's guidance, carried out his first piece of research, the results of which he announced in a paper read before the Chemical Society of London. 
In 1854 Perkin fitted up a laboratory at his home, where he undertook independent research, sometimes collaborating with Arthur H. Church, and the next year he started work as Hofmann's assistant. During the Easter vacation of 1856 Perkin attempted, in his home laboratory, to synthesize quinine by oxidizing a salt of allyltoluidine with potassium dichromate. The experiment failed. On repeating the method with aniline instead of the toluidine derivative, he obtained on work-up a purple-coloured solution which proved to possess dyeing properties, especially on silk. This was the first aniline or coal-tar dye to be discovered. Encouraged by Pullars of Perth, he filed a patent for this process (patent no. 1984 of August 1856). 
Perkin now resigned his position at the Royal College of Chemistry and embarked on a career in industrial chemistry. Assisted by his father and brother Thomas Dix Perkin he opened a chemical factory at Greenford Green, north-west of London, towards the end of 1858. The dye was first manufactured at the Perkins' works under the name of 'aniline purple' or 'Tyrian purple'. The name 'mauve', from the French word for the mallow flower, was given to the dye in England early in 1859 (chemists later called it mauveine). Perkin developed improved processes for manufacture of nitrobenzene from coal-tar benzene, and reduction of the nitro compound to aniline. He also undertook research into silk dyeing, and, of far greater commercial importance, the application of mauve to cotton dyeing and (calico) printing, for which mordants were required. Perkin's discovery and manufacture of the first aniline dye eventually led to the displacement of natural by artificial, or synthetic, dyestuffs, also made from various coal-tar products. In recognition of his invention of the mauve process, the 'Societe Industrielle de Mulhouse' awarded him, in 1859, a silver medal, and afterwards a gold medal. 
On 13 September 1859 Perkin married Jemima Harriet Lissett (died 1862), daughter of John Lissett, of Huguenot descent. There were two sons, William Henry Perkin (1860-1929) and Arthur George Perkin (1861-1937). Following Jemima's death Perkin married, on 8 February 1866, Alexandrine (Sascha) Caroline Mollwo, daughter of Ivan Herman Mollwo, of Russian descent. She was the mother of Perkin's third son, Frederick Mollwo Perkin, and four daughters, Helen, Mary, Lucie, and Annie. William Henry Perkin became professor of organic chemistry at Manchester University and later Oxford; Arthur George and Frederick Mollwo both distinguished themselves in the same branch of science as their father. 
In 1868 the German chemists Carl Graebe and Carl Liebermann showed that alizarin, the important red dyestuff present in the root of the madder plant and widely used in calico printing and Turkey red dyeing on cotton, was a derivative of the coal-tar hydrocarbon anthracene (and not, as previously believed, of naphthalene). Although they patented a process for synthesis of alizarin the product was too costly to compete with the red dye from the madder plant. During 1869 Perkin, and, independently, the Hoechst dyeworks and Heinrich Caro at BASF, developed much more economical (and almost identical) processes for the manufacture of artificial alizarin via a sulphonic acid derivative of anthraquinone. Perkin also invented a process based on dichloroanthracene. This afforded an anthraquinone derivative similar to alizarin that found considerable use as a textile dye. During 1869-70 Perkin and BASF pooled their resources and agreed to divide up the European market in synthetic alizarin. Perkin, with his brother, designed and erected suitable manufacturing plant. 
This branch of the coal-tar dye industry developed rapidly, and through the displacement of the madder dye and the application of formal knowledge to industrial problem-solving, foreshadowed the age of modern, science-based industry. The English market in alizarin was almost entirely held by the Perkins until the end of 1873, at which time intense competition and major technical advances by German manufacturers led the Perkins to sell their works to the firm of Brooke, Simpson, and Spiller. Following retirement after eighteen years in the synthetic dye industry, William Perkin thereafter devoted himself to pure chemical research at his home, The Chestnuts, in Sudbury, near Harrow. Perkin delivered before the Society of Arts in 1879 two lectures, which were published under the title 'The History of Alizarin and Allied Colouring Matters, and their Production from Coal-Tar'. These described mainly Perkin's work on the manufacture of alizarin. 
Even while actively engaged in industrial work Perkin had maintained a strong interest in pure chemistry, publishing many papers in 'Transactions of the Chemical Society' (where his contributions finally numbered ninety). In 1867 he published a description of his method for synthesizing unsaturated organic acids, later known as the 'Perkin synthesis'. During the following year the synthesis of coumarin, the odorous substance contained in such plant products as the tonka bean, was announced, and the continuation of this work after his retirement from industry led to his discovery of the synthesis of cinnamic acid from benzaldehyde. Scientific papers on the chemistry of mauve were published between 1863 and 1879. In 1881 he first drew attention to the magnetic rotatory power of some of the compounds which he had prepared in his researches. It was mainly to the study of this property as applied to the investigation of the constitutions of various compounds that he devoted the rest of his life. 
Perkin's services were widely recognized. He joined the Chemical Society of London in 1856, was its president from 1883 to 1885, and received its Longstaff medal in 1888. He was elected FRS in 1866 and received from the Royal Society a royal medal in 1879, and the Davy medal in 1889. He was president of the Society of Chemical Industry in 1884-5, receiving its gold medal in 1898, and at his death was president of the Society of Dyers and Colourists. The Society of Arts conferred on him its Albert medal in 1890, and the Institution of Gas Engineers its Birmingham medal in 1892. He also received honorary doctorates from the universities of Wurzburg (1882), St Andrews (1891), and Manchester (1904). 
In July 1906 the jubilee of Perkin's discovery of mauve was celebrated in Europe and North America. Perkin was knighted and received honorary doctorates from the universities of Oxford, Leeds, Heidelberg, Columbia, Johns Hopkins, and the Munich Technische Hochschule. He was presented with the Hofmann medal by the German Chemical Society, the Lavoisier medal by the French Chemical Society, and a special Perkin research medal by the New York section of the Society of Chemical Industry. After his death, a sum of $2000, subscribed by chemists of all countries, was handed to the Chemical Society as the Perkin memorial fund, to be applied to the encouragement of research in topics related to the coal-tar and allied industries. A Perkin medal was instituted by the Society of Dyers and Colourists in recognition of contributions to the 'tinctorial industries'. The first recipients, in 1908, were Graebe and Liebermann. An American joint committee extended the Perkin research medal initiative with, from 1908, a Perkin medal for American chemists engaged in industry-related work. 
Perkin attended Christ Church, South Harrow, and supported Anglican and Free Church places of worship with considerable generosity. He died at his home in Sudbury on 14 July 1907, and was buried at Christ Church; his second wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35478


Perkin, William Henry (1860-1929), organic chemist, was born on 17 June 1860 at 1 or 2 Chesham Villas, Sudbury, Middlesex, the elder son of Sir William Henry Perkin (1838-1907), manufacturing chemist, and his first wife, Jemima Harriet (died 1862), youngest daughter of John Lissett. Having attended two preparatory schools, in 1870 Perkin entered the City of London School where he was stimulated by good teaching in science and mathematics. Simultaneously he worked in his father's private laboratory. Though his father did not give him formal instruction, Perkin imbibed the idea of research as a supreme good. As a boy he followed his father in becoming an accomplished pianist and violinist. In 1877 he migrated to the Royal College of Chemistry, London, where he studied under Edward Frankland and W. R. E. Hodgkinson, head of the laboratories, who had worked under Johannes Wislicenus. After some hesitation by his father, who regarded Germany as a dangerous centre of free thought, Perkin went in 1880 to Wurzburg to work for a PhD under Wislicenus, a master of syntheses in organic chemistry and an undictatorial paternalist as a supervisor. 
Having gained his doctorate in 1882, Perkin spent four years at the University of Munich with Adolf von Baeyer, mainly as a 'privat Dozent' and personal research assistant. Baeyer soon became a chemical hero for Perkin, who was amazed by the excellent laboratories designed by him and impressed by the research productivity achieved by his steadfastness at the laboratory bench. A master of structural organic chemistry, Baeyer was generally indifferent to theory and to the then-new physical chemistry. Above all, Baeyer created by example an atmosphere in which research was the only thing that mattered, so that his research group was outstanding in size, productivity, and endurability. Perkin also saw that over half of Baeyer's researchers went into industry or commerce. In these ways Baeyer provided for Perkin an example to be followed or modified. 
In 1886 Perkin accepted an invitation from Harold Dixon, professor of chemistry at Owens College, Manchester, to work in a vacant laboratory there. Next year he became the first professor of chemistry at the Heriot-Watt College, Edinburgh, where his assistant was Frederic Stanley Kipping, who had studied under him at Munich. They soon began the collaboration which produced three enduring textbooks, 'Practical Chemistry' (1890), 'Organic Chemistry' (1894-5), and 'Inorganic Chemistry' (1909). On 31 December 1887 Perkin married Mina, the eldest daughter of William Thomas Holland, of Bridgwater. They had met in Manchester in Kipping's home where she was staying with a younger sister, Lily, Kipping's fiancee. Elected FRS in 1890 Perkin accepted in 1892 an invitation to succeed Carl Schorlemmer as professor of organic chemistry at Owens College. 
At Manchester, Perkin created an internationally renowned school of organic chemistry in which two future Nobel prizewinners, Walter Norman Howarth and Robert Robinson, both Manchester graduates, and the first president of Israel, Chaim Weizmann, were trained. The Perkin group of organic chemists was accommodated in impressive new research laboratories, some of which Perkin designed. He had an enviable knack of being associated with such munificent external endowments as the Schorlemmer Laboratory (1895), the Levinstein Laboratory (1895), the Schunck Laboratory (1904), and the John Morley Laboratories (1909) paid for mainly by Andrew Carnegie. In this greatly expanded accommodation, chiefly devoted to organic chemistry and unrivalled in any British university, Perkin pursued research and consultancies, encouraged pure and technical organic chemistry, and launched his pupils on academic and industrial careers. For Perkin there was no divide between pure and applied chemistry. Though his forte lay in producing academic organic chemists, he was concerned about the British organic chemical industry, which in his view relied too much on rule-of-thumb methods and neglected research because it was obsessed with short-term commercial interests. His solution was to produce trained research chemists for industry and establish co-operation on the German model between industry and universities. He did lucrative commercial work in his university laboratories at Manchester, his final venture being the manufacture of synthetic rubber. The project was marred for Perkin by a fracas with Weizmann, whom he sacked from the rubber team. 
In 1912 Perkin was invited by the University of Oxford to become Waynflete professor of chemistry, to rescue the subject from the parlous state to which it had sunk under William Odling. He accepted the chair on the understanding that his main role would be to build up research as rapidly as possible. Aware of Oxford's conservatism, collegiate structure, devotion to arts subjects, suspicion of specialized research, and hostility to industry, Perkin acted resolutely. He maintained his output of research and played a leading role in persuading the university, at a time of national emergency, to add a fourth year of research to the existing degree course in chemistry (1916) and to establish the research degree of DPhil (1917). Exploiting the dire contingency of war, he introduced into Oxford the notion and practice of industrial research, using chemists employed by the government-backed British Dyes and recruited mainly from outside Oxford. He persuaded Charles William Dyson Perrins, partner in the famous Worcestershire Sauce firm, to pay two-thirds of the cost of the first stage of a new chemical laboratory completed in 1916 and then, with an entrepreneurial wiliness bordering on deception, induced the university to pay for most of the second stage opened in 1922. 
In this Indian summer of his career Perkin suffered some disappointments: he had to recruit staff from outside Oxford, very few of his proteges secured permanent posts at Oxford, and only a handful of Oxford graduates researched with him. Even so he put organic chemistry at Oxford on the international map. His interests in music, horticulture, hospitality, and travel helped to make his aims and practices eventually acceptable in Oxford. At Manchester he was such an accomplished pianist that he played duets with the famous violinist Adolf Brodsky. At his Oxford home Perkin soon removed a partition wall to create a long room for chamber music. To the end of his life he practised at his piano every day before breakfast. For diversion on train journeys he used to read the score of a string quartet. He had green fingers with flowering plants, of which many were donated to the University Parks. He kept a good cellar and gave many parties at Magdalen, his college. In summer he regularly visited the Swiss and Italian lakes. Such connoisseurship, which made him an English version of the best sort of German professor, ended in 1929 when his robust health gave way. Perhaps weakened by strychnine, which he was studying, and by accidental poisoning by mercury vapour, he died at his home, 5 Charlbury Road, Oxford, on 17 September 1929 from pleurisy which affected his heart; he was buried at Wolvercote cemetery near Oxford on 19 September. His will showed his unfaltering commitment to research. His marriage being childless, the bulk of his estate reverted after his wife's death to Magdalen College for research studentships in organic chemistry. 
A large, portly man, gruff-voiced and with a bushy moustache in his prime, Perkin was the leading British organic chemist of his generation, being awarded the Longstaff medal of the Chemical Society (1900), of which he was president 1913-15, and the Davy and royal medals of the Royal Society (1904, 1925). With his large hands and spatulate fingers he was a renowned experimentalist who could induce reactions to 'go' and gums to crystallize. He was a bench chemist who adored the laboratory and its ineffable art. His field of research was not new or wide: he worked on the determination of the structure of naturally occurring organic substances, using the established techniques of degradation (breaking the substance down into identifiable fragments) and synthesis (making it from chemicals of known composition and structure by a series of controlled reactions whose course was indisputable). He exploited reagents and reactions devised by others, but in his time the Perkin triangle was a piece of apparatus widely used in collecting fractions during distillation under reduced pressure. All his life he suspected that physical chemistry was bogus so he did not use physical methods. Except in his research on synthesizing compounds containing rings composed of three, four, and five atoms of carbon, which confirmed Baeyer's strain theory, he avoided theoretical chemistry. 
With a rare combination of ability, enthusiasm, stamina, and guile, Perkin managed to continue at Oxford his Mancunian roles of researcher, research school director, designer of new laboratories, and securer of external funding. His research students and associates regarded him with respect and affection. They had confidence in his fairness and judgement; they admired his honesty, sincerity, and his unaffected large-heartedness, and revered him as 'Pa Perkin'. His pupils filled many chairs in British universities, mainly in organic chemistry, the best known being Robinson, his successor at Oxford and closest collaborator, W. N. Haworth, J. L. Simonsen, Kipping, J. F. Thorpe, H. C. H. Carpenter, W. A. Bone, F. L. Pyman, W. O. Kermack, J. Kenyon, G. R. Clemo, J. M. Gulland, R. D. Haworth, and W. Baker. Through them the Perkin gospel dominated British organic chemistry as long as it was concerned with structure, not mechanism, and as long as physical techniques of investigation were not widely employed. 


@@@@@


doc= 35479


Perkins, Sir Aeneas (1834-1901), army officer, born at Lewisham, Kent, on 19 May 1834, was the sixth son in a family of thirteen children of Charles Perkins, merchant, of London, and his wife, Jane Homby, daughter of Charles William Barkley ('b'. 1759), after whom Barkley Sound and Island in the Pacific are named. His grandfather was John Perkins of Camberwell, a partner in Barclay and Perkins's brewery. A brother George, in the Bengal artillery, was killed at the battle of the Hindan before Delhi in 1857. Perkins was educated at Dr Prendergast's school at Lewisham and at Stoton and Mayor's school at Wimbledon, where Frederick Roberts, his lifelong friend, was his schoolfellow. He entered Addiscombe College on 1 February 1850, at the same time as Roberts. Perkins showed ability in mathematics, and was a leader in all sports. Commissioned second lieutenant, Bengal Engineers, on 12 December 1851, he, after professional instruction at Chatham, arrived at Fort William, Calcutta, on 16 January 1854. 
As assistant engineer in the public works department Perkins was soon employed on irrigation work on the Bari Doab Canal in the Punjab. Promoted first lieutenant on 17 August 1856, he was transferred in November to the Ambala division, and in the following May, when the Indian mutiny began, joined the force under General George Anson, commander-in-chief in India, which marched to the relief of Delhi. Perkins was present at the battle of Badli-ki-sarai on 8 June, and at the seizure of the Delhi Ridge. He did much good work during the early part of the siege. On 11-12 June he was employed in the construction of a mortar battery -- known as 'Perkins's battery'. On 17 June he took part in the destruction of a rebel battery and the capture of its guns, and on 14 July in the repulse of the sortie. He was wounded a few days later near the walls of Delhi, and sent to Ambala. Although he soon recovered from the wound, he was forced by broken health to remain there until March 1858, when he was invalided home. 
After returning to India in 1859 Perkins held various offices in Bengal, including those of assistant principal of the Civil Engineering College at Calcutta, assistant consulting engineer for the railways, and executive engineer of the Berhampore division. On 12 March 1862 he was promoted second captain. He married in 1863 Janette Wilhelmina (who survived him), daughter of Werner Cathray, formerly 13th light dragoons, and they had two sons -- Major Arthur Ernest John Perkins, and Major Aeneas Charles Perkins, 40th Pathans -- and three daughters. 
In the autumn of 1864 Perkins took part as field engineer in the Bhutan expedition, during which he was three times mentioned in dispatches for gallant conduct, and was recommended for a brevet majority. Towards the end of the expedition he was appointed chief engineer of the force. A Victoria Cross recommendation for gallantry in storming a stockade at the summit of the Baru Pass was rejected as too late. For his services in Bhutan, he received a brevet majority on 30 June 1865. 
Perkins was executive engineer at Murshidabad, and from 1866 in the Darjeeling division. Promoted first captain in his corps on 31 October 1868, two years later he was sent to the North-Western Provinces as superintending engineer, and in April 1872 he was transferred in the same grade to the military works branch. He became regimental major on 5 July 1872, brevet lieutenant-colonel on 29 December 1874, and regimental lieutenant-colonel on 1 October 1877. 
A year later, at Roberts's request, Perkins was selected for active service in Afghanistan, and was appointed commanding royal engineer of Roberts's Kurram field force. During the operations in front of the Paiwar Pass he skilfully reconnoitred the enemy's position, and selected a site from which the mountain battery could shell the Afghan camp. The works carried on under his orders in the Kurram valley greatly facilitated the subsequent advance on Kabul. He was mentioned in dispatches, and was made a CB in 1879. On the conclusion of peace with Sirdar Yakub Khan, Perkins remained in the Kurram valley, laying out a cantonment at Shalofzan, but on the news of the massacre of Sir Louis Cavagnari and his escort at Kabul an immediate advance was made by the Kurram column, and Perkins was present at the victory of Charasia on 6 October, and at the entry into Kabul (8 October 1879), and was mentioned in dispatches. The engineers' work was then very heavy. At Kabul the Sherpur cantonment and Bala Hissar had to be repaired, and a new line of communication with India via Jalalabad had to be opened out. The Sherpur cantonment was rendered defensible by the beginning of December, just in time. A few days later the Afghans assembled in such overwhelming numbers that Roberts had to concentrate his entire force within the walls of Sherpur. Under Perkins's direction emplacements and abatis were rapidly constructed, blockhouses were built on the Bemaru heights, walls and villages dangerously near the cantonment were blown up and levelled, and a second line of defence within the enclosure was improvised. On 23 December the enemy attacked in great numbers. They were repulsed, and dispersed by a counter-attack. Perkins was mentioned in dispatches and promoted brevet colonel on 29 December 1879. 
Perkins attempted to make the position at Kabul secure. A fort and blockhouse were erected on the Siah Sang Ridge, the Bala Hissar and the Asmai heights were fortified, Sherpur was converted into a strongly entrenched camp, bridges were built across the Kabul River, the main roads were made passable for artillery, and many new roads were constructed. The works completed during the next seven months, mostly by unskilled Afghan labour, comprised ten forts, fifteen detached posts, three large and several small bridges, 4000 yards of loopholed parapet, 45 miles of road, and quarters for 8000 men. At the end of July 1880 the news of the Maiwand disaster reached Kabul. Perkins accompanied Roberts as commanding royal engineer with the force of 10,000 men in the famous march to Kandahar, and was at the battle of Kandahar on 1 September 1880. Soon afterwards he returned to India, and was made an aide-de-camp to the queen. 
Perkins rejoined the military works department, was appointed superintending engineer at Rawalpindi, and from April to July 1881 officiated as inspector-general of military works. After two years' furlough he was appointed chief engineer of the Central Provinces, was transferred in the same capacity in April 1886 to the Punjab, and on 10 March 1887 was promoted major-general. In May 1889, on reaching fifty-five, he vacated his military works appointment, and in 1890 was selected by Roberts, then commander-in-chief in India, to command the Oudh division, but this command was cut short by his promotion to lieutenant-general on 1 April 1891, and he returned to England. He was promoted general on 1 April 1895, made a colonel commandant, Royal Engineers, on the same date, and in 1897 was made KCB. He died at his home, 1 Bolton Street, Piccadilly, London, on 22 December 1901, and was buried at Brookwood cemetery, near Woking, Surrey. Roberts considered him 'an unusually intelligent, energetic gallant officer with considerable experience of war' ('Roberts in India', 69) and publicly praised him as 'talented and indefatigable' ('Forty-one Years', 373). However, Charles Metcalfe MacGregor described him as 'about the worst tempered fellow I know', and when he left the Oudh division it was described as 'the third relief of Lucknow' (Robson, 428). 


@@@@@


doc= 35480


Perkins, Robert Cyril Layton (1866-1955), entomologist, was born on 15 November 1866 at Badminton, Gloucestershire, the second of the five children of the Revd Charles Mathew Perkins and his wife, Agnes Martha Beach, daughter of the Revd Percy Thomas. His grandfather, father, and uncle were all interested in natural history and Perkins himself showed an interest in the subject from a very early age. He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School (1877-85) and Jesus College, Oxford, where after two years he changed from classics to science, obtaining a fourth class in 1889. His first great interest in entomology was Lepidoptera, but contact with Edward Saunders during his last years at school fostered an interest in Aculeata (stinging wasps, ants, and bees), which he retained throughout his life. 
Perkins briefly worked as a private tutor at Dartmouth, but in 1891 was selected by the Sandwich Islands committee (set up by the British Association and the Royal Society) to go as collector to the Hawaiian Islands. There he spent the greater part of the next ten years collecting all groups of terrestrial animals -- returning to England periodically to work on the results. His expeditions into the islands' interiors were almost always made alone, since local porters refused to stay in the forest. As a result each trip was limited to about six weeks as, being short and spare in stature, he was unable to carry equipment for a longer stay. 
In 1895 Perkins met Albert Koebele, and in the next few years helped him with the liberation of insect parasites which Koebele was sending to Honolulu for the control of pests. In 1897 they visited Mexico, where, from observations of the 'Lantana' weed, they started the successful use of insects in controlling its spread in the Hawaiian Islands. In 1901 Perkins married Zoe Lucy Sherrard Alatau (died 1940), daughter of A. T. Atkinson, sometime superintendent of public schools in the Hawaiian Islands, and granddaughter of Thomas Witlam Atkinson. Of their four sons, one died in infancy. From 1902 to 1904 Perkins worked for the board of agriculture of the Territory of Hawaii, organizing inspection of imported plants to prevent the introduction of pests. 
In 1904 Perkins became director of the new division of entomology at the Hawaiian Sugar Planters' Association's experimental station. The most urgent problem was to prevent the havoc then being wrought by the sugar cane leafhopper. No suitable means could be found of applying insecticides in cane fields, and so Perkins and Koebele went to Australia to collect the parasites of leafhoppers in the cane fields there, where the insects appeared to cause little damage. After returning to the Hawaiian Islands they raised stocks of the parasites for liberation and dispersal in the cane fields, where their introduction proved of great benefit. This work occupied Perkins throughout the day. At night he spent long hours studying the classification of these insects, of which little was known. He was able to correlate various biological observations with taxonomy, particularly in the Dryinidae, and the results of this work were published by the Hawaiian Sugar Planters' Association in a series of bulletins. 
Perkins retired to England from his post in 1912 on account of ill health and settled in Devon, but was retained on the staff as a consulting entomologist. From then on his work on Hawaiian insects was concerned mainly with taxonomy. He also resumed his study of the British Aculeata which led to a series of papers on the species of the larger and more difficult genera, greatly simplifying their recognition. Associated with this work, he studied the 'Stylops' parasites of British bees. He had a large correspondence and often gave help to young students of Aculeata. He encouraged a continued interest in the group, which was consequently one of the best worked of the order in Britain, both systematically and biologically. In the early 1920s Perkins helped the Revd F. D. Morice in his contemplated revision of the group of British sawflies, work which led to preliminary revisions of some of the critical genera. 
In addition to his entomological work, Perkins had interests in terrestrial zoology and he supplied information on the Hawaiian birds, many of which later became extinct. He had most acute vision and a remarkable visual memory, which aided both his field and his taxonomic work. In the latter he had a faculty for observing and selecting characters which vary little within a species, thus making identification simpler. 
Although not robust, Perkins had a great interest in sport. In his young days he enjoyed skating, and at Dartmouth he used to run with the beagles. Above all else he preferred trout fishing, which he continued until his eyesight began to fail. He retained his great interest in classics throughout his life. 
In 1906 Perkins was awarded an Oxford DSc and in 1912 he received the gold medal of the Linnean Society of London. He was elected FRS in 1920. Following the death of his first wife, he married, in 1942, Mrs Clara M. J. Senior ('nee' Dowse); she died in 1949. In his last days Perkins went blind; he died at his home, Wotton, Newton Road, Bovey Tracey, on 29 September 1955. 


@@@@@


doc= 35481


Perks, Sir Robert William, first baronet (1849-1934), industrialist and politician, was born at Old Brentford on 24 April 1849, the elder son of the Revd George Thomas Perks (1819-1877), president of the Wesleyan conference in 1873, and his wife, Mary (died 1894), daughter of James Alexander Dodds, an Edinburgh architect of promise who died young. 
Perks was educated at New Kingswood School, Bath (1858-65), which was then exclusively for Wesleyan ministers' sons, and at King's College, London (1867-71), where he gained honours in classics, English, and modern languages and won many open prizes. He competed for four years in succession for the Indian Civil Service, missing entrance each year by only a few places. This was a great disappointment at the time, but he lived to regard it as the most fortunate escape of his life. Turning to law he was articled to the firm of Messrs De Jersey and Micklem in the City, and qualified as a solicitor in 1875. In the following year he became the partner in London of Henry Hartley Fowler (afterwards Viscount Wolverhampton), a fellow Wesleyan, with whom he remained for twenty-five years. The firm specialized in railway and parliamentary practice, and by sheer business acumen Perks made a reputation as a lawyer who could pilot company bills through parliament. He studied intensively all railway law, and had little difficulty in being appointed solicitor (1879-92) to the London Metropolitan District Railway Company; he was later (1901-5) chairman of the company during its transition from steam to electricity. He was associated with Messrs T. A. and C. Walker of Westminster, contractors, in various construction and engineering works, including Barry docks and railway, the Severn Tunnel, Manchester Ship Canal, Preston docks, the harbour works that created the port of Buenos Aires, the Rio de Janeiro harbour works, and a railway tunnel through the Andes. After leaving Messrs Walker in 1912 he joined Messrs Macarthur, Perks & Co., a firm of dock and railway contractors in Ottawa and New York. 
His legal and business career established, Perks began his political life in 1886, serving as Liberal MP for the Louth division of Lincolnshire between July 1892 and January 1910, when he retired, somewhat disillusioned with the House of Commons (he subsequently said of his service there that 'there was no period of his life so fruitlessly spent, no time so absolutely wasted'). In this capacity he gained a reputation for his vigorous (not to say abrasive) advocacy of the interests of his rural electors and of nonconformist concerns, earning the sobriquet of Member for nonconformity. He was the moving spirit behind the nonconformist caucus in the house during these years, being co-founder (in 1898) and chairman (until 1908) of the Nonconformist Parliamentary Council (or Committee), which had 200 members in the 1906 parliament, although it was nowhere near as effective a pressure group as Perks liked to believe. He was closely identified with a number of legislative measures to redress nonconformist grievances, notably the 'Nonconformist Marriage Act' of 1898 (which removed the need for the attendance of the civil registrar at weddings held in non-Anglican churches); he advocated passive resistance against the 'Education Act' of 1902, supported disestablishment of the Church of England (which he regarded as the Anglo-Catholic church), and promoted the temperance cause. Of strongly imperialist views, which caused him to be known as 'Imperial Perks', he endorsed the South African War and was involved in the founding of both the Imperial Liberal Council in 1900 and the Liberal League in 1902, the latter under the presidency of Lord Rosebery, with Perks as treasurer and later vice-president. 
Perks's business and political skills also found expression in his service of Methodism, both in the local church and at connexional level. Among the first lay members of the Wesleyan conference in 1878, he rose to become one of the denomination's most influential laymen, serving on many key committees, including the committee of privileges (to which he was lay secretary in 1882-92). An advocate of Methodist union from 1878, he worked tirelessly for its consummation, and, when the Wesleyan, Primitive, and United Methodists finally merged in 1932, Perks was elected unanimously as the first vice-president of the Methodist church. With similar success, he inaugurated the Wesleyan Twentieth Century Fund in 1898, which set out to raise 1 million guineas from one million Methodists, the intention being that nobody was to contribute more than 1 guinea in their own name. Through Perks's efforts as treasurer, and his personal contribution of over $10,000, when the fund closed in 1908 $1,074,000 had been raised. This was used for a variety of purposes, including the construction of the Westminster Central Hall (opened 1912) as Wesleyanism's connexional headquarters on the site of the Royal Aquarium, facing Westminster Abbey. Equally ambitious, but conspicuously less successful, was his Methodist Brotherhood, launched in 1907 as a sort of denominational welfare state, exploiting the worldwide Methodist family to provide facilities for emigration, employment, financial loans, and old-age support. Progressively watered down, the scheme was finally overtaken by the Liberal social reforms (which Perks regarded as socialism) and by the First World War. 
Perks was created a baronet on 24 July 1908, but is believed to have declined a peerage as he disliked pomp and ceremony. He had married on 24 April 1878 Edith (died 1943), youngest daughter of William Mewburn of Wykham Park, Banbury, and had one son and four daughters, of whom the eldest predeceased her father. Perks died at his home, 11 Kensington Palace Gardens, London, on 30 November 1934, and was succeeded as second baronet by his son, Robert Malcolm Mewburn (1892-1979). 


@@@@@


doc= 35482


Perowne, Edward Henry (1826-1906), college head, third son of the Revd John Perowne and his wife, Eliza Scott, and younger brother of John James Stewart Perowne, was born at Burdwan, Bengal, where his parents were missionaries, on 8 January 1826. His family was of Huguenot descent. After private education, partly by his father, he was admitted pensioner of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, in 1846 and scholar in 1847; he was Porson prizeman in 1848, members' prizeman in 1849 and 1852, and senior classic in 1850. He graduated BA in 1850, proceeding MA in 1853, BD in 1860, and DD in 1873. He was admitted 'ad eundem' (MA) at Oxford in 1857. Ordained deacon in 1850 and priest in 1851, he was curate of Maddermarket, Norfolk (1850-51). He examined in the classical tripos several times between 1854 and 1863 and served as senior proctor in 1871-2. W. H. Thompson, master of Trinity, is alleged to have remarked, 'I presume God created Perowne in order to keep Senior Classics humble.' He was an unsuccessful candidate for the post of orator in 1857, when Joseph Romilly described him as 'a shy cold person'. 
Perowne was elected fellow and tutor of Corpus in 1858 and became master in 1879. He was Whitehall preacher (1864-6); Hulsean lecturer in 1866; examining chaplain to the bishop of St Asaph (1874-88); prebendary of St Asaph (1877-90); vice-chancellor of Cambridge University (1879-81); honorary chaplain to Queen Victoria (1898-1900), and chaplain-in-ordinary (1900-01); examining chaplain to his brother the bishop of Worcester (1891-1901). Devoted to his college and university, a sound disciplinarian, a man of many friendships and wide interests, Perowne refused preferment to the deanery of Chester in 1886, despite a fondness for 'state and circumstance', and was long one of the most conspicuous figures in the academic and social life of Cambridge. He was a strong evangelical, and in politics a rigid Conservative. Under him the college became a nursery of bishops and missionaries; but its numbers diminished and it declined academically. Perowne resisted all change in the university, and as master and vice-chancellor vainly obstructed the royal commissioners in 1879-81. When they were done he wrote, 'My heart is very very sad, well-nigh broken. I could wish myself far away from Cambridge and its imminent evils' (Browne, 225). 
Although, according to tradition, Perowne proposed more than once to Mrs Colvin Hutchinson, his successor's sister who became his residuary legatee, he died unmarried at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, after a long illness, on 5 February 1906, and was buried at Grantchester on the 7th. 
His principal works were: 'The Christian's Daily Life, a Life of Faith' (1860); 'Corporate Responsibility' (1862); 'Counsel to Undergraduates on Entering the University' (1863); 'The Godhead of Jesus' (1867); 'Commentary on Galatians' in the 'Cambridge Bible for Schools' series (1890); 'Savonarola' (1900). 


@@@@@


doc= 35483


Perowne, John James Stewart (1823-1904), bishop of Worcester, born at Durdawan, Bengal, on 13 March 1823, was the eldest of the three sons of the Revd John Perowne, a missionary of the Church Missionary Society, and his wife, Eliza, 'nee' Scott, of Heacham, Norfolk. His brothers were Edward Henry Perowne, master of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, and Thomas Thomason Perowne, archdeacon of Norwich from 1878 to 1910. The family was of Huguenot origin. Educated first by his father, and subsequently at Norwich grammar school, Perowne won a scholarship to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. He was Bell university scholar in 1842; members' prizeman in 1844, 1846, and 1847; Crosse scholar in 1845; and Tyrwhitt scholar in 1848. He graduated BA in 1845, and proceeded MA in 1848, BD in 1856, and DD in 1873. In 1845 he became assistant master at Cheam School; he was ordained deacon in 1847 and priest in 1848; and he served the curacy of Tunstead, Norfolk, from 1847 to 1849. In 1849 he became a master at King Edward's School, Birmingham, and was elected to a fellowship at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. 
For a time Perowne served his college as assistant tutor, while also lecturing at King's College, London, acting as assistant preacher at Lincoln's Inn, and carrying out duties as examining chaplain to the bishop of Norwich. He examined for the classical tripos in 1851 and 1852, and was select preacher in 1853, an office he also filled in 1861, 1873, 1876, 1879, 1882, and 1897. 
In 1862 following his marriage to Anna Maria Woolryche, daughter of Humphrey William Woolryche, Perowne moved to Wales. He was vice-principal of St David's College, Lampeter (1862-72); cursal prebendary of St David's (1867-72); canon of Llandaff (1869-78); and rector of Llandisilio, Montgomeryshire (1870-71). He became strongly influenced by the broad-churchman Connop Thirlwall, during his time at St David's, Lampeter. 
Perowne's name as an 'Old Testament' scholar was made by his two-volume commentary on, and translation of, the 'Psalms', published in 1864. In 1870 he was chosen one of the Old Testament Revision Company. In 1868 he had become Hulsean lecturer, and in 1872 he returned to Cambridge. From 1873 to 1875 he held a fellowship at Trinity College, Cambridge, and he was Lady Margaret preacher in 1874, and Whitehall preacher from 1874 to 1876. In 1875 he succeeded Joseph Barber Lightfoot as Hulsean professor, and he held office until 1878. For the same period (1875-8) he was one of the honorary chaplains to Queen Victoria, who was said to have commented that Bishop Perowne had the best legs of any prelate on the episcopal bench. 
In 1878 Perowne was appointed dean of Peterborough. He developed the cathedral services, carried on the restoration of the fabric, and cultivated friendly relations with nonconformists. In 1881 he was appointed to the ecclesiastical courts commission, and he was one of seven commissioners who signed a protest against the exercise by the bishop of an absolute veto on proceedings. In 1889 he aided in founding a body known as Churchmen in Council, which aimed at uniting 'moderate' churchmen in a policy regarding ritual; he explained the aim of the society by issuing in the same year a proposal for authorizing both the maximum and the minimum interpretation of the 'ornaments rubric', which was widely discussed but led to no results. 
Having turned down the bishopric of Bangor in 1889, Perowne accepted the see of Worcester and was consecrated bishop in Westminster Abbey on 2 February 1891. He obtained the appointment of a suffragan bishop, created a new archdeaconry, and summoned a diocesan conference. In 1892 and for several years following, he presided at some sessions of an informal conference on ecclesiastical reunion of nonconformists and Anglicans held at Grindelwald in Switzerland. Following a fire at the English church, Perowne celebrated communion in the Zwinglian chapel at Grindelwald and administered the sacrament to leading nonconformists at the conference. His action led to widespread censure by the high-church press. The church congress, hitherto excluded from the diocese, met at Birmingham in 1893, when the bishop announced his assent to the division of his diocese and his willingness to contribute $500 a year to the stipend of the new see from the income of Worcester. This was afterwards made contingent on his being allowed to give up Hartlebury Castle, to which the ecclesiastical commissioners refused consent. Attacked in the Birmingham press for his action in the matter in 1896, Perowne was presented with an address of approval by sixty beneficed clergy of three rural deaneries. He resigned the see in 1901, and retired to Southwick Park, near Tewkesbury in Gloucestershire, where he died on 6 November 1904. He was buried at Hartlebury churchyard. The Worcester diocese was divided under Perowne's successor and the see of Birmingham was founded in 1905. Perowne's wife, four sons, and one daughter all survived him. 
Perowne's ecclesiastical position is not easily categorized. Although a lifelong evangelical, he took independent views of biblical criticism, home reunion, and proposals for meeting ritual difficulties. His theological writings, his dislike of sect and party within church matters, and the influence of the broad-churchman Connop Thirlwall suggest that he was closer to the broad-church position than the evangelical one. As a bishop he accepted a difficult see late in life, but showed himself an industrious, capable administrator willing to make courageous and unpopular decisions where necessary. A portrait of the bishop by the Hon. John Collier was given to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, and another, by Henry Weigall, to Hartlebury Castle. Perowne's primary work remained his translation of and commentary on the 'Psalms', of which a sixth edition appeared in 1886. He produced several other articles and short books on the interpretation of the 'Old' and 'New' testaments, upholding the findings of biblical criticism. His 1868 Hulsean lectures on immortality were published in 1869. 
As general editor of the Cambridge 'Bible for Schools' (1877-) he was able to influence the degree to which the results of contemporary biblical scholarship were presented to Cambridge ordinands. He also edited Thomas Rogers in 'Catholic Doctrine of the Church of England' (1854); 'Remains of Connop Thirlwall, Bishop of St David's' (1877); 'The Letters, Literary and Theological, of Connop Thirlwall' (1881); and 'The Cambridge Greek Testament for Schools' (1881). 


@@@@@


doc= 35484


Perring, William George Arthur (1898-1951), aerodynamicist and government scientist, was born on 16 December 1898 in Gillingham, Kent, the eldest son of John Richard Brooking Perring, a shipwright, and his wife, Alice Johns, both formerly of Devon. In 1913 he commenced a seven-year apprenticeship at the Royal Naval Dockyard, Chatham, after which he obtained a three-year scholarship from the Worshipful Company of Shipwrights to enter the Royal Naval College, Greenwich. In 1923 he gained a first-class professional certificate in naval architecture in his final examination, and was awarded an 1851 royal commission postgraduate scholarship for two years' research in the William Froude ship tank at the National Physical Laboratory (NPL), Teddington, where his research under G. S. Baker included the application of airscrew vortex theory to ships' propellers. During this time he became a member of the Institution of Naval Architects, who published his paper 'Form effect and form resistance', and also of the North-East Coast Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders, who awarded him a $7 prize for his paper 'The influence of the type of engine on the running cost of ships', read to the institution in the 1923-4 session. After leaving the NPL he was briefly assistant to Sir George Hunter of Messrs Swan, Hunter, and Wigham Richardson in Newcastle upon Tyne, but with a depression in shipbuilding he turned to aviation and was appointed a junior scientific officer in the aerodynamics department at the Royal Aircraft Establishment (RAE), Farnborough, in December 1925. 
In 1926 Perring married Joyce Carver, eldest daughter of John Carver (1852-1921), a seaman, and his wife, Alice Ann (1862-1947). Their three children were born at 52 Manor Road, Farnborough: Kenneth in 1927, Jean in 1929, and Wendy in 1930. However, family life was tragically interrupted in 1933 when Joyce Perring died during a serious operation, and again in 1939 when his son died from an infected minor injury. That year he moved to Samarkand, Ashley Road, Farnborough, and in 1942 he married May Elizabeth Willstrop (1901-1998), the widow of a former RAE metallurgist and friend, with one son, Roderick, later to become an astronomer at the Cambridge observatory. In 1949 they moved to Samarkand, Prior Road, Camberley. 
From 1926 to 1930, under the leadership of G. P. Douglas, Perring carried out wind tunnel research at the RAE on numerous airfoil and prototype models, including research on multi-hinged flaps, induced drag from engine cooling systems, and high tip speed propellers, the latter particularly relevant to British Schneider Trophy seaplanes. In 1930 L. P. Coombes was transferred to Farnborough from the Marine Aircraft Experimental Establishment at Felixstowe to equip and run the new seaplane tank. Perring was appointed his assistant, but was first sent to Felixstowe for six months to gain practical water handling experience on flying boats. The new seaplane tank differed radically from ship tanks, which had been used previously. The speed, acceleration, and braking of the carriage, and the wing lift of the models required new methods of forced balance measurement and damping, and before model testing could begin on the hydrodynamic forces and stability of flying boat hulls, considerable test work was necessary to establish the wall, depth, and scale effect of the new tank. During these years, Perring published thirty Air Ministry reports and memoranda, and 'The Farnborough seaplane tank' in 'Aircraft Engineering', March 1934. 
Perring returned to wind tunnel research in 1936, first on the 24 foot wind tunnel and later on the design and construction of the new high-speed tunnel, later renamed the 8 foot transonic tunnel. Many well-known scientists, including professors A. Thom, W. A. Mair, and A. R. Collar, and Sir Arnold Hall, later director of the RAE, were among the young scientists he recruited to the project. He was appointed superintendent of scientific research in 1940 and deputy director in 1941 following William Farren's appointment as director. In the wartime organization Farren initially looked after the electrical, armament, and instrument areas, leaving aerodynamics to Perring: work vital to improving the performance of allied aircraft and analysing the performance of enemy ones, including the reconstruction of a V 2 rocket from parts recovered when a prototype fell in Sweden. Some of this work was published in 'A critical review of German long-range rocket development' and, with Thom, 'The design and work of the Farnborough high speed tunnel' in the 'Journal of the Royal Aeronautical Society', 50 (1946) and 52 (1948) respectively. In 1946 Perring was appointed director of the RAE with John Serby as deputy director, to organize post-war research and development at Farnborough and to plan the new national aeronautical establishment at Bedford. From shipyard apprentice to director of a large government research establishment was a remarkable career achievement. 
Slow of speech and slightly portly with ruddy complexion, Perring preferred to see specialist disciplines grouped together, with staff sharing experiences and able to move quickly from one problem to another, rather than placed in mixed discipline aircraft or missile departments. His prodigious workload and unfailing good humour were well known -- reports stacked in his office, work carried home in a battered old suitcase, reading and commenting quickly on all RAE reports of consequence, and writing in the evening to leave the following day free for meetings. Nevertheless, there was always time to discuss and encourage the work of young scientists and engineers, and he was actively involved with education at Cranfield Aeronautical College and the RAE Technical College. He was a member of the Aeronautical Research Committee and of the Commonwealth Advisory Aeronautical Research Council, a member of council of the Royal Aeronautical Society, and was appointed CB in 1949. 
This workload affected Perring's health and he died suddenly from a heart attack at his home in Camberley on 8 April 1951, aged fifty-two. He was buried in Ship Lane cemetery, Farnborough; a memorial service was held at Aldershot garrison church, at which addresses were given by Sir Archibald Rowlands and Sir Frederick Handley Page. The Royal Aeronautical Society posthumously awarded him their gold medal, but his early death denied him other civil honours he would undoubtedly have received. At the RAE a conference room was dedicated to his memory and the Perring memorial lecture was given in 1975 to mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 35485


Perrins, (Charles William) Dyson (1864-1958), book and porcelain collector and benefactor, was born in the parish of Claines, near Worcester, on 25 May 1864, the only son of James Dyson Perrins (1823-1887) and his wife and cousin, Frances Sarah (died 1918), daughter of Charles Perrins. His grandfather, William Henry Perrins, was one of the original partners in the firm of Lea and Perrins, makers of Worcestershire sauce, from which the family derived its wealth. Educated at Charterhouse School (1878-80) and the Queen's College, Oxford (where he matriculated in 1882), he served from 1888 in the 4th battalion of the Highland light infantry, but retired in 1892 with the rank of captain and began to devote himself to the family business and to public service. 
On 16 October 1889 Perrins married Catherine Christina, daughter of Allan Gregory, corn merchant of Inverness. She died of a stroke in 1922 after suffering bad health for many years. They had two sons and two daughters. His second marriage, to Florence Winifred Midwood Milne, known as Frieda ('b'. 'c'.1882), took place on 6 September 1923. They had no children. 
Perrins served as mayor of Worcester in the jubilee year 1897, and high sheriff of Worcestershire two years later. His benefactions went hand in hand with his services to public life and to education; after twenty-six years as a member of the governing body of the Worcester Royal Grammar School, in 1916 he became its chairman, a post he held for the next thirty-four years, and built for the school the Perrins Hall, in memory of his father, who had been a governor before him, and a science laboratory. He maintained a continuing interest in education as a life governor of Birmingham University and a member of the council of Malvern College. To Malvern, where he lived, he presented Rose Bank house and gardens on his retirement in 1918 from the chairmanship of the urban district council, and also gave the town its hospital (himself providing the site, buildings, and equipment) and its public library, in conjunction with the Carnegie Trust. His own university received from him a large gift of money to foster the study of organic chemistry, and a further sum for the construction of the laboratory named in his honour, which was opened in 1916 and for which Oxford expressed its gratitude in 1919 by making him an honorary DCL. 
Meanwhile Perrins's name had begun to become familiar in the world of the arts and of book collecting. His father had collected pictures -- among them the great painting 'Palestrina' from the middle period of J. M. W. Turner, which Dyson Perrins was to bequeath to the National Gallery -- but his own tastes were as wide, as were his means to gratify them, while his choice was as sure as his generosity was public-spirited in buying treasures and presenting them to appropriate national institutions. Always a discriminating benefactor, he gave or bequeathed objects of the highest artistic value and historic interest to, for example, the Victoria and Albert Museum, the National Gallery, the Ashmolean Museum at Oxford, and the British Museum, which received by bequest two of his most splendid manuscripts, to which his heir allowed a further eight to be added by purchase at a specially reduced price. The main period of his book collecting lay in the two decades from 1900 to 1920, when he boldly took opportunities, the like of which will hardly recur, to acquire manuscripts and printed books of the finest quality from a series of great auction sales such as those of the libraries of Lord Amherst, Bishop Gott, and A. H. Huth. He was no less inspired in his purchases by private treaty: in 1906 he bought thirty-three manuscripts from Charles Fairfax Murray, and in the same year acquired en bloc, on the eve of its dispersal by public auction, the great collection of early woodcut books formed by Richard Fisher of Midhurst. 
Perrins's prowess as a collector was recognized in 1908 by his election to the Roxburghe Club, and though he wrote nothing himself his patronage and his collections led to the publication of a notable series of volumes written by scholars who enjoyed his friendship. First among these was the monograph on the Gorleston psalter, published in 1907 by Sydney Cockerell, on whose advice Dyson Perrins had bought the manuscript in 1904, under the very nose of his friend and rival Henry Yates Thompson. His own presentation volume to the Roxburghe Club followed in 1910, the 'Epistole et evangelii... in lingua toscana', reproducing more than 500 Florentine woodcuts from an all but unique 1495 edition which he owned. This was edited by A. W. Pollard, who went on to publish in 1914 'Italian book-illustrations and early printing: a catalogue of early Italian books in the library of C. W. Dyson Perrins', which has remained an important work of reference. In 1916 the Roxburghe Club members jointly issued 'Topographical Study in Rome in 1581', edited by Thomas Ashby from a manuscript in Dyson Perrins's library. Four years later came the sumptuous 'Descriptive Catalogue' of his illuminated manuscripts, the work of Sir George Warner, in two volumes, describing in detail what has proved to be almost the last, and certainly one of the finest, gatherings of illuminated manuscripts formed by a single individual of the golden age of private collecting. The end of the series inspired by the Dyson Perrins collections came with a volume published in 1927 devoted to another single manuscript, the 'Apocalypse in Latin', described by M. R. James. 
Only a few additions were made after the issue of the 1920 catalogue of Perrins's manuscripts, but one such purchase, made from a Yates Thompson sale, was the finest of the three surviving mid-twelfth-century bindings executed at Winchester; this he later presented, with characteristic generosity, to Winchester Cathedral Library. In 1946 Dyson Perrins decided to sell his printed books, in order to spend the proceeds on what had always been one of his special interests, the Royal Worcester porcelain factory. His own collection of Worcester china, probably the best in existence, and as strong in everyday pieces as in special ones, he eventually presented to the china works, which he had so long befriended and supported. After the First World War, when the factory was in economic difficulties and closure would have added to local unemployment as well as ending a historic enterprise, Dyson Perrins himself had for a time taken over the management and kept the china works in operation at his own expense. After the Second World War he determined to re-equip the factory to resume production up to the highest standard of the past, and the money raised by the auction of his printed books at four sales during 1946-7, which totalled $147,627, was earmarked for this purpose. After his death his illuminated manuscripts, with a few outstanding printed books, were dispersed in three auction sales during 1958-60, at which foreign national libraries competed with booksellers from all over the world to pay a record sum for only 154 lots. Including the earlier printed book sales and the British Museum's private purchases, the Dyson Perrins library brought nearly $1,100,000, the largest amount fetched to that time by a single individual's collection. 
Despite the fame of his possessions and the publicity attendant on his numerous benefactions Dyson Perrins was personally extremely modest and deliberately shunned the limelight. Besides his various fields of collecting he enjoyed pursuits such as photography, and was a keen sportsman, for whom an estate in Ross-shire provided the stalking, fishing, and shooting in which he delighted. However, the estate was sold in 1937 when his other financial commitments meant he could no longer afford its upkeep. Perrins died at his home, Davenham, Malvern, on 29 January 1958. His second wife survived him. 
David Rogers', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35486


Perry, Sir (Edwin) Cooper (1856-1938), physician and medical administrator, was born at Castle Bromwich, Warwickshire, on 10 September 1856, the only son of Edwin Cresswell Perry (1828-1899), who became vicar of Seighford, Staffordshire, in 1861, and his wife, Esther Cooper, daughter of Joseph Cockram, of Darlaston, Staffordshire. Perry's father, an all-round scholar and mathematician, was responsible for his entire education until he was thirteen. Then in 1870 Perry won a scholarship at Eton College, where he became head of school and was awarded the Newcastle scholarship in 1876. He left that year to become a scholar of King's College, Cambridge, where he gained the Bell university scholarship (1876), the Browne scholarship and medal (1878), and the Pitt scholarship (1879); he was senior classic in the tripos of 1880. While at Cambridge he was joint editor with A. H. Mann, the organist of King's, of the King's College anthem book, revised between 1879 and 1882. 
In 1880, having been elected into a fellowship at his college, Perry set aside classics and the prospect of a career in the church to become a medical student. In 1883 he was appointed assistant lecturer in medical subjects at King's and assistant demonstrator of anatomy in the Cambridge medical school. In 1885 he entered the London Hospital; he qualified MRCS in October, and in 1886-7 held the posts of house surgeon to Frederick Treves and house physician to Stephen Mackenzie. In 1887 his fellowship ran out and Perry was appointed an assistant physician, demonstrator of morbid anatomy, and physician to the dermatological department at Guy's Hospital, London. In the following year he became dean of the medical school. Now his formidable administrative energies came into play, and he reorganized the system of junior appointments and built a residential medical college for the students, of which he became the first warden. In conjunction with Frederick Newland-Pedley he was responsible for the establishment in 1889 of a dental school at Guy's. Even while primarily an administrator he retained his skill as a physician, and he acted as examiner on several subjects for the London, Cambridge, and the Conjoint boards. 
Perry married in 1890 Caroline Matilda (died 1935), second daughter of James MacManus, of Killeaden House, Kiltimagh, co. Mayo; they had one daughter. In 1892, on the death of John Charles Steele, he was appointed superintendent of Guy's Hospital, an office which he held until 1920; he was a governor of the hospital from 1920 to 1937. Perry went twice to Egypt, in 1897 and 1926, in order to assist in the reorganization of the teaching of medicine in the University of Cairo; on the second occasion he became director of the faculty of medicine, in his seventy-first year. Also in 1897 Perry was appointed one of the first visitors for the Prince of Wales's Hospital Fund (later King Edward's Hospital Fund); he served for many years as a member of its distribution committee and was its chairman from 1921 until his death. He was appointed GCVO in 1935 in recognition of his services to the fund. 
Perry was elected in 1900 to the senate of the University of London as a representative of the faculty of medicine. He resigned in 1905 but was re-elected in 1915. From 1917 to 1919 he was vice-chancellor, and in 1920, on retiring from Guy's, he was appointed principal of the university; he held this post until 1926. In 1929 he became a member of the committee which redrafted the statutes of the university and he was a crown member of the court from 1930 until his death. In 1916 he was involved with the initiative that led to the formation of the College of Nursing. In accordance with the recommendations of the Athlone committee on postgraduate medical education in London, in 1921, he took a leading part in the foundation of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, instituted by royal charter in 1924, and for many years he was the chairman of the council. 
After the South African War, Perry served on a commission appointed to reorganize the Army Medical Service. For his assistance in helping to found the Royal Army Medical College at Millbank he was knighted, in 1903. He received the honorary degree of LLD from the University of London and that of MD from the University of Egypt. 
At the end of 1938 Perry suffered a complete right-sided paralysis and he died at his home, Seighford, 25 Mill Road, West Worthing, twelve days later, on 17 December. His body was cremated and his ashes were interred in the church of his old home at Seighford, Staffordshire. 
Perry's life was full and many-sided. A classical scholar, a musician, a sound physician and morbid anatomist, and an administrator of unusual quality, he would have made an ideal civil servant. Weighty, wise, deliberate in judgement, knowing just when to wait and watch and when to take decisive action, he could draft a document that could be subtle without deceit, and uncompromising yet courteous. He was a master of concise and lucid English prose. When in doubt as to the clarity of a sentence he had a habit of translating it into the more compact confines of Latin and then retranslating it. 
Perry was little known to the public, for he was shy and had few social gifts. He cared little who received the credit for any task as long as it was done, usually by himself. He published practically nothing; his life's work is embodied in minutes, memoranda, and charters. Those who worked behind the scenes knew his value, his intellect, and his constructive capacity. 'Bulky, even ungainly, in figure, he was possessed of the most dextrous fingers. No one who ever saw him perform an autopsy could doubt it' (Cameron, 302). 


@@@@@


doc= 35487


Perry, Walter Copland (1814-1911), writer and collector of casts, born in Norwich on 24 July 1814, was the second son of Isaac Perry (1777-1837), a Congregational minister at Cherry Lane, Norwich (1802-14), who later became a Unitarian minister at Ipswich (1814-25) and at Edinburgh (1828-30), and then a schoolmaster at Liverpool. Walter's mother was Elizabeth, daughter of John Dawson Copland. He received his early education from his father, a fine scholar. In 1831 he was entered, as Walter Coupland Perry, at Manchester College, York, where he remained until 1836. He distinguished himself as a classical scholar, and on the advice of John Kenrick, tutor at Manchester College, who had studied at Gottingen, he went there in 1836; in August 1837 he gained a PhD with high honours for a thesis on Ephesus. 
On returning to York, Perry replaced Kenrick as classical tutor in 1837-8, while the latter was ill. From 1838 to 1844 he was Unitarian minister at George's Meeting, Exeter, as colleague with Henry Acton. His pulpit services were more scholarly than popular. In 1844 he conformed to the Anglican church as a layman; his 'Prayer Bell' (1843) suggests that his views were more evangelical than was common among Unitarians. He married on 23 June 1841 Hephzibah Elizabeth (died 1880), second daughter of Samuel Shaen of Crix Hall, Hatfield Peverel, Essex, with whom he had five sons, who all survived him, and one daughter (died 1898). 
On 12 January 1844 Perry entered as a student at the Middle Temple; he was called to the bar on 31 January 1851. After settling in Bonn at the end of 1844, he and his wife obtained great reputations as teachers and he came to act as the 'organ and representative of the English visitors at Bonn', as he expressed it. Among Perry's pupils were Edward Robert Bulwer, first earl of Lytton, Sir Francis Bertie, British ambassador in Paris, and Sir Eric Barrington. 
On returning to Britain in 1875, Perry settled in London, where he was a member of the Athenaeum, and continued to write. He had already published on German universities (1845) and the Franks (1857) and now turned his hand to subjects as diverse as classical sculpture, Homer, Sicily, and the French Revolution, as well as fiction, of which he published some works anonymously and one pseudonymously as John Copland. In 1880 his first wife died and on 12 November 1889 he married Emma Evelyn, daughter of Robert Stopford. By his efforts, initiated at a meeting in Grosvenor House on 16 May 1877, followed by his paper 'On the formation of a gallery of casts from the antique in London' (1878), Perry gathered a large collection of casts, installed at first in a special gallery at the South Kensington Museum and after 1909 at the British Museum. He produced a catalogue of the collection in 1887. Such collections of casts had long been desired to enable students to trace the progress of classical sculpture, but Perry's creation was belated and short-lived. The British Museum, short of space for original sculptures, did not consider the cast gallery space well used and by 1939 the collection had been entirely dismantled and dispersed. 
Perry, who had great personal charm, enjoyed blood sports and was a good amateur actor. He died at his residence, 25 Manchester Square, London, on 28 December 1911 and was buried in Hendon parish churchyard. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35488


Petavel, Sir Joseph Ernest (1873-1936), engineer and physicist, was born in London on 14 August 1873, the younger son of Emmanuel Petavel DD and his wife, Susanna, daughter of William Olliff, of Great Missenden, Buckinghamshire. An eminent Hebrew scholar, Emmanuel Petavel moved to England from Neuchatel in 1863 to become minister of the Swiss church in Endell Street, London. In 1876 the family left England for Geneva, later settling in Lausanne where Joseph attended school and read engineering at the university. In 1893 he returned to England to study science and engineering at University College, London. 
In 1896 Petavel published his first paper, written in collaboration with John Ambrose Fleming, of University College, on the alternating current arc. With the award for three years of an 1851 Exhibition grant he was able to work in the laboratories of the Royal Institution, where he made, for Fleming and James Dewar, accurate measurements of the physical properties of materials at low temperatures. His skill in design and measurement was also evident in the work he carried out as John Harling research fellow at Manchester University in 1901-3, working in the new physics laboratory of Arthur Schuster. This work included the development of the 'Petavel gauge' for measuring the variation in pressure caused by the explosion of gases, and the construction of electrical furnaces and apparatus for studying chemical action at high pressures and temperatures. 
In 1904 Petavel spent a year in charge of the British scientific contribution to the St Louis International Exhibition where he built and operated a reproduction of Dewar's plant at the Royal Institution for the liquefaction of gases. Petavel returned in 1905 to the University of Manchester as a lecturer in mechanics. Three years later he was appointed to the Beyer chair of engineering, held from 1868 to 1905 by Osborne Reynolds, which he combined with the post of director of the Whitworth and later the John Hopkinson Engineering Laboratories. His work at Manchester was chiefly concerned with standards of light, ventilation, structural stresses, the theory of gas engines, and aeronautics, and Petavel showed himself to be a capable and efficient administrator. During the First World War not only was his laboratory working at high pressure on the design of instruments and on testing of materials, but he also spent much of his time in London serving on committees for aeronautics, on which he became a recognized authority. 
In 1919 Petavel was appointed director of the National Physical Laboratory as successor to Sir Richard Glazebrook and he remained in this post until his death. During his directorship the laboratory grew steadily as new buildings were constructed for the study of physics, high-tension electricity, acoustics, and aeronautics. Petavel greatly extended the national and international authority and influence of his institution and successfully managed the often difficult relationship with the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research which had assumed financial responsibility for the laboratory from the Royal Society at the end of the war. Those who worked with him at the laboratory recalled his hospitality, and his afternoon and moonlight parties were remembered fondly by his staff and friends. He will also be remembered for the beautifying of Bushy House and its grounds, for which he left the Royal Society a large sum. 
Petavel, who had been elected FRS in 1907, was appointed KBE in 1920. He died, unmarried, at Bushy House, Teddington, on 31 March 1936 and was buried at Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 35489


Peterson, Sir Maurice Drummond (1889-1952), diplomatist, was born on 10 March 1889 in Dundee, the younger son of Sir William Peterson (1856-1921), classical scholar and educationist, and his wife, Lisa Gibb, eldest daughter of William Ross, shipowner, of Glenearn, Perthshire. He was educated in Canada, after his father's appointment as principal of McGill University, and then at Rugby School and Magdalen College, Oxford, where he took a first in modern history in 1911. He entered the Foreign Office in December 1913, and between then and his retirement in June 1949 he had a varied career as a clerk and diplomatist, and particularly made his mark in Egypt and the Soviet Union and in the Foreign Office in London during part of the Second World War. 
The high point of Peterson's early career in the Foreign Office came in May 1917, when he was appointed a member of Arthur Balfour's mission to Washington. Three years later, in January 1920, he was transferred to Washington as second secretary. In February 1921 he was promoted first secretary, and between October 1921 and February 1922 he was attached to the British delegation to the Washington naval conference, as Balfour's private secretary. He returned to London in October 1922, but was transferred to Prague in June 1923. There he acted at various times as charge d'affaires. In December 1924 he was transferred to Tokyo, where he made a serious study of the Japanese language, and concluded that the Japanese ruling elite was both jealous of and fundamentally hostile towards the British empire. On his return to England he married, on 27 April 1927, Eleanor Angel ('b'. 1903/4), the second daughter of the Revd Henry William Leycester O'Rorke, rector of Woodstock, Oxfordshire. They had three sons. 
Shortly after his marriage, Peterson was transferred to Cairo, still as first secretary. After two years he was moved to Madrid, where he was promoted counsellor in November 1929 and remained until July 1931; he despised his ambassador, Sir George Grahame, admired Alfonso XIII, and witnessed with sadness the passing of the Spanish monarchy, not to be restored during his lifetime. From July 1931 to October 1936 he was head of the Egyptian department in the Foreign Office and was sent out to Cairo for four months in 1934 as acting high commissioner. A mission to Rome in late 1933 to negotiate a border agreement between Libya and the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan, which failed in the face of excessive Italian demands, convinced him of Italian enmity to Britain. He was intimately involved in the negotiations surrounding the Abyssinian crisis in 1936, and although he was closely associated with what came to be known as the Hoare-Laval plan to stop the war in Abyssinia, he favoured a hard line against Mussolini during the later stages of the war, including barring the Suez Canal to Italian shipping. 
Peterson's first headship of a mission was in Sofia from October 1936 to March 1938, as minister, to be followed by his first embassy, Baghdad, from March 1938 to March 1939. These years involved him in dealings with two royal autocrats: Boris III, for whom he had mixed feelings; and King Ghazi, who exasperated him and whose deposition by Britain he had come to regard as inevitable before Ghazi's death in a car accident accomplished the same purpose. Peterson was appointed KCMG in February 1938, having been made a CMG in January 1933. In February 1939 a meeting of senior officials decided that Peterson should become ambassador to Spain following the end of the civil war, as being 'our most energetic man: we hope to organise a regular drive -- commercial missions, propaganda, etc -- to get Franco over to our side or at least back to neutrality' (Harvey, 252). This was to lead to a humiliation that would blight the remainder of Peterson's life. His conviction that he was making a success of his mission was not shared by the Foreign Office, which decided in late April 1940 to replace him by Sir Samuel Hoare, bluntly informing Peterson that, in their estimation, he had failed. He spent most of the rest of the war in London, including six months during which the 'Foreign Office List' described him as 'unemployed', before being placed in charge of the Egyptian, eastern and far eastern departments from January 1942 until September 1944. He worked hard to restore Anglo-American relations over the Middle East, but annoyed some by appearing too ready to endorse American views on the future of Palestine. 
From September 1944 until May 1946 Peterson was ambassador to Turkey. In his memoirs, written when Turkey had become a cold war ally, he exaggerated his cordiality to the country. He went to Ankara feeling emotional contempt for Turkish neutrality in the war while understanding the intellectual case for it. In May 1946 Bevin offered him one of the most important embassies, Moscow, while informing him that for humane reasons he would only remain there for two years; it was a city where 'you can never have a night out' ('Diaries of Sir Robert Bruce Lockhart', 532). In this case Peterson's memoirs provided a more reasonable guide to his stewardship. He was not convinced by the very pessimistic briefing about Soviet intentions provided by the Foreign Office before his departure; indeed, he went to Russia full of goodwill and gratitude for its part in defeating Hitler. His spurning in 1948 of the offer of a visit to Stalingrad was, in his words, 'a measure of the distance I had traversed since May 1946' (Peterson, 275). He had become convinced that Russia was not part of European civilization, and that its foreign policy was motivated by militant ideological communism in combination with revived tsarist imperialism. His specific advice could be bad, including the claim in 1947 that Stalin was a 'failing force' within the Politburo, and the proposal that the west should launch 'political warfare against Communism' (TNA: PRO, FO 371) at the very time when western governments were trying to make it appear that Russia was sincerely being offered Marshall economic aid and was spurning the offer. Health troubles in the form of heart disease resulted in his retirement in June 1949. Afterwards he served on the board of the Midland Bank and wrote a volume of memoirs. He had been promoted GCMG in 1947. 
Peterson's characteristics may be summarized under seven headings. The first was real eccentricity, exemplified by his use of dog biscuits for the cheese course when he was entertaining the foreign secretary in Moscow in 1947. The second was a high degree of touchiness and an inability to set aside a slight, especially if it emanated from the Foreign Office. This produced, third, a feeling of being in the Foreign Office but not of it. Fourth, he enjoyed exercising power and regretted that only once, in Egypt in 1934, was he able to bring about an important political change in the country to which he was accredited. Fifth, he was a passionate imperialist, a characteristic which, during the 1930s, caused him to regard Italy as a greater threat than Germany. Sixth, he could admire democracy abroad, as in Czechoslovakia in the 1920s, but saw no reason to object to autocracies 'so long as they did not become mere organisations for war' (Peterson, 42). Finally, he was a strong protestant and was convinced, 'inter alia', that intrigue by pro-Franco Anglo-Catholics had been an important factor in his recall from Madrid. He died at his home, Inglewood Lodge, Kintbury, Berkshire, on 15 March 1952. 


@@@@@


doc= 35490


Peterson, Sir William (1856-1921), classical scholar and educationist, the fifth son of John Peterson, a merchant of Leith, and his wife, Grace Montford, 'nee' Anderson, was born in Edinburgh on 29 May 1856. He was educated at the high school there and the University of Edinburgh; graduating in 1875, he went with a travelling fellowship to Gottingen in Germany; in 1876 he entered Corpus Christi College, Oxford, as Ferguson scholar, graduating in 1879. From 1879 to 1882 he was assistant professor of the humanities at Edinburgh, and from 1882 to 1895 first principal of the newly founded University College, Dundee. Successful as an administrator, he secured excellent terms for his institution in the long negotiations leading to union with the University of St Andrews. He also continued his classical studies, editing book x of Quintilian's 'Institutio oratoria' (1891), the 'Dialogus de oratoribus' of Tacitus (1893), and Cicero's 'Pro Cluentio' (1895). Peterson married in 1885 Lisa Gibb, eldest daughter of William Ross, shipowner, of Glenearn, Perthshire; they had two sons, the younger of whom was the diplomatist Sir Maurice Drummond Peterson. 
In May 1895 Peterson was appointed principal of McGill University, Montreal, Canada, in succession to Sir William Dawson. There his talent as administrator had ample scope. He found a group of largely autonomous schools and transformed it into a university. He won the confidence of the wealthy men of Montreal -- especially Lord Strathcona and Sir William Macdonald (1831-1917), the head of the Canadian tobacco industry -- and obtained from them buildings and endowments, especially for agriculture, applied science, and medicine. Faculties of law, medicine, commerce, education, and social service were added to the university; but Peterson's constant endeavours to strengthen the faculty of arts found less sympathy in a great commercial city. 
As principal of McGill, Peterson continued his own classical studies and publications. In 1901 he discovered in the library of Holkham Hall a ninth-century manuscript (formerly belonging to Cluny) of Cicero's speeches; and in 1907 he produced an edition of the 'Verrines', based on this text. He also took an active part in educational work in Quebec, and throughout Canada and the United States, and was a very distinct personality among North American university presidents. He was for some years chairman of the protestant committee of the council of public instruction in Quebec, and a most influential trustee, and for a time chairman, of the Carnegie foundation for the advancement of teaching. He received many honorary degrees, and in 1915 was made KCMG. In politics he was an imperialist, and in his later years spoke and wrote much in favour of the continued and closer connection between Canada and Great Britain. Though devoted to McGill and to Canada, Peterson always remained half-Scot, half-cosmopolitan. He could show a salutary hauteur on occasion, and he did not suffer fools gladly, but he had also great personal charm and distinction. 
During the First World War, Peterson spoke and worked unceasingly, and on 12 January 1919, while presiding at a meeting on behalf of the dependants of dead or disabled Scottish soldiers and sailors, he was stricken with paralysis. In May he resigned, and returned to England; he died in London at his home, Wildwood, North End, Hampstead, on 4 January 1921, his wife surviving him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35491


Lawrence, Frederick William Pethick-, Baron Pethick-Lawrence (1871-1961), politician, was born on 28 December 1871 in London, the youngest in the family of two boys and three girls of Alfred Lawrence, carpenter and later owner of a building firm, and his wife, Mary Elizabeth, daughter of Henry Ridge of Upper Clapton, Middlesex. His father died when he was three. Frederick Lawrence was a restless, difficult child who in his own words 'objected to the whole status of childhood' (Pethick-Lawrence, 15). He attended a day school in London, then at eleven boarded at Wixenford, a prep school in Wokingham, moving on in 1885 to Eton College, where he stayed until 1891. There he was bullied, bored with the classics, and 'remained... something of an outsider and a critic' (ibid., 22). 
From his youngest days, however, Lawrence had been fond of figures and games, and for much of his life was keen on and skilled at tennis and billiards. Happy at last at Trinity College, Cambridge, he gained first classes in mathematics (part one, 1891) and natural sciences (part one, 1895), won several prizes, became president of the Union, played billiards for the university, and was inspired by Alfred Marshall's lectures on economics. His social conscience was roused at Cambridge by meeting Percy Alden, warden of Mansfield House university settlement in Canning Town. As he recalled, 'Marshall stimulated my brain to ascertain the facts. Alden forced me to face them and, if I could, to justify them' (Pethick-Lawrence, 48). Trinity College elected him a fellow (1897-1903) but he decided against an academic career and left on a world tour, visiting India, Australasia, the Far East, and the United States. 
Lawrence's Unitarian upbringing exposed him to Hindu influence, and at this time he began creating his personal amalgam of Christian and oriental religion. In his autobiographical chapter on 'my philosophy' he described 'the enlargement of personality' as life's main objective (Pethick-Lawrence, 204); the individual must through open-mindedness and self-control ensure that good comes out of ill, and cultivate a sense of proportion which will transcend the many divisions between human beings. Pethick-Lawrence's ideas seem imprecise, and their flowery expression was for Hugh Dalton 'quite blush-making' ('War Diary', 556). Nor are they clarified in what Pethick-Lawrence once described as 'my favourite book' (Pethick-Lawrence, 149): Mabel Collins's 'Light on the Path' (1885), a highly abstract theosophical booklet consisting of a set of mystical and often paradoxical injunctions. Two years before he died he told Lord Layton that he was an agnostic, adding half-seriously, 'I am the most religious-minded agnostic I know' ('Hansard 5L', 17 Oct 1961, 327). Yet his beliefs sufficed to bear him up through a lifetime of ideals challenged, pain endured, and career set-backs surmounted. 
On returning to London, Lawrence went to live in Canning Town, intending to extend Charles Booth's social survey work. But university settlement business absorbed him, and he became its treasurer; he studied law, and was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1899. The death of his elder brother in 1900 made him wealthy, and in the following year he was selected Liberal Unionist candidate for North Lambeth. Meanwhile, what he recalled as 'love at first sight' (Pethick-Lawrence, 51) for Emmeline ['see 'Lawrence, Emmeline Pethick- (1867-1954)] -- daughter of Henry Pethick, of Weston-super-Mare -- edged him politically leftwards. Her progressive views, together with his strong opposition to the South African War, made him abandon North Lambeth, and when the serious-minded couple married at the Town Hall, Canning Town, on 2 October 1901, disapproval from the relatively conservative Lawrence family was made apparent and hit his pocket. Lawrence, who quickly grew fond of his wife's family, prefixed his wife's name to his own. Their marriage was childless, and the Pethick-Lawrences now collaborated in trying to improve East End conditions. He gave the Dunkin lectures at Manchester College, Oxford, on economic issues, in 1900-01, and in 1902 published an article on the need for town planning in the symposium 'The Heart of the Empire', edited by C. F. G. Masterman. To assist organized labour he bought 'The Echo', a radical evening halfpenny newspaper; in 1902 he became its editor when Percy Alden resigned. Its contributors included H. N. Brailsford and J. Ramsay MacDonald, but although Pethick-Lawrence increased the paper's circulation and invested a fortune in it, he could not make it pay and in 1905 closed it down. From 1905 to 1907 he edited the 'Labour Record and Review'. 
Pethick-Lawrence welcomed the Liberal landslide at the general election of 1906, but increasingly diverged from the Liberal government when sucked into the Pankhursts' militant Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU). His unobtrusive but full-time commitment to the union from 1907 to 1912 reflected his paradoxical combination of new-found feminist conviction with old-fashioned chivalry and personal devotion to Christabel Pankhurst, who christened him 'Godfather'. She and the Pethick-Lawrences pushed aside the union's democrats, who seceded into the Women's Freedom League in 1907; thereafter the trio gave the WSPU firm and efficient direction until 1912. He provided much needed level-headed financial, organizational, and legal expertise, and published extensively for the cause. Already in 1906 he was supporting suffragettes in the law courts, guiding them in self-defence, and standing bail for more than 100 of them. In 1907 the Pethick-Lawrences founded and became joint editors of the periodical 'Votes for Women'. In 1909, when his wife was in prison, he became joint treasurer, his first official post in the union. The man at the heart of the WSPU warded off sex conflict just as the rich man within the labour movement had earlier warded off class conflict. 
In 1912, however, the Pethick-Lawrences were convicted of conspiracy to incite members of the WSPU to cause damage in the West End of London, and despite the jury's recommendation to clemency they were sentenced to nine months' imprisonment; Pethick-Lawrence and Mrs Pankhurst were ordered to pay the costs of the trial. All three went on hunger strike, but only Pethick-Lawrence had to face the full rigours of forcible feeding twice a day for several days; his wife was forcibly fed only once and Mrs Pankhurst not at all. After five weeks the Pethick-Lawrences were released. As Pethick-Lawrence refused to pay the costs he was declared bankrupt, a declaration rescinded a year later. Disagreements about militant strategy now caused the Pankhursts to expel the Pethick-Lawrences from the WSPU. The Pethick-Lawrences, concealing their private bitterness at how they had been treated, continued to edit 'Votes for Women', gathered the Votes for Women Fellowship around it, and in 1914 eventually merged it with the United Suffragists, a bridge-building body aiming to draw together suffragists of both sexes, and to unite militants with non-militants. 
The First World War changed everything, but it gave Pethick-Lawrence another sphere in which to pursue conciliation -- this time between conflicting or potentially conflicting nations, for he opposed coercive imperialism and pressed for an early peace settlement. He told John Maynard Keynes in 1920 that his 'Economic Consequences of the Peace' (1919), condemning the Versailles peace settlement, was 'of epoch making importance' (Pethick-Lawrence to Keynes, 23 Jan 1920, Marshall Library, Cambridge, Keynes papers EC1/2) -- hence Lawrence's support for 'appeasement' in the 1930s. He became treasurer of the Union of Democratic Control, but standing in 1917 at the by-election for South Aberdeen as a 'peace by negotiation' candidate he won only 7 per cent of the votes cast. In 1918 he became liable for conscription, but because he favoured a negotiated peace he refused to serve, and was assigned to work on the land. This made him enemies among supporters at Hastings, where he had been adopted as Labour candidate, and at the general election of 1918 he withdrew. His reflections on war finance led to his book 'A Levy on Capital' (1918) on the need for such a levy, followed by his 'Why Prices Rise and Fall' (1920). 
By 1922 Pethick-Lawrence, as a seasoned author on economic policy, was of value to the Labour Party. Standing at South Islington he was disappointed to win only 30 per cent of the votes cast, coming bottom of the poll in a three-cornered contest. In 1923, however, with 45 per cent of the votes cast in another three-cornered contest at West Leicester, he defeated Winston Churchill -- more than preserving the Labour majority in a seat he retained until 1931. He set about mastering parliamentary procedure, grew to love the House of Commons, and took a genuine pride in its traditions. His maiden speech advocated pensions for widowed mothers, but he specialized in finance. He spoke in favour of a capital levy, and opposed the return to the gold standard in 1925. In the second Labour government he enjoyed his role as financial secretary to the Treasury, and got on well with his civil servants, usually sharing the Treasury view. In 1931, however, he strongly opposed the financial policy of the National Government, rejected Ramsay MacDonald's suggestion that he might be prepared to join it, and rapidly published his lucid and wide-ranging book 'This Gold Crisis' (1931). For him, the crisis had arisen from the mistakenly punitive policy the allies had adopted towards Germany in the 1920s; there was, he said, no question of British national bankruptcy, and his remedy was to restore confidence and peg the exchange rate by announcing that the government would mobilize British-owned foreign investments, as occurred in both world wars. Nor did he shrink in the early 1920s or the late 1930s from the capital levy or wealth tax as an egalitarian device for curbing the national debt. 
At the general election of 1931, in a straight fight with a Liberal, Pethick-Lawrence won only a third of the votes cast and was soundly defeated. This freed the Pethick-Lawrences to resume their frequent worldwide travels. In his visit to Russia in 1932 he acknowledged its totalitarian structure, but 'saw much to admire' (Pethick-Lawrence, 178), and like many in the Labour Party until the 1960s 'formed a very high opinion of the way in which planning was being carried out' (ibid., 177); nor is it surprising that the preface to an autobiography written in December 1942 should refer to 'the heroic Soviet Union' (ibid., 5). His concern at Fascist advance forced him in the 1930s to reject pacifism in favour of collective security through the League of Nations. As Labour candidate for Edinburgh East at the general election of 1935 he won 43 per cent of the votes cast in a three-cornered contest. He immediately attacked the Hoare-Laval pact in parliament, but his main role was now to act as principal financial spokesman for Labour, and in 1937 he was proud to be appointed privy councillor. He claimed in 1959 to have been a lifelong 'unrepentant Keynes-ite' ('Hansard 5L', 15 April 1959, 645). Certainly he repeatedly contested in the 1930s the analogy between individual and public finance, denying that the budget must be balanced every year. He also cited Sweden and New Zealand as exemplars for getting out of depression by expanding purchasing power, but later in the decade he regretted that the National Government chose a time of boom rather than slump for expanding the economy, and with the aim of rearmament rather than to boost national wealth. Throughout his career he saw the budget not as a narrowly fiscal measure, but as the occasion for monitoring the progress of the economy as a whole. In his later career, as the Treasury gained increasing control over the economy, his two major interests -- taxation and banking -- came together. 
All-party government in 1940 separated the roles of Labour Party leader and leader of the opposition, a role assumed by H. B. Lees-Smith with Pethick-Lawrence as his unofficial deputy and chairman of the public accounts committee. Then, on Lees-Smith's death, Labour unanimously elected Pethick-Lawrence as his successor until departure from the cabinet soon freed Arthur Greenwood to assume the role. Pethick-Lawrence was now an experienced and much-respected member of the party, of which he became vice-chairman. He had long looked older than he really was, and evoked impatience from younger zealots like Aneurin Bevan, who once referred to him as 'a crusted old Tory'. Such critics underestimated Pethick-Lawrence's continuing capacity for pushing nineteenth-century Liberal ideals in ever more radical directions: fruitfully combining statism with respect for the individual, applying reason and a faith in human progress to emotive issues such as penal reform and capital punishment, and keeping the free-trade flag flying amid protectionist reaction. 
Pethick-Lawrence had long believed that the British empire could rest secure only on a basis of goodwill, and with his wife built up over many years a network of Indian contacts. For some years until 1923 he had contributed a weekly letter to Mrs Besant's 'New India', and as a Labour MP in the 1920s he championed Indian self-government. His one burst of fury as parliamentary orator was on 18 April 1944 when L. S. Amery showed himself insensitive to Indian nationalist opinion. British wartime set-backs rendered Pethick-Lawrence's ideas practicable, and after he had been re-elected at Edinburgh East by an even larger majority in 1945, independence for India became government policy. He was appointed secretary of state for India, with a seat in the House of Lords. In 1946, accompanied by Stafford Cripps and A. V. Alexander, he led the cabinet mission to Delhi which aimed to demonstrate the sincerity of Britain's commitment to Indian independence. He did not enjoy the experience: unhappy at being parted from his wife, frustrated by Indian negotiators whose language was subtler than his own, oppressed at the age of seventy-four by the heat and by the failure in long-drawn-out negotiations of goodwill alone to prevail, he could not bridge the gulf between Hindu and Muslim, and at one point privately told his wife that he had 'nearly reached the limit of human endurance' (Brittain, 175). Still, his fairness and sincerity held the mission together and demonstrated the British government's goodwill, nor would the subsequent settlement have been possible if the mission had not first exposed the difficulties without undue rancour. Before agreeing to go as viceroy to India, however, Earl Mountbatten pressed for Pethick-Lawrence's removal, and in April 1947 Pethick-Lawrence resigned as secretary of state, though in the House of Lords he supported the government's Indian policy thereafter. 
As an elder statesman Pethick-Lawrence was influential throughout the 1950s in the House of Lords, a more congenial forum than the Commons for his approach to politics, and one which reciprocated his obvious affection for it. The house respected his technical expertise, his long experience, and his consistent courtesy when voicing views that were controversial there. His intellect remained alert to the end, and he was capable of long synoptic speeches on large policy issues. His contributions became if anything more numerous after his wife died in 1954, nor did their quality decline. In 1956 he deplored the Suez venture's threat to Britain's moral authority, but his debating year was by then oriented round three major economic events: his speeches at the start of the new session, in the annual debate on the economic situation, and on the 'Finance Bill' -- all informed by much leisure reading on economics and banking. He consistently deprecated what he saw as the government's clumsy and short-term fiscal controls by comparison with the more closely targeted and longer-term physical controls that Labour favoured, and urged close collaboration between government and the TUC. He disliked the general direction of government economic policy, as well as what was in his view an increasingly self-indulgent mood within the nation as a whole. 
Behind all this activity was a powerful secretarial machine, driven by a punctilious and demanding master. With the day's engagements carefully listed for him, the appropriate documents attached, Pethick-Lawrence began the day by going through the agony column in the newspapers, sending condolences punctiliously. Not a moment was wasted, filing and the keeping of accounts were meticulous, newspaper clippings were systematically marked up for his attention, internal memoranda were frequently exchanged, unexpected interruptions (especially from the telephone) were discouraged and could well evoke rudeness. None the less, Pethick-Lawrence won loyalty from staff through his classless outlook; he publicly expressed pride in his secretaries, who worked as a team, and the Pethick-Lawrences drew them into their private life. His mind combined opposites: on the one hand rationalistic and in many respects radical, he was at the same time highly sentimental (especially in religion and personal relations) and also traditionalist -- proud of British institutions, eager to keep up with old friends, and an enthusiast for commemorating anniversaries. His mathematical mind might have led him to take black and white views in politics, and yet he was a lifelong enthusiast for compromise and for the British institutions which encouraged it. 
Attractive to intimates was Pethick-Lawrence's almost childlike personality. Carefully graduated lists of charities supported and Christmas cards sent and received were prepared, and he took a childlike pleasure in opening presents and anticipating birthdays -- hence his close rapport with children. Spartan in personal comforts, hating waste of food or time, walking and exercising regularly to keep fit, he was a fanatic for routine and punctuality. Visiting Kew Gardens annually to look at the magnolias, holidaying from year to year with the same friends, stringent about the unchanging timing and content of meals, he took some pleasure in shopping, cooking, and jam-making at weekends. The contrast with his wife's habits could hardly have been greater, and she too was caught up in his bureaucratic routine, with notes regularly shuttling between them about day-to-day matters as well as formal letters on special occasions. Somehow this famous Fred and Emmeline partnership survived for more than half a century. Fred needed company, and Emmeline when ill in later life made it clear that she expected him to remarry. Some friends were surprised that after she died on 11 March 1954 he sought a replacement. On 14 February 1957 he married Helen Millar, widow of Duncan McCombie and daughter of Sir John George Craggs, chartered accountant. She was not the first to be approached, but they had been friends since the time when Helen had herself been a militant suffragette, and the inevitable difficulties in mutual adjustment were somehow surmounted. Pethick-Lawrence died in the Manor House Hospital, London, on 10 September 1961, whereupon the barony became extinct. 
In 1943 Pethick-Lawrence published his autobiography, 'Fate has been Kind', dedicated to 'my wife by whose constant inspiration my life has been enriched'. It was revealing and reflective on his childhood, and provided a description of the suffragette movement more vivid and personal than appears in his wife's autobiography. But his view of Pankhurstian tactics up to 1912 remained uncritical, and he did not adequately justify the contradiction between, on the one hand, the militancy and authoritarian control which he had endorsed in the WSPU, and on the other the humanitarian and democratic ideals which so patently inspired the rest of his career. Nor was the detailed case for militancy that he presented to G. M. Trevelyan in 1949 at all convincing (see Brittain, appx 1, 215-18). His account of the inter-war years contained penetrating insights, but in discussing the 1930s it degenerated into a mere narrative; it was written too close to the events under discussion for the Labour Party and his role within it to receive the close analytical attention they deserved. Vera Brittain's 'Pethick-Lawrence: a Portrait' (1963) took the story to the end of his life, drew on unpublished material, and furnished useful context, but was in important respects less penetrating than the autobiography, giving 'causes' too much attention by comparison with his role in parliament and party. Although feminism retained his support to the end, for example, far more important in his career was his role as a leading Labour spokesman on economic matters. Full justice to him will probably never be done because his personal papers, once so ample and so efficiently organized, were mostly lost through wartime salvage and through deliberate destruction at the end of his career. 
Pethick-Lawrence had every facility for rising to the top in politics: a fine brain, wealth, industriousness, and a bevy of able secretaries and helpers. Vera Brittain explained his failure to reach the peak by noting that he was 'disinclined to be pushful' (Brittain, 75), but this will not suffice. Pethick-Lawrence's somewhat quietist personal philosophy may have held him back, but it is his personality that provides the key. His speeches read well in 'Hansard', and he was as capable of the broad-sweep survey as of well-informed detailed contributions on technical issues. The latter were often economic, but his policy range was wide. He took great trouble in preparing his speeches, circulated them widely, and expressed himself lucidly. Yet he lacked the essential ingredient: rapport with his audience. Nicknamed in the press gallery Pathetic Lawrence, he had 'no charm, no imaginative background' (Johnston, 200), and no amount of professional guidance could remedy the defect. 'Very sound', said Attlee, 'but never really came over in the House of Commons' ('Yorkshire Post', 27 June 1963, 4). Pethick-Lawrence was a clubbable parliamentarian, with a ready fund of anecdote, but he developed no close trade-union or local-government links. Nor was he ever prominent at the party conference; besides, so coldly rational and humourless a speaker could never have won the Labour Party's heart, and he lacked the prestige of working-class status. He was unlucky, too, in his timing -- rarely within the control of politicians but often integral to their success -- for he had arrived late on the parliamentary scene, and always looked his age. When he and other potential leaders were out of parliament from 1931 to 1935, Attlee was getting entrenched. Add to this Pethick-Lawrence's personal foibles, which to many made him seem eccentric, even a crank: 'funny old Pethick' is Dalton's phrase ('War Diary', 556). Yet none of this should detract from his career's considerable significance. Few politicians more conventionally successful were as far-sighted as he on international, social class, and feminist issues -- few as resolutely decent in their values or as selfless in their personal and political integrity. 


@@@@@


doc= 35492


Petit, Sir Dinshaw Manockjee, first baronet (1823-1901), cotton merchant and philanthropist in India, was born at Bombay on 30 June 1823, the elder of two sons of Manockjee Nasarwanji Petit (1803-1859), a Parsi merchant, and his wife, Bai Humabai (1809-1851), daughter of J. D. Mooghna. In 1805 his grandfather, Nasarwanji Cowasjee Bomanjee, migrated from Surat to Bombay, where he acted as agent to French vessels and those of the East India Company. On account of his small stature, his French clients gave him the cognomen of Petit, and, in accordance with Parsi custom, this, pronounced in the English manner, became the family surname. Dinshaw was educated in Bombay. He went, at the age of nine, to a school run by a pensioned sergeant named Sykes, and later to a more ambitious seminary kept by messrs Mainwaring and Corbet. At the age of seventeen he became a clerk on a monthly salary of 15 rupees (then the equivalent of $1 10's'.) in the mercantile office of Dirom, Richmond & Co., of which his father was Indian manager. He married on 27 February 1837 Sakerbai (died 1890), daughter of Framjee Bhikhajee Panday, of Bombay, and they had three sons and eight daughters. Subsequently his father built up a large broker's business, in which Dinshaw and his younger brother, Nasarwanjee, became partners in 1852, carrying it on after their father's death in May 1859 until 1864, when they divided a fortune of about Rs 2.5 million and separated by mutual consent. 
Meanwhile Dinshaw inaugurated the cotton manufacturing industry which made Bombay the Manchester of India. A cotton mill was started for the first time in Bombay in 1854 by another Parsi, Cowasjee Nanabhai Davur, but it spun yarns only. In 1855 Dinshaw persuaded his father to erect a similar mill with additional machinery for weaving cloth. This mill commenced work as the Oriental Spinning and Weaving Mill in 1857. In 1860 he and his brother started the Manockjee Petit mill, which they converted into a joint-stock company. 
The problems encountered by the Lancashire cotton industry during the cotton famine of 1861-5 encouraged wild speculation in Bombay, but Dinshaw Petit maintained his self-control and reaped colossal gains. Other mills were soon built by him, or came under his management, and he led the way in the manufacture of hosiery, damask, other fancy cloths, sewing thread, and also in machine dyeing on a large scale. Before his death he had the major shareholding in six joint-stock mills, aggregating nearly a quarter of a million spindles and 2340 looms, and employing 10,000 workers. He was thus mainly responsible for the conversion of the town and island of Bombay into a great industrial centre. 
In addition to his entrepreneurial activities, Dinshaw Petit played a prominent role in early nationalist politics in Bombay. He was a founder member of the influential Bombay Presidency Association in 1869 and became its president in 1883. In 1888 the association split, with radicals supporting the newly formed Indian National Congress, and moderates, including Petit and most of the Parsi merchant community, maintaining a more pro-British stance. 
Dinshaw Petit was also a co-founder of the powerful Bombay Mill-Owners' Association in 1874, of which he became chairman from 1878 until 1883. This body, composed, unusually, of both Indian and European businessmen, was formed to represent employers' views on industrial relations. Petit had conservative opinions on this subject and opposed the introduction of factory legislation to regulate the Bombay mill industry in 1875. 
Dinshaw Petit served on the board of the Bank of Bombay; he was a justice of the peace for the city, and for a short time a member of the municipal corporation; he was sheriff of the city, 1886-7. He served on the legislative council of the governor-general, 1886-8, being the first Parsi to receive that honour. Knighted in February 1887, he was created a baronet of the United Kingdom on 1 September 1890, with special limitation to his second son. Petit was the second native Indian to receive this hereditary title, the first being Sir Jamsetjee Jeejeebhoy. 
Throughout western India, Dinshaw Petit showed public spirit in the disposal of his great wealth. He arranged for the housing of the Bombay technical institute -- a memorial of Queen Victoria's jubilee of 1887 -- in the manufacturing district of the city. He founded the Petit Hospital for Women and Children; gave 100,000 rupees (equivalent to nearly $7000) towards building a home for lepers; erected a hospital for animals as a memorial to his wife; and presented property both in Bombay and Poona for research laboratories. A devout Parsi, he was always attentive to the claims of his own community, and in various places where small colonies of them were to be found, he erected for their use fire temples and towers of silence (places for the disposal of the dead). 
Petit died at his Bombay residence, Petit Hall, on 5 May 1901, and his remains were committed to the towers of silence, Hill, the same day. At the 'oothumna', or third day obsequies, charities were announced amounting to Rs 638,551. Petit's second son, Framjee Dinshaw, on whom the baronetcy had been entailed, predeceased his father on 8 August 1895, and his eldest son, Jeejeebhoy Framjee ('b'. 7 June 1873), became second baronet under the name of Sir Dinshaw Manockjee Petit. 


@@@@@


doc= 35493


Petre, Sir George Glynn (1822-1905), diplomatist, born on 4 September 1822 at Twickenham, was the great-grandson of Robert Edward Petre, ninth Baron Petre, and the second son of Henry William Petre of Dunkenhalgh, Clayton-le-Moors, and his first wife, Elizabeth Anne, daughter of Edmund John Glynn, of Glynn, Cornwall. Raised as a Roman Catholic, he was educated at Stonyhurst College and Prior Park College, near Bath. 
Petre entered the diplomatic service in 1846 as attache to the British legation at Frankfurt, then the seat of the diet of the German confederation; he was thus in Frankfurt during the revolutions of 1848. He was transferred to Hanover in 1852 and to Paris in 1853, and was appointed paid attache at The Hague in 1855 and at Naples in March 1856. When the Neapolitan government ignored the Anglo-French remonstrance on its anti-libertarian behaviour, diplomatic relations were broken off in the summer. Ill health caused Sir William Temple, the British minister, to leave Naples in July, and Petre assumed charge of the legation until it was withdrawn at the end of October. Petre performed his duties with judgement and ability; his reports laid before parliament give an interesting narrative of the course of events. In 1857 he was temporarily attached to the embassy at Paris, and in June 1859 he accompanied Sir Henry Elliot on his special mission to Naples, diplomatic relations having been resumed on the accession of Francis II. He then went as secretary of legation to Hanover, and acted as charge d'affaires there from December 1859 until February 1860. He was transferred in 1864 to Copenhagen (where, in the following year, he assisted at the investiture of Christian IX with the Order of the Garter), and in 1866 to Brussels, and was promoted to be secretary of embassy at Berlin in 1868. After four years of service at Berlin, covering the period of the Franco-Prussian War, he became charge d'affaires at Stuttgart in 1872, and in April 1881 he was appointed British envoy at Buenos Aires. In 1882 he was also accredited to the republic of Paraguay as minister-plenipotentiary. In January 1884 he was appointed British envoy at Lisbon, where he remained until his retirement on a pension (1 January 1893). 
During the latter years of his service in Portugal the obstacles offered by the Portuguese authorities to free communication with the British missions and settlements established on the Shire River and the shores of Lake Nyasa, and the seizure of British vessels while passing through Portuguese waters on their way to the lake, led to a state of acute tension between the two governments. A convention for the settlement of these and related questions was signed by Lord Salisbury and the Portuguese minister in London on 20 August 1890, but in consequence of popular and parliamentary opposition the Portuguese government resigned office without obtaining the authority of the Cortes to ratify it, and their successors found themselves equally unable to carry it through. The negotiations had therefore to be resumed 'de novo'. A 'modus vivendi' was agreed upon and signed by Lord Salisbury and the new Portuguese minister, Senhor Luiz de Soveral, on 14 November 1890, by which Portugal granted free transit over the waterways of the Zambezi, Shire, and Pungwe rivers and a satisfactory settlement was finally placed on record in the convention signed by Petre and the Portuguese minister for foreign affairs on 11 June 1891. Petre's naturally calm and conciliatory disposition and the excellent personal relations which he succeeded in maintaining with the Portuguese ministers did much to keep the discussions on a friendly basis and to procure acceptance of the British demands. He was made CB in 1886 and KCMG in 1890. 
Petre married on 10 April 1858 Emma Katharine Julia, fifth daughter of Major Ralph Henry Sneyd; they had six sons and a daughter. One son and the daughter predeceased him. He died at 6 Queen's Gardens, Hove, on 17 May 1905, and was buried at Odiham, Hampshire. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35494


Petrie, Sir David (1879-1961), police officer in India and head of the security service, was born on 9 September 1879 at Inveravon, Banffshire, the second surviving son of Thomas Petrie, master millwright, and his wife, Jane Allan. After taking an MA degree at Aberdeen University, Petrie entered the Indian police in December 1900. He served for three years in the Punjab and was then seconded (1904-8) to the north-west frontier as quartermaster and adjutant of the Samana Rifles (Kohat border military police). An essay by him on civil-military co-operation won a prize from the United Services Institution in India (1911). After acting as assistant to the deputy inspector-general of the Punjab criminal investigation department (1909-11), he was moved to the department of criminal intelligence (DCI), responsible to the home department of the government of India, and there became assistant to its assistant director. 
Petrie faced a crucial test when chosen to investigate the bomb attack on the viceroy, Lord Hardinge, in Delhi in December 1912. The reputation of the DCI was at stake until he finally arrested the terrorists in February 1914; he received the king's police medal. The outbreak of the First World War emboldened militant Indian nationalists. In a gun battle with Sikh revolutionaries at Budge-Budge on 29 September 1914 Petrie was wounded, and a subsequent infection warranted convalescence in Britain. 
When Petrie returned to India in summer 1915, the DCI was worried about contacts between Indian rebels and German agents in neutral Siam. He therefore spent six months as an intelligence officer at the British legation in Bangkok from August 1915, with results that convinced the government of India that it needed its own overseas intelligence network. Petrie recruited agents during a tour of Singapore, the Dutch East Indies, the Philippines, Hong Kong, China, and Japan, and directed their operations from August 1916 to November 1919, while ostensibly vice-consul in Shanghai. He was honoured with the CIE (1915), OBE (1918), and CBE (1919). 
Petrie turned down the directorship of the DCI in 1919, pleading exhaustion. In the following year he married Edris Naida (died 1945), daughter of W. Henry Elliston Warrall, a sea captain; there were no children. He escorted the duke of Connaught and the prince of Wales during their visits to India (1921-2) and worked again in the Punjab as senior superintendent of police in Lahore (1923). As a member of the royal commission on the public services in India (1923-4), he pondered the rate at which Indian personnel should be admitted to the higher echelons. 
In 1924, when Cecil Kaye retired, Petrie this time consented to become director of the DCI, renamed the intelligence bureau of the home department of the government of India. It co-ordinated the efforts of provincial police forces to combat terrorism and communal violence and used informers to monitor the activity of the non-co-operation movement. Attempts by M. N. Roy to establish communist cells were comprehensively thwarted, for which Petrie received much credit. Knighted in June 1929, he left the intelligence bureau in 1931 to become first a member and then chairman (1932-6) of the Indian public services commission. He also chaired the Indian Red Cross Society. 
On his retirement from Indian service in 1936 Petrie passed some time in east Africa and the Levant. He assisted his old friend and colleague Sir Charles Tegart in reporting on reorganization of the Palestine police (December 1937-January 1938) before settling in Britain. His career appeared to be at an end until the Second World War saw him commissioned into the intelligence corps and posted to Cairo in May 1940. Six months later he was recalled to London and asked to become director-general of the Security Service (still commonly known as MI5, its designation prior to 1931). Petrie hesitated to accept. 
MI5, responsible for defence against espionage, subversion, and sabotage, was near collapse in 1940, riven by internal feuds and overwhelmed with reports of suspected 'fifth columnist' activity and demands for security 'vetting'. Churchill had dismissed its long-serving chief, Sir Vernon Kell, in June, but his temporary successor, A. W. A. (Jasper) Harker, had made little difference. It was Stewart Menzies, head of the Secret Intelligence Service (SIS or MI6), who now put forward Petrie, but Sir David refused to take charge without examining the situation for himself. His report, dated 13 February 1941, revealed that rapid expansion of MI5 (from thirty officers in 1938 to more than 200) had produced haphazard recruitment, inadequate supervision, confusion in the chain of command, and general demoralization. Having emphasized the seriousness of the problem, he agreed to tackle it -- on the understanding that the director-general should be master in his own house. Petrie suspected that interference by Lord Swinton, chairman of the security executive, had exacerbated factional struggles. He formally took over on 24 April 1941. 
The mere presence of Petrie appeared to improve the atmosphere inside MI5. A powerfully built man, with a steady gaze, square jaw, and military moustache, he was straightforward, firm, and decisive, combining a thorough grasp of practical intelligence work with the skills of an unspectacular but effective manager. His manner with subordinates was rather formal; he called even those closest to him by their surnames, and some sensed an air of Scottish puritanism about him. Very industrious, he briefed himself with great care for meetings, where he generally spoke little but to the point. His writing style could be long-winded and pompous, and he made scant effort to cultivate influential people, yet his reliability helped restore official confidence in his top-secret department. 
Petrie ended wrangling within MI5 over the new Hollerith punch-card filing method by ruling in its favour, and reorganized the divisional structure of the service to allow its B division to concentrate on counter-espionage. Since autumn 1940 Guy Liddell had been successfully developing the 'double cross system', whereby captured German spies were used to feed false information to Berlin. There was much friction between MI5 and the SIS over access to decrypted signals intelligence from the Radio Security Service, and Petrie grew exasperated. The two secret services seemed competitive rather than complementary in some matters. MI5 did not operate more than 3 miles outside the British empire, while the SIS managed British intelligence and counter-intelligence in foreign countries. Petrie proposed in April 1942 that the SIS counter-intelligence section should be incorporated into B division of MI5, but prolonged negotiations came to nothing, despite his argument that the ideal demarcation between MI5 and the SIS was functional (defensive-offensive) rather than geographical. 
In 1944, after the D-day landings surprised the Germans, Petrie claimed that MI5 had totally defeated enemy espionage in Britain. Post-war study of German archives confirmed this. In retrospect, however, this triumph had to be set alongside a serious failure: inadequate surveillance of Soviet spies. Petrie sensed that the Russian espionage which MI5 uncovered was the tip of an iceberg, but the Foreign Office urged restraint and MI5 had itself already been penetrated (by Anthony Blunt). 
Petrie was awarded the KCMG in 1945, as well as American, Dutch, and Czechoslovak orders. Though the new Labour government viewed MI5 with some suspicion, he succeeded in resisting any reduction in its powers or remit. Attlee disregarded his recommendation of Liddell as a successor, however, and appointed Percy Sillitoe as director-general when Petrie retired in 1946. Shooting, fishing, and the countryside remained his pleasures. He died at Sidmouth, Devon, on 7 August 1961. 
People routinely described Petrie as solid, sound, and trustworthy -- with some clearly insinuating that he was neither intellectually brilliant nor inspiring. Historians of the secret services focused on more flamboyant characters, yet none denied that his plain merits had stabilized MI5 at a critical juncture. 


@@@@@


doc= 35495


Petrie, William (1821-1908), electrical engineer, was born on 21 January 1821 at Kings Langley, Hertfordshire, the eldest of four sons of William Petrie ('b'. 1784), a War Office official, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Henry Mitton, banker, of The Chase, Enfield, Middlesex. From 1829 to 1837 the family lived at the Cape of Good Hope, where Petrie's father was deputy commissary-general. After an early education at home, Petrie and his brother Martin entered the South African College in Cape Town. He had early shown a liking for mechanics and chemistry, and his youthful studies were fostered by the friendly encouragement of their near neighbour, the astronomer Sir William Herschel. 
In 1836 Petrie began studying for the medical profession at Cape Town Hospital, but abandoned that course when his family returned to London. He enrolled at King's College, London, taking chemistry under Professor Daniell, and also mathematics, and in 1840 went to study at Frankfurt am Main, devoting himself to magnetism and electricity. When he returned to England in 1841 he published '''Results of some experiments in electricity and magnetism' in the' Philosophical Magazine', the first of many scientific papers, and took out a patent for a magneto-electric generator. 
From 1846 to 1853 Petrie worked assiduously on electric lighting problems in collaboration with William Edwards Staite. In the course of this work he studied the magnetic properties of varieties of steel, presenting his results to the British Association. He also considered the principle of the arc lamp, where an electric spark or 'arc' is drawn between two pieces of carbon. The resulting heat produces light, but also burns up the carbon. A mechanism was needed to move the carbons together as they burnt, and Petrie was able to devise such a self-regulating arc lamp, supervising its manufacture at the works in Long Acre, in London, established by the mechanic Charles Holtzapffel. Under test, Petrie's lamp yielded a light of between 600 and 700 standard candle-power, with a consumption of one-third of a pound of zinc per 100 candle-power per hour. The lamp was displayed at the Hanover Square Rooms on 1 November 1848. Petrie gave a demonstration out of doors, on 28 November, with a lamp of 700 candle-power on the portico of the National Gallery, and on various nights in 1849 from the old Hungerford Bridge in London. These demonstrations were witnessed by Charles Wheatstone and other prominent scientists. On 6 February 1850 Petrie and Staite described their achievements to the Society of Arts. Unfortunately, however, their efforts to promote electric lighting brought financial disaster; indeed they could not have been successful until practical electrical generators became available in the 1870s. 
Petrie married on 2 August 1851 Anne (1812-1892), only child of Matthew Flinders, a naval hydrographer. She was a competent linguist and Egyptologist. Under the pseudonym 'Philomathes' she published a work on the relation between mythology and scripture, and as 'X.Q.' contributed essays to periodical literature. Their only child, (William Matthew) Flinders Petrie (1853-1942), achieved fame as an archaeologist and professor of Egyptology at University College, London. 
In later years Petrie turned his attention to electro-chemistry, designing and equipping chemical works in France, Australia, and the United States. For many years he worked for Johnson, Matthey & Co., for whom he designed and patented a platinum-iridium boiler for concentrating sulphuric acid. He died at his home, 30 Crescent Road, Bromley, Kent, on 16 March 1908, survived by a second wife, Cecilia. He was buried at Bromley. 


@@@@@


doc= 35496


Petrie, Sir (William Matthew) Flinders (1853-1942), Egyptologist, was born at Ecclesbourne Cottage, Maryon Road, Charlton, near Greenwich, on 3 June 1853, the only child of William Petrie (1821-1908) and his wife, Anne (1812-1892), the daughter of Captain Matthew Flinders RN, the navigator and explorer of Australia. Too delicate to be sent to school, he was educated at home by his father, a skilled engineer and surveyor, and his mother who taught him history, music, and French, and encouraged him to collect minerals and coins. His mother was herself a scholar and published a work on the relationship between mythology and scripture under the pseudonym 'Philomathes'. Petrie showed precocity in mathematics and science, and by the time he was sixteen he was often in the galleries of the British Museum, sometimes buying for their coin department Greek and Roman coins picked up in antique shops and country sales. His father taught him surveying, and in his early twenties he would travel about the south of England with measuring tape and theodolite, planning earthworks and ancient monuments; with his father's help he measured Stonehenge, setting a new standard of accuracy for that much surveyed antiquity. The result of these expeditions was a portfolio of plans which he deposited in the British Museum, and a book, 'Inductive Metrology' (1877), in which he sought to determine the ancient linear standards of antiquity; the experience gained by his surveys, and the natural accuracy of his eye, served him in good stead for the rest of his life. 
During the 1870s Petrie senior, a deeply religious man, became interested in the theories of Piazzi Smyth concerning the supposed eschatological symbolism of the Great Pyramid. Flinders himself was at first tempted to believe, but felt that more accurate measurements were needed. In 1880, after careful preparations, he set out for Egypt; his father, who was to have accompanied him, never plucked up courage to go. Flinders spent two winters of solitary, sometimes dangerous work in Giza, triangulating the whole pyramid field and minutely investigating the outer structure and inner plan of the Great Pyramid; his meticulously accurate measurements disproved the existence of Smyth's 'pyramid inch' and demolished his theories. He had now formed the resolution to spend the rest of his life, if that were possible, in rescuing the antiquities which he saw everywhere in Egypt pillaged by treasure-hunters and wrecked by clumsy excavators who destroyed more evidence than they obtained. 'Egypt was like a fire', he wrote later, 'so rapid was the destruction going on. My duty was that of a salvage man: to get all I could quickly gathered in' (Petrie, 'Seventy Years in Archaeology', 19). His book 'The Pyramids and Temples of Gizeh', published by the Royal Society in 1883, brought him to the attention of Amelia Edwards, the novelist and traveller whose enthusiasm for Egypt's antiquities had led her, with the help of influential friends, to found the Egypt Exploration Fund. With her encouragement and support Petrie was sent out by the fund in 1883 to excavate at Tanis, in the Nile delta. Single-handed in command of a workforce of over 200, he uncovered huge statuary but also insisted that small broken objects and pottery, hitherto discarded by archaeologists as useless for museum display, had their story to tell. Previously excavators had employed labour gangs, driven by overseers and interested only in recovering monumental remains and museum pieces; all else was discarded. Petrie chose his own workmen, supervised them himself, and rewarded them for their finds, which otherwise might have gone to dealers, their context destroyed. In 1884 he found the city of Naucratis; here and at Defennah, the ancient Daphnae, he found quantities of Greek pottery, confirming the identity of these places as Greek trading colonies. 
Petrie soon quarrelled with the Egypt Exploration Fund, whose officials he found dilatory and extravagant, and for the next few years he worked on his own. Two wealthy businessmen, at Amelia Edwards's instigation, agreed to finance his work: in 1887 they formed a syndicate, Petrie to dig, and the three of them to share what finds he was permitted to bring home. The next two years, of work in the Faiyum, were among the most rewarding, and certainly the most arduous, of his life: they brought the penetration of the waterlogged pyramid chambers of the Middle Kingdom, the excavation of a whole Middle Kingdom town, the discovery of the Labyrinth, and the unexpected finding of a cemetery of Roman date in which, day after day, more mummy portraits came to light. Those which he was allowed to bring home to England caused a sensation when they were exhibited in London. Petrie also imported twelve complete mummies and sixty-five skulls. In the 1990s the British Museum commissioned the forensic reconstruction of heads from two of the skulls; the resulting casts in wax and bronze demonstrated the realism of the associated mummy portraits. 
In the spring of 1890 Petrie was engaged by the Palestine Exploration Fund to dig on its behalf; he chose Tell al-Hesy, which he (wrongly) identified with ancient Lachish, and in only six weeks cut a vertical slice through the mound in steps, noting the level at which each type of pottery was found; to some wares he could give a date because he had found them in a dated context in Egypt. It was the first stratigraphic excavation in the Near East. Petrie had noted, and admired, the work of Pitt Rivers in England, and had read of the 'immense cutting' of Schliemann's work in Troy, but Schliemann himself had denied the possibility that pottery could be used as a guide to chronology. Petrie wrote: 'Once settle the pottery and the key is in our hands for all future explorations. A single glance at a mound of ruins... will show as much to anyone who knows the style of the pottery as weeks of work may reveal to a beginner. ('Palestine Exploration Fund Quarterly Statement', 22, 1890, 329)' Although later work has revised some of his conclusions, Petrie is regarded as the founding father of Palestinian archaeology. 
Amelia Edwards's death in 1892, while Petrie was excavating the site of the palace of Tell al-Amarna with its painted pavement, brought an alteration to his fortunes. In her will she left her library and her collection of Egyptian antiquities to University College, London, together with a capital sum enough to endow the first chair of Egyptology in England; she let it be known that she wished Petrie to be the first Edwards professor. His appointment in 1892 gave him the academic status he needed; out of his small stipend he paid an assistant to teach the language; by the terms of his appointment he himself was expected to dig every winter and train students to dig. With his first assistant, James Quibell, he found archaic statuary at Coptos and, in the following year, a large predynastic cemetery at Negada; later he devised a chronological sequence for the contents of the graves by a remarkable statistical method of his own devising, which he called sequence dating. On 29 November 1896 Petrie married Hilda Mary Isabel (1871-1957), daughter of Richard Denny Urlin, of Rustington Grange, Worthing, Sussex. They had a son and a daughter. 
Petrie's greatest contribution to the study of Egypt's history was the revelation of its earliest phases. When he first began to dig, textbooks began with the pyramid builders: Manetho's early dynasties were regarded as semi-mythical. During three seasons (1899-1903), working again for the Egypt Exploration Fund, his careful excavation of a necropolis at Abydos, near Balliana, revealed the graves of kings of the first two dynasties. At Sinai in the winter of 1905 he found a Middle Kingdom temple with inscriptions in a hitherto unknown script, the earliest known alphabet. In the following year, leaving the fund again, he formed the British School of Archaeology in Egypt, a society whose members were to support his work financially for the rest of his life. His wife laboured as secretary to raise funds and recruit new subscribers. Except for a few years while their son and daughter were small, she accompanied her husband every year in the field; his autobiography is dedicated 'to my wife, on whose toil most of the work has depended'. Their archaeological camps, run on a shoestring for students and helpers, became a byword for austerity. 
In 1904 Petrie published a small but epoch-making book, 'Methods and Aims in Archaeology', in which he described his management of his workforce, his techniques of excavation, of recording, and of restoration, the packing and transport of antiquities, and the publication of results. Each spring, after his return from the field, he would hold an exhibition of his finds, which were then distributed, some to subscribing museums and some for his own collection. The latter was later purchased for University College by public subscription. Known as the Petrie Museum, it is the finest Egyptological teaching collection in Britain. Petrie founded the journal 'Ancient Egypt' and edited it for twenty years. He published over a hundred books and articles; besides the annual excavation report which came out promptly every autumn, he issued catalogues of different types of objects and a number of more popular books for a wider audience. These and his lectures, delivered all over England, roused public interest for Egyptology and financial help for his work. During his absences abroad, students were taught the elements of Egyptology by Margaret Murray, one of his first students. After two years they would join the professor in the field; many of them became well-known archaeologists. 
In 1926 Petrie decided to move his work to Palestine. He excavated three 'tells', Jemma, Far'a, and Ajjul, south of Gaza, but unfamiliarity with the stratigraphical advances made by excavators since his work at Tell al-Hesy detracted from the value of his findings; after the season of 1934 he was denied a permit to dig. In 1933 he had retired from the Edwards chair and made his home in Jerusalem. Unable to obtain a permit to dig in Syria, he worked for two seasons on a windswept site in Sinai; it was not until 1939 that he finally admitted that his digging days were over. 
Those who dug with Petrie were agreed that he had an almost uncanny 'flair'. In the Faiyum he found polychrome sherds which he guessed at once must be Aegean; Kamares ware of the Middle Minoan period had not yet been discovered but later, with the Mycenaean pottery he found at Tell al-Amarna, he, Arthur Evans, and Ernest Gardner were able to work out a chronology for Bronze Age Greece. The men from Quft whom he trained to be foremen passed on their skills to their descendants, who were still employed as professional diggers in Egypt at the end of the century. He has been accused of undue haste in publication; better that, he maintained, than to sit on one's material for years, hoping to elucidate every problem: the records were there for future archaeologists to consult. In all he wrote over a hundred books and some nine hundred reviews and articles; he dug over fifty sites and trained a generation of archaeologists. It has been said that he found Egyptology a treasure hunt, and left it a science. Essentially a fieldworker and not an armchair scholar, he was not a linguist, and his theories sometimes met with ridicule, in particular the impossibly long chronology of Egyptian civilization, to which he clung until the end of his life; but his mistakes were small compared with the services which he rendered to the still nascent science of archaeology. 
Petrie was knighted in 1923, and was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1902 and a fellow of the British Academy in 1904. He received honorary degrees from the universities of Oxford (1892), Edinburgh (1896), Strasbourg (1897), and Cambridge (1900). He was a member of the Royal Irish Academy, of the American Philosophical Society, and of many other foreign learned societies. He died in the government hospital, Jerusalem, on 29 July 1942 and was buried the next day in the protestant cemetery on Mount Zion. His library was donated by his widow to the new department of antiquities in the Sudan. 


@@@@@


doc= 35497


Petter, (William) Edward Willoughby (1908-1968), aircraft designer, was born on 8 August 1908 at Highgate, Middlesex, the oldest in the family of three sons and one daughter of Ernest Willoughby Petter (1873-1954), co-founder and chairman of Petters Ltd, oil engine and aircraft manufacturers of Yeovil, Somerset, and his wife, Angela Emma (died 1934), daughter of Henry Petter of Calcutta. He was educated at Marlborough College and Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he was awarded a first class in the mechanical sciences tripos in 1929 and shared the John Bernard Seely prize in aeronautics after concentrating on aerodynamics and aircraft engineering in his third year. Cambridge University had established a chair in aeronautical engineering in 1919, and most of the leading British aeronautical engineers were Cambridge graduates. 
After leaving Cambridge, Teddy Petter, as he was commonly known, joined Westland Aircraft Works, the subsidiary of Petters Ltd, and after two and a half years as a graduate apprentice working in the machine and assembly shops and in the design office he became personal assistant to the managing director, Robert Bruce, in 1932. Also in 1932 he married Claude Marguerite Juliette (died 1975), daughter of Louis Munier of Geneva, a Swiss League of Nations official; they had three daughters. When Sir Ernest Petter decided that his son should be co-opted onto the board of directors of Westland Aircraft Works as technical director in 1934, Bruce and several other older members of the firm resigned. In 1935 Westland Aircraft Works was detached from its parent company, becoming Westland Aircraft Ltd. 
At first the Air Ministry lacked confidence in Petter's designs because of his youth and inexperience, and he had no success in tendering for Air Ministry specifications. However, he had powerful friends, including Roy Fedden at Bristol, who convinced the ministry of Petter's technical brilliance, and Westland was invited to tender for specification A.39/34 for an army co-operation aircraft. This led to a contract for two prototypes, designed by Arthur Davenport, the chief engineer, under Petter's technical direction, followed by an order for 169 aircraft in 1936. This plane was later named the Lysander, and between 1935 and 1942 more than 1400 were built at Yeovil. To cope with the production of the Lysanders Petter successfully challenged his father's proposal that the firm should merge with British Marine Aircraft Ltd, and instead persuaded it to build a large new assembly shop in Yeovil. When John Brown Ltd, the Clydeside shipbuilding firm, took over Westland in 1938, Teddy Petter remained as technical director. 
Petter's other most successful designs were the Whirlwind, a four-cannon fighter, which won a contract for 175 planes in 1937 with the first planes delivered to the RAF in 1940, and the Welkin, a high altitude fighter, accepted in 1941. Although more than a hundred of these were built, there was little call for them as there turned out to be very few attacks at high altitude. Most of the Westland production during the Second World War consisted of subcontracted Spitfire and Seafire aircraft. At the peak of its production Westland was building twenty Spitfires a week. Meanwhile Petter was working on the early stages of an Admiralty specification for a strike fighter to be launched from an aircraft-carrier. 
In December 1944 Petter resigned from Westland Aircraft Ltd after failing to obtain the board's agreement to his taking over responsibility for production as well as design. He had begun work on a government specification for a twin-engined jet fighter bomber to replace the Mosquito, and was allowed by the managing director, Eric Mensforth, to take the designs with him, to the English Electric Company in Preston, Lancashire, where he was appointed chief engineer of the aircraft division. English Electric had re-entered the aircraft manufacturing business in 1938, subcontracting the mass production of airframes, and had been making Halifax bombers. The company had been without a design office since 1923, but in 1944 the decision was taken to continue to build aircraft after the end of the war, and as there would be little subcontract work, a design team and development centre were needed. In 1944 English Electric was one of the companies invited by the government to develop a jet bomber, and the managing director, George Nelson (later first Baron Nelson of Stafford), approached Petter, asking him to form and head a design team. The government specification had changed, as the Air Ministry decided it wanted a high altitude jet bomber, and Petter's design won a Ministry of Supply contract for four prototypes in 1946. Later named the Canberra, this made its first flight in 1949, and its first public display at that year's Farnborough Air Show generated great excitement, as it flew at double the speed of previous bombers. This was the first British jet bomber, and its success moved English Electric to the forefront of British aviation. The Canberra was chosen by the United States Air Force: known as the B 57, it was the first British military aircraft to be built in the United States for over forty years. More than 1300 Canberras were built in Britain, the United States, and Australia, and it was still being used by the RAF in the 1980s and served in the Falklands War. Petter's other important design for English Electric was a supersonic fighter, with swept back wings, which developed into the Lightning. 
In 1950 Petter resigned from English Electric, just as suddenly as he had previously resigned from Westland, and for the same reason, that he found it difficult to work with colleagues in other departments and wanted to be in charge of production as well as design, and to have his own experimental shop. When this was refused, he joined Folland Aircraft Ltd, a small subcontractor company in Hamble, Hampshire, as chief engineer, taking several members of his English Electric design team with him. After the death of Henry Folland in 1954 Petter became managing director. At Folland he designed a small jet fighter, the Gnat. More than three hundred were sold to the Ministry of Aviation, as well as sales to India, Finland, and Yugoslavia, and a later version, the Gnat trainer, became standard equipment in the RAF Flying Training Command. In 1962 Folland Aircraft Ltd was taken over by the Hawker Siddeley Group; Petter resigned as he did not want to work in a large organization again, and he left the aircraft industry altogether. 
Petter was a brilliant designer, one of the leading aeronautical engineers of his time, but his eccentricity and authoritarian approach alienated his colleagues. He was conceited and had a reputation for rejecting any idea that he had not originated. Harald Penrose, chief test pilot at Westland, described him as 'poetical looking', and he had intellectual interests, particularly in philosophy. He never learned to fly. 
Petter was elected a fellow of the Royal Aeronautical Society in 1944 and was awarded its silver medal in 1950. In 1951 he was made a CBE. When he left Folland he decided to devote the rest of his life to prayer and meditation, and moved with his family to Switzerland. In an attempt to cure his wife of Parkinson's disease, Petter, his wife, and youngest daughter joined a small religious community which practised faith healing, and, dressed in a monk's habit, he continually prayed for her recovery. They later moved to the same order in France. Petter died in Beruges, France, on 1 May 1968. 


@@@@@


doc= 35498


Pettigrew, James Bell (1832-1908), comparative anatomist, born on 26 May 1832 at Roxhill, Lanarkshire, was the son of Robert Pettigrew and Mary Bell. He was related on his father's side to Thomas Joseph Pettigrew, surgeon, and on his mother's side to Henry Bell, the builder of the 'Comet' steamship. Educated at the Free West Academy of Airdrie, he studied arts at the University of Glasgow from 1850 to 1855. He then migrated to Edinburgh, where he pursued medical studies. In 1858-9 he was awarded Professor John Goodsir's senior anatomy gold medal for the best treatise 'On the arrangement of the muscular fibres in the ventricles of the vertebrate heart' ('Philosophical Transactions', 1864). This treatise gained him the appointment of Croonian lecturer at the Royal Society of London in 1860. He received at Edinburgh in 1860 the annual gold medal in the class of medical jurisprudence with an essay 'On the presumption of survivorship' ('British and Foreign Medico-Chirurgical Review', January 1865). He graduated MD at Edinburgh in 1861, obtaining the gold medal for his inaugural dissertation on 'the ganglia and nerves of the heart and their connection with the cerebrospinal and sympathetic systems in mammalia' ('Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh', 1865). 
In 1861 Pettigrew acted as house surgeon to Professor James Syme at the Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh, and in 1862 he was appointed assistant in the Hunterian Museum at the Royal College of Surgeons of England. Here he remained until 1867, adding dissections to the collection and writing papers on various anatomical subjects. In 1867 he contributed a paper to the 'Transactions of the Linnean Society' entitled 'On the mechanical appliances by which flight is maintained in the animal kingdom', and in the same year he left the Hunterian Museum in order to spend two years in the south of Ireland so as to extend his knowledge of the flight of insects, birds, and bats. He also experimented largely on the subject of artificial flight. His 'Animal Locomotion, or, Walking, Swimming, and Flying, with a Dissertation on aeronautics' appeared in 1873 and was translated into French (1874) and German (1879). 
Elected FRS in 1869, in the autumn of that year Pettigrew became curator of the museum of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh and pathologist at the Royal Infirmary. He continued his anatomical, physical, and physiological researches, especially those on flight, and in 1870 he published a memoir 'On the physiology of wings, being an analysis of the movements by which flight is produced in the insect, bird and bat' ('Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh', 26). 
At Edinburgh Pettigrew was elected FRSE and FRCP (Edinburgh) in 1873. He was appointed in the same year lecturer on physiology at the College of Surgeons of Edinburgh. In 1874 he was awarded the Godard prize of the French Academie des Sciences for his anatomico-physiological researches and was made a laureate of the Institut de France. In 1875 he was appointed Chandos professor of medicine and anatomy and dean of the medical faculty in the University of St Andrews. In 1875-7 he delivered special courses of lectures on physiology in Dundee, and University College, Dundee, owes its origin largely to his efforts. In 1877 he was elected by the universities of Glasgow and St Andrews to represent them on the General Medical Council. After 1886, when a new medical act enabled each of the Scottish universities to return its own member, Pettigrew represented St Andrews alone on the council. In 1883 he received the honorary degree of LLD at Glasgow. He married, in 1890, Elsie, second daughter of Sir William Gray, of Greatham, co. Durham, but left no family. 
Pettigrew died at his home, the Swallowgate, St Andrews, on 30 January 1908. A museum for the botanic gardens was erected in his memory by his widow as an adjunct to the Bute medical buildings of St Andrews University. Pettigrew's 'Design in Nature', the work which occupied the last ten years of his life, was published posthumously in three volumes in 1908. 


@@@@@


doc= 35499


Fitzmaurice, Edmond George Petty-, Baron Fitzmaurice (1846-1935), politician and historian, was born on 19 June 1846 at Lansdowne House, Berkeley Square, London, the second son of Henry Thomas Petty-Fitzmaurice, earl of Shelburne, later fourth marquess of Lansdowne (1816-1866), and Emily Jane Mercer Elphinstone de Flahault, Lady Nairne (1819-1895), eldest daughter of General Auguste Charles Joseph, comte de Flahault de la Billardrie (1785-1870). 
Edmond Fitzmaurice was educated at home, before moving on to a private school at Woodcote and then to Eton College, from whence he went to Trinity College, Cambridge, as a scholar in 1865. His literary tastes and scholarly aptitude were by then already much in evidence: at Eton he was awarded the prince consort's prize for French, and at Trinity he won the English essay prize before graduating with a first in the classical tripos in 1868. He also captained the Etonian football club and took an active role in the revival of the sport at university level ('WWW'). He earned his first political spurs in 1866, when he succeeded his lifelong friend and political associate Sir Charles Wentworth Dilke, second baronet, as president of the Cambridge Union. In 1871 he was called to the bar, although he never practised. 
In 1868, the year of his graduation, Fitzmaurice was returned unopposed at the general election for the family seat of Calne in Wiltshire, where he succeeded Robert Lowe, later Viscount Sherbrooke, whose private secretary he became in 1872. Unlike the anti-reformist Lowe, however, and despite his family's long-time status as one of the pillars of the whig establishment, Fitzmaurice was a leading light, in conjunction with Dilke and Sir William Harcourt, of the 'below-the-gangway radicals'. The former was his oldest friend, but Harcourt was his most influential political associate (Fitzmaurice to Sir William Harcourt, 4 Jan 1883, Bodl. Oxf., MSS Harcourt, dep. 212, fol. 3; Fitzmaurice to Lewis Harcourt, 13 June 1906, Bodl. Oxf., MSS Harcourt, dep. 439, fol. 76). Unlike Dilke, he somewhat reluctantly followed Harcourt in supporting Hartington's leadership during Gladstone's 'retirement' (Fitzmaurice to Harcourt, 4 Jan 1875, MSS Harcourt, dep. 206, fols. 1-2). Fitzmaurice's relations with the latter, however, were ambivalent. His amendment to the 'University Tests Bill' had incurred him the Grand Old Man's displeasure. Fitzmaurice himself held Gladstone and the 'theological maggot in his head' responsible for the confusion within the Liberal Party (ibid.); and generally thought him 'a greater tactician than strategist' (Fitzmaurice to Harcourt, 29 Dec 1898, MSS Harcourt, dep. 239, fols. 181-3). He was dismayed by what he regarded as Gladstone's dictatorial inclinations and his ignorance of the Irish problem (Fitzmaurice to Vincent, 16 April 1882, D'Abernon MSS, BL, Add. MS 48928, fols. 143-6). Ultimately, however, he remained loyal to his party and its leader during the home rule crisis; and later, in the 1890s, frequently enlisted Gladstone's support in his attempts to be selected as a parliamentary candidate. 
With the return of the Liberals to power in 1880 Fitzmaurice's career entered its perhaps most interesting phase. Until the fall of Gladstone's second ministry in 1885 he was involved in Britain's foreign affairs in several capacities. His interest in international diplomacy was perhaps stimulated by his own descent: his father had been parliamentary under-secretary for foreign affairs in 1856-8, a position which he himself would later fill; and his maternal grandfather, the comte de Flahault, the natural son of Talleyrand and 'aide-de-camp' to Napoleon Bonaparte, had served successively as French ambassador at Berlin, Vienna, and finally at London under the July monarchy and Napoleon III. Already in 1878, at the height of the great Eastern crisis, Fitzmaurice had raised the case of Greece in the Commons as a leading member of the Liberals' Greek Committee. Throughout his political career he retained a strong interest in the affairs of the Balkan peninsula. In the summer of 1880 he was Britain's representative on the European commission at Constantinople for the reorganization of the Ottoman provinces in Europe and Crete under the provisions of article 23 of the treaty of Berlin of 1878. In this role he won an accolade as the principal draughtsman of a comprehensive scheme for administrative reform, though ultimately his reform scheme came to nothing because of Sultan Abdul Hamid II's skill in playing off the great powers against each other. Similarly, his proposal for a semi-autonomous greater Albania under Ottoman suzerainty foundered, this time on Russian opposition (Fitzmaurice to Granville, no. 68, 27 July 1880, and no. 94, 20 Aug 1880, TNA: PRO, FO 97/529). 
The various aspects of the Eastern question continued to occupy Fitzmaurice. In 1883 he served, at Lord Granville's invitation, as second British plenipotentiary at the international conference convened at London to settle the complex question of the Danube navigation (Fitzmaurice to Granville, 31 Jan 1883, Granville MSS, TNA: PRO, PRO 30/29/195). But his skilful negotiations at Constantinople, the breadth of his knowledge of European affairs, and his informed contributions to parliamentary debates had earmarked Fitzmaurice for higher honours. At the beginning of 1883 he succeeded Dilke as parliamentary under-secretary at the Foreign Office, taking particular responsibility for the office's commercial department (Fitzmaurice to Stead, 10 Dec 1883, Stead MSS, CAC Cam., STED 1/26). In his new role Fitzmaurice earned the respect of his chief, Earl Granville, as well as of the officials with whom he worked. The former rated his abilities so highly that in 1884 he suggested his under-secretary as a strong candidate for the post of ambassador at Constantinople, though, ultimately, the appointment went to a career diplomatist. 
But while Fitzmaurice was politically successful, he was now also dogged by recurrent health problems. Continued bouts of neuralgia, the result of an accident in 1875, made him consider resigning in May 1885, although he was persuaded to carry on his duties until the ministry's resignation in the following month (Fitzmaurice to Granville, 22 and 26 May 1885, Granville MSS, TNA: PRO, PRO 30/29/195). This breakdown came at a most unfortunate juncture in Fitzmaurice's career. In July, despite his illness, he addressed a Liberal meeting at Glasgow, outlining various domestic reform schemes. The speech attracted considerable attention and sharpened his radical profile, and led to his adoption as the Liberal candidate for the Blackfriars division of Glasgow, his old seat at Calne having been abolished under the 1884 'Redistribution Act'. But ill health compelled him to withdraw his candidacy, and he retired into private life. He emerged briefly in November 1887 to proclaim his attachment to Irish home rule at a meeting in Old Cumnock, Ayrshire. 
For thirteen years, between 1885 and 1898, Fitzmaurice remained outside the Westminster fray. In 1887 he was appointed one of the five county boundary commissioners under the 'Local Government Act'. In light of his family's strong ties with Wiltshire, it was perhaps not surprising that he took an active part in county affairs, serving as chairman of the county council (1896-1906) and of the court of quarter sessions (1899-1905). Throughout this period Fitzmaurice devoted much of his unflagging energy to matters of public education: for fifteen years he was 'practically... Minister of Education' in the county (Fitzmaurice to J. A. Spender, private letter, 16 Oct 1905, Spender MSS, BL, Add. MS 46389, fol. 146). The town of Bradford-on-Avon, where he resided, also owes him the building of its municipal public baths. On 23 November 1889 he married Caroline (died 1911), daughter of William John Fitzgerald, of Lichfield, Connecticut, USA. Their marriage was annulled in 1894, and the couple had no children. 
Despite the strong interest he took in local and county affairs, Fitzmaurice was none the less anxious to return to national politics. Early in 1892 he put himself forward as a prospective candidate for the Kirkcaldy burghs by-election. His credentials as a home-ruler were impeccable; and through his mother he was related to the grand whig families in Fife and Perthshire. But opposition from 'the Scotch gang' led by Edward Marjoribanks, later Lord Tweedmouth, and R. C. Munro-Ferguson, later Viscount Novar, apparently with the support of Lord Rosebery, scuppered his bid to win the nomination (Fitzmaurice to Gladstone, 29 Feb and 6 March 1892, Gladstone MSS, BL, Add. MS 44514, fols. 73-7 and 108-13). Fitzmaurice unsuccessfully contested Deptford at the 1892 general election, and suffered another defeat in the Cricklade division of Wiltshire at the next general election in 1895. He eventually carried Cricklade at a by-election in 1898 and successfully defended the seat at the 'khaki' election of 1900. 
Immediately on his return to the Commons Fitzmaurice was invited by his old associate and mentor Harcourt to a place on the opposition front bench (Fitzmaurice to Harcourt, 18 March 1904, MSS Harcourt, dep. 245, fol. 116). When Harcourt resigned the leadership of a party rent by sectional disputes at the end of 1898, Fitzmaurice threw in his lot with the anti-imperialist or 'pro-Boer' section of the Liberals under Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman. In the latter's estimate Fitzmaurice was 'as straight as a reed in his actions and as sound as a bell in his views' (Campbell-Bannerman to Herbert Gladstone, private letter, 21 Jan 1900, Campbell-Bannerman MSS, BL, Add. MS 41215, fol. 216). But his support for the new leader exacted a high political price. When the Liberals returned to power in December 1905, Fitzmaurice, to his own bitter disappointment, was passed over for a place in the cabinet: 'In my 'dreams' I have seen myself Foreign Secretary. My 'daylight' hopes were by contrast on the Education Office' (Fitzmaurice to J. A. Spender, 13 Dec 1905, Spender MSS, BL, Add. MS 46489, fol. 146). To some in the party his considerable experience of international diplomacy, his command of foreign languages, and his knowledge of European countries and statesmen singled him out for the Foreign Office. But not only was Fitzmaurice actively opposed by the Liberal Imperialists -- and apparently by John Morley -- he also lacked a wider following within the parliamentary party (T. R. Buchanan, diary, 1 Dec 1905, Campbell-Bannerman MSS, BL, Add. MS 52520, fol. 83; Fitzmaurice to Pentland, 'c'.January 1919, Campbell-Bannerman MSS, BL, Add. MS 52520, fols. 61-2), a circumstance which was not alleviated by the somewhat idiosyncratic delivery of his speeches in the Commons. The peerage which Campbell-Bannerman offered as a consolation prize he refused with the words of his Cromwellian ancestor Sir William Petty when offered a peerage by Charles II: 'A bare 'title' without some 'trust' might seem to the world a Body without soul or spirit' (Fitzmaurice to Campbell-Bannerman, 12 Dec 1905, Campbell-Bannerman MSS, BL, Add. MS 42214, fol. 201). But he accepted a peerage (conferred on 9 January 1906) after the prime minister also offered him his old post, the parliamentary under-secretaryship for foreign affairs, under the Liberal Imperialist Sir Edward Grey, in order that the Foreign Office was represented in the upper house. 
During his second spell at the Foreign Office Fitzmaurice was a largely isolated and impotent figure. He had little influence over Grey and his impact on policy decisions was limited: his views and recommendations 'reflected an earlier era in British foreign policy' (Steiner, 108): the 1880s, when he had last been at the Foreign Office, a fact of which he himself was not entirely unaware (Fitzmaurice to Dilke, confidential, 16 Dec 1905, Dilke MSS, BL Add. MS 43882, fols. 140-42). He remained highly suspicious of Russian diplomacy, and inclined towards closer ties with Germany (for example Fitzmaurice to Vincent, 16 Nov 1882, D'Abernon MSS, BL, Add. MS 48928, fols. 147-50; memo., Fitzmaurice, April 1907, 'British Documents on the Origins of the War', ed. G. P. Gooch and H. W. V. Temperley, 8 vols., 1928, no. 400). Although by no means blind to German machinations after 1905, he was none the less appalled by the apparent anti-German line of the Foreign Office under Grey (Fitzmaurice to Ripon, 18 April 1906, Ripon MSS, BL, Add. MS 43543, fols. 9-10; Fitzmaurice to Lascelles, 31 May 1906, and confidential, 21 Sept 1906, Lascelles MSS, TNA: PRO, FO 800/13). In consequence, he was critical of Grey's talks with Cambon in 1906, to which he was not party, but of which he was informed and, indeed, the contents of which he leaked to the lord chancellor, Lord Loreburn, thereby stirring dissension within the cabinet (Fitzmaurice to Spender, 21 March 1923, Spender MSS, BL, Add. MS 46389, fols. 200-03; to Pentland, 'c'. January 1919, Campbell-Bannerman MSS, BL, Add. MS 52520, fols. 61-2). His closest ally at the time was the lord privy seal, the marquess of Ripon, through whom he obtained some degree of influence. 
It was, however, not only the government's foreign policy with which Fitzmaurice was out of sympathy. With the change of premier from Campbell-Bannerman to Asquith he also found himself at odds with what he regarded as the Liberals' aimless drift in domestic politics (Fitzmaurice to J. A. Spender, confidential, 10 Dec 1908, Spender MSS, BL, Add. MS 46389, fol. 107 ff.). Asquith's ascendancy created an ambiguous situation for Fitzmaurice: unlike his predecessor, the new prime minister was certainly not favourably inclined towards him; and Ripon's resignation in October 1908 only heightened his isolation (Fitzmaurice to Ripon, 10 Oct 1908, Ripon MSS, BL, Add. MS 43543, fols. 76-7). On the other hand, it was Asquith who at last raised Fitzmaurice to cabinet rank as chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, and who made him a privy councillor. Fitzmaurice retained responsibility for representing the Foreign Office in the House of Lords, though his influence on foreign policy decision making was by this time minimal. His occupancy of a place at the cabinet table, however, was short-lived. Crippled by arthritis, which led to the progressive paralysis of his lower limbs, he was compelled to resign in June 1909. A faithful servant of his party to the very end of his public career, Fitzmaurice was anxious to dispel rumours that his resignation was caused by a rift with Asquith or misgivings over Lloyd George's controversial 'People's Budget' (Fitzmaurice to J. A. Spender, 19 June 1909, Spender MSS, BL, Add. MS 46389, fols. 171-3). 
Fitzmaurice never attained a high public profile, and he was perhaps best known to the wider public as a historian. In this field, his three-volume 'Life' of his ancestor William, earl of Shelburne (1875-6) established his reputation. In 1881 he was offered, but declined, the editorship of the 'Contemporary Review' (Fitzmaurice to E. Vincent, 7 Dec 1881, D'Abernon MSS, BL, Add. MS 48928, fols. 139-41). Throughout the period of opposition and exclusion Fitzmaurice was a regular contributor to the 'Contemporary' and 'Quarterly' reviews. Shortly before his return to national politics he chose another of his ancestors as the subject for another literary work, the 'Life of Sir William Petty' (1895). In 1901 he published a small monograph on Charles William Ferdinand, duke of Brunswick, who led the Prussian army during the wars against revolutionary France. Perhaps his best work, however, was the official biography of his old chief at the Foreign Office, Earl Granville (2 vols., 1905), which, nearly a century later, remains the only comprehensive work on this Victorian statesman. His historical works earned Fitzmaurice election as a fellow of the British Academy in 1914 and an honorary DLitt from Bristol University in 1912. From 1881 to 1915 he was a trustee of the National Portrait Gallery. Fitzmaurice died at his home, Leigh House, in Bradford-on-Avon, Wiltshire, on 21 June 1935. 


@@@@@


doc= 35500


Fitzmaurice, Henry Charles Keith Petty-, fifth marquess of Lansdowne (1845-1927), politician, was born at Lansdowne House, Berkeley Square, London, on 14 January 1845, the elder son of Henry Thomas Petty-Fitzmaurice, fourth marquess of Lansdowne (1816-1866), politician and landowner, and his second wife, Emily Jane Mercer Elphinstone de Flahault, Lady Nairne (1819-1895), daughter of Auguste Charles Joseph, Count de Flahault de la Billardrie, and his wife, Margaret de Flahault de la Billardrie, Lady Nairne and Baroness Keith. He was known as Viscount Clanmaurice until the death of his grandfather (Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, the third marquess) in 1863, and as the earl of Kerry until the death of his father in 1866. Lord Edmond George Petty-Fitzmaurice (1846-1935) was his younger brother. Grandson of the third marquess of Lansdowne, a prominent whig leader for more than fifty years, and great-grandson of Lord Shelburne, one of George III's prime ministers, Clanmaurice was destined from birth to inherit one of the foremost whig titles, endowed with great estates in England, Scotland, and Ireland. His education was a careful preparation for public affairs. After a preparatory school at Woodcote, near Reading, he proceeded to Eton College, where he was fag master to Arthur James Balfour, who was three years his junior and who as tory leader was to be his closest political associate in later life. In his mid-teens his father withdrew him from Eton, where he had fallen in with the boating set, and sent him to a private tutor (the Revd Lewis Campbell), who was given instructions to prepare him for Balliol rather than the more customary Christ Church. 
On the sudden death of his father in 1866, while still an undergraduate Lansdowne succeeded to the marquessate and family estates. At Balliol he spent successive long vacations with Jowett, his tutor and soon to be master, who delighted to exercise his influence on young men of position and characteristically advised him that 'wealth and rank are means and not ends, and may be the greatest evil or the greatest good as they are used' (Newton, 7). In later years Lansdowne was wont to remark that but for Jowett he would have done little with his life. After a typical aristocratic student life in which sport featured largely, he worked hard for Greats, although he missed a first. He showed little interest in politics at Oxford, but his subsequent career -- beyond that of 'grand seigneur' -- was never in doubt. 'A new era of politics is beginning and unless a man would be a cipher or a paradox he should fit himself for it', was Jowett's parting advice (ibid., 9). 
On 8 November 1869, shortly after graduation, Lansdowne married Lady Maud Evelyn Hamilton (1850-1932), younger daughter of James Hamilton, the first duke of Abercorn. As a whig, Lansdowne took his seat on the Liberal benches in the House of Lords as a matter of course. Neither Gladstone nor Granville, the Liberal leader in the upper house, was slow to nurture young aristocratic promise. Lansdowne was appointed a junior whip in Gladstone's first government (1869), promoted to under-secretary for war three years later, and made under-secretary for India at the start of Gladstone's second government (1880). However, he shared the growing whig disillusion with the Liberal leader, and in 1880 resigned his ministerial office after only two months over the 'Irish Compensation for Disturbance Bill', the prelude to the sweeping 'Irish Land Act' of the following year. Lansdowne told Gladstone that his opposition to the interference with property rights, and his 'position as an Irish landlord' (Newton, 19), made the break unavoidable. 
It was the first notable step of a career in which the defence of the landowning class against a perceived threat from the left was to be a principal theme. Lansdowne was far from an unthinking reactionary, but his standing as one of the largest Anglo-Irish landlords, with a prominent political position, made him a foremost target for the anti-landlord movement in England and Ireland throughout his life. With the aristocracy still firmly entrenched at Westminster, it did nothing to impede his early career. 
Lansdowne did not immediately leave the Liberal Party after his resignation. In 1883 he accepted Gladstone's offer to go to Canada as governor-general, from whence, in 1888, he proceeded almost directly to India as viceroy at the invitation of Lord Salisbury; he remained in Calcutta until 1894. As a youngish great magnate with administrative capacity, a suitable consort, and 'persona grata' to both political parties, Lansdowne was an obvious choice for the two most senior viceregal offices in the empire. Until the First World War both posts were normally held by aristocrats of grand title and Lansdowne was one of several peers in the period to hold the two in succession, with Canada -- a self-governing white colony -- regarded as an apprenticeship for the more arduous duties of India. Although money played a part in his decision to go abroad, politics was more important. Imperial service enabled Lansdowne, a whig with increasingly tory sympathies, to avoid the bitter internecine strife engulfing the Liberal Party, while building credit with both parties and acquiring high-level imperial experience and expertise at a time when they were useful assets for a political career at home. As he put it to his mother on accepting India, 'I shall only be doing what all those have to do who are soldiers or sailors or diplomatists, and who have to take their turn of service abroad as an inevitable incident of their profession' (Newton, 51). 
Lansdowne's qualities of tact and reliability, fortified by little imagination and no ambition to seize the reins from ministers at home, served him well in his viceregal postings. Sir John Alexander Macdonald was secure in the Canadian premiership during his period of office. Most of Lansdowne's time was devoted to travelling, to Canada's external policy (notably the long-running dispute with the United States over the delimitation of the Newfoundland fisheries), and to social duties, where his fluent French was an advantage. In India the pressures were far greater. The dominant concerns of British rulers of the period were domestic unrest -- without, as yet, an organized nationalist dimension -- and the security of the raj from Russian advances from the north. Unlike Lytton before or Curzon after, Lansdowne managed an active defence of imperial interests without arousing controversy at home through an avowed 'forward' policy or divisions within his government. He worked in harmony with Sir Frederick Roberts, the commander-in-chief. Friction developed with Gladstone's Liberal government in 1892 over a proposed military mission to Afghanistan, but a compromise was reached. Lansdowne remained and Roberts was recalled to London, in marked contrast to the resolution of the crisis between Curzon, Kitchener, and the home government a decade later. 
On returning to London in 1894, during the short-lived Gladstone-Rosebery government, Lansdowne confirmed himself in Salisbury's confidence and a year later was made war secretary (1895-1900) in the succeeding Unionist administration. Nominally a Liberal Unionist, he was soon regarded as Salisbury's protege. Balfour was heir apparent to the premiership, but it came as little surprise when, after the 1900 election, Lansdowne succeeded the ageing premier at the Foreign Office, and later -- after a brief tenure by the duke of Devonshire -- as Unionist leader in the House of Lords. 
Most of Lansdowne's efforts at the War Office were devoted to carrying through the reorganization recommended by the Hartington commission in 1890, which subordinated the commander-in-chief to the war secretary. But the conduct of the South African War, which began in October 1899, was his most trying assignment. Although the errors of the early campaigns may be largely attributed to misjudgements by Sir Redvers Buller, the commander-in-chief, Lansdowne attracted widespread public criticism, even after Buller's supersession by Roberts in January 1900 and the turning of the military tide. Yet much of the indictment was shared by the rest of the cabinet -- particularly the prime minister -- and it did nothing to thwart his promotion to the Foreign Office after Salisbury's landslide victory in the 'khaki election' of November 1900. 
It was as foreign secretary for the next five years, and as leader of the Unionist peers in the fierce conflicts between the Lords and the pre-war Liberal governments of Campbell-Bannerman and Asquith, that Lansdowne left two of his three signal marks on early twentieth-century politics. The third, and perhaps most enduring, was his peace initiative of 1916-17. 
As foreign secretary, Lansdowne precipitated Britain's engagement with the system of continental alliances which was to culminate in the First World War. Salisbury's policy, misleadingly termed 'splendid isolation', involved co-operation with continental powers, particularly on imperial disputes, but stopped short of treaty commitments placing Britain in one or other of the emerging continental blocs. By the end of the South African War, an event which heightened fears for British imperial security, this policy of co-operation without alliances was increasingly seen as unsustainable in the face of rapidly growing continental naval forces and increasingly formalized imperial rivalries. In this context, the decision to ally with France and Russia was not especially surprising. Britain's imperial interests were most immediately affected by those two powers: Lansdowne had experienced at first hand the tension with Russia in Asia, and the decision of the Liberal government of 1892-5 -- sustained by Salisbury after 1895 -- to retain Britain's interest in Egypt made a settlement of rivalries with France a matter of pressing concern to many imperial authorities. Historians have traced this 'new course' in British foreign policy back to the Liberal government of 1892-5, although they have also highlighted its uncertainties and contradictions (Penson, 136-8). 
Lansdowne gave an impetus to this new course, and by the time he left the Foreign Office it was wellnigh irreversible. But it was far from a preconceived grand plan, or indeed a plan of any kind until Salisbury retired from the premiership. On the contrary, Lansdowne's first initiative was a rapprochement with Germany. Exploiting the goodwill created by Wilhelm's visit to Victoria in her final illness, he opened discussions in early 1901 and by May a draft convention had been framed. However, neither side was prepared to make a further advance. Facing a persistently anti-English press and public opinion, Count Bulow prevaricated, while Salisbury remained unpersuaded of the virtue of the implied commitment to support Germany and Austria against Russia. For similar reasons the collapse of the German talks did not lead to any immediate overture to France, with whom relations had remained tense since the Fashoda crisis, or with Russia, by now France's ally. Lansdowne sought instead to safeguard British interests in the Far East by improving relations with Japan, leading to the Anglo-Japanese treaty of 30 January 1902. 
Salisbury's retirement did not lead to an immediate change of policy. But it allowed Lansdowne greater latitude in Europe, and as relations improved with France during 1903 the underlying forces for more formal Anglo-French co-operation asserted themselves. A conducive atmosphere was created by the celebrated visit of Edward VII to Paris in May 1903 and the return visit by President Loubet two months later, although the king took no part in the actual negotiations. Talks continued throughout the latter months of 1903, turning on a mutually advantageous trade-off between the recognition of British claims in Egypt and of French claims in Morocco. 
The 'entente cordiale' was signed on 7 April 1904, and stands as Lansdowne's greatest act as foreign secretary. In form it was a settlement of colonial tensions; but even at the time its significance in signalling Britain's engagement in the continental alliance system was clear enough. A growing hostility between Britain and Germany, unchecked by its diplomats, became apparent at every level. Under Sir Edward Grey, Lansdowne's successor and a fellow whig imperialist, the policy of the entente was taken forward through military talks with France and the 1907 Anglo-Russian entente. 
Although responsible for leading the House of Lords in the last two years of Balfour's government, Lansdowne took no prominent part in domestic politics until the 1906 election. He largely abstained from the tariff reform controversy which engulfed the Unionist alliance after Chamberlain's pro-tariff Birmingham speech of May 1903, being content to follow Balfour's lead -- however indecisive -- on that as on most other issues. 
The 1906 Liberal landslide forced Lansdowne to prominence in one of the bitterest periods of party strife in modern British history. As leader of the Unionist peers, commanding virtually the entire membership of the upper house in opposition to a radical and determined Liberal government, he faced a challenge as great as that confronting the duke of Wellington in the 1830s and Lord Salisbury in the 1880s. The legislative power of the Lords was still, in law, equal to that of the Commons, yet it had to be exercised with extreme discretion if it was to strengthen, not weaken, the Unionists and the landed interest. Opposing Gladstone's last three governments, Salisbury had a shrewd strategic sense for when the Lords should refrain from asserting itself, while satisfying his supporters with defiant rhetoric and a powerful popular presence. Lansdowne had little of the strategic sense and none of the defiance or popular touch. One long-standing colleague (Selborne) remarked in retirement that he was 'the most perfect gentleman in the world, of great experience, ability and good sense; but ridiculously diffident, and a nature too cautious, almost timid... he has some vision, but little initiative, and no driving power' (Adonis, 33). The later peace letter revealed Lansdowne to be far from devoid of vision or initiative, but he was at his weakest in domestic politics. As leader of the Unionist peers, his natural diffidence was exacerbated by subordination to Balfour's direction, when Balfour's leadership was itself vacillating and increasingly mistrusted by his more ardent followers in both houses. This served to encourage extremism among the peers, a hard core of whom -- particularly the less wealthy Irish landowners who felt betrayed by the previous Unionist government -- already shared a 'die-hard' mentality and were goaded to feckless resistance by the fiery rhetoric of Lloyd George, which met no match on their own front bench. 
Conflict between the two houses commenced immediately after the election, but for the first three sessions of the parliament Lansdowne was able to exploit the fact that much of the government's legislation was designed to appease its nonconformist Liberal activists and aroused little popular passion. The mauling of the 1906 'Education Bill' (to limit the power of the established church in schools), and the rejection of the 1907 'Licensing Bill' (to strengthen the liquor licensing regime), did the peers no harm in the country, while Lansdowne tactfully allowed the 1906 'Trades Disputes Bill' (giving unions legal immunity in industrial disputes) to pass unscathed. Although condemning the latter as 'dangerous', he warned the peers: 'It is useless for us, situated as we are, to oppose this measure' (Adonis, 141). A number of land reforms relating to Ireland and the extension of smallholdings were allowed through the Lords on the same principle. 
The 1908 session marked the watershed. In April Asquith succeeded Campbell-Bannerman, with Lloyd George moving to the exchequer and Churchill to the Board of Trade. A string of by-election defeats attested to the government's waning popularity, and its Labour allies grew increasingly restive. These factors pushed the Liberals decisively down the road of social reform to appeal to the Labour vote; and for a government committed to free trade and anxious to take on the Lords, the cost of state pensions for the indigent elderly, plus the bill for the accelerating armaments programme vociferously demanded by the Unionists, had to be met partly by heavier taxes on the wealthy. Hence Lloyd George's 'people's budget' of 1909. In reality the new taxes were fairly moderate and the workers suffered from a sharp rise in excise duties, but the wealthy classes supporting the Unionists -- not just the peers -- saw the new 'super tax' and land duties as the thin end of a socialistic wedge. Moreover, the campaign against the budget had months to gather momentum, as it moved slowly through the Commons, harried clause by clause, during the summer and autumn of 1909. Lloyd George's provocative speeches, culminating in his famous Limehouse tirade of 30 July, turned Unionist back-bench opinion frenzied, and support for rejection of the budget, an unthinkable act even six months previously, became almost uncontrollable in the Lords. 
Lansdowne did nothing to control the frenzy; nor did Balfour, which was probably the critical factor. Sharing the landowners' fears which gave rise to the anti-budget campaign, and anxious to force an early election which they hoped would weaken or possibly even eradicate Asquith's majority, they drifted inexorably towards rejection. Lansdowne was acutely aware of the struggle that would have been entailed by a decision 'not' to reject. In 1908 he had to exert himself to restrain disgruntled Irish peers from rejecting the 'Irish Evicted Tenants Bill'; he also allowed the peers to pass a series of amendments to that year's budget -- which raised Unionist hackles by equalizing tax rates on earned and unearned income -- only to be forced to retreat after Balfour conceded in the Commons that they were a breach of privilege. In July 1909 he only narrowly averted the passage of Roberts's bill for compulsory military service, and in October, a month before the arrival of the budget, faced another rebellion by the Irish peers on that year's 'Land Bill'. By then Lansdowne had all but committed himself to opposing the budget. In a private letter in early October, he noted 'the general feeling' of the peers 'decidedly in favour' of rejecting the budget, and declared, almost fatalistically: 'I do not see how the House of Lords could ever intervene usefully in the future if it accepts a deliberate slap in the face now' (Adonis, 153). 
Lansdowne moved the rejection of the budget on 22 November, and after six days of debate which exhibited, more than anything, the peers' loathing of the proposed property and capital taxes, it was rejected by 350 votes to 75. The Liberals triumphed in the ensuing election (January 1910). Although henceforth dependent on Labour and Irish nationalist support, Asquith had a Commons majority of more than 100 with them, and those parties were, if anything, still more anxious than the Liberals to curb the Lords' veto. The budget was immediately reintroduced, and passed the Lords unopposed. It was swiftly followed by a 'Parliament Bill' to limit the veto to two years and abolish it altogether in the case of money bills. The death of Edward VII brought a temporary halt to hostilities: both sides agreed to a constitutional conference to consider a compromise. This was the last best chance for Balfour and Lansdowne to salvage their position, perhaps by securing agreement to referendums for the passage of significant constitutional changes opposed by the Lords. But they refused to countenance an agreement involving abolition of the Lords' veto over 'penal' taxation. Asquith, meanwhile, had secured a commitment from George V -- as yet unpublished -- to create sufficient Liberal peers to carry the bill should the peers reject it after another election. 
The December 1910 election repeated the verdict of the January poll, and unleashed a year of internecine strife within the Unionist Party. The peers began by amending the 'Parliament Bill' out of all recognition. In mid-July 1911 Asquith secured the king's consent to publish his earlier promise, and wrote to Lansdowne and Balfour (20 July) to warn that further resistance by the Lords would be followed by a creation of Liberal peers sufficient 'to secure the passing of the bill into law' (Newton, 420). At this critical juncture Lansdowne, following Balfour's example, all but abdicated his leadership. At a shadow cabinet meeting on 21 July Balfour mystified colleagues as to his own position; while at a meeting of Unionist peers immediately afterwards Lansdowne announced that he would abstain in the forthcoming Lords votes on the 'Parliament Bill', and did nothing more decisive than leave an impression that he favoured prudence. The Unionist peers promptly split between the 'die-hards' and a hastily convened group of 'hedgers' prepared to see the bill pass to prevent a mass creation of Liberal peers. Lansdowne's weakness was exemplified by the defection of his two whips, and much of his front bench, to the die-hards. He took little part in the final Lords debates on 9 and 10 August 1911, beyond tacitly encouraging Curzon -- prime organizer of the hedgers -- to allow some Unionists to vote with the Liberals to ensure the defeat of the die-hards. Immediately after the narrow passage of the bill Lansdowne left for his Irish estate. 'I have had a luckless session of it', he wrote to Balfour (Adonis, 35). 
Although it was widely expected that he would resign with Balfour in the autumn, Lansdowne remained Unionist leader in the Lords under Bonar Law, and presided over another three years of bitter conflict between the two houses -- notably over the 'Irish Home Rule Bill', which the Lords managed to delay until 1914, when the war prevented its implementation. 
Lansdowne strongly supported the decision for war in August 1914. A shadow cabinet meeting in Lansdowne House on the evening of 2 August dispatched a note to Asquith warning that 'it would be fatal to the honour and security of the United Kingdom to hesitate in supporting France at the present juncture', and offering 'unhesitating support' for any military action (Newton, 440). Having thus strengthened the hands of Asquith and Grey within the cabinet, two days later -- after the declaration of war -- Lansdowne told Haldane that he was 'strongly of opinion' that the British expeditionary force should be sent to the continent 'at the very outset' (Newton, 440), committing the Unionists to the ensuing strategy on the western front. Personal tragedy struck early: Lansdowne's second son was killed in France in October. But his commitment to the war did not waver. In May 1915 he took office as minister without portfolio in Asquith's coalition, and in government he supported conscription. 
Doubts about the capacity of the allies to score a decisive victory grew on Lansdowne after the catastrophic Somme offensive of June 1916. Five months later, in response to a round robin invitation from Asquith for views as to the course of the war, he submitted a memorandum, dated 13 November 1916, which presaged the peace letter of the following year. It was a remarkably lucid and balanced assessment. Reviewing the military situation, the available resources, and the position of the allies, he concluded that although there was no question of defeat, outright victory was unlikely. He argued for a restatement of war aims that might open the way to a negotiated settlement. Most striking was an emotional appeal as to the scale of the slaughter. Noting that 15,000 British officers had been killed to date out of total allied casualties of more than 1.1 million, he wrote: 'We are slowly but surely killing off the best of the male population of these islands.... Generations will have to come and go before the country recovers from the loss' (Earl of Oxford and Asquith, 2.138-47). 
In his war memoirs Lloyd George claimed the memorandum 'startled the Cabinet' (George, 2.318), and Crewe, perhaps Asquith's closest ministerial confidant, later asserted that it precipitated Lloyd George's bid for power in the following weeks through fear that Lansdowne might gain wider support. In reality, there was no overt support for Lansdowne and Asquith's fall was caused by wider forces, notably the growing appreciation of his incapacity as a war leader. The fact that Asquith wrote a short note to Lansdowne on 28 November expressing his 'complete concurrence' with the memorandum was, more than anything, characteristic of his readiness to appease strongly expressed views. Lansdowne's intervention was but one marker in the final disintegration of the Asquith government. 
Lansdowne left office on Asquith's resignation. The subsequent German peace note offered little basis for negotiations, yet Lloyd George made no attempt to create an opening even had it been possible. It is therefore unsurprising that, after another massively costly but largely futile assault on the western front at Passchendaele, Lansdowne should have been still more attracted to a negotiated peace. More surprising is that he should have gone public, through his famous peace letter printed in the 'Daily Telegraph' on 29 November 1917 (perhaps the result of a misunderstanding of a conversation held in the street with A. J. Balfour). Yet his views were well known in senior reaches of government, and had made no impact. By nature the least populist of politicians, Lansdowne was acutely aware that all the major shifts of opinion during the war had depended upon the media; and as the ministers he consulted -- notably Balfour -- were averse to a parliamentary debate, he decided on a public letter instead. It was a courageous act, but far from a precipitate one. Indeed, it might have had a greater chance of success -- both in mobilizing domestic support and exploiting the military impasse -- had it been undertaken at the time of his initial cabinet memorandum, of which the letter was practically a paraphrase. 
The letter created a sensation, as much for its emotional tone as for its argument. 'We are not going to lose this War', Lansdowne wrote, 'but its prolongation will spell ruin for the civilised world, and an infinite addition to the load of human suffering which already weighs upon it' (Newton, 467). Denunciation, bitter and personal, followed immediately from the Northcliffe press, and Lansdowne was ostracized by the Unionist leadership in public. But his move was warmly received by the leading provincial press, attracted significant private support in high quarters, and served as a beacon to the peace movement. A Lansdowne committee was formed and addresses presented. 'The prevailing note is, 'you have had the courage to say what we have been thinking for ever so long'', he told his daughter of his large mailbag (Newton, 472). President Wilson's 'fourteen points' were widely seen to be on Lansdowne lines, and he pressed on with further letters in March and July, supplemented by Lords speeches, calling for a careful restatement of war aims. Only with the unexpected collapse of Germany in November 1918 did the Lansdowne movement cease. 
Lansdowne's initiative almost certainly came too late to open the way to a negotiated peace. Yet its motivation was reasonable to all who could face the reality of the war, and it tapped a broad vein of popular opinion -- far broader than its own generation, including many of those who were supportive at the time, were prepared to concede. 
Increasingly infirm, Lansdowne appeared only occasionally in the Lords after the war. The looting and burning of his beloved Irish house at Derreen, co. Kerry, in the autumn of 1922 distressed him greatly, and symbolized the fate of the southern Irish landlord class. With characteristic tenacity he pursued the Irish government for compensation, rebuilt the house, and it was 'en route' to it, at Newtown Anmer House, Clonmel, that he died, of heart failure, on 3 June 1927. He was buried at his ancestral seat of Bowood, and was succeeded as sixth marquess by his elder son. He was survived by his wife. 
Lansdowne was a foremost exemplar of the last generation of great magnates to rule in Britain almost by hereditary right. Other hereditary peers -- notably Halifax, Home, and Carrington -- were to follow in similar footsteps, but they were less grand and more socially isolated in their prominence. Although he never once occupied an elected office, Lansdowne's entire adult life was spent in posts of the highest political responsibility. Little suited to democratic politics, he played a pivotal role -- almost in spite of himself -- in Edwardian and First World War politics, and by the end of the war was a figure of greater controversy than any of the popular leaders of the age. With its remarkable combination of popular, patrician, and imperial elements, his career graphically symbolized the significant political role played by Britain's old aristocracy until well into the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 35501


Peuleve, Henri Leonard Thomas (1916-1963), special operations officer, the only son of Leonard Otho Peuleve and his wife, Eva Juliet Dallison, both of British nationality, was born on 29 January 1916 at Worthing, where his mother and sister were temporarily in refuge from the German invasion of France. The family home was in Paris where Leonard Peuleve represented a firm of British seedsmen until the outbreak of war in 1914 when he joined the British army. At the time of his son's birth he was a staff sergeant-major in the Army Service Corps. When the fighting in France became stabilized as trench warfare, his wife returned with the two children, moving from one place to another as her husband's unit was posted from this sector to that. 
The Peuleve agency in France was not revived after the war and the family's wanderings continued while Peuleve sought to make a living, shuttling back and forth between France and England, with a period in Algiers where for a time he was British vice-consul. Thus Harry Peuleve's upbringing was as unsettled as his education was varied. His many schools included a nuns' kindergarten in Algiers, the Shakespeare School at Stratford upon Avon, Rye grammar school, private schools and tutors in England and France, and finally a technical college in London where he took courses in telegraphy and wireless which led him to his first job, as technical assistant in the Baird Television Company. From this he went on to the British Broadcasting Corporation in the early days of television, became a cameraman, and was so employed at the outbreak of war in 1939 when he joined the army. 
Peuleve was commissioned in the Royal Army Ordnance Corps, worked on the first radar equipment, and later transferred with the rank of captain to the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers (REME), whence in 1942, as one of the earliest volunteers, he was seconded to Special Operations Executive (SOE), the paramilitary body created by the British joint chiefs of staff to organize and conduct clandestine warfare in enemy-occupied territories. Peuleve could not have been better fitted for such a task: he was bilingual and could pass as a Frenchman in France; his loyalties to that country and to Britain were equal, indivisible, and dedicated; he had an ingrained ability to make the best, even to take advantage, of the unpredictable; and he was already a specialist in wireless communication as both technician and operator. As though these qualifications were insufficient, nature had provided him with a well-built body, broad-shouldered and suggestive of considerable physical strength. Large grey-green eyes which could on occasion compel without frightening were allied with a persuasiveness remarkable in that it was always muted and made acceptable by his charm of personality. These attributes came together in developing his powers of leadership in circumstances where difference and independence in the men he commanded in the field were uncontained by the disciplines of military training. A final gift stood him in great stead in outwitting and escaping his enemies: he was able to withdraw mentally, to make his mind still in the presence of those he did not want to notice him -- a surer disguise than any false beard or dark glasses. 
After training in a secret agent's special skills by SOE, Peuleve parachuted near Nimes on the night of 30 July 1942, but, by the pilot's error, he was too low for safe landing and broke a leg. He escaped across the mountains on crutches into Spain where he was imprisoned; in April 1943 he got away and reached England in very poor physical condition. After recuperating he volunteered to try again. In September 1943 he was landed safely by light aircraft; he established himself in the Correze area and extended his influence to the northern Dordogne. With the help of the novelist Andre Malraux he based his 'Author' network in the market town of Brive-la-Gaillarde, from where he co-ordinated twenty-four supply drops of arms and equipment. He trained and armed a large group of resistance fighters which in the course of the following five months reached some 4000 men whom he led in extensive sabotage operations, on occasions joining battle in running fights with German occupation troops and inflicting considerable casualties. 
Despite the Gestapo's determined efforts to find and capture him, Peuleve evaded them until by a stroke of bad luck he was erroneously suspected of being a black marketeer and arrested with three of his team on 21 March 1944. Interrogated under torture he refused to talk, and the enemy never discovered who he was and the important part he had played in the clandestine war. Imprisoned in solitary confinement at Fresnes for four months, he attempted escape, was shot and wounded in the thigh, and, since he was refused medical treatment, himself removed the bullet with the aid of a spoon. In August 1944 he was taken to Buchenwald where he was chosen by F. F. E. Yeo-Thomas as one of the two agents who with himself changed identities with Frenchmen dying of typhus. In November he was transported to Schonebeck camp near Magdeburg. As one of the prison's forced labour group Peuleve was more easily able to escape (11 April 1945); but he was recaptured almost within sight of an advancing American unit by two Belgian SS. He persuaded the two men of the danger of being captured in uniform, suggested they undress, and while they were doing so seized one of their pistols and made them his prisoners, then delivered them to the Americans. He was appointed to the DSO, made a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur, and received the MC and Croix de Guerre. 
After the war Peuleve worked for the Shell Oil Company in several European countries, Egypt, and Tunis. In 1952 he married Marie-Louise Jahn, a Danish woman; they had a son and a daughter, but were divorced in 1956. Peuleve died at the Hotel Alfonso XIII in Seville, of a heart attack on 18 March 1963. 
Selwyn Jepson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35502


Phear, Sir John Budd (1825-1905), judge in India and author, was born at Earl Stonham, Suffolk, on 9 February 1825, the eldest son of John Phear (1794-1869), fellow of Pembroke College, Cambridge, and rector of Earl Stonham from 1823 to 1869, and his wife, Catherine Wreford, only daughter of Samuel Budd, doctor, of North Tawton, Devon. Of his two brothers, Henry Carylon Phear (1826-1880) was a fellow of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, and a chancery barrister, and the Revd Samuel George Phear (1829-1918) was master of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, from 1871 to 1895. 
Educated privately by his father, John entered Pembroke College, Cambridge, in March 1843 and graduated BA as sixth wrangler in 1847. In April 1847 he was elected a fellow of Clare College and shortly thereafter mathematical lecturer. While at Cambridge he published two textbooks, 'Elementary Mechanics' (1850) and 'Elementary Hydrostatics with Numerous Examples' (1852), and in 1856 was moderator of the mathematical tripos. He left Cambridge in 1854, but retained his fellowship until his marriage in 1865. In 1854 Phear was called to the bar by the Inner Temple and joined the western circuit, subsequently transferring himself to the Norfolk circuit. In 1859 he published 'A Treatise on Rights of Water', which remained the standard legal text on the topic for many years. 
In 1864 Phear was appointed a judge of the high court of Bengal, and on 16 October 1865, at Madras, married the widowed Emily Tabart (died 1897), daughter of John Bolton of Burnley House, Stockwell, with whom he had two daughters. 
As a judge Phear prided himself on his freedom from racial prejudice and was particularly noted for his refusal to trivialize cases of assault brought by Indians against Europeans. In Calcutta's insular Anglo-Indian community such behaviour was soon translated into the perceived sin of 'a partiality for the natives' -- a view heightened in 1867, when Phear and his wife gave an Indian name to their first-born daughter, Ethel Kamini. 
In addition to his judicial duties, Phear was variously president of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, the Bengal Social Science Association, and the Bengal Photographic Society. In particular, as long-term president of the Bethune Society, dedicated to the education of Bengalis, he established himself as a prominent commentator on Indian domestic life. He was respected by many Westernized Bengalis but his belief that India's social and political advancement hinged on the processes of Anglicization and female emancipation alienated the more radical members of Bengal's intelligentsia. Phear only moved comfortably among those Bengalis who acknowledged the superiority of Western achievements; it was beyond doubt to him that Bengal's indigenous culture, which he described in 'The Aryan Village in India and Ceylon' (1880), represented a lesser, primitive stage of civilization. 
Phear left Calcutta in August 1876 and in the following year was knighted and appointed chief justice of Ceylon, in which post he revised the civil and criminal code for the colony. He returned to England in 1879 and settled at Marpool Hall, Exmouth, Devon, and, as in Bengal, threw himself into local public life. He chaired the quarter sessions for fourteen years from October 1881 and served as an alderman of Devon county council from 1889 until his death. An ardent Liberal, he thrice contested unsuccessfully Devon county divisions in the Liberal interest: Honiton in 1885, Tavistock in 1886, and Tiverton in 1892. In 1886 he was president of the Devonshire Association for the Advancement of Science, Literature, and Art. He was a good cricketer and a life member of the London Skating Club, and, from 1852, a fellow of the Geological Society. 
Phear died at Marpool Hall, Exmouth, on 7 April 1905 and was buried at Littleham. His wife, Emily, a member of the Exmouth school board, had died in 1897. 


@@@@@


doc= 35503


Phelps, Lancelot Ridley (1853-1936), college head and authority on social administration, the third son of Thomas Prankerd Phelps, rector of Ridley, Kent, and honorary canon of Rochester Cathedral, and his wife, Laura, fourth daughter of Sir Percival Hart Dyke, fifth baronet, was born at Ridley on 3 November 1853. He was educated at Charterhouse School (of the governing body of which he was later for many years a valuable member) and at Oriel College, Oxford. Admitted a scholar in 1872, he obtained seconds in classical moderations and 'literae humaniores'. He then studied for two semesters at Leipzig and Gottingen universities. He was elected a fellow of Oriel in 1877, and ordained deacon in 1879 and priest in 1896. He was a lecturer (1880-85) and vice-principal (1885-93) of St Mary Hall; and was tutor (1893-1914), provost (1914-29), and honorary fellow (1929-36) of Oriel. On the occasion of the college sexcentenary in 1926 the university conferred upon him the honorary degree of DCL. He died, unmarried, at his home, 24 Norham Road, Oxford, on 16 December 1936. 
As a tutor of the college, Phelps was responsible for the general supervision of one third of its undergraduates, and he was the friend of many more. He talked with them late into the night; he took them on reading parties to High Force, on the Tees; he kept up a lifelong correspondence with many of them. He probably had as wide and deep an influence as any Oxford tutor of his time. He never became a specialist in any academic subject, but he had a very active and lively mind, and was an excellent and popular lecturer on classics and on political economy. In particular, his lectures on economics to Indian Civil Service probationers influenced many who became distinguished civil servants; and in later years he had an equally great influence on the members of the Sudan civil service. 
Two matters in which Phelps was deeply interested were the fabric of the college and the college estates. It was mainly to his efforts that the college owed the adornment of the hall by panelling and stained-glass windows executed by his friend John Ninian Comper; he was a frequent visitor to the estates, where he rode and shot with the farmers and discussed the crops and stock. To his colleagues he was perhaps most completely himself as steward of the common room. An admirable talker and raconteur, he never monopolized the conversation; he insisted that this must be general, and his art in its management resembled nothing so much as that of a conductor who draws its best out of every instrument. Another side of his interests is illustrated by his notable collection of paintings by William Turner of Oxford, which he sold in 1929 after his resignation from the provostship. 
A supporter of the university extension movement and a member of the executive committee of the Toynbee Hall Settlement in the East End of London, Phelps was a leading exponent of T. H. Green's ideals of active citizenship. He was for many years a councillor and afterwards an alderman, and was a leading figure in the Oxford Cottage Improvement Society. His main activity outside the college was his work as chairman of the Oxford board of guardians of the poor from 1912 (he had been a guardian since 1880), and later of the public assistance committee. An active member of the Charity Organization Society, Phelps combined a great interest in the welfare of the poor with a truly Gladstonian economy and individualism. He was a member of the royal commission on the poor laws (1905-9), and his views were prominent in the majority report, which he had a hand in drafting. In 1929-30 he served as chairman of a Home Office departmental committee on the relief of the casual poor. The principles set forth at length in the reports of these two bodies had been briefly and lucidly stated in a pamphlet, 'Poor Law and Charity', published by Phelps as early as 1887. 


@@@@@


doc= 35504


Philby, Harry St John Bridger (1885-1960), explorer and Arabist, was born at St John's, Badulla, Ceylon, on 3 April 1885, the second son of Harry Montagu Philby (died 1913), a coffee planter, and his wife, Queenie (1864-1950), known as May, daughter of Colonel John Duncan, commander of the local garrison. The Philbys were from Chigwell in Essex and perhaps originally from Filby Broad in Norfolk. Philby's father was an unsatisfactory husband and his wife left him in 1891, going home to her parents in London and taking her four sons with her. Thereafter Philby's contact with his father was sporadic and the family was always short of money. Philby, who was known as Jack, won a scholarship to Westminster School, where he excelled in both studies and games. In 1904 he went to Trinity College, Cambridge, with an exhibition in classics. Switching to modern languages, he took a first and was accepted into the Indian Civil Service. He spent an extra year at Cambridge studying oriental languages under the famous E. G. Browne and in November 1908 sailed for India, where he was posted to the Punjab. In 1910 he married Dora Johnston (died 1957); they had a son and three daughters. 
In the Punjab, Philby won a reputation for zeal and industry and early reports on his work were glowing. But a couple of incidents which revealed his innate pugnacity, together with a marriage too early by Indian Civil Service standards, held up his promotion. He took refuge in the acquisition of languages: Urdu, Punjabi, Baluchi, Persian, and, eventually, Arabic. The allowances he got for them helped his shaky finances and his linguistic aptitude changed his career. In October 1915 Percy Cox, the chief political officer with the Mesopotamian expeditionary force, needed linguists as civilian administrators, and Philby was among those selected. 
In Mesopotamia, Philby's work was the old mixture of competence and tactlessness. He won influential supporters (Cox and Gertrude Bell, for example); he reformed the administration's finances; he became Cox's personal assistant; he was appointed CIE. But failing to get on with Cox's deputy, Arnold Wilson, he contrived to have himself sent, in November 1917, as head of a mission to Ibn Sa'ud, ruler of the Nejd in central Arabia, whom the British were keen to woo into an attack on the Rashids of Ha'il, allies of the Turks. He travelled with a small party by camel from the coast of the Persian Gulf to Riyadh. There he spent ten days and was deeply impressed by the personality of Ibn Sa'ud. It was the start of an admiration that stayed with him for life. Persuading Ibn Sa'ud to provide an escort, he continued his journey, again by camel, to Jiddah on the Red Sea, characteristically without waiting for Baghdad's permission. This crossing of Arabia from coast to coast brought him for the first time into the public eye. 
In Jiddah, Philby met the Hashemite ruler of Hejaz, the Sharif Husain, leader of the Arab revolt, whose sons were in the field against the Turks, under the guidance of T. E. Lawrence. He became convinced that the British authorities in Cairo and London were wrong to prefer Husain over Ibn Sa'ud as the future leader of the Arabs. But his arguments to this effect did not prevail, either then or later. Though he went back to Riyadh for a time, the end of the war brought the closure of his mission to Ibn Sa'ud. After a long leave in England, during which he was sent out to Arabia in a fruitless bid to reconcile Husain and Ibn Sa'ud, he was recalled to Baghdad to help with the administration of the new state of Iraq. But he was out of sympathy with British policy there, especially with the decision to insert a Hashemite monarch (Faisal, son of the Sharif Husain), and in 1921 he accepted with relief the post of British representative in Transjordan, where the emir Abdullah, another son of Husain's, had been installed by a decision of Winston Churchill, the colonial secretary, at a conference in Cairo. Here too, though, he was eventually uncomfortable. Chief among his grievances were friction with Sir Herbert Samuel, the high commissioner in Jerusalem, and dismay at what he saw as the British government's departure from the policy established at the Cairo conference. Accordingly he resigned in 1924 and a year later left the public service altogether. 
Philby rejoiced in his freedom but had no income apart from a small pension. In 1926 with the support of some businessmen he settled in Jiddah (whence Ibn Sa'ud had now ousted the Hashemites), founded a trading company, Sharqieh Ltd, and became a close friend and an unofficial adviser of Ibn Sa'ud. His family visited him from time to time but for the most part stayed in England. Business, exploration, writing, and Ibn Sa'ud's councils were henceforth the pattern of his life. Commerce, however, was only his bread and butter: his true interest was exploration. Over the next thirty years he made a series of remarkable journeys, of which the greatest was his crossing of the 'empty quarter' in 1932. On these journeys he travelled by camel and later by car. By day he collected place names, temperatures, compass bearings, barometric pressures, rocks, fossils, flora and fauna, and ancient inscriptions. At night he wrote them up in his diaries, squatting in the sand by lamplight and hiding his work from his suspicious Arab escort. These journeys and the many books, articles, and lectures in which he described them are a monument to his scholarship, industry, and endurance, and won him high honour with the Royal Geographical Society, the British Museum, Kew Gardens, and academic societies all over the world. He was awarded the founder's gold medal of the Royal Geographical Society in 1920 and the Sir Richard Burton memorial medal of the Royal Asiatic Society in 1925. His other writings (on Islam, on the history of Arabia, and autobiography) suffer from a ponderous and sometimes antiquated prose. In all, he published fifteen books. 
As a member of Ibn Sa'ud's circle of advisers Philby's position was unique. A foreigner, a European, and -- at first -- an unbeliever, he was widely suspected of being a British agent. But the king enjoyed his company and valued his knowledge of the outside world and his uniquely candid opinions. He was an influential middleman in the negotiations which led to the award of an oil concession to an American company in 1933 (a blow to the British and a turning point for Saudi Arabia). His conversion to Islam in 1930 -- probably not an act of faith but inspired by an urge to enter more deeply into Arabian society -- brought the two men closer. Thereafter he was called by Saudis Sheikh Abdullah. Ibn Sa'ud paid no salary but from time to time presented him with gifts, among them, in 1945, a second wife, Rozy Abdul Aziz ('b'. 'c'.1929). They had two sons, who became citizens of Saudi Arabia. 
Before and during the Second World War Philby was a pacifist and an appeaser. In 1939 he stood as an anti-war candidate in a by-election in Hythe and lost his deposit. Back in Arabia his outspoken attacks on British policy irritated the king and prompted him to warn the British legation in 1940 of Philby's intention to travel to America for a lecture tour. Philby was arrested in Bombay, taken to England, and imprisoned briefly under wartime regulations. After friends procured his release he was involved for a time with the Common Wealth, but soon gave up British politics. At the end of the war he returned to his old life in Arabia. But after the death of Ibn Sa'ud in 1953 his outspoken criticisms of the extravagance and corruption under the new king led in 1955 to his exile in the Lebanese village of Ajaltun. A year later there was the semblance of a reconciliation and he subsequently paid several visits to his old haunts, but his home remained in Lebanon. He died on 30 September 1960 in hospital at Beirut, where he had been staying with his son, the British intelligence officer (and Soviet spy) Harold Adrian Russell (Kim) Philby (1912-1988). He was buried the next day in the Muslim cemetery in the Basta quarter of Beirut. 
Philby's character was a mixture of opposites. His claim to be a man of unyielding principle was largely true. He stuck to his guns, even though it made him an awkward colleague and subordinate. He was always 'agin the government', obstinate and combative. He records that he was once caught saying: 'I didn't hear what you said but I entirely disagree with you' (Philby, 'Arabian Days', 135). He was, in short, an opinionated radical. At the same time he had an old-fashioned tory's addiction to 'The Times', the cricket scores, the honours list, the Athenaeum. And he could be devious. His replacement of a senior colleague as head of the mission to Ibn Sa'ud in 1917 was a dubious manoeuvre. The part he played in winning the Saudi oil concession for the Americans was secretive (though it was good for the Saudis). His motives for the adoption of Islam were obscure. His views on the Palestine problem were highly inconsistent. His treatment of his long-suffering wife Dora was sometimes shabby. Yet there was something about him that was defiant, persistent, even noble. Few would quarrel with the inscription on his tombstone: 'Greatest of Arabian explorers'. And in the central judgements of his life -- that Ibn Sa'ud was the man to back in Arabia and that the Arabs had to have their independence -- he was right and almost everyone else was wrong. 


@@@@@


doc= 35505


Philip, Sir Robert William (1857-1939), physician and founder of tuberculosis dispensaries, was born at Govan, Glasgow, on 29 December 1857, the youngest son of George Philip, a minister of the Free Church of Scotland, whose charge was Union Church, Govan, and his wife, Margaret Josephine, daughter of Joseph Robertson. In 1866 his father was transferred to St John's Free Church in Edinburgh, and Philip was educated at the Royal High School, Edinburgh, and at Edinburgh University, where he took an arts MA degree before graduating MB, CM, with honours, in 1882. 
In the winter of 1882-3 Philip travelled to Leipzig and Vienna to undertake postgraduate work in embryology and gynaecology. He arrived in Vienna shortly after Robert Koch announced the discovery of the tubercle bacillus, and Philip took the opportunity to review Koch's work and to see the bacillus for himself. After returning to Edinburgh in 1883, he set about establishing himself in medical practice. In the same year he was house physician to John Wyllie at the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary; in 1885 he became assistant physician to the New Town Dispensary; and in 1887 he was appointed assistant to the professor of medicine at the university, Thomas Grainger Stewart, and also examiner in medicine and pathology at the University of Aberdeen. He retained his interest in tuberculosis and embarked on a series of investigations that he wrote up into a thesis entitled 'A study in phthisis, etiological and therapeutic', which in 1887 earned him the Edinburgh University MD degree and gold medal. His research was inspired by Koch's work, which to Philip's mind had profound implications for how tuberculosis was to be understood. Hitherto it had been regarded as a loose grouping of distinct if morphologically similar local lesions, whose causes were chiefly hereditary. By contrast the discovery of the tubercle bacillus implied that the various local affectations -- of the lungs, the joints, and various tissues -- were all aetiologically identical and should be attributed to a transmissible agent rather than a hereditary taint. Philip went on to hypothesize that the localized effects of the disease were only secondary manifestations of a systemic infection, the morbid effects of which were due primarily to the production and circulation of toxic bacterial waste-products. His experimental investigations, which involved making chemical preparations of tuberculous sputum and injecting them into rabbits and other animals, provided evidence in support of this theory. 
Philip's views on the aetiology of tuberculosis, coupled with his exposure to the large numbers of tuberculous patients who attended the New Town Dispensary, convinced him that far more could be done to combat the disease, which was coming to be regarded as a major public health problem. Consequently in 1887, with the financial assistance of a number of his friends, he opened the Victoria Dispensary for Consumption and Diseases of the Chest, initially located in three rooms of a flat at 13 Bank Street, Edinburgh. Among his supporters was his fiancee, Elizabeth (died 1937), youngest daughter of John Fenton Motherwell, of co. Sligo, whom he married in 1888. As with his research for his MD degree, the methods Philip developed at the Victoria Dispensary were informed by his understanding that tuberculosis was both a transmissible and a systemic disease. Therapeutically he had little time for methods of treatment which focused on the local lesions, for instance the surgical extirpation of tuberculous joints or the later development of artificial pneumothorax. Rather he argued that the best way to treat tuberculosis patients was to build up their general constitution and thus enable them to resist the infection: fresh air, clean surroundings, a nutritious diet, 'physiological rest', and careful exercise were all indicated. Consequently the dispensary employed nurse visitors to attend patients at home and advise on such matters as cleanliness, diet, and regimen. Moreover, Philip was strongly of the opinion that the disease could be treated most effectively if it was caught early in its development. As he regarded the home as the main site of transmission, he used home visits as an opportunity to search out other cases by lining up contacts and examining them for signs of the disease -- a procedure he liked to call a 'march past'. 
The dispensary was successful in attracting both patients and philanthropic funding, and in 1891 it moved to larger premises at 26 Lauriston Place, near to the Royal Infirmary and the medical school. Accommodation was now provided for an extensive outpatient practice, including waiting rooms, consulting rooms, and a laboratory. Between thirty and eighty patients would routinely be seen in an afternoon, and the medical officer made about 140 home visits each month. The dispensary thus provided a site from which to extend systematic medical surveillance and supervision into patients' homes. It also subsequently came to serve as a centre around which provision of other medical services could be organized and co-ordinated. In 1894 the Victoria Hospital for Consumption was opened at Craigleith, to provide institutional treatment for more advanced cases of tuberculosis. Accommodation was initially available for only fifteen patients, but open-air sleeping shelters were quickly built, and pavilion wards were added in 1903, when Edward VII consented to be patron of the hospital, and again in 1907, providing more than 100 beds. The therapeutic regime of the hospital was based on the system of fresh-air treatment that had already found favour in German sanatoria, and it was augmented by Philip's own scheme of rest, while the disease was active, and carefully modulated restorative exercise, as the patient began to recover. Work in the hospital grounds and buildings also assisted both in the recovery and the rehabilitation of patients. This occupational side of Philip's scheme was further developed in 1910 when a farm colony was opened at Springfield near Lasswade, for training men in suitable open-air occupations. 
In 1898 an agreement was made with the Edinburgh corporation under which the Victoria dispensary and hospital undertook to care for all patients with tuberculosis within the municipal boundaries, while the corporation provided beds for incurable cases. Then in 1906 the Local Government Board for Scotland declared pulmonary tuberculosis a notifiable disease under the 'Public Health (Scotland) Act' of 1897 -- an arrangement that Philip had advocated since 1890. In view of the increase in patients that came with this statutory responsibility, the corporation agreed to provide $1000 per annum towards the costs of the hospital and dispensary, and to segregate all advanced and incurable cases in the local hospital for infectious diseases. In 1912 the dispensary again moved to more extensive accommodation in Edinburgh, this time in Spittal Street, where a new laboratory, library, and lecture room were provided. Meanwhile, funds had been made available under the 'National Health Insurance Act' of 1911 to provide sanatorium treatment for tuberculosis cases. In the following year a departmental committee was appointed under Lord Astor to make detailed recommendations for such provision. Philip was included among the members of the committee, which adopted the Edinburgh scheme, and especially the diagnostic and co-ordinating role of the dispensary, as the model for its recommendations. The disruption of the First World War, and the economic crises that followed it, prevented this scheme being widely implemented by local authorities. Nevertheless, Philip's ideas of surveillance and hygienic supervision became commonplace in public health thinking between the wars. His work was acknowledged when a knighthood was conferred on him in 1913. He was also appointed in that year to the advisory council of the newly established Medical Research Committee (later Council), which likewise had its origins in the 'National Health Insurance Act' and the Astor Committee. 
With the adoption of the national tuberculosis scheme in Edinburgh, in 1914 the Royal Victoria Hospital, dispensary, and farm colony were gifted to the city corporation; Philip was retained as consultant and expert adviser to the corporation. Two years later a new body -- the Royal Victoria Hospital Tuberculosis Trust -- was created to take charge of the remaining funds and to continue work in areas not covered by the corporation scheme. One of these was the training of medical students, which had been conducted under Philip's direction at both the dispensary and the hospital. In 1917 the trust endowed a chair of tuberculosis at the University of Edinburgh, and Philip became its first occupant; his course of lecture demonstrations was compulsory for candidates for the university's medical degree. In 1920 his consultant post with the corporation was terminated, and he lost access to the facilities of the Royal Victoria Hospital. Consequently in 1922 the trust opened the new Sanatorium Colony at Liberton on the outskirts of Edinburgh for the treatment and employment of tuberculosis patients and the continuation of clinical research. Attached to the sanatorium was a farm where a herd of tuberculin-tested dairy cattle was established as an object lesson in the provision of tuberculosis-free milk. 
As well as his specialist activity in the field of tuberculosis, Philip also practised as a general consulting physician; his success in this regard was ensured when, following his knighthood, he was made one of the honorary physicians in Scotland to George V. In 1890 he was appointed assistant physician to the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary. In the same year he became lecturer in chest diseases at the extramural school of medicine; he subsequently also taught courses in general medicine, and was highly regarded as a teacher. He was made a full physician to the infirmary in 1906 and retired in 1921, though he remained on the staff as physician consultant in tuberculosis. In 1887 he became a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh. He served as secretary to the college in 1894 and president from 1918 to 1923. After retiring from the presidency he became curator of the college's research laboratory, where he had conducted research since its inception in 1887; he held the curatorship until 1937. In 1933 he was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, London, in recognition of his special services to medicine. He was the local general secretary of the British Medical Association when it met in Edinburgh in 1898, and president of the association when it returned to Edinburgh in 1927. He was also president of the Association of Physicians of Great Britain and Ireland in 1937-8. In 1889 he was made a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh; he was its vice-president from 1927 to 1930. He also served for a while as vice-president of the Queen's Institute of District Nursing (Scottish branch). When the National Association for the Prevention of Tuberculosis was set up in 1898 by the prince of Wales, Philip was appointed a member of the council; he became vice-chairman in 1912 and chairman in 1932. He also became consulting physician to the King Edward VII Welsh National Memorial Association, which co-ordinated sanatorium provision in the principality. He sat on the council of the International Union Against Tuberculosis, and was president of its conference in London in 1921. He was author of 'Pulmonary Tuberculosis, Etiological and Therapeutic; Based on an Experimental Investigation' (1891), and in 1911 'A Selection of Writings' appeared; he wrote 'The Actual Position of Tuberculosis To-Day' (1923) and 'Collected Papers on Tuberculosis' (1937). Twelve of his former pupils, and many specialists in other countries, prepared a festschrift entitled 'The Control and Eradication of Tuberculosis; a Series of International Studies' (1911). 
In public life Philip cut a forbidding figure. His precise, measured speech and sonorous voice could hold a class or an after-dinner audience, but his students and junior colleagues dreaded the stinging rebukes he was capable of delivering. At home, however, he was a gracious and entertaining host, who took a rather fastidious delight in his choice of dinner menus. His main relaxation was travel, and he was a good linguist, proficient in German, French, and Italian, as well as Latin and Greek. He attended church regularly but did not make any great show of his religion. His work for the anti-tuberculosis movement continued until the very end of his life. His first wife predeceased him in 1937. A year later he married Edith Josephine (died 1939), eldest daughter of Joseph McGaw, of Kooba, New South Wales, and herself a campaigner against tuberculosis; she had opened the first tuberculosis dispensary in England at Paddington in 1909. Their life together was not destined to last long, however. Philip died at his home, 9 Palmerston Road, Edinburgh, on 25 January 1939, and was cremated three days later at Edinburgh crematorium; the funeral was preceded by a memorial service at St Giles's Cathedral. He left no children, and his second wife survived him by less than a month. 


@@@@@


doc= 35506


Philipps, Sir Ivor (1861-1940), army officer and businessman, was born on 9 September 1861 at the vicarage in Warminster, the second of six sons of James Erasmus Philipps, twelfth baronet (1824-1912), vicar of Warminster, and his wife, Mary Margaret (died 1913), eldest daughter of Samuel Best, rector of Abbots Ann, Hampshire. The Philippses had long been one of the great landowning families of west Wales, with an ancestral seat at Picton Castle in Pembrokeshire. James Philipps had inherited a baronetcy created in 1621; the estates passed to another branch of the family early in the nineteenth century. John W. Philipps, first Viscount St Davids, was Ivor's elder brother. 
Ivor Philipps was educated at Felsted School from 1873 to 1876. He served in the Wiltshire militia from 1881 until 1883 when he was commissioned into the Manchester regiment, then serving in India. He qualified for the Bengal staff corps of the Indian army in 1884 and two years later joined the 1st battalion, the 5th Gurkha regiment, based at Abbottabad in the Punjab. He remained with the regiment for the rest of his time in India, with temporary detachments to other units. He was promoted captain in 1894 and major in 1901. He was attached to the Burma military police in the years immediately following the absorption of Burma into India in 1886 and subsequently saw active service in many campaigns against Afridi and Orakzais tribesmen on the north-west frontier of India -- notably at Miranzai (1891), Chitral (1895), and Tirah (1897). He was appointed to the staff of the commander-in-chief, India, in 1900 and was awarded the DSO later that year. After retiring from the regular army in 1903 he joined the Pembroke yeomanry, which he commanded from 1908 to 1912, and made a career in the City. On 9 September 1891 he had married Marian Isobel, daughter of James Buchanan Mirrlees, of Redlands, Glasgow. They had one daughter. 
Philipps became Liberal MP for Southampton in 1906 and held the seat until 1922. On the outbreak of war in 1914 he was called to the War Office for staff duties and in November of that year he was given command of the 115th brigade with the temporary rank of brigadier-general. Within two months he was given further promotion to temporary major-general in command of the newly formed 38th Welsh division, part of Lloyd George's grandiose scheme to raise a Welsh army corps. The promotion owed much to Lloyd George, and was dependent upon Lloyd George's younger son becoming Philipps's aide-de-camp. 'I have seen Ivor Philipps and confirmed Gwilym's appointment with him if P. gets the generalship of the division', Lloyd George wrote to his wife. 'Have seen K[itchener] about that now and think it will be all right' (Morgan, 175). Philipps took the division to France in December 1915, in the meantime briefly holding the post of joint parliamentary secretary in the Ministry of Munitions. 
On 7 July 1916, at the battle of the Somme, the 38th Welsh division, together with the 17th division under Major-General Pilcher, attacked Mametz Wood. The attack failed and higher command blamed Pilcher and Philipps, perhaps unfairly as the ill-fated plan was not of their making. Both were removed from their posts. On 12 July the Welsh division, under another commander, captured the wood. Lloyd George put his own gloss on the dismissal: 'Unfortunately', he wrote, 'the general has broken down in health and returned home' (W. George, 255). Philipps's reputation was not harmed and in 1917 he was appointed KCB for 'services during the war' ('London Gazette', 1917, 5456). 
Philipps continued his business activities and chaired many substantial companies including Ilford, the photographic manufacturers, Schweppes, makers of soft drinks, several rubber plantation companies, and investment and insurance businesses. He was also a director of several other companies. He played a prominent part in public life in Pembrokeshire and carried out restoration work at Pembroke Castle, for which he was given the freedom of the city of Pembroke. His country home was Cosheston Hall, Pembroke, and his London residence was 1 Lygon Place. Sir Ivor Philipps died of heart failure in the Empire Nursing Home, Vincent Square, Westminster, on 15 August 1940, survived by his wife and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 35507


Philipps, John Wynford, first Viscount St Davids (1860-1938), financier and politician, was born at the vicarage in Warminster, Wiltshire, on 30 May 1860, the eldest of six sons of the Revd Sir James Erasmus Philipps, twelfth baronet (1824-1912), vicar of Warminster, and his wife, the Hon. Mary Margaret Best (died 1913). Sir James, later a prebendary of Salisbury Cathedral, was a prominent and energetic Anglo-Catholic and established a religious order for women, a training college for missionary priests, and a number of charitable institutions in his parish. His was a remarkable family; apart from St Davids three of his sons achieved distinction -- Major-General Sir Ivor Philipps, Owen Cosby Philipps, Baron Kylsant, and Laurence Richard Philipps, Baron Milford; and one of his five daughters -- Elsbeth Fell Philipps was assistant director of milk, at the Ministry of Food during the First World War. All the brothers were tall, imposing men. 
John Philipps was educated at Felsted School and at Keble College, Oxford, where he graduated with a third-class degree in modern history in 1882. He was called to the bar at the Middle Temple in 1886, but he was already determined to enter parliament as a Gladstonian Liberal. He failed at his first attempt in Wiltshire in 1886, and then with help from his brother Owen he won Mid Lanarkshire in 1888. Earlier in that year on 14 February he had married Leonora Gerstenberg (1862-1915), heir to almost $100,000 left by her father, Isidor Gerstenberg, founder of the Corporation of Foreign Bondholders, which represented UK investors in overseas stock. John used his new-found wealth to establish a shipping business in partnership with Owen. 
Philipps's commercial ambitions lay elsewhere, however, in the developing world of investment trusts, which were being increasingly used to channel family funds into areas of new development, particularly abroad, where rates of return and risks were high. Although many trusts were public companies, they were controlled by a tight-knit group of City men who often used them to extend their own business interests. In 1890, sponsored by his father, a successful fund-raiser for his various ecclesiastical and charitable ventures, he was elected to the board of the Government Stock and Other Securities Investment Company. Within a year, against the background of the crisis at Barings, he had conducted a radical review of the company's investments, brought his school friend J. S. Austen onto the board, and been elected chairman. In this position, through a web of cross-share holdings, Philipps had a voice in the affairs of other investment trusts, including the Omnium Investment Company, the Government and General Investment Trust Ltd, and the Consolidated Trust Ltd. These trusts were quickly brought under his control and new ventures were floated, including the Trustees Industrial and Investment Company in 1891 and the Premier Investment Company in 1892. Philipps used the funds of these trusts and his growing knowledge of the investment business to help his brother Owen to expand his shipping interests. Together in 1897 they established the London Maritime Investment Company, entirely to finance further shipping and related acquisitions. 
Philipps did not confine his interests to shipping. During the 1890s he also became a director and chairman of several railway companies operating in Costa Rica and Argentina. These he reorganized, refinanced, and encouraged to expand. When he became chairman of the Buenos Aires and Pacific Railway Company it had little more than 400 hundred miles of track; by amalgamation and extension he was able to develop it into a network of over 4000 miles, reaching from Buenos Aires to Chile, and connecting with the Transandean Line. Later Philipps was involved in several companies promoted by Henry O'Hagan, including British Electric, Associated Portland Cement Manufacturers Ltd, and British Portland Cement Manufacturers Ltd. To help control many of these investments he arranged for the appointment of his brothers Ivor, Bertram Erasmus, and Laurence Richard to their boards. 
Despite his many business involvements Philipps remained deeply engaged in Liberal politics. He resigned his Mid Lanarkshire seat in 1894, but in 1898 he was returned for Pembrokeshire. A close supporter of Lloyd George, he resigned his seat in 1908 reportedly to make way for Winston Churchill. He was immediately created a peer as Viscount St Davids of Roch Castle in Pembrokeshire. By this time, Owen and he had embarked on more ambitious maritime adventures, acquiring the Royal Mail Steam Packet Company in 1902, Elder Dempster Ltd and the Pacific Steam Navigation Company in 1910, and the Union Castle Line in 1912. In building this shipping empire, known as the Royal Mail Group, Owen began to work closely with William Pirrie, of the Belfast shipbuilders Harland and Wolff. By the eve of the First World War their method of financing their deals through the use of large amounts of loan capital relative to equity were beginning to raise eyebrows in the City, and St Davids distanced himself from his brother's activities. 
According to family legend the deterioration in the brothers' relationship was caused by Owen's efforts to make up a long-standing family feud with his cousin Sir Henry Erasmus Philipps of Picton Castle, who had inherited the estates but not the baronetcy from their common forebear Lord Milford. This loss of the family home was deeply resented and St Davids refused to forgive his brother for attending a garden party at Picton. The rift was made final in 1916 when Owen became a Conservative, St Davids remaining a loyal Liberal. St Davids was appointed chairman of the Lloyd George Fund and helped to set up the National Liberal political fund to provide Lloyd George with independent financial backing. He was instrumental in the fund's purchase of United Newspapers in 1918. Both of St Davids's sons were killed in the First World War, Colwyn Erasmus Arnold (1888-1915) and Roland Erasmus (1890-1916). His wife, Leonora, died in 1915. In the following year he married Elizabeth Frances Rawdon-Hastings (1884-1938), later Baroness Strange, Baroness Hungerford and Baroness Moleyns, second daughter of Paulyn Francis Cuthbert Rawdon-Hastings and Lady Maud Grimston. They had a son, Jestyn Reginald Austen Plantagenet, and a daughter. 
After the war St Davids's investment trusts grew in size and importance and were known collectively as the Old Broad Street Group from their offices at 69 Old Broad Street, London. Although St Davids continued to act as a trustee for some of the debentures issued by the Royal Mail Group, the trusts during these years largely financed other businesses, like Ilford Ltd, Schweppes Ltd, and Court Line Ltd, which were managed by Ivor and Laurence Philipps. The Old Broad Street Group also developed extensive links with other large investment trusts. Much of St Davids's time in the 1920s was taken up with public work, particularly the chairmanship of the unemployment grants committee from 1920 to 1932. The committee allocated funds to local authorities for a variety of public works' schemes (mostly in road building), which were required to take on unemployed people. The day-to-day management of the trusts was left to J. S. Austen and Harley Drayton. 
In 1927 the split between St Davids and Owen, now Lord Kylsant, became very public when St Davids in his capacity as a trustee of debenture stock sought permission to interview the auditor of Royal Mail about qualifications to the accounts. This was refused and St Davids indicated his intention to resign, with a catastrophic effect on the share price. The disagreement rumbled on through 1928 and 1929 as the Royal Mail Group's problems intensified. In October, with the reconstruction of the group now high on the Treasury's agenda, Kylsant tried to patch up the quarrel. St Davids had refused to meet him for the preceding three years, dealing with him only through his lawyers. After Royal Mail's issue of further debentures in December 1929, St Davids's resignation the following month as a trustee of one of the debenture issues was inevitable. What difference to the outcome of the collapse of the Royal Mail Group in 1931 a settlement of this unedifying family squabble would have made is hard to judge. In a sense all the dispute did was to confirm market rumours of the group's difficulties, and it forced the Treasury, the joint-stock and merchant banks, and a reluctant Bank of England to move more quickly and with greater secrecy than they might otherwise have done to mitigate the repercussions of the largest corporate exposure of the time. Even after the reconstruction had been imposed and his brother effectively ousted, St Davids, as a trustee of the other debenture issue, continued to harass the newly appointed voting trustees led by Sir William McLintock. By now it was obvious that his motive was vindictive rather than in the interest of the debenture holders, whom he was supposed to represent. 
St Davids's own business interests were not without their difficulties in the late 1920s and early 1930s. The Court Line was liquidated in 1929 and its assets transferred to the United Baltic Steamship Company; the Buenos Aires and Pacific Railway had to be reconstructed in 1932; and British Portland Cement Manufacturers faced serious competition resulting in a new price and production agreement in 1934. St Davids died at 235 Almoner's House, St James's Court, London, on 28 March 1938, at the age of seventy-seven, leaving only a modest estate of less than $130,000. He was succeeded as second viscount by his surviving son. 


@@@@@


doc= 35508


Philipps, Owen Cosby, Baron Kylsant (1863-1937), shipowner, was born at the vicarage, Warminster, Wiltshire, on 25 March 1863, the third son of the vicar, the Revd Sir James Erasmus Philipps, twelfth baronet (1824-1912), and his wife, Mary Margaret Best (died 1913). After an unremarkable education at Newton College at Newton Abbot in Devon, Philipps chose to serve a six-year apprenticeship with Dent & Co., ship managers and brokers of Newcastle upon Tyne. After completing his time in 1886, he joined the Glasgow firm of ship managers and brokers, Allen C. Gow & Co., and quickly became honorary secretary of the Glasgow and West of Scotland Liberal Association. Two years later he started his own firm, Philipps & Co. in Glasgow and in 1889, with funds raised from Liberal friends in the west of Scotland, purchased his first ship, 'King Alfred', in partnership with his brother John. Early in 1892 the shipping enterprise was extended with support from John's newly acquired interests in investment trusts. Philipps left Glasgow in 1894 to live with his brother in London, partly to allow him to pursue his ambition of joining John in parliament. However he failed to be elected in 1895 when he stood for Montgomery Boroughs, or in 1898, when he contested Darlington. Meanwhile a subsidiary company, the Scottish Steamship Company, was established in 1896, and the following year the brothers formed the London Maritime Investment Company as a vehicle for raising funds for further shipping investments. They purchased in 1898 the London and Thames Haven Petroleum Wharf, of which Philipps became chairman. 
At the beginning of the century the brothers began searching for new tonnage, taking over the Northern Transport Company, with its three ships but failing to win control of the Tyne Steam Shipping Company. Early in 1901 they began to buy shares in the Royal Mail Steam Packet Company, one of Britain's oldest passenger steamship companies, which was in financial difficulties. By the spring of 1903 Philipps, who had no experience of passenger or mail steamship operation, was chairman of the company. He immediately received an offer from William J. Pirrie of Harland and Wolff of Belfast to build modern tonnage at cost price in return for all repair work and subsequent contracts, beginning a relationship which was to last until Pirrie's death in 1924. On 16 September 1902 Philipps married Mai Alice Magdalene Morris of Coomb, Llangynog, Carmarthenshire, who had inherited 5000 acres and some $125,000 from her father, Thomas, a banker; they raised three daughters. In 1906 he achieved his ambition of being elected a Liberal MP for the Pembroke and Haverfordwest District. His new-found wealth and status gave Philipps the confidence to promote Royal Mail's interests aggressively, both when introducing the new tonnage and in enlarging the company's capital. By 1908 he had won the respect of the shipping community in turning Royal Mail round. His achievements were publicly recognized with the award of a knighthood in 1909. 
Philipps still had ambitions to extend his shipping interests. The opportunity came in 1909 on the death of Sir Alfred Jones, the architect of the Elder Dempster group of shipping companies. Lord Pirrie, now Philipps's close confidant and a large shareholder in the group, invited him to participate in a joint bid. When this succeeded in January 1910, Philipps immediately went on to acquire the Pacific Steam Navigation Company. Outwardly Philipps and Pirrie were unlikely partners. Philipps was as tall and arrogant as Pirrie was small and homely; but they had much in common. They had both been brought up with strong Christian values, which gave them a deep sense of their own mission in life. Pirrie, as a Presbyterian, and Philipps as an Anglo-Catholic, had both been led by their faith to adopt Liberal politics. They both had a love of grand designs and giant enterprises. However they rarely met socially as Lady Pirrie disliked Philipps intensely. 
Other acquisitions soon followed; the Glen Line and Lamport and Holt (together with its subsidiary Liverpool Brazil and River Plate Steam Navigation Company) in 1911, the Union Castle Line in 1912, and the Nelson Line in 1913. These massive additions to the fleet were financed by large debenture issues. This reliance on fixed-interest securities attracted criticism from the City and other shipowners. Although the shipping lines retained their separate identities, increasingly Philipps and Pirrie began to treat all the associated companies as an integrated Royal Mail Group, held together by a complex web of cross-shareholdings. 
During the First World War much of the group's tonnage was requisitioned for service as troopships, hospital ships, colliers, and armed merchant cruisers and altogether an estimated 100 ships were lost. The war also provided opportunity for the purchase of more shipping companies -- Moss Steamship Company and Robert MacAndrew in 1916 and Coast Lines and Argentine Steam Navigation Company in 1917. At the same time Harland and Wolff became integrated with the group as new shipbuilding businesses and a major Scottish steelworks were acquired. By now Philipps was the nominated business heir of the childless Pirrie. The Easter Rising of 1916 had forced Pirrie to abandon his home rule principles and return to the Unionist camp. Only months earlier Philipps joined the Conservative Party, and his election as MP for Chester confirmed the rift with his brother John Wynford Philipps. This had been caused by his attendance at a garden party at Picton Castle given by his cousin Sir Henry Erasmus Philipps in an effort to patch up a long standing bitter family feud. He held his seat at Chester until 1922. 
Although Philipps failed to win control of the White Star Line or General Steam Navigation Company in 1919, other smaller acquisitions were made. At the same time, with Lord Inchcape, he purchased all the wartime standard ships left in government hands. Directly controls over share transactions were relaxed in 1919, Philipps and Pirrie began to raise huge sums in new capital, largely to pay for replacement liner tonnage. They also took advantage, on a massive scale, of funds guaranteed by government under the 'Trade Facilities and Northern Ireland Loans Guarantee Acts'. As the recession began to bite in the early 1920s the group was increasingly in difficulties. The problems were disguised from outside observers by the ingenious use of a cross-shareholding structure and elaborate window dressing of the accounts. Worst effected because of the cancellation of orders was Harland and Wolff, which did not technically become part of the group until after Pirrie's death in 1924. On taking over as chairman of Harland and Wolff in 1924, Philipps, who the previous year had been raised to the peerage as Baron Kylsant, was horrified to discover the extent of the company's financial difficulties and Pirrie's own virtual bankruptcy. However, Kylsant had little room for manoeuvre; all he could do was to attempt to control costs with the help of John Craig of Colvilles, the Scottish steelmakers, and hope for better times ahead. 
The group's deteriorating financial position did not prevent Kylsant from acquiring the White Star Line for the enormous price of $7 million early in 1927. His motive was chiefly to secure premier liner contracts for the Belfast yard. From then on the group slid inexorably out of control. Its problems were not helped by the rift in relations between Kylsant and his brother St Davids. By the winter of 1929 the Treasury, acting in collaboration with all the principal clearing and merchant banks and advised by the Bank of England, was actively seeking to impose a reconstruction scheme on what was by far the largest group of enterprises in the United Kingdom. When it emerged that the group had total liabilities of almost $20 million, Kylsant was forced by Lord Plender and Sir William McLintock to relinquish control in May. After an extended holiday in South Africa, Kylsant was arrested and tried for issuing a false prospectus and publishing false accounts. He and the group's auditor, Harold Morland, were acquitted of the second charge; but he was found guilty on the first charge and sentenced to one year's imprisonment in Wormwood Scrubs. During his sentence he worked in the prison library. Many, including McLintock, believed he had been harshly treated. McLintock at once set about assisting the family in reorganizing their own finances so that they could afford to live comfortably. When Kylsant returned to Coomb his car was drawn by forty estate workers through an arch of welcome. He made a brief return to public life in 1933 and died at Coomb on 5 June 1937; he was buried in Llangynog churchyard on 10 June. The barony became extinct on his death. 
Philipps's obituary in 'The Times' concluded 'it was largely because he attempted too much that his later years were clouded'. This was a fair assessment of the career of a complex man motivated more by Christian Liberal principles than by a desire to make profits. For all the brilliance of his lifestyle he had remained churchwarden of St John's, Clerkenwell, in an unfashionable part of London, for most of his career. He had also attached considerable importance to his role as vice-chairman of the finance committee of the Welsh Church Representative Body, ensuring that the dis-established church in Wales had sufficient funds. Despite the scale and extent of his business involvements, he remained a shadowy, aloof figure, troubled by a speech impediment that encouraged shyness. 


@@@@@


doc= 35509


Phillimore, John Swinnerton (1873-1926), classical scholar and poet, was born at Boconnoc, Cornwall, on 26 February 1873, the fourth son of Vice-Admiral Sir Augustus Phillimore (1822-1897), of Shedfield, Hampshire, and his wife, Harriet Eleanor (died 1924), second daughter of the Hon. George Matthew Fortescue, of Boconnoc, MP for Hindon, Wiltshire, in 1826-31. He was a first cousin of Walter Phillimore, first Baron Phillimore. He was educated at Westminster School, and proceeded with a scholarship to Christ Church, Oxford. At Westminster his talent was recognized and fostered by William Gunion Rutherford, and at Oxford he proved himself the best classical scholar of his time. He obtained first classes in classical moderations (1893) and in 'literae humaniores' (1895), and won the Hertford and Craven scholarships (1892), the Ireland scholarship (1893), and the chancellor's prize for Latin verse (1894). He was already writing distinguished verse, and, like his friend Hilaire Belloc, he was a leading figure at the Oxford Union, of which he became president in 1895. 
Phillimore was appointed a lecturer of Christ Church in 1895, student in 1896, and tutor in 1898. With one of his colleagues, S. G. Owen, he published in 1898, under the title 'Musa clauda', a collection of versions from English into Latin elegiac verse. He took up the study of Russian, and wrote a translation of Mikhail Lermontov's novel 'A Hero of Nowadays' (not published until 1921). He also took a serious interest in politics at this period, and he was one of the contributors to the volume 'Essays in Liberalism by Six Oxford Men' (1897). In the vacation much of his time was spent in mountaineering in the Dolomites. In recognition of his skill and daring the guides and president of the Club Alpino decided that 'one of the fine ascents he had made should bear his name'. 
In 1899, at the age of twenty-six, Phillimore was appointed to succeed Professor Gilbert Murray in the chair of Greek in the University of Glasgow. He married in 1900 (Margaret) Cecily, only daughter of the Revd Spencer Compton Spencer-Smith, vicar of Kingston, Dorset, and they had one son and one daughter. For some years he took a prominent part in the political life of the west of Scotland as a Liberal Imperialist, but his interests were steadily concentrating on his work as a scholar and teacher. In 1902 he published a translation in rhymed verse of three plays of Sophocles, but the texts of Propertius (1901) and of Statius's 'Silvae' (1905), which he revised for the Clarendon Press at this period, showed where his real bent lay. 
It was a great satisfaction to Phillimore when in 1906 he was transferred from the chair of Greek to that of humanity (Latin), rendered vacant by the retirement of Professor George Gilbert Ramsay. Thenceforward he contributed to the 'Classical Quarterly', to the 'Classical Review', to 'Mnemosyne', and to other periodicals a steady stream of notes, linguistic and textual, on Latin authors. He published a translation and an 'Index verborum' of Propertius (1906), and he set to work upon a large-scale edition of that poet. His facility in Greek now exercised itself in studies of the intellectual and religious life of the Roman imperial period; and a translation of Philostratus's 'Apollonius of Tyana', introduced by a characteristic essay, appeared in two volumes in 1912. From time to time he published papers and addresses on classical subjects, notably 'The Greek romances' (in 'English Literature and the Classics', 1912), 'Some Remarks on Translation and Translators' (1919), 'The Revival of Criticism' (1919), ''Ille ego'' (1920), and 'Pastoral and Allegory' (1925). 
Phillimore's growing reputation at home and abroad was shown by the conferment upon him of the honorary degree of LLD by the University of St Andrews (1917) and of that of LittD by Trinity College, Dublin (1921); by the dedication to him, as 'philologue, humaniste, poete', of Frederic Plessis's edition of the 'Odes' of Horace (1924); and by his appointment for the year 1914-15 to the Sather professorship in classics in the University of California. This appointment he was prevented from taking up by the outbreak of the First World War. 
In 1902 Phillimore published 'Poems', a volume containing a selection of the verse which he had written up to that year. He issued a second volume in 1918 under the title 'Things New and Old'. The change of outlook evident in these two volumes is explained by the fact that in 1906 Phillimore was received into the Roman Catholic church. He wrote occasionally for the 'Dublin Review', his contributions including a notable essay, 'Blessed Thomas More and the arrest of humanism in England' (1913). A substantial work on Christian Latin poetry he left unfinished. In the year of his death he published in a popular series 'The Hundred Best Latin Hymns' (1926). It was characteristic of his versatility that in the same year he wrote an introduction to a reprint of Francis Hickes's translation of the 'Vera historia' of Lucian. 
Phillimore was an occasional contributor to the 'Eye Witness', to its successor the 'New Witness', and to 'G. K.'s Weekly'. As his sympathetic association with those reviews indicated, Phillimore no longer concerned himself with party politics, but he maintained from a new angle his interest in national affairs and international relations, and he welcomed the opportunity to go to France towards the close of the war as a representative of the Franco-Scottish Society. At the universities of Bordeaux and Toulouse and at the Sorbonne he delivered addresses on the cultural relations of Great Britain with France and with Germany. In the public life of the west of Scotland he held a position of his own as a witty speaker and an admired lecturer on a wide variety of topics, among which he once ventured to include the national poet. 
But Phillimore's main concern was with his duties at the university. He was scrupulously diligent in attendance at academic committees, and he took his full share in the routine of his chair. Most of the work he published was a by-product of his careful preparation of his lectures. He would undoubtedly have published more had he been a less conscientious teacher, but he took this role seriously and was painstaking in his preparation. As one former student recalled, his Latin teaching was never brought out of 'cold storage'. The regard in which he was held by his students found expression in January 1925 when, in their name, a portrait of him painted by Maurice Greiffenhagen was presented to the university. Yet Phillimore's influence was not confined to the Latin classroom. When the students of Glasgow first decided to issue 'University Verses' (1910), and when all four Scottish universities later combined to publish 'Scottish University Verses' (1923), he was invited on each occasion to supply the preface introducing the volume to the public. As professor of humanity he exercised a profound influence upon the student body as a whole, and through it upon the cultural life of Scotland. He died at his home, Cam Cottage, Shedfield, Hampshire, on 16 November 1926; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35510


Phillimore, Sir Richard Fortescue (1864-1940), naval officer, was born at Boconnoc, Cornwall, on 23 December 1864, the eldest of the six sons and one daughter of Admiral Sir Augustus Phillimore (1822-1897), who was commander-in-chief at Plymouth from 1884 to 1887, and his wife, Harriet Eleanor (died 1924), second daughter of George Matthew Fortescue, and cousin of Hugh, third Earl Fortescue. He was a first cousin of Walter Phillimore, first Baron Phillimore. He was educated at Westminster School, and he then entered the Royal Navy as a cadet on the training ship 'Britannia' in 1878. He became a midshipman in 1880, sub-lieutenant in 1884, and was promoted lieutenant from the royal yacht in 1886. He became a gunnery officer and was gunnery lieutenant of the 'Invincible' and successively of the cruisers 'Phaeton' in the Mediterranean, 'Aeolus' in China, and 'Furious' in the channel squadron, whence he was promoted commander in 1899. 
As executive officer of the battleship 'Goliath', Phillimore took part in the operations against the Boxer uprising in China in 1900, receiving the China medal. From January 1904 he commanded the cruiser 'Mohawk' in the Indian Ocean, and during the operations in Somaliland of that year he landed in command of the machine guns of the naval brigade and took part in the capture of Illig. Promoted captain in June 1904, he later commanded the cruiser 'Juno' in the Home Fleet, 'Aboukir' in the Mediterranean, and the battle cruiser 'Inflexible' in the Home Fleet. On 21 December 1905 he married Violet Gore (died 1963), youngest daughter of Henry Hobhouse Turton, banker. They had three sons and one daughter. In 1912 Phillimore became chief of staff to Admiral Sir A. Berkeley Milne, commander-in-chief, Mediterranean, with the rank of commodore, second class, from 1913, and he was holding that post at the outbreak of war in 1914. 
After the escape of the German battle cruiser 'Goeben', Milne was recalled from the Mediterranean, and Phillimore took over command of the 'Inflexible'. In November 1914, with her sister ship the 'Invincible', she was sent to the south Atlantic under Vice-Admiral Sir F. C. D. Sturdee, and after arriving at the Falkland Islands destroyed the German squadron under Admiral Graf von Spee. The 'Inflexible' then returned to the Mediterranean and became the flagship of Vice-Admiral S. H. Carden at the Dardanelles. In the attack on the Turkish forts in March 1915 she came under heavy fire which wrecked her bridge and foretop, and she also struck a mine, so that she was in danger of sinking, and was 'only saved by the fine seamanship of her Captain' (Marder, 2.246). Phillimore managed to get her to an anchorage off Tenedos where she was patched up sufficiently for her to return to Malta for repair, making the passage stern first. While she was out of action he became principal beach master at the Gallipoli landing, earning a mention in dispatches; later, he was principal naval transport officer at Mudros, the advanced base for the Gallipoli operations. 
Promoted rear-admiral in August 1915, Phillimore was sent to Russia as head of a British naval mission; in that capacity he was in constant close contact with the tsar, travelled to every part of the Russian front, and was on board the Russian flagship at the bombardment of Varna in October 1916. He remained in Russia until the following December, when he was given command of the first battle cruiser squadron of the Grand Fleet, with his flag in the 'Repulse'. While holding that command he took a leading part in developing the use of aircraft carried in ships of the fleet; and he was also again in action. In November 1917 his flagship supported, under difficult and dangerous conditions, the British light cruisers chasing German light cruisers into the Heligoland bight, and was commended by Admiral Beatty for his 'determined support' (Marder, 4.305). 
In 1918 Phillimore took over command of the aircraft-carriers of the Grand Fleet, with the title of admiral commanding aircraft, flying his flag in the cruiser 'Furious', which had been partially converted by the addition of a flying-off deck in place of her fore turret; he held that command for the remainder of the war. In this position he also developed for the Admiralty what Roskill describes as an innovative and 'full and far-sighted report on the Navy's future requirements for ship-borne aircraft and on their functions' (Roskill, 1.114). 
That was Phillimore's last service at sea. He was promoted vice-admiral in 1920 and then commanded the Reserve Fleet until 1922. From 1923 to 1926 he was commander-in-chief at Plymouth, being promoted admiral in 1924. He was first and principal naval aide-de-camp to the king from 1928 until compulsorily retired in 1929. He was appointed MVO in 1905, CB in 1914, KCMG in 1918, KCB in 1919, and GCB in 1929; he also held both Russian and Japanese orders. Most clearly remembered by contemporaries was Phillimore's lack of fear and what Sir Roger Keyes referred to as his 'indomitable' spirit. After his retirement he lived at Shedfield House, near Botley, Hampshire, and became involved in local government. He died at Shedfield House on 8 November 1940 and was buried at Shedfield on 12 November. 


