@@@@@


doc= 35511


Phillimore, Walter George Frank, first Baron Phillimore (1845-1929), judge, was born in London on 21 November 1845, the only son of Sir Robert Joseph Phillimore, first baronet (1810-1885), one of the last judges of the high court of Admiralty, and Charlotte (died 19 January 1892), third daughter of John Denison, of Ossington Hall, Nottinghamshire, whose brothers included John Evelyn Denison, Viscount Ossington, speaker of the House of Commons, and Edward Denison, bishop of Salisbury. His grandfather was Joseph Phillimore, regius professor of civil law at Oxford University, and first cousin of John Swinnerton Phillimore, professor of Greek at the University of Glasgow. Phillimore was educated at Westminster School, where he became captain of the school and won a studentship to Christ Church, Oxford, in 1863. He obtained first classes in classical moderations in 1865, in 'literae humaniores' in 1866, and in law and modern history in 1867. He was secretary and treasurer of the union. In the interval between the last two degree examinations he was elected to a fellowship at All Souls College. In 1868 he won the Vinerian law scholarship. He entered the Middle Temple, was called to the bar in 1868, and joined the western circuit. In 1870 he married Agnes (died 1929), daughter of Charles Manners Lushington, MP for Canterbury; they had four sons and three daughters. 
Phillimore was counsel in many famous ecclesiastical cases during a period of animosity between evangelical and Anglo-Catholic factions within the Church of England. Among the most famous were 'Boyd v. Philpotts' (the Exeter reredos case, 1874) and 'Reed v. Bishop of Lincoln' (1891) in the court of the archbishop of Canterbury. He was also counsel in other cases involving controversy over ritualism, such as the use of lighted candles on the communion table, the wearing of Catholic-style ecclesiastical vestments, the eastward position during the prayer of consecration, the singing of the 'Agnus Dei', and sculptural representations of the transfiguration and ascension on a church reredos. In 1872 Phillimore became chancellor of the diocese of Lincoln. He held that a nonconformist minister was not entitled to describe himself by the title of 'Reverend' on the tombstone erected to his daughter ('Keet v. Smith', 1876). The decision was upheld by his father, Sir Robert Phillimore, but reversed by the privy council. 
Phillimore never became queen's counsel, but in December 1883 a patent of precedence was conferred upon him which gave him the same privileges as a QC. In 1885 he succeeded to his father's baronetcy. Apart from ecclesiastical cases he appeared almost entirely in the Admiralty court, and for many years was its acknowledged leader. As a politician Phillimore was not successful. An admirer of W. E. Gladstone and the Liberal Party, he contested St George's, Hanover Square, in 1885, and the Henley division of Oxfordshire in 1886 and again in 1902, but without success. 
Phillimore seldom appeared in common-law courts, so there was some surprise when, in December 1897, he was appointed a judge of the Queen's Bench Division. He remained a judge of first instance for sixteen years. His lack of experience of criminal law led to considerable criticism of him when he presided at assizes. His sentences were thought too severe, especially in sexual cases, though he mellowed with time. In civil cases at 'nisi prius' before a jury he tended to interrupt cross-examination of counsel. He was more at home as the single judge and excelled in interpreting confusing and apparently conflicting acts of parliament, although here too he could be rather pedantic. His decision on facts was not so sound as his determination of the law, where he drew on his classical training to express his judgments concisely and lucidly. His versatility was acknowledged when he was appointed to administer the bankruptcy jurisdiction of the King's Bench. He was a rapid judge and no time was wasted in his court. He had the unusual gift of being ambidextrous, and took notes of evidence with either hand. Though he was never a great judge, his abilities improved with time and the benefit of experience. He was an alderman of the borough of Kensington, where he lived, and mayor from 1909 to 1911. 
In 1913 Phillimore was made a lord justice of appeal and admitted to the privy council. Again, the appointment was a surprise, but it was justified by results. The Court of Appeal benefited greatly during the First World War from Phillimore's expertise in international law. He was party to the judgment in the 'Continental Tyre Company v. Daimler Company' (1915), concerning the status of an English company controlled by Germans resident in Germany. He helped decide 'R. v. Speyer' (1916) as to whether naturalized British subjects were eligible for membership of the privy council. His judgment in 'Beal v. Horlock' (1915) on the effect under the 'Merchant Shipping Act' of the detention of a British ship in a German port at the outbreak of war was subsequently affirmed in the House of Lords. 
Phillimore retired from the bench in 1916, and in 1918 was raised to the peerage under the title Baron Phillimore of Shiplake, in Oxfordshire. He regularly heard cases in the House of Lords and the privy council over the next ten years. He had a good deal of knowledge of Roman and canon law and showed a great ability to deal with other codes and new problems, as was seen in his treatment of Burmese, Hindu, and Islamic law in the judicial committee. By the 'Naval Prize Act' of 1918 he was appointed chairman of the naval prize tribunal. His career as a lord justice and in the highest courts showed him to be one of the best lawyers of his generation. 
As an international jurist, Phillimore acquired a European reputation. He was a regular attender at the meetings of the International Law Association at Grenoble, Stockholm, Vienna, and Warsaw. He was president of the association in 1919-20. At the request of the then foreign secretary, he had been appointed in 1917 and 1918 chairman of a committee to consider early schemes for the League of Nations. His report was sent to the cabinet, taken up by General Smuts, and communicated to President Woodrow Wilson. The president deputed Colonel E. M. House to use Phillimore's draft, thus linking the British empire with the institution of the league. In 1917 Phillimore published 'Three Centuries of Treaties of Peace and their Teaching', and in 1920 was a member of the committee which drew up the statute constituting the Permanent Court of International Justice at The Hague. 
Phillimore found time for many outside activities. He was an active governor of his old school, Westminster, from 1885 until his death, and he took a prominent part in the affairs of the Middle Temple, being reader (1898) and treasurer (1907). He joined the English Church Union in 1865 and was president in 1919. For many years he was treasurer of Pusey House, Oxford, and after his retirement from the Court of Appeal he took part in the sessions of the church assembly, especially in the controversial revision of the prayer book (1927-8). He was one of the chief authors of the scheme for clergy pensions. 
In the House of Lords, Phillimore's speeches were not eloquent, but he took a large share in the debates upon the 'Legitimacy Bill' (1926) and the 'Guardianship of Infants Bill' (1925). He had strongly held though rather narrow views, which were, however, advanced with courtesy and consideration for the opinions of others. 
Phillimore was responsible for the second edition of his father's 'Ecclesiastical Law of the Church of England' (2 vols., 1895), for the third edition of the fourth volume of his father's 'Commentaries upon International Law' (1889), and for many editions (1872-1905) of J. H. Blunt's 'Book of Church Law'. 
To the end Phillimore retained his youthful appearance, and quick and incisive manner of speech and walk. He died at his home, Cam House, Campden Hill, in Kensington, on 13 March 1929, two months after the death of his devoted wife of sixty years, and was buried five days later in Shiplake church. Phillimore was succeeded as second baron by his third son, Godfrey Walter ('b'. 1879). 


@@@@@


doc= 35512


Phillips, Sir Claude (1846-1924), art critic and museum curator, was born in London, at Gloucester Villas, Gloucester Road, Regent's Park, on 29 January 1846, the second son of Robert Abraham Phillips, a jeweller, and his wife, Helen, daughter of Moses Lionel Levy and sister of Joseph Moses Levy (1812-1888), founder of the 'Daily Telegraph'. He was educated mainly in France and Germany, and took an MA at London University. He was admitted as a solicitor, but subsequently entered the Inner Temple and was called to the bar in 1883. Phillips's practice involved visits to Italy, of which he took full advantage for artistic study; during travels in other European countries he made systematic visits to galleries, churches, and private collections. His knowledge and love of music, particularly the work of Wagner, Richard Strauss, and Franck, came second only to his passion for art, and his first contributions to the 'Daily Telegraph' in the later 1880s were on musical matters. Articles on painting followed, increasing in number, and in 1897 Phillips was appointed regular art critic to that paper -- a post which he both energetically and devotedly filled until the end of his working life. In addition to the 'Daily Telegraph', Phillips was a frequent contributor to many of the leading journals of the day, especially (until 1919) the 'Burlington Magazine', on the consultative committee of which he served. A selection of his essays was published posthumously under the title 'Emotion in Art' (1925). 
Phillips's authority as an art scholar was recognized in 1897 when he was appointed, on 28 July, the first keeper of the Wallace Collection, which was then being prepared for its opening by the prince of Wales at Hertford House in 1900. In the arrangement of the collection a board of trustees played the controlling part, but the cataloguing fell to Phillips, and in the course of it he identified as an original Titian a 'Perseus and Andromeda' which had been neglected as a school piece and hung in a bathroom on the first floor of the house. Phillips was knighted in 1911 on his retirement from the keepership of the Wallace Collection. 
In addition to his journalistic work, Phillips was the author of 'Sir Joshua Reynolds' (1894) and of five valuable numbers of the 'Portfolio' monographs inaugurated by Philip Gilbert Hamerton: 'Frederick Walker' (1894), 'Antoine Watteau' (1895), 'The Picture Gallery of Charles I' (1896), 'The Earlier Work of Titian' (1897), and 'The Later Work of Titian' (1898); the last two titles were of great significance for the study of that artist. As a writer on art Phillips was wide-ranging: his particular interest was Venetian sixteenth-century painting, but he also admired French art of the eighteenth century and did not ignore contemporary developments in France and Britain. He wrote at a time when the principles of connoisseurship were being developed, and judged each work on its own merits, as opposed to subscribing to any single critical proposition. Phillips 'did much to establish writing about art as a respectable form of enterprise' (Sutton, 332), always expressing his insights or attributions in a polished style. His outlook was influenced both by his profound knowledge of the French, German, and Italian languages and by his circle of friends within the art world. Yet he was fastidious in retaining an independence of judgement and opinion. Although he avoided being tainted by contact with the commercial art world, he was public-spirited in his support for the National Art Collections Fund (founded in 1903) and in his concern for the National Gallery during the First World War. Sir Charles Holmes wrote on Phillips's death that with him 'there died the general appreciation of the Arts in England upon which not only Trafalgar Square and Bloomsbury, but Chelsea and Bond Street, the New English and the Academy, had existed for thirty years' (C. J. Holmes, 'Self and Partners (Mostly Self)', 1936, 382). 
Phillips was unmarried, but found satisfaction in social life and activities. He was fond of his family, living for most of his life at 40 Ashburn Place, Kensington, London, with his sister Eugenie. There was an air of Proust about Phillips: one younger contemporary recalled him as 'a stout man, immaculately dressed and heavily scented, who talked continuously while he looked at the pictures' (Oliver Brown, 'Exhibitions: the Memoirs of Oliver Brown', 1968, 35). Phillips died at his home at 40 Ashburn Place on 9 August 1924 and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery on 13 August. He left a bequest of money and pictures to the National Gallery, London, two pieces of sculpture by Rodin (both given to Phillips) to the Victoria and Albert Museum, and some minor pictures to the National Gallery of Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 35513


Phillips, Morgan Walter (1902-1963), political organizer, was born on 18 June 1902 at Aberdar, Glamorgan, the eldest son in the family of six children of William Phillips, a coalminer, and his wife, Sophia Alberta Jones. The young Phillips attended Bargoed elementary school until he was twelve, and then began working in the local pits. He became an active trade unionist and was chairman of the Bargoed steam coal lodge from 1924 to 1926. He was also politically involved, and between 1923 and 1925 was secretary of the Bargoed Labour Party. 
Morgan Phillips grew up in a south Wales mining community in a period when industrial and political militancy were at their most lively. He was much influenced by the tradition which in 1912 produced 'The Miners' Next Step', and in the year of the general strike he won a South Wales Miners' Federation scholarship to the 'marxisant' Central Labour College in London. When his two-year course ended, Phillips chose to remain in London rather than return to almost certain unemployment in Aberdar. He became secretary and agent to the West Fulham Labour Party from 1928 to 1930, and he married on 15 March 1930 Norah Mary (1910-1992) ['see 'Phillips, Norah Mary, Baroness Phillips], daughter of William Charles Lusher, a postman. He was to remain associated with the borough of Fulham throughout the 1930s. In the early years of the decade he was for a short time on the staff of the National Council of Labour Colleges, and then in 1934 he became Labour Party agent for Whitechapel. Between 1934 and 1937 he was also a member of the Fulham borough council and became chairman of its finance committee. 
Until this time Phillips's career had been typical of the general run of Labour Party local organizers. His efficiency and competence were, however, beginning to be recognized beyond the boundaries of the London Labour Party, and in 1937 he joined the headquarters staff of the Labour Party at Transport House as propaganda officer. When war broke out in September 1939 he served for a short time in the Ministry of Information; he was party organizer for the eastern counties from 1940 to 1941, and in the latter year he returned to head office in charge of the research department -- a position which was to become increasingly important as post-war plans came under urgent discussion. In 1944 he was selected by the national executive committee of the Labour Party to succeed J. S. Middleton as national secretary. He faced serious competition for the job, most notably from George R. Shepherd, the national agent, from Reg Wallis, Lancashire regional organizer, and Maurice Webb, the youth officer. Hugh Dalton, who was on the selection committee, noted in his memoirs that Phillips's record at Transport House as secretary to the policy committee had been impressive, and that his ability to guide a discussion and state a case in lucid and persuasive terms was well proven. In the selection committee Phillips had a majority of two votes over Maurice Webb. 
Phillips remained national secretary for seventeen years. By the time he was elected, his own political views had moderated considerably from those of his youth, and in the 1950s he was to oppose vigorously the left groupings within the party, especially the Bevanites. He backed Hugh Gaitskell for leadership during the bitter controversies of these years, although he and Gaitskell never seem to have been close personally. Immediately after his appointment in 1944 his central concern was the working efficiency of the labour organization in the country for the post-war election. Phillips's ability to infuse new energies into political organizations was never better illustrated, and the part which he played in the 1945 victory was widely appreciated. He was a member of the 1945 campaign committee, with Herbert Morrison, Clement Attlee, Dalton, and Arthur Greenwood, but as regards policy he was much less important at this time than Morrison, who was chairman. In the general elections of 1950 and 1951 his political influence was greater; indeed Morrison always believed that Phillips, resentful of Morrison's acknowledged part in the 1945 election, contrived to limit and curtail Morrison's place and role in the future. Certainly by the time of the 1955 general election Phillips was in a strong position, and the election campaign was largely run by him from Transport House. The political leadership apparently never or rarely met to discuss strategy; but the poor showing of Labour at the polls led to criticism of Phillips himself. 
During this decade Phillips was involved in three main areas of political work. The first, and most important, was the unity of the party, which Phillips was convinced should develop around the moderate platform favoured by Gaitskell. Phillips was against a commitment to large-scale nationalization; favoured the acceptance of German rearmament; and was strongly opposed to the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament at the end of the decade. The second concern was the rebuilding of the Labour Party's youth section, a matter to which he had referred in his first address as general secretary to the 1944 annual conference. To the 1950 annual conference he explained the new constitution and organization of the Youth League, and he urged the whole party to involve themselves in their youth movement. It remained a minor but troublesome issue for the leadership. 
Phillips's third notable interest was with the international movement, and he played a leading part in the re-creation of the Socialist International. He presided over several conferences which preceded the establishment of the International in 1948, and was its chairman from that date until 1957. On behalf of both the International and the British Labour Party Phillips travelled widely, including a visit to Moscow and China with an official Labour Party delegation which included Attlee and Edith Summerskill (August 1954). His last series of visits before he became ill in 1960 were to Central and South America on behalf of the International. 
The general election of 1959 took place at a time when Phillips's reputation within the Labour Party was reviving, and although he had no central part in policy making during the election campaign, his daily press conferences were widely appreciated. He had always been an excellent conductor of meetings with the press, where his qualities of conciseness and well-ordered answers found much favour. Early in 1960 his status within the party was raised from secretary to general secretary, and in the same year he published 'Labour in the Sixties', an influential pamphlet which achieved a wide circulation and evoked intense discussion. 
Phillips had begun to think seriously again about a parliamentary career (he had been parliamentary candidate for Central Nottingham in 1931 but withdrew before the general election), and he made several efforts to obtain a nomination. What finally settled the matter was a serious stroke in August 1960, from which he never fully recovered. He resigned from the general secretaryship in December 1961, and died in Westminster Hospital on 15 January 1963, being survived by his wife and their son and daughter. He was buried at Fulham cemetery, and on 12 February a memorial service was held in the Kingsway Hall, at which Donald Soper officiated and the address was given by James Griffiths MP. His wife was created a life peer in 1964. Their daughter, Gwyneth P. Dunwoody (1930-2008), was Labour MP for Exeter from 1966 to 1970, for Crewe from 1974 to 1979, and for Crewe and Nantwich from 1983. 
John Saville', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35514


Phillips, Stephen (1864-1915), poet and playwright, was born on 28 July 1864 at Albert Villa, George Street, Summertown, Oxford, the eldest of the thirteen children of Stephen Phillips ('b'. 1837), precentor of Peterborough Cathedral, and his wife, Agatha Sophia ('nee' Dockray), a relative of the Wordsworths. Phillips's relationship with his father was strained; from his mother he inherited a feeling for poetry and the contemplative melancholy that was the keynote of his life and poems. He attended Trinity College School, Stratford upon Avon; then, for six months, King's School, Peterborough; and finally Oundle School (1878-83). A morose boy, Phillips was unpopular at school and despised his teachers. He had no capacity for mathematics or science, but delighted in the Greek and Latin classics. Although he was recommended for a minor scholarship in classics at Queens' College, Cambridge, he prepared instead for the civil service at a crammer run by W. B. Scoones in London. One of the staff, John Churton Collins, encouraged Phillips's interest in poetry, which resulted in the privately printed 'Orestes and Other Poems' (1884). 
In the spring of 1885 Phillips travelled to Wolverhampton to join the theatrical company managed by his cousin F. R. Benson. His histrionic assets were mostly physical, although he possessed a beautiful voice and elocution. He stood an imposing 6 feet 4 inches and had auburn hair and large, intense blue eyes. He resembled Benson, and could double for him. Phillips's strong sense of humour, love of practical jokes, and gift for mimicry meant that this resemblance was exploited in off-stage imitation. Like Benson, he was a keen cricketer. The constant repetition involved in acting bored him, especially in such small roles as Hastings in 'Richard III', Gremio in 'The Taming of the Shrew', or Snake in 'The School for Scandal'. However, he was a notable Ghost in 'Hamlet', attempted an unusual Iago, and played Prospero in 'The Tempest' (when he amused himself by using his wand as a fishing rod over the orchestra pit). In the same production he fell in love with one of the ballet dancers, May Lidyard (1874/5-1948), daughter of Henry Lidyard, a builder. He married her on 28 March 1892 and she was a devoted wife, even though Phillips's drinking excesses and philandering finally forced a separation. They had two children, Persephone ('b'. 1897), who died in infancy, and Stephen ('b'. 1899). Phillips commemorated both children in the poem 'A Gleam'. 
While acting Phillips began writing plays with the notion of restoring poetic drama to the stage, but the play he offered for Benson's consideration met with a silent rebuff. More profitable was his friendship with his cousin Laurence Binyon, who discerned Phillips's poetic talent and devised a scheme whereby they would each write a poem a week and then compare notes. They published 'Primavera: Poems by Four Authors' in 1890, with Manmohan Ghose and A. S. Cripps as their collaborators. Phillips's contributions, 'To a Lost Love' and 'A Dream', exhibit a lyrical mood rather than any dramatic impulse. 
Phillips left Benson in 1892 and for a time earned a living as a history lecturer at an army tutorial school near London run by Messrs Wolffram and Needham. His heart was in his poetry, however. In 1894 he published 'Eremus', whose theme and texture anticipated 'Christ in Hades', published in 1897 as part of a series edited by Laurence Binyon. However, it was the success of 'Poems' in 1897 which persuaded Phillips to become a full-time writer, a decision rendered easier by the 100-guinea prize with which 'The Academy', in 1898, crowned the volume for its outstanding merit. 'Poems' includes 'The Apparition', 'Christ in Hades', 'Marpessa', and 'The Wife', four distinctive non-dramatic poems which illustrate Phillips's gift for charging lyric or narrative matter with dramatic sense. 
The success of 'Poems' led also to a commission from George Alexander for a poetic play for the St James's Theatre. However, unavoidable delays in casting 'Paolo and Francesca', the play Phillips wrote, meant that it appeared first in book form. It was greeted with almost unanimous praise, although Max Beerbohm sniffed, 'It seemed to me very delicate, very smooth, wholly derivative. It might have been the work of a beautiful, etherialised sixth-form boy with an instinct for the stage' (Beerbohm, 316). Eagerness to see it played was increased by the success both in the theatre (1900) and in print (1901) of 'Herod', which H. B. Tree staged with his usual pictorial sumptuousness at Her Majesty's. When 'Paolo and Francesca', which boasted seven Bensonians in its cast, was eventually performed in 1902, Phillips was hailed as the successor of Sophocles and Shakespeare, and his royalties amounted to $150 per week. The play contains some effectively poetic lines, but characterization and motivation are thin, while hyperbole and bombast abound. Nevertheless, it ran for 134 performances, two more than Phillips's next piece, 'Ulysses', an even more pictorial work than 'Herod', on which Tree lavished his attention in 1902. 
Phillips was still at his apogee when Tree staged the loosely constructed, rhetoric-charged 'Nero' in 1906. Tellingly, Phillips told Hesketh Pearson, 'I wrote 'Paolo and Francesca' for love, 'Herod' for popularity, 'Ulysses' for money, and 'Nero' for all three' (Pearson, 142). From then on he was driven by the need for money, which slipped through his fingers as a result of his generosity and dissipation. He preferred 'the company of rougher and ruder individualities' (H. D. Phillips, 215), and revelled in slumming in London's East End. Profit was the motive for his collaboration with J. Comyns Carr on 'Faust' in 1908, and in the same year he dramatized Scott's novel 'The Bride of Lammermoor' (also known as 'The Last Heir'). By 1909 he was already separated from his long-suffering wife, whom he had deserted for his mistress and secretary, variously known as Greta Hyam and Margaret H. Jerome, under which name she wrote about him; she was probably the journalist Margaret Heimann (1887/8-1940), of Swiss origin, recorded in the census of 1911. In that year Phillips was forced into bankruptcy with liabilities of $710. In the previous year he had squandered over $1100. 'Pietro of Siena', a pale imitation of his first (and best) play, did nothing to revive his fortunes in 1910: it received just one performance. 'Iole' in 1913 managed only two performances. The following year Phillips dusted off an earlier work, 'The Sin of David', which had been first performed in Germany in 1905. Because of the censor's ban on biblical subjects, Phillips transposed this story of David, Bathsheba, and Uriah to Cromwellian England, but with little success. His last staged work was 'Armageddon' (1915), a series of revue sketches notable only for their patriotism. 
While enjoying success in the theatre Phillips had not abandoned poetry entirely. In 1908 he brought out 'New Poems', which confirmed suspicions that his reputation was overblown. His longest poem, 'The New Inferno' (1911), is a clumsily constructed series of overdrawn pictures illustrating trite moral texts. Better, with its flashes of Phillips's old spontaneity, was 'Lyrics and Dramas' (1913), but his themes remained commonplace. His last volume, 'Panama and other Poems' (1915), is better forgotten. A brighter facet of Phillips's later career was his editorship of the 'Poetry Review' from January 1913 until his death. 
Shortly before his death Phillips completed 'Harold', a verse play about the Norman conquest, having completed a scenario for one on John the Baptist. In mid-October 1915 he fell seriously ill after suffering a severe chill. He died at Goodwin Cottage, Griffin Street, Deal, Kent, where he was living, on 9 December 1915, of cirrhosis of the liver and exhaustion. His funeral service at St Clement's Church, Hastings, was conducted by his brother the Revd David Phillips, and attended by his wife and son, and his friend the actor Martin Harvey. Phillips was buried in the cemetery at Hastings on 13 December. He died intestate and worth a nominal $5. 
For ten years Phillips was accorded film-star status, which disappeared as quickly as it came. It is difficult now to see much intrinsic merit in his work, and easier to perceive how derivative his poetry was (as several contemporaries also indicated). Nevertheless, the response to his plays reveals that Phillips was alive to that theatrical taste which embraced the spectacular, the romantic, and the melodramatic, cloaked in easy-going pseudo-Elizabethan verse. That Phillips failed to capitalize on his successes is indicative of his indolent nature, his lack of true talent, and his predilection for strong drink. 


@@@@@


doc= 35515


Phillips, Sir Tom Spencer Vaughan (1888-1941), naval officer, was born on 19 February 1888 at Pendennis Castle, Falmouth, Cornwall, the son of Colonel T. V. W. Phillips, Royal Artillery, and his wife, Louisa May Adeline, the daughter of Admiral Sir Algernon F. R. de Horsey. At fifteen he entered the training ship 'Britannia' as a naval cadet in a distinguished year that was to see six of the class eventually reach flag rank. 
Phillips was known for his intelligence from the outset and duly satisfied his examiners at every turn: he was appointed midshipman in 1904, sub-lieutenant in 1907, and, after gaining the maximum five first-class certificates, lieutenant in July 1908. He decided to specialize in navigation and saw service in the First World War, initially as navigator of the cruiser HMS 'Bacchante' during the Dardanelles operation. Although he sought more excitement, his next posting was as navigator on the more modern cruiser HMS 'Lancaster', stationed well out of the action in the Far East. Disappointed that he was denied the opportunity to participate more fully in the war, Phillips none the less worked hard and prospered. Benefiting from an unexpected vacancy, he was given the rank of acting commander and became the executive officer of the 'Lancaster' from April 1917 onwards. In the following year he was made acting captain and commanded the ship for three months before being transferred to the cruiser HMS 'Euryalus' in early 1919 so that he could bring her back to the United Kingdom. 
In the same year Phillips married Gladys Metcalfe, the daughter of Captain F. G. Griffith-Griffin and the widow of J. H. Brownrigg. It was a highly successful partnership, not least because they were able to spend far more time ashore together than was usual within the service. They were to have one son who, perhaps not surprisingly, decided to follow his eminent father into the Royal Navy. 
Although he was widely respected for the quality of his mind, it has to be admitted that Tom Phillips was not the most popular leader of men ever to go to sea. Lacking the common touch and a sense of humour, he was generally considered to be aloof, disdainful, impatient, intolerant, and dismissive of those whose opinions he did not value. Being utterly self-confident, he was often both assertive and dogmatic in portraying his views on matters both large and small. Nicknamed Tom Thumb and Titch Phillips because of his slight physical stature -- he was no taller than 5 foot 2 inches in height and roughly 57 kilos in weight -- Phillips was sallow in complexion and often looked exhausted. Apart from his love of chocolate, which he ate more or less permanently, he had few foibles. An intense individual who could rarely relax and whose hobbies were limited, Phillips was essentially a compulsive workaholic and a person disinclined to delegate authority to even those subordinates with ability. Senior officers could depend upon him, however, and his knack of working harmoniously with even the most difficult of them showed a diplomatic side to him that his critics rarely concede. He lived for his work and he set his staff exacting standards of professionalism that often proved impossible for others less gifted or less driven than him to match. Difficult though he could be to work for, he inspired a real sense of loyalty from those of his staff who spent much time with him. 
Phillips's career took off after the war. He attended the first Staff College course and was duly noticed by the authorities as an officer to watch. Thereafter he served for three years on the staff of the British naval representative at the League of Nations, and was promoted to the rank of commander in June 1921. After his stint in Geneva, he worked in the plans division of the Admiralty for a further two-year period of staff work. Late in 1924 he was sent back to sea in command of the sloop HMS 'Verbena' on the Africa station. Eight months later he was appointed to the operational staff of the Mediterranean Fleet serving under Admiral Sir Roger Keyes and working closely with his chief of staff, Dudley Pound, whose firm friendship he gained and never lost. Phillips remained in the Mediterranean until May 1928 and was promoted captain in June 1927. His next appointment was in command of the sixth destroyer flotilla for nineteen months from September 1928, whereupon he returned to the plans division as assistant director. It was a very fraught period, coinciding with the onset of the great depression and the withering effects of severe financial economies in public expenditure that culminated in the tragic Invergordon mutiny in September 1931. A year later he left Admiralty House once more to take command of HMS 'Hawkins', the flagship of the East Indies squadron, and remained in that post until January 1935. 
After his shore leave he returned once more to Whitehall as director of plans. He held this post from August 1935 to April 1938 at a time of increasing tension in both Europe and the Far East. As the British government grappled with the problem of imperial overstretch and remained committed, at least on paper, to the 'Singapore strategy' with wholly inadequate naval resources at its disposal, Phillips was brought into the planning circle that Anthony Eden, the foreign secretary, formed to find alternative ways of dealing with these very considerable potential threats to the United Kingdom's democratic existence. Eden, no firm believer in appeasement, felt that the only effective answer lay in involving the Americans in some form of naval co-operation against the Japanese in the Pacific. To this end a top-secret meeting between Captain Royal E. Ingersoll, the American navy's representative, and Tom Phillips took place in the Admiralty in early January 1938. Unfortunately, the Ingersoll-Phillips conversations were rather anticlimactic in nature and their inconclusive results did much to scuttle Eden's plans for coping with the Japanese menace. Eden's alternative to appeasement had therefore failed to materialize and so the strategic mess that the United Kingdom found itself in remained unresolved. 
After leaving Admiralty House in the month after the 'Anschluss' had been arranged between Germany and Austria, Phillips was appointed commodore of the Home Fleet destroyer flotillas. It was not a sinecurial appointment. In the early hours of 25 September 1938, in foul weather on passage from Rosyth to Scapa Flow, one of Phillips's destroyers, 'Encounter', managed to collide with the aircraft-carrier HMS 'Furious'. Although no board of inquiry was held into this incident and therefore no blame was attached to him, it certainly did not add any lustre to Phillips's reputation within the navy as a whole. He was seen essentially as a very competent staff officer rather than a naturally gifted ship-handler. When he reached flag rank in January 1939, his critics commented wryly upon his good connections. These were certainly in evidence in the summer of 1939 when he was asked by Dudley Pound, the newly appointed first sea lord, to become his deputy chief of the naval staff. This meant yet another lengthy spell in London and away from any form of naval action on the high seas, yet it was also an extraordinary offer that simply could not be refused. Usually, this level of appointment would be filled by someone of vice-admiral rank. Phillips was some years shy of such a rank, but Pound had no qualms about his ability to do the job. His assessment proved to be correct. Phillips and Pound formed a wonderful working relationship with one another. Complete trust was established between the two of them from the outset and Phillips's abilities and work ethic soon won over the rest of the naval staff and his political masters as well. His sharp, penetrating intellect and calm, unruffled demeanour were qualities much appreciated by Churchill, who consulted him on numerous questions and enjoyed his company and frequently invited him to spend the weekend at Chequers after May 1940. By then Churchill had recommended that he be given the acting rank of vice-admiral in February 1940 and the first lord's hand could also be seen in Phillips's redesignation as vice-chief of the naval staff two months later. Whatever the value of his advice may have been to the former first lord, the same independence of spirit exhibited by Phillips in criticizing policies that Churchill advocated, namely, retaliatory bombing of German cities (September 1940) and the diversion of troops and supplies from north Africa to Greece (April 1941), eventually alienated the prime minister and the two men rarely spoke thereafter. Aware of the estrangement, Albert Alexander, the Labour MP who became first lord of the Admiralty in May 1940, did not hold it against Phillips, whom he came to rely upon for the same type of analytical shrewdness that his predecessor had valued. 
Wishing to go back to sea after his period as vice chief of the naval staff was completed, Phillips learned in May 1941 that he was to become the commander-in-chief of the as yet unformed Eastern Fleet. This was another controversial appointment that rankled with many of his fellow officers, not least because he would receive a double promotion to acting admiral. Quite apart from the favouritism that they felt had once more been shown to him, his critics complained that he did not have the requisite amount of command experience at sea to hold down such a post, let alone in wartime. At the time and even subsequently there was much debate over the composition of the fleet that Phillips would command. While these details were being worked out, he remained in the Admiralty until October 1941, when he was finally ordered to the River Clyde in order to pick up his flagship, the modern battleship HMS 'Prince of Wales', and take her out to South Africa in the first instance and further east if circumstances warranted it. 
It is evident that Phillips was perturbed about the magnitude of the task that faced his fledgeling Eastern Fleet. As someone who had been involved in the evolution of the 'Singapore strategy' almost from its inception, Phillips did not need reminding that this version of it was only a pale shadow of the massive force first envisaged by the Admiralty planners in the early 1920s. Lacking an aircraft-carrier -- the HMS 'Indomitable' had run aground in the Caribbean -- the newly constituted Force G led by the 'Prince of Wales', though still not properly worked up, left the Clyde on 25 October with the destroyers 'Electra' and 'Express' and would rendezvous with the old battle cruiser HMS 'Repulse' and two further destroyers, 'Jupiter' and 'Encounter', in Colombo. Before crossing the Indian Ocean, however, Phillips, on Churchill's orders, had flown to see Field Marshal Jan Smuts, the South African prime minister, in Pretoria. Impressed though Smuts was with Phillips, he was deeply concerned that the Eastern Fleet, far from being a deterrent to the Japanese, might prove to be an irresistible temptation to them. Phillips was painfully aware that if the Eastern Fleet was to be an important fleet-in-being it must be augmented as quickly as possible with other heavy units and fighter protection. While Phillips was a late convert to the effectiveness of air power, it is also evident that he still regarded the battleship, properly handled and screened, as capable of wielding the most destructive power of any military unit at sea. 
As soon as the 'Prince of Wales' had reached Ceylon, Phillips was ordered by the Admiralty to fly to Singapore on 29 November in order to hold planning discussions with the British military commanders on the island. This left the 53-year-old W. G. Tennant, the immensely popular captain of the 'Repulse', to bring Force G into Singapore on 2 December amid much fanfare and acclaim from the local press and populace. Phillips formally took command of the Eastern Fleet on 3 December and next day flew off to Manila to confer with Admiral Hart, the commander-in-chief of the American Asiatic fleet, about the possibilities of gaining naval reinforcements for his Eastern Fleet from both the American and Dutch naval commands. While he remained in the Philippines, he ordered the 'Repulse' to steam to Port Darwin to 'show the flag' in the hope that it might encourage the Australian government to release at least a cruiser to supplement his force in Singapore. 
In the afternoon of 6 December, however, even before the 'Repulse' had reached Darwin and Phillips had concluded his conversations with Hart, ominous news arrived indicating that three separate convoys of Japanese transports, totalling thirty-eight ships in all and flanked by strong naval escorts, had been spotted off the southern coast of French Indo-China steaming in the direction of the Gulf of Siam. While no declaration of war had been issued as yet by the military authorities in Tokyo, their aggressive intentions were palpably clear. Ironically, just when the time to act had arrived Phillips was in no position to respond. If he could have sent his capital ships to wreak havoc on the intensely vulnerable Japanese transports as they were landing their troops either on the coast of southern Thailand or north-eastern Malaya, the imperial Japanese army's invasion of Malaya could have been seriously disrupted. As it was, however, neither Phillips nor the 'Repulse' was on hand to do anything about this intelligence report, and to make matters worse -- if that was possible -- the 'Prince of Wales' was in no condition to sally forth immediately to engage the enemy since she was having her boilers overhauled. It would be a further two full days before Phillips could take his ships to sea. 
By then, of course, the guessing game was over as the Japanese had already begun landing their troops at Singora, Patani, and Kota Bahru, had bombed both Singapore and the allied air bases throughout the Malayan peninsula, and had created havoc with the American Pacific Fleet at Pearl Harbor. Since the Admiralty did not issue him with any instructions about what to do with his ships in this new and hostile environment -- a grievous omission if ever there was one -- and he refrained from requesting any such advice, Phillips was left to ponder the very few practical options open to him. Given that his ships could not remain undetected and unharmed for long in Singapore, a retreat to Australia, Ceylon, or the Dutch East Indies was indeed possible if he wished to pursue the fleet-in-being concept, even though such a move was bound to be considered morally indefensible by those fighting for their very lives in Malaya at this time. Steeped in naval tradition, Phillips appears to have felt that there was no realistic alternative but to take his ships, now to be known as force Z, into the South China Sea to do some belated damage to the amphibious operation that the Japanese had launched in the early hours of 8 December. Quite how long he expected the Japanese to take in landing their troops on the Thai and Malayan coasts is unclear, but one imagines that he hoped that the north-easterly monsoon would have inhibited these movements in a significant way. Unfortunately, the vital adjunct to any search and destroy mission -- air power -- was unlikely to be available to him in significant strength for the duration of his sortie. It was essential, therefore, that force Z, shorn of its aerial cover, should remain undetected by either Japanese submarines or aircraft on its outward journey so that it could arrive unexpectedly off the invasion beaches and inflict maximum damage to the Japanese cause before escaping at high speed southward. Whether it was wisdom, or sheer folly, for Phillips to sail 'to the sound of the guns' has been debated ever since this ill-starred operation left the Johore Strait in the late afternoon of 8 December, but few would disagree that it was a bold and courageous act and in keeping with the best traditions of the Royal Navy. 
Sadly, force Z, consisting of his two capital ships and four destroyers of mixed vintage and ability, the modern and fast 'Electra' and 'Express' and the ancient and slow 'Tenedos' and 'Vampire', was not to remain undetected for long. Despite taking an indirect route to the Gulf of Siam to avoid both a likely Japanese minefield and submarine flotilla and obscured by heavy cloud and poor visibility, force Z was still spotted at 1345 hours on 9 December by submarine 'I-65' some 100 miles north of the Anambas Islands. Unaware that force Z had been detected, Phillips pressed on northward but just over three hours later the skies suddenly cleared and at about 1740 hours three Japanese seaplanes emerged on the horizon and shadowed the two British capital ships until dusk fell. Phillips realized that the game was up and that any chance of striking a decisive blow against the Japanese transports had evaporated. All that remained for him to do was to escape from the enemy dragnet that was certain to be mounted against his ships from that time forward. He altered course twice under cover of darkness before aborting the original operation and setting course for a return to Singapore at 2015 hours. As midnight approached a signal was received on the 'Prince of Wales' from Rear-Admiral Palliser, Phillips's chief of staff in Singapore, reporting an enemy landing at Kuantan, a town roughly half-way along the east coast of Malaya and less than 200 miles from Singapore. Phillips was a stickler for observing radio silence once an operation had begun and he did not contact Palliser for confirmation that this report was correct. (It proved, alas, to be false.) Even so, such a landing would make perfect sense for an invasion force because once a bridgehead had been established the Japanese could then make use of a good existing arterial road system to cut off the allied troops operating in the north of the country and accelerate their own progress against those pitted against them in the southern state of Johore and on the island of Singapore. Thus the danger to be apprehended from making a diversion to Kuantan was worthwhile and Phillips had few qualms about doing so. Whether Phillips expected Palliser to send fighter cover for force Z at Kuantan is unknown, but he did not break radio silence to request it. For his part, Palliser was blissfully unaware of Phillips's actual position or indeed whether he intended to follow up the as yet unconfirmed report about the landing at Kuantan. 
Not surprisingly, when force Z reached Kuantan at 0800 hours on 10 December the ships found themselves alone. Moreover, all was quiet on the Pahang shoreline. Despite the fact that there was no sign of any invasion and the weather was bright and clear, Phillips proceeded to waste more than two hours scouring the seas off Kuantan for what was a non-existent invasion fleet. He could not have been oblivious to the vulnerability of force Z, but even so he was still engaged in this futile investigation when his ships were eventually spotted by a Japanese reconnaissance plane at 1015 hours. At this point Phillips had nothing to lose by breaking radio silence and requesting Singapore to send all available aircraft to protect force Z as it sped home, since the Japanese now knew where it was and were sure to attack it. Amazingly, no such request was ever transmitted from the 'Prince of Wales'. Decades later the seminal question of why Phillips continued to maintain radio silence at this stage remains unanswered. Although there has been much conjecture from numerous quarters, no definitive evidence has ever been unearthed to solve this tragic conundrum. In the final analysis, however, it is doubtful whether the limited force of ageing Brewster Buffaloes available to the allies in Singapore would have made any material difference to the eventual outcome even if they had been covering force Z over the South China Sea at this time. 
Away from the realms of speculation, the Japanese aircrews were ruthlessly efficient in dispatching force Z. From the time that they located the British ships and began their high-level bombing (at 1113 hours) to the successive waves of torpedo attacks that finally finished off the 'Repulse' (1233 hours) and 'Prince of Wales' (1320 hours), the degree of co-ordination and courage shown by them was impressive, as was the heroic resistance put up by the crews of the two doomed capital ships. In the end, however, force Z was overwhelmed by hostile forces. It was a sobering lesson for the traditionalists within the Royal Navy to learn, for it graphically demonstrated that the age and supremacy of the battleship had passed. 
Tom Phillips had the opportunity to save himself before his ship sank but he chose not to. He was one of the 840 officers and men of force Z who lost their lives as a result of this naval disaster in the South China Sea on that fateful day, 10 December 1941. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35516


Phillips, Walter Alison (1864-1950), historian, was born at Lewisham, London, on 21 October 1864, the youngest son of John Phillips (died 1871), a commission merchant, and his wife, Jane, daughter of John Atkins, solicitor. He received his elementary education in Germany at Weimar, where the family had moved after his father's death. The musician Walther Wolfgang von Goethe, the poet's grandson, was his godfather; indeed until 1875 the family occupied rooms in the 'Goethehaus' in the centre of the town. In that year Phillips was sent to a preparatory school at Margate. In June 1877 he went on to Merchant Taylors' School, London, from where he went to Merton College, Oxford, as an exhibitioner in 1882. Having graduated with first class honours in modern history in 1885, he was elected a senior scholar of St John's College, Oxford, in 1886. In the following year he was president of the Oxford Union. 
Despite his early academic distinction Phillips did not immediately enter academia. An accomplished musician of artistic temperament, he was attracted by the idea of a career as a professional singer. He returned in 1888 to Weimar, where he remained until 1891, pursuing musical and artistic studies. The liberal cosmopolitanism of Weimar society had a lasting influence on him, as indeed had German culture. His first publication in 1896 was a selection of poems by Walther von der Vogelweide which he translated from the medieval Middle High German. On his return to England he sang professionally for the next five years; but with a great career on the concert platform seemingly beyond his vocal powers he abandoned music for scholarship, lecturing for the university extension movement. He married in 1905 Catherine Beatrice, daughter of George Frederick Sennett, an accountant's clerk, of Dale in Pembrokeshire. Like Phillips an accomplished linguist, she translated several historical works; they had no children. 
It was during this period that Phillips developed his interest in modern European diplomatic history. Indeed he first attracted attention as a historian with 'The War of Greek Independence', which he published in 1897. This small monograph and his work for the university extension movement led to an invitation by Rivingtons to contribute to their series on European history. His 'Modern Europe, 1815-1899', published in 1901 and reprinted several times, soon established itself as a standard textbook in the universities and higher forms of the public schools. In 1903 he became chief assistant editor of the eleventh edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', for which he wrote some 94 articles, mostly on European history and aspects of diplomatic practice. His three contributions in volume 10 of the 'Cambridge Modern History' (1907) also dealt with aspects of diplomatic history, most notably his chapter on the congresses after 1815. His contribution to volume 2 of the 'Cambridge History of British Foreign Policy' (1923) was on the same subject. Indeed much of his best work can be found in composite histories and encyclopaedias. The immediate post-Napoleonic period had particularly captivated him. His writings on it were based on the meticulous and extensive study of original documents; they are characterized by his lucid power of exposition and a certain vehemence in the expression of his views. 
This also applies to perhaps the most important work by Phillips, 'The Confederation of Europe: a Study of the European Alliance, 1813-1823', which was published in 1914. The book originated from a series of six lectures which he was invited to deliver in the University Schools, Oxford, by the delegates of the Common University Fund in the Trinity term 1913. Although the subject required and was given historical treatment, the object and scope of the book were not purely historical. The principal purpose of the 'Confederation' was to illustrate the problems involved in the practical application of the principles of international law. A tour of the United States in 1911 had impressed upon him the dangers of what he regarded as 'the shallow and uninformed idealism of the pacifist movement' ('Preface to the second edition', vi). In the second and much enlarged edition, published in 1920, he applied those warnings to the idealism that fired the League of Nations movement. 
During the three years before the outbreak of the First World War Phillips occupied himself intensely with the study of past and present international politics. In 1912 he was invited to join the staff of 'The Times', to which he had previously contributed leading articles and reviews on an occasional basis. In the same year, until 1913, he travelled as the paper's special correspondent through South America; he also acted as editor of the 'Times South American Supplement' and as adviser on South American affairs. 
In 1914, soon after the publication of 'The Confederation of Europe', Phillips was appointed to the newly endowed Lecky chair of modern history at Trinity College, Dublin. His previous scholarly work and his long tenure of the Lecky professorship -- he held it until his retirement in 1939 -- lent distinction to the chair and the university, though, as his contemporaries noted, he remained somewhat 'aloof... giving the impression of not really belonging to either Ireland or to Trinity College, but rather to Oxford or London' ('The Times', 31 Oct 1950, 6); and indeed, when not actually in residence at Trinity, he spent much of his time in London. 
Throughout the First World War Phillips published on the political issues involved in the conflict. His contributions principally to the 'Edinburgh' and 'Quarterly' reviews and 'New Europe' are characterized by a blend of enlightened pragmatism and a resigned scepticism as to the efficacy of all grand peace designs. This pessimism earned him the unmerited epithet of 'the English Bernhardi', an apostle of the gospel of war, on pacifist platforms ('The Confederation of Europe', 1920, 'Preface to the second edition', vii). 
After the war Phillips turned his attention to other subjects. He was profoundly out of sympathy with the 'Irish quarrel', which had outlasted the cataclysm of the war. His pronounced, though meticulously researched and carefully documented, views on Irish affairs found expression in 'The Revolution in Ireland, 1906-1923' (1923), which was based on official documents as well as ephemeral nationalist pamphlets. In the following years he published three smaller general surveys of early modern European history from the Reformation to the Thirty Years' War. In 1933 he undertook his last major piece of scholarly work. At the request of the Irish ecclesiastical authorities and under his editorship the three stout volumes of 'The History of the Church in Ireland' were published in 1933-4. The idea of clerical life had attracted him on leaving Oxford, and ecclesiastical history and rituals continued to fascinate him -- a fascination to which his learned though abstruse articles in the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' on aspects of church hierarchy and liturgy testify. In 1936, in a joint effort with Arthur Reede, he returned for a last time to the field of diplomatic history with a study of neutral commerce and belligerent rights during the Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars. 
Walter Alison Phillips was a LittD of Dublin and a member of the Royal Irish Academy, and was elected an honorary fellow of his old college, Merton, in 1938. He died at his home, 24 Bellevue Road, Barnes, Surrey, on 28 October 1950; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35517


Phillips, William (1822-1905), botanist and antiquary, was born on 4 May 1822 at Presteigne, the ninth of the ten children of Thomas and Elizabeth Phillips. After an elementary education in Presteigne, Phillips moved to Shrewsbury about 1836 to work with his older brothers in their tailor's shop in High Street. On 3 September 1846 he married Sarah Ann Hitchins (1824-1895). The couple later had two sons and two daughters. 
After studying photography and astronomy Phillips was encouraged to take up botany by William Allport Leighton (1805-1889) and William Houghton (1828-1895) about 1861, and became interested in fungi about 1869. He achieved a European reputation as an authority on cryptogamic botany and his 'Manual of the British Discomycetes' (1887) was immediately recognized as the definitive work on the subject. In 1875 he was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society of London. A genus of fungi was named 'Phillipsia' in recognition of his work. 
Phillips's records of Shropshire fungi, published by the Caradoc and Severn Valley Field Club, constitute the county's most important early mycological work. In 1897 he was elected chairman of a club committee set up to devise a flora of the county, and he was primarily responsible for mapping the county into districts for this project. In 1885 he supervised the transfer of the Shropshire Archaeological Society's collections to the new Shrewsbury Free Public Library and Museum and accepted the honorary duty of curator of botany. 
Phillips's interest in local history arose when failing eyesight meant he was no longer able to pursue his microscopic investigations and botanical draughtsmanship. The establishment of the Shropshire Archaeological Society in 1877 provided a focus for much of his research. Between 1877 and 1905 its transactions contained forty-seven articles or notes by Phillips, most notably his edition of the 'Ottley Papers' (1894-6) which remains a major contribution to Shropshire's civil war history. He also published numerous articles in the antiquarian columns in the Shrewsbury and Oswestry newspapers. He edited and largely wrote the Shropshire notes and queries column in the 'Shrewsbury Chronicle' and transcribed the registers of four parishes for publication by the Shropshire Parish Register Society. 
Phillips was an active magistrate from 1886 and a trustee of local charities which he judiciously administered to the benefit of the town's poor. He played an important role in the establishment of the Shropshire Horticultural Society. In 1903 he was granted the honorary freedom of Shrewsbury for his many services to the town. He was methodical, industrious, generous, and unassuming. He disliked political and theological controversy. Politically he was a Liberal. In religion he was 'an old fashioned Methodist', sometime acting as a local preacher. However, he was well known among the local Anglican clergy and was married and buried according to the rites of the Church of England. Phillips died from heart disease at his home, Aucuba House, Canonbury, Shrewsbury, on 23 October 1905 and was buried in the town's general cemetery three days later. His herbarium was purchased by the Shrewsbury Free Public Library and Museum, as were his local history manuscripts. 


@@@@@


doc= 35518


Phillpotts, Eden (1862-1960), writer, was born on 4 November 1862 at Mount Abu, Rajputana, India, the eldest of the three sons of Henry Phillpotts (1828-1865), an officer of the Indian army and political agent to the governor-general of Rajputana, and Adelaide Matilda Sophia (1843-1921), daughter of George Jenkins Waters, of the Madras civil service. When Henry Phillpotts died in 1865 his wife took their children to England, where her father received them in his west-country home. 
Eden Phillpotts was educated at Mannamead School, Plymouth (later incorporated with Plymouth College), and at seventeen went to London to work as a clerk for the Sun Fire Insurance Company. His own ambition was to be an actor, and after office hours he studied at a school of dramatic art, only to realize after two years that he was not suited to acting. He turned instead to writing, and soon he was earning $400 a year in his spare time by writing novels and short stories, and also one-act plays, sometimes in association with Arnold Bennett, who became his friend. After ten years he left the insurance company and in 1890 became assistant editor to a weekly periodical, 'Black and White', for three days of his writing week. 
On 18 November 1892 Phillpotts married Emily (died 1928), daughter of Robert Topham. They had a daughter, (Mary) Adelaide Eden Phillpotts, later Ross (1896-1993), who became an author in her own right, and a son, Henry Phillpotts. Eden Phillpotts left London in 1899 to settle in his beloved Devon, first at Torquay, where he lived from 1899 to 1929, and later at Broadclyst, near Exeter, where he lived from 1929 until his death. Both places are not far from Dartmoor, the setting for most of his fiction. 

'Lying Prophets' (1897), Phillpotts's first important work of fiction, was commended by James Payn; his next, 'Children of the Mist' (1898), was more generally welcomed and was praised by R. D. Blackmore, author of 'Lorna Doone', whose memorial Phillpotts unveiled in Exeter Cathedral six years later. For more than fifty years after these first successes Phillpotts produced an average of three or four books a year -- novels, short stories, poems, plays, essays, mystery fiction, and retold legends from the classics. Phillpotts's best-known works are the eighteen novels and two collections of short stories that make up his 'Dartmoor cycle'. What Thomas Hardy did for Dorset, Phillpotts did for Dartmoor. Each book of the series focuses on a specific part of the moor and describes it faithfully. 'The River' (1902), set in West Dart, 'The Secret Woman' (1905), set in Belstone, and 'The Thief of Virtue' (1910), set in the region's heart, are among the best works of the Dartmoor cycle. Their excellence lies in their convincing dialogue in west country dialect, their depiction of the rural experience of the local people, the author's sympathy for his characters, and, most importantly, the accuracy of their described topography. Phillpotts also collaborated with his daughter, Adelaide, in producing four books: 'Yellow Sands' (1930), 'The Good Old Days' (1932), 'West Country Plays' (1933), and 'My Lady's Mill' (1935). 
Phillpotts began to write plays in 1895, when he collaborated with Jerome K. Jerome in a comedy, 'The Prude's Progress'. 'The Farmer's Wife', entirely his own work, was his first real success, being produced at the Birmingham Repertory Theatre in 1916. The eventual London production in 1924 was phenomenally popular. It ran for three years, a reminder that rural atmosphere and country dialogue had not been wholly superseded in English drama. There followed other plays in the same genre, notably 'Yellow Sands', which ran at the Haymarket Theatre, London, for 610 performances. 
Only one setback marred these successes: 'The Secret Woman', originally a novel, was recast for the stage in 1912. It was banned by the censor because Phillpotts refused on principle to delete two sentences 'that mattered nothing to the play and involved no sacrifice of art', he afterwards recalled. A protest was widely signed by his fellow writers, including G. B. Shaw and Henry James, and appeared in 'The Times' (weekly edition, 6 Feb 1912). The poetry of Eden Phillpotts -- twenty-two volumes in all, beginning with 'Wild Fruit' (1910) -- and the essays, first collected in 'My Devon Year' (1904), have, like his other works, the flavour of a rich ancestral speech. The artist's use of dialect led him, as he matured, from word distortion to rhythmic suggestion and Phillpotts's creative prose has, therefore, something of the quality of his exemplars, Thomas Hardy and Henry Fielding. His rationalist philosophy, genial and manly, but less oppressed by fatalism than Hardy's, was steadfast. 
After the death of his first wife Phillpotts married in 1929 Lucy Robina Joyce (died 1968), daughter of Dr Fortescue Webb. Eden Phillpotts died at his home, Kerswell House, Broadclyst, near Exeter, on 29 December 1960 and his ashes were interred on Dartmoor. 


@@@@@


doc= 35519


Philpot, Glyn Warren (1884-1937), painter and sculptor, was born on 5 October 1884 in London, the youngest of five children of John Philpot (1849-1927), surveyor, and his wife, Jessie Carpenter (1842?-1892), who died when Philpot was seven. He showed a precocious aptitude for drawing, and at thirteen began printing little booklets whose woodcut decorations show a debt to Charles Ricketts. When ill health forced him to leave school at Streatham, he was sent to the Lambeth Art School to study with Philip Connard in the hope that he might be interested in the lessons without tiring. Here he showed a facility for drawing and composition which obtained him a scholarship for two years. When he was only nineteen, a view of a church interior that he had painted during a visit to Rouen in France was hung at the Royal Academy. He spent 1906 in the studio of Jean-Paul Laurens at the Academie Julian in Paris. However, he was as unaffected by the styles of his art masters as he was by the current trends adopted by his fellow students. It was rather the work of old masters such as Titian, studied in galleries in London and Paris, and his English models, Ricketts and Charles Shannon, that stimulated him towards old-fashioned figurative and imaginative subjects rather than landscape. He also became a brilliant exponent of their method of building up a picture with successive glazes over an underpainting. 
In 1906 Philpot became a Roman Catholic, which shocked his Baptist family. He took a series of ever larger studios in Chelsea and organized several small exhibitions. These earned him enough to travel to Spain in 1908. On his return he painted 'Manuelito' (1909), the picture which, more than his first one-man show at the Baillie Gallery in 1910, made his reputation. A number of successful portraits led to a stream of commissions, which earned him a prosperous living. However, aware that hack work led to sterility, he sought to make each portrait a challenge by varying the pose or the technique. At the same time, he was painting decorative subject pictures on classical and religious themes. He constantly drew from male models, latterly mostly black men -- 'to keep my eye and hand in' (Philpot MSS) -- and often used such studies in his paintings. Having barely saved sufficient money to last two months, he again went to Spain. As a result he painted 'Zarzarrosa' (1910), which was hailed in the press as a masterpiece. His success financed the first of many visits to Italy and returns to Paris. 'The Marble Worker' (1912) won him the first prize of a gold medal and $300 at the Carnegie International Exhibition at Pittsburgh in 1913, when he painted some portraits in the United States. When war was declared in 1914 he was living in Venice, and he returned promptly to England to enlist. After several rejections on medical grounds, he was finally accepted but was demobilized when his health broke down. As a war artist, he painted portraits of admirals. 
During Philpot's first retrospective show, at the Grosvenor Gallery in London in 1923, he was elected RA. Chosen to paint King Fouad in Cairo, he was paid $3000 and his fare. In 1927 he bought a house at Baynards, Sussex, where he fashioned a large bronze, 'Oedipus Replying to the Sphinx'. Three years later he returned to the United States as a member of the jury (along with Matisse) at the 1930 Carnegie International Exhibition, Pittsburgh, and a collection of his pictures was shown at the Venice Biennale. 
However, despite such marks of success, long-standing dissatisfaction with his work, a belief that it ought to express more spiritual values, and a desire to free himself from possessions culminated in 1931 in his hiring a studio in Paris, where for a time he devoted himself to sculpture. Upon resuming painting he abandoned glazes and endeavoured, by direct painting with brighter colours, by a simplification of form, and by a more sensitive line, to forge a new style. He was aware of the financial risk involved. When both the critics and the public disliked his new manner, sales and commissions almost ceased. He had to sell Baynards Manor. To win new patrons he organized one-man exhibitions (1932 and 1934) at the Leicester Galleries, London. There he first exhibited the still lifes which show his gift as a colourist. From 1935 to 1937 he worked frequently in north Africa and the south of France, painting watercolours, exhibited at the Syrie Maugham Gallery (1935) and the Redfern Gallery (1937) in London. He also did a series of superb paintings of his Jamaican servant, Henry Thomas. However, the strain of four exhibitions in six years exacerbated problems with high blood pressure. Two days after a dental operation he suddenly suffered a fatal stroke, on 16 December 1937 at his home, 1 Marlborough Gate House, Lancaster Gate, London. After a service at Westminster Cathedral he was buried at Petersham, near Richmond, London. A few days later Vivian Forbes, an artist friend whose emotional instability added to the stress of Philpot's last years, committed suicide. 
Courageous and unmercenary, Philpot was also generous, gentle, shy, enthusiastic, and quick, with a great charm of manner, and a delicious sense of fun and of the ridiculous. He was unmarried; his sister Daisy unselfishly devoted herself to looking after him. A memorial exhibition of his work was held in 1938 at the Tate Gallery, of which he was a trustee in 1927 and 1935. A major retrospective at the National Portrait Gallery, London (1984-5), made his work known to a younger generation. 


@@@@@


doc= 35520


Phipps, Sir Eric Clare Edmund (1875-1945), diplomatist, was born in Madrid on 27 October 1875, the only child of Sir (Edmund) Constantine Henry Phipps (1840-1911), diplomatist, later HM minister in Brussels (1900-1906), and his first wife, Maria Jane (died 1902), eldest daughter of Alfred Miller Mundy, of Shipley Hall, Derbyshire. He came from a family which had distinguished itself through service to the British crown during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, particularly in the navy, diplomacy, and the colonies. His great-grandfather, Henry Phipps, first earl of Mulgrave, had served as foreign secretary in 1805-6, and his great-uncle, Constantine Henry Phipps, first marquess of Normanby, had been lord lieutenant of Ireland and ambassador in Paris. Phipps accompanied his parents to their various diplomatic posts and was privately educated in Dresden, Vienna, and Paris. He studied for a year at King's College, Cambridge, and subsequently graduated 'bachelier-es-lettres' at the University of Paris. He was twice married, first on 20 July in 1907 to Yvonne (died 1909), youngest daughter of the Comte de Louvencourt, of Paris, and second on 29 April 1911 to Frances Georgina (died 1988), second daughter of Herbert Ward, a British sculptor who had settled in France. Although there were no children of the first marriage, by the second there were two daughters and four sons, one of whom was killed in action at Leros in November 1942. 
In view of his upbringing and family background it was natural that Phipps should consider a career in the diplomatic service for which he was nominated as attache in October 1898 and which he entered after passing the competitive examination in January 1899. He served in Paris from October 1899 to December 1904 (being promoted third secretary in January 1901), and in Constantinople from January to September 1905 (being promoted second secretary in April that year). After a short spell in the Foreign Office he was transferred to Rome in September 1906. In February 1909 he was appointed private secretary to the British ambassador in Paris, Sir Francis Bertie. In April 1912 he secured promotion to first secretary and thereafter served in St Petersburg until October 1913, when he was transferred to Madrid before returning to Paris in May 1916. Following the armistice he was attached to the British delegation at the Paris peace conference until September 1919 when he was promoted counsellor and assigned to the Foreign Office in London. Appointed CMG in January 1920, he was transferred in November that year to the British embassy in Brussels, where he served for two years as charge d'affaires. He was made a CVO in May 1922. In November 1922 he was appointed minister-plenipotentiary and transferred again to Paris, where he spent the next six years, frequently acting as charge d'affaires. He was made a KCMG in June 1927. In June 1928 he received his first independent post as envoy-extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary in Vienna, in which capacity he was attached to the British delegation at the Hague reparations conferences of August 1929 and January 1930. 
His experience in Vienna of National Socialist agitation and subversion served Phipps well for his appointment as HM ambassador in Berlin, where he replaced Sir Horace Rumbold in August 1933 (a week after being sworn of the privy council). The next four years provided him with an excellent opportunity to observe Hitler and his movement, and to evaluate their significance for Germany and the wider world. In common with many of his contemporaries he initially hoped that Hitler might be persuaded to sign an armaments agreement and to pursue other avenues of multilateral negotiation with the new regime. Shortly after taking up his post, however, he became intensely suspicious of the aims of national socialism, to which his subsequent voluminous correspondence with the Foreign Office bears ample testimony. Elegant and humorous, yet at the same time teeming with insight and penetration, Phipps's reporting has a quality that sets him aside from his contemporaries in the British diplomatic service. Stanley Baldwin later reflected that his dispatches contained 'too much wit and not enough warning' (Vansittart, 445), a statement which immediately calls to mind Phipps's celebrated account of his visit in June 1934 to Hermann Goering's bison enclosure in the Schorfheide. The 'bison dispatch', as it became known in the Foreign Office, combined a crushingly sarcastic pen portrait of Goering with a simple but telling warning about the growth of German air power. In concluding his report to Sir John Simon, Phipps wrote: 'The chief impression was that of the almost pathetic naivete of General Goering, who showed us his toys like a big, fat, spoilt child: his primeval woods, his bison and birds, his shooting-box and lake and bathing beach, his blonde 'private secretary', his wife's mausoleum and swans and sarsen stones, all mere toys to satisfy his varying moods, and all, or so nearly all, as he was careful to explain, Germanic. And then I remembered there were other toys, less innocent, though winged, and these might some day be launched on their murderous mission in the same childlike spirit and with the same childlike glee. (Woodward and others, 'Documents', 2nd ser., vol. 6, no. 452)' Unmoved by Hitler's pleas for an intimate association with Great Britain, and equally unimpressed by his occasional violent outbursts, Phipps endured several difficult interviews with the Fuhrer and only once lost his composure when, during one of their early conversations, he was unable to suppress a laugh when the German chancellor suggested that the Sturm-Abteilung and Schutzstaffel were comparable to the Salvation Army. 
For all the light, even comic, touches which sometimes enlivened his dispatches, Phipps gave ample and frequent warning of Nazi intentions to his superiors in London, cataloguing with increasing conviction and intensity his fears and anxieties as the Nazi regime grew ever stronger. He periodically submitted lengthy and detailed examinations of German policy. These listed in order of priority the formidable territorial aims of the Nazi leaders and warned that Germany was a 'furiously 'expanding universe'' (Woodward and others, 'Documents', 2nd ser., vol. 16, no. 177), as he put it in March 1936, whose people, economy, and armed forces were being ruthlessly prepared for external aggression. By spring 1937, having witnessed the remarkable but terrifying rejuvenation of the German military machine, the destruction of the Rhineland settlement, and the gradual deterioration of Anglo-German relations, he had abandoned all hope of coming to any satisfactory arrangement with Hitler. Germany could only be contained, if at all, he believed, through accelerated and extensive British rearmament, a close alliance with France, and as intimate an association as possible with the United States. 
Phipps's well-founded suspicion of German aims, the consequent emphasis which he placed on the need for Anglo-French solidarity, and his tireless defence of British interests, earned him not only the respect and appreciation of his colleagues in Whitehall but also the undying hostility of the Nazis who saw in him a major obstacle to the Anglo-German alliance they so earnestly professed to desire. Shortly after the reoccupation of the Rhineland the Germans went so far as to attempt to enlist the support of prominent pro-German figures in British society in an effort to have him replaced as ambassador by a more amenable and malleable personality. When in April 1937 Phipps finally left Germany to succeed Sir George Clerk as British ambassador in Paris, the 'Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung' bade him farewell with a graceless leading article which drew attention to the fact that during his period in Berlin Anglo-German relations had 'not been clarified on all points as far as might be wished' (Ogilvie-Forbes to the Foreign Office, 16 April 1937, TNA: PRO, C 2960/1495/18, FO 371/20747). 
As the new British ambassador in Paris, his 'spiritual home' according to Anthony Eden (Avon, 503), Phipps spared no effort to strengthen ties between Britain and France. However, he found his task complicated by the lingering atmosphere of mistrust within the entente generated by successive crises in Abyssinia and the Rhineland, and, not least, by the deep political divisions in French society which had been exacerbated by the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War in July 1936. Nevertheless, his activities in Paris were widely regarded as having substantially contributed towards improving relations in the two years before war broke out. Conscious of the military strength of the axis powers, the psychological paralysis of French leaders in the face of a rejuvenated and rearmed Germany, and the relative general weakness of the democracies, Phipps supported Chamberlain's policies, all the more so in view of what he knew of the depleted state of the French armed forces. At the time of Munich he famously wrote that 'All that is best in France is against war, 'almost' at any price' (Woodward and others, 'Documents', 3rd ser., vol. 2, no. 1076), an opinion which earned him the opprobrium of several senior Foreign Office officials, including his brother-in-law, Sir Robert Vansittart, who roundly accused him of defeatism. Phipps's attitude during the crises of 1938-9 was certainly determined by his experiences in Berlin and his acknowledgement of German strength. Indeed, it could hardly have been otherwise, but the charge of defeatism and the slur of 'appeaser' were certainly unwarranted, as some of his detractors later had the grace to admit. He continued to report dispassionately and objectively on the situation and mood in France during the summer and autumn of 1939. Although he remained convinced of the need to improve Anglo-French relations, he none the less felt obliged to alert the British government to the fact that defeatist sentiment had penetrated deep into the highest governmental circles in France -- a judgement at least partially borne out by the Third Republic's spectacularly rapid collapse in mid-1940. 
After serving for forty years in the diplomatic service, over half of which he had spent in Paris, and falling now into increasingly frail health, Phipps retired on a pension in November 1939. At the request of the Foreign Office he agreed in February 1940 to broadcast to the French people, but France fell before the planned transmission could take place. From September 1939 until June 1940 he acted as chairman of the United Associations of Great Britain and France, the principal purpose of which was to provide aid and relief for French civilians affected by the war. Thereafter he retired to Wiltshire, where he acted as high sheriff in 1943-4. During the war he also became a director of the Midland Bank. In the course of his long and distinguished career Phipps received numerous honours in recognition of his services to the British empire. He was made a GCB in 1941, having been promoted GCMG in 1934 and GCVO in 1939. He was also made a commander of the Belgian order of Leopold in 1922 and awarded the grand cross of the Legion d'honneur in 1938. 
Phipps's French colleague during his period of service in Berlin, Andre Francois-Poncet, spoke warmly in his memoirs of the kindness, humour, and insight of this 'charming man' and 'great servant of the Entente Cordiale' who had 'seen through Hitler's real nature and had never been a dupe of the Third Reich' (Francois-Poncet, 112). Above all else it was perhaps Phipps's endeavours to maintain and strengthen Anglo-French relations during the 1930s which provoked Hitler's bitter wartime reference to him as a 'complete thug' ('Hitler's Table-Talk', 488), a description which, had he ever been made aware of it, would no doubt have brought a broad smile of satisfaction to the face of this astute and unflappable public servant. On 13 August 1945 he died suddenly at the London Clinic, 20 Devonshire Place, of a pulmonary embolism following a prostectomy. He was buried at Alton Barnes church, near Marlborough, on 18 August. Two days later a memorial service was held at St Margaret's, Westminster, at which the king and the foreign secretary were represented. He was survived by his second wife, Frances, and by five of his six children. 


@@@@@


doc= 35521


Piatti, Alfredo Carlo (1822-1901), cellist and cello teacher, was born on 8 January 1822 in the via Borga Canale, Bergamo, Italy, the first of two children born to Antonio Piatti ('b'. 1801), a violinist, and his wife, Marianna Marchetti ('c'.1805- 'c'.1822). His father led the orchestra in Bergamo, and at the age of five Piatti began to study with its principal cellist, his great-uncle Gaetano Zanetti. When he was seven he joined the orchestra as an unpaid member, and a year later he replaced his deceased uncle. In 1832 he entered the conservatory at Milan. His studies there with Vincenzo Merighi (1795-1849) culminated in his graduation performance on 21 September 1837. He then returned to Bergamo as a permanent player in the orchestra and also toured locally as a soloist. Work in Vienna and Turin ensued and, after returning to his home town once again, Piatti took a post in Milan without permission and was dismissed from the Bergamo orchestra. 
Having played in Munich with Liszt, who subsequently presented him with an Amati cello, Piatti began to travel further afield. In 1844 he appeared in Paris and also paid his first visit to London, where he made his public debut in Lucy Anderson's Annual Grand Morning Concert at Her Majesty's Theatre on 31 May. The 'Morning Post' pronounced that 'his certainty and precision were unerring'. Piatti presented a fantasia by Kummer on 24 June at his first Philharmonic Society engagement; Mendelssohn, who also performed, began work on a cello concerto for Piatti, which is now lost. In 1844-5 he toured the British Isles, Milan, and St Petersburg. After returning to England in 1846 his engagements included work for the Italian Opera, the Beethoven Quartet Society, the National Concerts, and the Sacred Harmonic Society, where his short, bespectacled figure became familiar and well loved by audiences. His earnest, tasteful approach, fine tone, and cantabile lines, produced from an instrument without endpin, were considered to be unsurpassed. He was particularly revered for his chamber music performances. 
Piatti's name became inextricably linked with the other great performers of the day, including Joseph Joachim, Clara Schumann, Charles Halle, Ludwig Straus, and Bottesini. Composers, including Sterndale Bennett, Sullivan, and Molique, wrote works expressly for him. Piatti's own compositions included the 'Twelve Caprices' (op. 25), songs with cello obbligato, a concertino (op. 18), two concertos (opp. 24 and 26), a 'Fantasia romantica', six sonatas, and a serenata for two cellos. He taught privately and at the Royal Academy of Music, and his pupils included William Whitehouse, Robert Hausmann, Leo Stern, Hugo Becker, and Squire. He made a vital contribution to the cello repertory in producing editions of works by Locatelli, Marcello, Valentini, Veracini, Boccherini, Porpora, Ariosti, J. S. Bach, and C. Simpson, and his cello method was widely used and later updated. On 27 March 1855 Piatti married Mary Anne Lucy Welsh ('b'. 1828/9), the daughter of Thomas Welsh, a professor of singing. Of their four children, only one daughter survived to adulthood. The unhappy marriage ended in separation. Piatti resided at 51 Stanhope Street, then in Queens Gardens, and then, for the last twenty years of his life, at 15 Northwick Terrace, St John's Wood. 
In 1867 Piatti was given a fine 1720 Stradivarius, which became known as 'the Piatti'. He became principal cellist for the Musical Union, and composed the 'Six Sonatas for Violoncello and Pianoforte' (1885-96) for Chappell's Monday Popular Concerts, at which he was principal cellist from 1859 to 1898. On 22 March 1894 he and Joachim were presented with a testimonial at the Grafton Galleries to celebrate the jubilee of their London debuts. In the autumn of 1898, at a music festival celebrating the centenary of Donizetti's birth, held in Bergamo, the king of Italy conferred the rank of commendatore della Corona d'Italia on Piatti. After his retirement in 1898, owing to ill health, Piatti lived with his daughter, Countess Rosa Lochis, at Crocetta di Mozzo, near Bergamo. He died there on 18 July 1901. A public funeral took place on 22 July and his body was interred at the Lochis family chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 35522


Pick, Frank (1878-1941), transport administrator, was born at Spalding, Lincolnshire, on 23 November 1878, the eldest child of Francis Pick, draper, of Stamford, and his wife, Fanny Clark, of South Ferriby. His early years were spent at York where he held a scholarship at St Peter's School and was then articled to a solicitor. Having qualified in 1902 he took his LLB (London) with first-class honours in the following year. In 1904 he married Mabel Mary Caroline, daughter of Charles Simeon Woodhouse, solicitor, of York. They had no children. 
In 1902, Pick entered the service of the North Eastern Railway Company, and after working in various departments joined the staff of the general manager, Sir George Gibb. In 1906 Gibb went to London to take over the management of the Metropolitan District and London Underground Electric Railways and took Pick with him. In the following year Gibb retired from his direct managerial responsibility and Pick was transferred to the staff of his successor, A. H. Stanley, later Lord Ashfield. 
Henceforward Pick was closely associated with Stanley in the management of the underground railways of London and of the associated company, taken over in 1912, the London General Omnibus Company. As traffic development officer (1909) and commercial manager (1912) he was responsible, in particular, for building up the system of bus routes in London and also for advertising. In 1917 Pick was appointed by his chief, then president of the Board of Trade in Lloyd George's wartime government, to take charge of the household fuel and lighting branch of the coal-mines control department, under Guy Calthrop. Returning to the underground group of companies after the war, Pick became a joint assistant managing director in 1921 and three years later assumed full administrative control under Ashfield. He became joint managing director in 1928 and, when the London Passenger Transport Board was formed in 1933 with Ashfield as chairman, Pick was the natural choice for vice-chairman and chief executive officer. 
It was the combination of Pick and Ashfield, rather than the work of either as an individual, that brought about the remarkable development of public passenger transport in London in the thirty years prior to the outbreak of war in 1939. The two men were essentially complementary. Ashfield was at his best in dealing with politicians, shareholders, and the public. Pick, on the other hand, was a very shy man, but he had great qualities as an administrator. He was primarily responsible for the day-to-day efficiency of a system which technically was generally acknowledged to be without equal anywhere in the world. He had a very quick mind and an exceptional grasp of operating and engineering principles and techniques. There was no part of the transport undertaking of which he did not have a thorough understanding; and the power of decision came easily to him. Furthermore, he had a wide interest in the visual arts and fervently believed in the importance of good design in everyday things. London's transport system gave him a unique opportunity to encourage modern art. He commissioned Edward Johnston to design an alphabet for display purposes (1916), and London Transport lettering on direction signs and posters became celebrated for its clarity. In the period between the two world wars Pick raised the whole standard of poster design by the example which he set; he sought out artists of quality, both young and old, including such masters of the art of the poster as Fred Taylor and Edward McKnight Kauffer. Station design, ranging from the overall architecture to details such as waste-paper baskets, was subject to Pick's personal scrutiny to ensure that the fundamental principle of good design, fitness for purpose, was properly observed. The many examples of excellent contemporary architecture in the buildings erected by London Transport in Pick's time are lasting monuments to his ideals. He was president of the Design and Industries Association from 1932 to 1934 and when the Council for Art and Industry was set up by the Board of Trade in 1934, with the object of improving standards of design in the products of industry, he was selected to be its first chairman. One of his few recreations was opera at Covent Garden. 
Pick retired from the London Passenger Transport Board in 1940 and was for a short and unhappy time director-general of the Ministry of Information. In 1941 he undertook special duties for the minister of transport in connection with the development of traffic on canals and inland waterways. He died at his home, 15 Wildwood Road, Golders Green, Middlesex, on 7 November 1941. 


@@@@@


doc= 35523


Pickard, Benjamin (1842-1904), trade unionist and politician, was born on 28 February 1842 at Kippax, Yorkshire, the son of Thomas and Elizabeth Pickard. He was educated locally until the age of twelve, left school to join his father in the pit, and went on to work at other jobs at the collieries belonging to Messrs Locke & Co. 
Pickard was active in the trade union movement at an early age, first at regional, then at national and international levels. He joined the Kippax lodge of the West Yorkshire Miners' Association, becoming lodge secretary at the age of sixteen. He went on to become assistant secretary of the association in 1873, and three years later he was appointed general secretary. He took a leading role in the 1881 amalgamation of the West Yorkshire Miners' Association and the South Yorkshire Miners' Association into the Yorkshire Miners' Association. As first general secretary of the new organization, he saw it grow into the third largest trade union in the coal industry, and one of the largest in the country. 
Pickard was even more successful at the national level. In 1877 he became vice-president under Alexander Macdonald (1821-1881) of the Miners' National Union, and went on to take a leading part, with Thomas Ashton (1841-1919) of Lancashire, in the establishment of the Miners' Federation of Great Britain (MFGB). As founder president, he saw this organization too grow enormously. By 1893, the federation's 200,000 members represented nearly a third of the mining workforce (and about a seventh of all British trade unionists); seven years later the federation numbered among its members nearly half of all miners (and a sixth of all trade unionists) in the country. Pickard led the MFGB in the 1893 lock-out, the largest industrial dispute that the country had ever seen. Whether the dispute is judged a success or a failure, it marked the coming of age of the Miners' Federation and a decisive turning point in the history of British industrial relations. 
Internationally, Pickard was active in the formation of the International Federation of Mineworkers in 1890, and he attended congresses in Austria, Belgium, France, and Germany. He was active in other ways too, his interest in arbitration leading to his participation in a peace deputation to the president of the United States, Grover Cleveland, in 1897. 
Pickard was also active politically as an 'ardent liberal' in the labour interest. He became a member of the Wakefield school board in 1881 and eight years later he was elected an alderman of the West Riding county council (he was re-elected twice more). In 1885 he was elected to parliament to represent Normanton, a constituency in which over 60 per cent of the electorate were miners, and which he held until his death in 1904. Although it has been claimed that 'Pickard was not a success as an MP' ('DLB'), he led the lengthy campaign for a statutory eight-hour day for underground workers which finally proved successful four years after his death. 
Pickard seemed both to many contemporaries and to many later commentators to epitomize, in his personality and policies, the essence of late nineteenth-century 'Lib-Lab' coalmining trade union leadership. A Wesleyan local preacher and supporter of the Lord's Rest Day Association, he was for most of his life a non-smoker and teetotaller. Stubborn, aloof, and rather distant, his ruthlessness and single-mindedness earned him the sobriquet 'the Iron Man'. In 1864 Pickard married Hannah Elizabeth Freeman of Kippax, who predeceased him in 1901. They had four sons and four daughters. Pickard died of heart failure at 2 St Stephen's Mansions, Church Street, Westminster, London, on 3 February 1904 and was buried in Barnsley cemetery on 6 February. He left an estate worth $2019 net (having received gifts of $750 from the miners after the 1893 dispute and $500 from his fellow Liberal MPs in 1897). 


@@@@@


doc= 35524


Pickard, Sir Robert Howson (1874-1949), chemist, was born on 27 September 1874 at Balsall Heath, Birmingham, the elder of the two sons of Joseph Henry Pickard, a tool manufacturer, and his wife, Alice, daughter of Robert Howson, of Birmingham. From 1883 he attended King Edward VI's Grammar School, and from 1891 he was a student at the chemistry department of Mason College, Birmingham, which from 1894 was under the direction of P. F. Frankland. In 1895 he graduated BSc (London) with a first class in chemistry and in January 1896, as an 1851 Exhibition scholar, he proceeded to the University of Munich where he obtained the degree of PhD in 1898 'summa cum laude'. He then spent a year in Birmingham studying bacteriology and pursuing chemical research, before becoming head of the chemistry department of Blackburn Technical School in 1899; from 1908 to 1920 he was also principal of the school. During this period of twenty years Pickard published, with others, some thirty-five original papers in the 'Journal of the Chemical Society'. An organic chemist, he specialized in stereochemistry; his original work on the relation between chemical constitution and optical activity was highly regarded by contemporaries, and in 1917 his research was recognized by his election as a fellow of the Royal Society. 
During his stay in Blackburn, Pickard was occasionally consulted by cotton manufacturers, leading him to realize that there was much scope for the substitution of more scientific methods in place of the empirical and rule-of-thumb procedures operative in the industry. This experience probably laid the foundation for his lively interest in the cotton industry, as well as for the extensive technical knowledge that he gradually acquired. 
In 1920 Pickard became principal of Battersea Polytechnic, and during his seven years' tenure did much to foster its educational facilities. During the same period he was director of the British Leather Manufacturers' Research Association, but his name is most closely associated with the directorship of the British Cotton Industry Research Association, known as the Shirley Institute, in Manchester, a post to which he was appointed in 1927 and in which he remained until 1943. He soon realized that the time was opportune for an intensive application of the scientific knowledge which had been accumulated by the association since its creation in 1919, and for the introduction of active measures to link the scientists more closely and effectively with industrial practices. In 1928 a liaison department was formed, and at the same time investigations, both fundamental and technological, were pursued on a steadily expanding scale. Large extensions of both laboratory and workroom accommodation were formally opened in 1936. 
Pickard tackled with understanding the peculiar difficulties inherent in a research association connected with an industry divided into several distinct sections (for example, spinning, weaving, bleaching, and finishing), and realized that an important function was to envisage the industry as a whole rather than as a collection of component groups of firms with sectional interests and needs. His policy of co-ordination was well received, and by the time of his retirement the research association was recognized on all sides as an integral part of the textile industry. Pickard regarded his stay at the Shirley Institute as the most congenial and productive period of his career, and it certainly provided an opportunity for the full exercise of his organizational skills and highly developed critical faculty. 
In 1901 Pickard married Ethel Marian (died 1944), daughter of Henry Wood, provision merchant, of Edgbaston. They had one son and one daughter; the latter predeceased him. He was an active member of British scientific bodies and educational institutions. He served on the council of the Royal Society 1936-8, was president of the Society of Chemical Industry, 1932-3, and its medallist in 1941; vice-president of the Institute of Chemistry for many years, and its president, 1936-9; vice-president of the Chemical Society for six years, and chairman of the Chemical Council, 1935-8; and for several years chairman of the committee of directors of research associations. He was a member of the senate of the University of London for twenty-two years, a member of the court, 1937-48, vice-chancellor, 1937-9, chairman of convocation in 1948, and for several years chairman of the external council. He was also a member of the Surrey education committee and of the consultative committee of the Board of Education, and for eight years was chairman of the governing body of Roedean School. He was knighted in 1937. He died on 18 October 1949 at his son's home, Tumber House, in Headley, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 35525


Pickford, William, Baron Sterndale (1848-1923), judge, was born on 1 October 1848 in Manchester, the second son of Thomas Edward Pickford, a merchant there, and his wife, Georgina, daughter of Jeremiah Todd-Naylor, of Liverpool. The Pickfords came from Prestbury in Cheshire: James Pickford, who died in 1768, was a waggoner between Manchester and London; his son Matthew, and his grandson Thomas (Pickford's grandfather) developed a big carrier's business, and the latter took Joseph Baxendale into partnership. The Baxendales eventually took over but retained the name, Pickford's. 
Pickford's father died in 1859 and his mother moved to Liverpool soon after. Pickford was educated at Liverpool College before going in 1867 to Exeter College, Oxford, where he obtained second classes in classical moderations (1870) and in 'literae humaniores' (1872). He was elected an honorary fellow in 1916. In 1871 he entered as a student of the Inner Temple, where he was taught by Thomas Henry Baylis and was called to the bar in 1874. In 1875 he joined the northern circuit, and began at the local bar at Liverpool, having his chambers for a few years at 22 North John Street, and from 1879 at Commerce Chambers, Harrington Street. He had to wait some years before he acquired a practice, largely in commercial affairs, but with the usual mix of work common to a provincial practice. In 1889 he was counsel at the police court and junior counsel at the assizes for Mrs Maybrick in her sensational case. 
In 1880 Pickford married Alice Mary, daughter of John William Brooke, of Sibton Park, Yoxford, Suffolk; she died in 1884, leaving two daughters, including the politician Mary Ada Pickford, for him to bring up alone. In 1892 Pickford moved to London, where he had begun to spend an increasing amount of time, in particular in the Admiralty court where he conducted almost all the collision and salvage cases for Liverpool shipowners or solicitors. He made London his headquarters with chambers at 2 Mitre Court Buildings, Temple. In 1893 he became queen's counsel, at the same time as Charles Swinfen Eady (afterwards first baron Swinfen), whom he was to succeed as master of the rolls twenty-six years later. 
Pickford continued to work on the northern circuit and soon became its 'de facto' leader. But the growth of his business in London made his visits to the north less and less frequent. As an advocate he never had the brilliance of more famous colleagues, but he could get what he wanted from a jury as well as, or better than, even the most renowned nineteenth- and early twentieth-century judges. Nor was he merely a jury advocate. The earlier volumes of the 'Commercial Cases' show that he had a large share of the work of the commercial court during its busiest days from its foundation in 1895 until he became a judge. 
In 1901 Pickford was made recorder of Oldham, and in 1904 recorder of Liverpool. In 1902 he became a bencher of the Inner Temple. In 1905 he was leading counsel for Great Britain at the inquiry held in Paris into the attack by the Russian fleet on the Hull trawlers at the Dogger Bank. In 1905 he was sent as commissioner of assize on the north-eastern circuit, the usual prelude to promotion to the King's Bench. 
Following parliament's sanction of the appointment of an additional judge of the High Court, King's Bench Division, Pickford was selected for the post by the lord chancellor, Lord Loreburn, in 1907 and received the usual knighthood. It was Loreburn's first judicial appointment and met with general approval. Pickford proved an ideal judge: he was not a very learned lawyer, and he had no brilliance of style or expression; but in the substance of his decisions he was almost invariably right. He possessed that quality which makes for efficiency in a judge and happiness in the individual: he could make up his mind without being worried whether he was right and could forget all about a case as soon as it was over. He was equally successful in trying criminals or civil cases, and in working with a jury or sitting alone in the commercial court. 
As a young lawyer, Pickford had been active in the proceedings of the International Maritime Committee and other movements for the unification of maritime law. In 1905, while still at the bar, he had been the senior British representative at the Brussels conference which formulated the conventions as to collision and salvage, given legal force in England by the 'Maritime Conventions Act' of 1911. As a judge, he took a prominent part in the later conferences which formulated conventions about limitation of liability and mortgages and maritime liens. He also presided in 1923 over a select committee of both houses of parliament to consider the bill which became the 'Carriage of Goods by Sea Act' of 1924. 
In 1914, on the resignation of Sir Roland Bowdler Vaughan Williams, Pickford was promoted to the Court of Appeal as lord justice and sworn of the privy council. Although he had little of the erudition of his predecessor, he was a much more efficient judge, and proved successful in the Court of Appeal. 
In July 1916 the bill to set up a commission 'to inquire into the origin, inception, and conduct of operations in the Dardanelles' was introduced. In the House of Lords Lord Cromer, the designated chairman, proposed that someone of judicial experience should be added to the commissioners named in the bill as it came from the Commons, and, as a result, Pickford attended the laborious meetings of the commission. An interim report was issued before the death of Lord Cromer, on 29 January 1917, when Lord Justice Pickford was selected by his colleagues to succeed as chairman. The final report signed by him was published on 8 March 1917. Pickford also presided over a 'conscientious objectors' tribunal in Chelsea. Unlike some others, he did the work judicially. 
On the death in September 1918 of Sir Samuel Thomas Evans, Pickford with some reluctance accepted the post of president of the Probate, Divorce, and Admiralty Division of the High Court. He was then raised to the peerage as a baron. He took the title Lord Sterndale after a small estate at King Sterndale, near Buxton, in Derbyshire, which had been purchased by his great-grandfather. In London he lived first at 92 Elm Park Gardens, and from 1910 onwards at Queen's House, a fine Queen Anne house in Cheyne Walk. The First World War ended about two months after Sterndale's appointment to the Admiralty court, and in a year he had disposed of most of the important prize cases. In October 1919, on the resignation of Swinfen Eady very shortly before his death, he was appointed master of the rolls. He was thus spared the trial of divorce suits and collision and salvage cases, and gladly returned to the Court of Appeal as its president. 
After spending an active day in a hayfield at King Sterndale, and going to bed seemingly in the excellent health which he had always enjoyed, Sterndale was found dead the following morning, 17 August 1923. He was buried at King Sterndale on 22 August. Since he did not have a son, the barony became extinct. 
Pickford was described as a tall, handsome man. He was a prominent freemason but never took part in politics, and had no ambitions to stand for parliament. He was also quite a sportsman, having been a keen cyclist, cricketer, and beagler in his youth, and was an active member of the Alpine Club, to which he was elected in 1894, serving as president from 1914 to 1916. He was also said to have been a good judge of port, and was a member of the Athenaeum and United Oxford and Cambridge clubs. 


@@@@@


doc= 35526


Pickles, William Norman (1885-1969), general practitioner and epidemiologist, was born on 6 March 1885 in Camp Road, Leeds, where his father was in general practice; he was the second of the six sons, of whom five qualified as doctors, of John Jagger Pickles and his wife, Lucy Dobson. Pickles went to Leeds grammar school and afterwards studied medicine at the medical school of the then Yorkshire College and at the Leeds General Infirmary, where he qualified as a licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries in 1909. After serving as resident obstetric officer at the infirmary, he began a series of temporary jobs in general practice. In 1910 he graduated MB, BS, London, after two failures in the final examination. He proceeded MD in 1918. 
Pickles first visited Wensleydale as a 'locum tenens' for Dr Hime of Aysgarth in 1912. After serving as a ship's doctor on a voyage to Calcutta, he returned to Aysgarth later that year as second assistant to Hime. In 1913 he and the other assistant, Dean Dunbar, an old friend from his student days, were able to purchase the practice. Dunbar died in 1934, but Pickles remained in practice in Wensleydale until he retired in 1964; he left only in the First World War, during which he served in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve as a surgeon-lieutenant. In 1917 Pickles married Gertrude Adelaide (died 1969), daughter of Harry Tunstill, a wealthy mill owner from Burnley who had a holiday house in Wensleydale. They had one daughter. 
'Will Pickles of Wensleydale' achieved fame during his lifetime as the embodiment of the ideal general practitioner or country doctor. He achieved this not by his outstanding intellect, but because of his warm humanity and deep interest in his patients, most of whom were visited in their own homes; surgeries were of little importance. In introducing one of his lectures Pickles said: 'And as I watched the evening train creeping up the valley with its pauses at our three stations, a quaint thought came into my head and it was that there was hardly a man, woman or child in all those villages of whom I did not know the Christian name and with whom I was not on terms of intimate friendship. My wife and I say that we know most of the dogs and, indeed, some of the cats.' When he was forty-one, Pickles read 'The Principles of Diagnosis and Treatment in Heart Affections' by Sir James Mackenzie, who had made many important contributions to medical knowledge from his general practice in Burnley. His example fired Pickles. In 1929 an epidemic of catarrhal jaundice broke out in Wensleydale, affecting 250 people out of the total population of 5700. Pickles was able to trace the whole epidemic to a girl whom he had seen in bed on the morning of a village fete and who he never dreamed would be able to get up that day. In this enclosed community Pickles was able to trace time and again 'the short and only possible contact', and to establish the incubation period as 26-35 days. This was a notable contribution, for it not only established the infective nature of the disease, but also its surprisingly long incubation period. An account of the epidemic in the 'British Medical Journal' ('BMJ', 24 May 1930) received scant notice at first. Two years later Pickles published in 'The Lancet' (2 July 1932) the records of an outbreak of Sonne dysentery; and in the next year he recorded ('BMJ', 4 November 1933) for the first time in Great Britain an epidemic of myalgia, or Bornholm disease, later known to be an infection with the Cox-Sacchie virus. 
In 1935 Pickles described some of his work to the Royal Society of Medicine. After this meeting, a leading article in the 'BMJ' stated, 'It may mark the beginning of a new era in epidemiology'. Major Greenwood, the outstanding epidemiologist of the time, suggested that Pickles should write a book on his observations, which was published in 1939 as 'Epidemiology in Country Practice'. This became a medical classic, and established Pickles's reputation. It also showed how a country practice could be a field laboratory with unique opportunities for epidemiologists. 
Pickles had now become famous. He was Milroy lecturer at the Royal College of Physicians, London (1942), and Cutter lecturer at Harvard (1948). A member of the Royal College of Physicians since 1939 he was elected a fellow in 1963, having in the meantime been awarded the Bisset Hawkins medal (1953). In 1946 he shared the Stewart prize of the British Medical Association with Major Greenwood and in 1955 he was elected an honorary fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh and was awarded the first James Mackenzie medal. He received an honorary DSc degree from Leeds in 1950. In 1953 he was elected the first president of the College of General Practitioners; he held office for three years, during which period the college was given its royal charter. In 1957 he was appointed CBE. In 1965 he became an honorary fellow of the Royal Society of Medicine and an honorary vice-president of the British Medical Association. 
Pickles died in hospital in Northallerton on 2 March 1969 and was buried in Aysgarth. His wife died later in the same year. His epidemiological charts (1931-63) have been deposited at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. 
George Pickering', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35527


Picton, James Allanson (1832-1910), politician and author, was born on 8 August 1832 in Liverpool, the eldest son of Sir James Allanson Picton (1805-1889), and his wife, Sarah Pooley (died 1879). His early education was at Liverpool high school and at the city's mechanics institute. At the age of fifteen he entered the office of his father, who was an architect in Liverpool. In 1850 he resolved to study for the ministry and was accepted by Lancashire Independent college at Manchester. He simultaneously attended Owens College at Manchester. This brought him into contact with Alexander John Scott, principal of Owens College from its opening in 1851. In 1831 Scott had been deposed from the ministry for heresy by the general assembly of the Church of Scotland. Scott's influence can be traced among a number of leading Independent ministers of liberal views and intellectual gifts through the 1860s and 1870s, but in none more than in Picton, who held him in very high esteem. In particular he followed Scott in emphasizing the human nature of God manifested in Christ and the sacredness of all the created world. 
Picton followed a course at Owens College that led to his taking an MA at London University in 1855. He then made an academic tour of Halle, Heidelberg, and Leipzig, returning to play a principal part in the defence of Dr Samuel Davidson, his tutor at Lancashire College, who was accused of heresy. Having thus identified himself with theological liberalism, Picton found difficulty in securing a call to ministry in an Independent (Congregational) church. In 1857, however, he became minister of Cheetham Hill church, Manchester, where he promoted popular lectures. In 1862 his sermon, 'Christian law of progress', attracted an accusation of heresy against Picton himself. He removed to Gallowtree Gate Church, Leicester, in that year, continuing his commitment to popular education and becoming president of the Leicester Library and Philosophical Society. He moved to St Thomas's Square Chapel, Hackney, in 1869. 
Picton was one of the chief promoters of the so-called Leicester Conference, a meeting for liberal Congregationalists which was held to coincide with the Congregational Union's autumn assembly at Leicester in 1877. The meeting was the focus of the tension between the conservative evangelical strengths of traditional Congregationalism and the theological liberalism of ministers such as Picton and, at that time, Peter Taylor Forsyth. Liberalism itself was diverse; Picton represented that strand of it which minimized the importance of the sacraments and of trinitarianism, arguing that the church should be held together by spiritual union rather than rituals and creeds. Part of the criticism of the Leicester Conference platform, designed to bring together those 'who value spiritual religion, and who are in sympathy with the principle that religious communion is not dependent upon agreement in theological, critical or historical opinion', was that it served as a stalking horse for unitarianism. Other critics simply lamented the undue influence of F. D. Maurice on the participants. 
Although some of those who supported the Leicester Conference had seen in it an opportunity to use the Congregational principle of tolerance to bring liberal and conservative theology together within the Congregational Union, the majority of the assembly were critical of the most radical aspects of liberalism. People such as Picton, and his friend and fellow minister Mark Wilks, moved away from the formal circles of the Congregational Union after the Leicester meeting. Picton made a farewell speech to organized Congregationalism at the spring assembly of 1878, and his name was withdrawn from the 'Congregational Year Book' in 1879 on technical grounds. Wilks's name continued on the list until his death but Picton, after an initial complaint about the way he had been treated, moved into politics and writing, relinquishing his ministry in Hackney. In his complaint to the Congregational Union, Picton described himself as a 'well-known Independent minister', and no doubt felt that he could continue as such with or without formal sanction. His writings became more historical and philosophical in their themes. He lectured at the South Place Ethical Society and developed his interest in Spinoza, publishing a handbook to his ethics in 1907. 
Picton was a lively writer, both in his books and in more ephemeral publications. His journalism included contributions to the 'Christian World', the 'Theological Review', the 'Fortnightly Review', the 'Contemporary Review', 'Macmillan's Magazine', 'The Examiner', and the 'Weekly Despatch', a radical journal for which he supplied frequent leading articles. 
After Picton's withdrawal from the Congregational Union he took up public life in London as a member, from 1870 to 1879, of the first London school board, where he was joined by Wilks; he also acted as a magistrate. Through the influence of his Leicester friends Picton became the successful Liberal candidate there in 1884, succeeding Peter Alfred Taylor, whose opinions he largely shared. 
Although he was not an unqualified admirer of Gladstone, Picton spoke in support of him and the 'Irish Home Rule Bill' of 1886. He took an interest in the plight of crofters in Scotland. He opposed vaccination. His preferred strategy in parliament, especially in opposition, was to pursue ministers with questions rather than to speak in debates. His speech in an education debate of 1885 revealed his support for kindergartens, phonetic teaching of reading, and the Froebel philosophy of education. He often asked questions on religious issues, which were usually critical of the Church of England and supportive of nonconformist rights. 
Picton was small in stature and given to complex argument, which did not help him to dominate the house. His predisposition to radical views and general angularity seem to have kept him from office, and he retired from the House of Commons in 1894 at a comparatively early age and went to live at Caerlyr, Capel Ulo, near Penmaen-mawr, Caernarvonshire. He learned Welsh and was a member of the county council until 1909. He continued to write, though the distance from London made his regular contribution to the 'Christian World' impossible. In these later years his religious views were heavily influenced by rationalism, but he retained a sense of the transcendent. For Picton, God was present in people and the created world. While rejecting the divine inspiration of the 'Bible' he emphasized its intrinsic authority and ability to inspire people, but only within Christian cultures. These views are set out in his books 'The Bible in School' (1901) and 'Man and the Bible' (1909). He believed that the sacred scriptures of other religions played a similar role in their respective countries. He equated the kingdom of God with 'the triumph of rational socialism'. 
Picton was twice married. His first wife was Margaret Beaumont of Manchester and his second wife, whom he married in 1866, was Jessie Carr, daughter of the publisher Sydney Williams. Of his four sons, one survived him. After his death at Caerlyr on 4 February 1910 he was cremated at Liverpool, the nearest crematorium, and one of the first three in England (cremation being at that time still a radical gesture). 


@@@@@


doc= 35528


Piercy, William Stuckey, first Baron Piercy (1886-1966), financier, was born on 7 February 1886 at 4 Kinross Street, Bermondsey, London, the only son and eldest of the four children of Augustus Edward Piercy and his second wife, Mary Ann Margaret Heaford. In 1893 Augustus Piercy was killed in an accident while working as an engineer for Vickers Ltd, leaving the family short of money. Piercy attended a local school in Hoxton, London, but he left in 1898 at the age of twelve to begin work with the City office of Pharaoh Gane, the timber brokers. He attended evening school, and matriculated in 1909, and with two small scholarships began a part-time BSc economics course at the London School of Economics (LSE) in 1910. He won the Gladstone memorial prize in 1911 and 1913, and in 1912, when he won a university scholarship, he became a full-time student. In 1913 he graduated BSc (economics) with first-class honours. He specialized in economic history, being taught by Dr Lilian Knowles, and served as secretary and president of the students' union in 1913-14. He obtained a Mitchell research studentship and was appointed as a lecturer in history and public administration at the LSE, but the outbreak of the First World War halted this promising academic career. 
Between 1915 and 1917 Piercy worked in the Ministry of Munitions, helping to design the munitions levy which contributed significantly to financing wartime expenditure. In 1917 he went to Washington, DC, as secretary of a mission to negotiate food purchases with Herbert Hoover, US food administrator, and thereafter remained in the United States working with the allied co-ordinating committee and helping to establish the British Ministry of Food of which he became a director. In 1919 he returned to England and was appointed CBE in recognition of his wartime work. 
In 1919 Piercy became marketing director for Harrisons and Crosfield, East India merchants. At the same time, he undertook some part-time lecturing for the LSE, specializing in Far Eastern trade and helping to develop the new commerce degree at the school. In 1925 he moved back to Pharaoh Gane as a director, where he worked to restore the softwood trade which had been disrupted by the Russian Revolution. This and other business took him to Scandinavia, the Russian borders, and Germany. Having toyed with the idea of studying the teaching of business administration in universities in the United States, before attempting to implement such practices in Britain, he decided instead to enter the City, becoming a member of the stock exchange and a partner of Capel-Cure and Terry in 1934. With Capel-Cure until 1942 and also with Fenns Crosthwaite from 1937 to 1942, he both made his fortune and played a crucial role in organizing the first unit trusts. 
During the Second World War Piercy returned in his fifties to public service, initially during 1940 and early 1941 as a special assistant in the export credit guarantee department and then, from May 1941, as head of the British Petroleum mission to Washington. Chosen as an independent figure from outside the oil industry, he supervised the negotiation and organization of petrol purchase under the 'lend-lease' arrangements and also assisted in the introduction of 'pooled', rather than brand, distribution of petrol during the war. He then began to serve as principal assistant to the deputy prime minister, Clement Attlee, working under Evan Durbin, then a lecturer at the LSE. In January 1945 Durbin and Piercy swapped positions, with Piercy becoming the full-time salaried assistant. During the war he switched from being a Liberal to becoming a member of the Labour Party. He was an important member of Nicholas Davenport's XYZ group, a gathering of financiers and economists sympathetic to the Labour Party, and whose members included his close friend from the LSE, Hugh Dalton, as well as Hugh Gaitskell, Durbin, Douglas Jay, and Thomas Balogh. As a member of this group he became involved in plans to establish a National Investment board and was largely responsible for writing the draft legislation for the nationalization of the Bank of England. He considered attempting to stand as a Labour candidate in the 1945 general election but decided instead in summer 1945 to accept an invitation from his friend Lord Catto to become the first chairman of the newly established Industrial and Commercial Finance Corporation (ICFC). Catto and Piercy had become friends during their time together at the Ministry of Munitions, since when Catto had gone on to become governor of the Bank of England. Had Dalton not resigned as chancellor of the exchequer after the November 1947 budget leak, it seems highly probable that Piercy would have succeeded Catto in 1949 as governor. On 14 November 1945, following the election of the Attlee government, Piercy was created a baron. 
The ICFC was incorporated on 20 July 1945 to fill the so-called 'Macmillan gap' in the financing of small- and medium-sized businesses. Reluctantly established and financed by the banks at the prompting of Catto, the ICFC required all of Piercy's skill and mental dexterity to see it through some difficult early years. Under his stewardship the ICFC grew to become an established financial corporation, having assets of some $70 million and having lent over $120 million by the time he resigned as chairman in 1964. In 1952, during his time at the ICFC, he established the Estates Duties Investment Trust (EDITH), which acquired minority interests in private and small companies so as to enable the shareholders to make provision for estate duty. He remained as chairman of EDITH until his death in 1966. The ICFC eventually grew into 3i, a major lender of development capital to industry. 
In 1915 Piercy married Mary Louisa Pelham (1885-1953), who had been secretary of the LSE students' union when he had been its president. They had one son, Nicholas Pelham Piercy, who succeeded his father in the barony, and three daughters. Through her mother, Mary Pelham was related to Lord Balfour of Burleigh, who as chairman of Lloyds Bank (1946-54) and the Committee of London Clearing Bankers (1950) was of some help to Piercy during the ICFC's difficult early years. Mary Piercy predeceased her husband, dying in 1953. 
Piercy was a complex, intellectual, diffident enthusiast, with that mix of sharp wit and occasional deviousness which often characterizes self-made successful individuals. He maintained his academic and extra-financial interests throughout his life, being a director of the Bank of England between 1946 and 1956, and serving as a governor of the LSE until his death. He was also a member of the senate and court of the University of London, a fellow (1922-66) and president (1954-5) of the Royal Statistical Society, president of the National Institute of Industrial Psychology (1946-63), trustee (1946-65) and chairman (1960-65) of the Wellcome Trust, and chairman of the committee of inquiry on the rehabilitation, training, and resettlement of disabled persons which reported in November 1956. Apart from his Masonic activities, his other interests included book collecting and walking. 
In 1964 Piercy, aged seventy-eight, married the 32-year-old Veronica Warham, who had been appointed as secretary to the ICFC chairman in October 1954. She did much to ease his final years as a reluctantly ageing man with a strong tendency to overwork. Two years later, on 7 July 1966, Lord Piercy died of a heart attack at the Grand Hotel in Stockholm while attending a meeting of the Kuwait international advisory committee of which he was a member. Lady Piercy survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35529


Pigou, Arthur Cecil (1877-1959), economist, was born on 18 November 1877 at Beachlands, Ryde, Isle of Wight, the son of Clarence George Scott Pigou and his wife, Nora, second daughter of Sir John Lees. Clarence Pigou was a retired army officer of little distinction, descended from a Huguenot family which had long connections with China and India, first as traders, then as members of the Indian Civil Service. The Lees were descended from a family which acquired wealth and distinction in Irish administration. In 1891 Pigou, like his father, went to Harrow School, to which he gained an entrance scholarship and where he was head of the school (1895). At King's College, Cambridge, which he entered in 1896, he was awarded a scholarship and obtained a first class in the history tripos in 1899, followed by a first in part two of the moral sciences tripos in 1900. Hence he came to economics by way of history, philosophy, and ethics. He was a brilliant debater and became president of the Cambridge Union. When he began to teach economics he could scarcely have been regarded as a specialist in the subject; indeed he had won the chancellor's medal for English verse in 1899, the Burney prize in 1900, and had submitted as his first, unsuccessful, attempt for a fellowship at King's a thesis, 'Browning as a religious teacher'. 
Pigou began to lecture in economics in 1901, before his election in 1902 to a fellowship at King's; he was made Girdler's lecturer in the summer of 1904. Already in 1901-2 he had begun to give to second-year students the course on advanced economics that formed the basis of the education of Cambridge economists over the next thirty years. Much of his writing at this time, including 'The Riddle of the Tariff' (1903), which won him some public recognition, was associated with the tariff question, on which he was a vigorous free-trade campaigner; there were also a few short technical pieces on consumer surplus, import duties, and dumping. His most ambitious publication prior to his appointment to the Cambridge chair was the rather discursive 'Principles and Methods of Industrial Peace' (1905), part of which was written in collaboration with John Maynard Keynes, but it was in no way a major work. To the delight of Alfred Marshall and the chagrin of some of the older historical school Pigou was elected in 1908, at the age of thirty, to succeed Marshall as professor of political economy at Cambridge. His publications record at the time was respectable though not substantial; he was certainly appointed very much on promise rather than performance. He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1927. 
The two major influences on Pigou were Henry Sidgwick, whose lectures on ethics Pigou had attended, and Alfred Marshall. Sidgwick's influence showed itself principally in Pigou's wholehearted adoption of the utilitarian view and in his distinction between private and social cost; Sidgwick had also stressed the importance of public goods and the tendency to undervalue the future. Marshall was the supreme influence in terms of economic analysis and method but in terms of vision and of Pigou's lifelong interest in the welfare aspects of economics Sidgwick was at least as important. Throughout his life Pigou was a devoted and largely uncritical pupil of Marshall; his course of lectures became the principal channel through which the oral tradition of Marshall's economics was passed down. Pigou was uncritical in the sense that it was he, more than any other, who brought up a generation of Cambridge economists in the conviction that 'it's all in Marshall'. 
Pigou's character and personality have always been something of a puzzle. In the early days his tall and viking-like appearance made a great impression. He was a highly effective debater and a brilliant and systematic lecturer, who gave generations of students their training in the disciplines and techniques of economic reasoning. Hugh Dalton was among his 'hero-worshippers' (Dalton, 57-8). To the evident irritation of Marshall, Pigou was careless of his personal appearance. Marshall complained: 'Fay, I do wish you'd speak to Pigou on a personal matter -- a rather delicate matter. I saw him coming out of Bowes' shop in a Norfolk jacket with holes in both the elbows. So bad for the Economics Tripos!' (Saltmarsh and Wilkinson, 18). Pigou loved practical jokes and young men and often affected a silly high-pitched voice. He was an enthusiastic rock-climber and led parties of undergraduates both in the Alps and in the Lake District. In both his life and his work he adopted a tone of high moral seriousness. As a consistent pacifist he volunteered to drive for the Friends' Ambulance Unit at the front during the First World War and insisted on taking on the more dangerous jobs. However, the shocks of war had a profound effect upon him: from 1927 onwards he suffered from a debilitating heart disease and he was increasingly regarded as an eccentric and a recluse. Those who went up to Cambridge in the late 1950s remembered him as an eccentrically clad, unapproachable figure reading 'shockers' on a deck chair on the grass at King's. He had never been interested in administration or in sitting on committees (though he reluctantly served on the Cunliffe committee of 1918-19 and the Chamberlain committee of 1924-5) and had never attended an economics conference. In later years he withdrew altogether from national affairs and devoted himself almost completely to academic economics. This picture of personal isolation may be misleading, however: although he never married, his correspondence with his publishers, Macmillan, suggests a small circle of close friends, both male and female. 
Pigou's ultimate standing as an economist must depend on the ideas put forward in his major work, 'The Economics of Welfare' (1920), which was based on his earlier book of 1912, 'Wealth and Welfare'. This book went through many editions and virtually created the subject of welfare economics. At its centre was the Marshallian concept of the national dividend, or national income, a concept which Pigou did much to polish and refine. Pigou offered a coherent and practical double criterion for an improvement in economic welfare: first, economic welfare would increase if the national dividend increased while the poor did not become worse off; second, economic welfare would increase if the poor became better off while the national dividend did not decrease. Behind his scheme lay the notion that the satisfactions of different people could be compared with one another. Satisfactions were not in principle incomparable even if they were not directly measurable; there was a sufficient body of evidence that people were on average alike in many characteristics and that, for large groups of people, it was not unreasonable to treat them as such. While this view became unfashionable after the 1940s and necessitated a defence when Pigou was in his seventy-fourth year, inter-personal comparisons were later widely used in welfare analysis. Pigou was arguing, however, for a very limited form of income redistribution which would unambiguously improve welfare only if it did not reduce the national dividend. Cases where it might reduce the dividend -- minimum wage legislation, for example -- required careful evaluation. 
On the whole Pigou expected competition to maximize the national dividend since it tended to make marginal products equal in all lines of activity. However, following Sidgwick's lead, he distinguished carefully between marginal private and marginal social net products. The differences between them came to be known as externalities. The abatement of smoke from factory chimneys improves air quality and is an example of marginal social product exceeding marginal private product; there is a positive externality. The employment of pregnant women in heavy industrial work has adverse effects on the health of the woman and her baby and is an example of marginal private product exceeding marginal social product; there is a negative externality. The general import of Pigou's discussion (though heavily qualified) was that negative externalities should be taxed so as to discourage them, and positive externalities subsidized so as to encourage them. Until very recently Pigouvian taxes have been little used and were much criticized in principle by Coase and the Chicago school from 1950 on the ground that, in the presence of well-defined property rights, they are not only unnecessary but make matters worse. This line of criticism ignores Pigou's own statement which made it clear that he was considering cases where such well-defined rights did not apply. Though in general Pigou favoured the free market system the emphasis he put on externalities ensured that a major difficulty with the optimality properties of competition had to be taken account of by mainstream economists. 
Following Marshall and Sidgwick, Pigou famously stressed people's undervaluation of the future, which he described as a 'defective telescopic faculty'. He saw discounting of the future as irrational, as something that could in time be educated out of people. This line of argument was pushed even further by his brilliant young colleague at King's, Frank Ramsey, who held that time discounting was actually immoral. Pigou believed that people also undervalued the future because the benefits of longer-term investment would tend to go to those 'remote in blood or time'; unlike good utilitarians they valued the utilities of other people at less than their own. As in the case of externalities this argument created another hole in the optimality of competition since saving, and therefore investment, would be too little. As was so often the case with Pigou he was reluctant to press the obvious policy conclusion of a bounty on saving in the form of tax relief since it would tend to favour the better off (A. C. Pigou, 'Study in Public Finance', 1928). 
In view of the genetic engineering debate at the end of the twentieth century Pigou's participation in the eugenics debate at the beginning of the century is of interest. Both Marshall and Pigou were keen advocates of building up human capital, particularly the human capital of the poor. Pigou saw, however, that if human welfare were to depend mainly on 'germ-cells' there would be only a limited role for economics. In a striking phrase -- 'environments too have children' -- he emphasized the importance of the physical and human capital that each generation passed to the next. Economics would continue to be important! 
Pigou's contribution to the analysis of business cycles has been undervalued until quite recently. Pigou was one of a number of distinguished pre-Keynesian writers on the cycle, who included Ralph Hawtrey and Dennis Holme Robertson. His 'Industrial Fluctuations' (1927) was a magisterial account of a comprehensive yet eclectic approach which went out of fashion following Keynes but is similar in spirit to much of the late twentieth-century work stimulated by real business cycle theory. Pigou considered, but rejected, the notion of an equilibrium business cycle. Fluctuations, he argued, are driven by variations in the profit expectations of business people; these, in turn, are set off by impulses which may be real, psychological, or monetary in nature. Once the initiating impulse has made itself felt it may be sustained by any or all of the three. Consequent fluctuations in employment will be greater the greater the degree of price or wage rigidity and, because of externalities, are probably larger than is socially desirable. Typically Pigou was not willing to explain such a complex phenomenon as the cycle by means of a single, simple theory. His emphasis on the welfare aspects of fluctuations was consistent with his original inclusion, in 'Wealth and Welfare' (1912), of reductions in variations in the national dividend as a criterion for improvement. His theory of the cycle had already been sketched out in that work and his analysis of unemployment was outlined for non-specialists in 'Unemployment' (1913). 
To the new generation of economists graduating in the 1930s Pigou's work, particularly his 'Theory of Unemployment' (1933), became best known as a stalking-horse for Keynes's 'General Theory'. Keynes's excuse for his sometimes sharp and merciless attack on Pigou was that 'Pigou's 'Theory of Unemployment' seems to me to get out of the Classical Theory all that can be got out of it' (Johnson, 151). Their two books certainly took quite different views of the problem. Both accepted that a slump implied a reduction in the real demand for labour. For Pigou the elasticity of the real demand for labour was crucial to the consequent level of unemployment and much of his book was devoted to measuring it. For Keynes unemployment was due to a lack of aggregate demand. Pigou's book, though generally well received, was strongly attacked by the rising Keynesians. Pigou was similarly scathing about Keynes's 'General Theory' in a review he wrote for 'Economica' (new ser., 3, 1936): 'Einstein actually did for Physics what Mr. Keynes believes himself to have done for Economics... but he did not insinuate... that Newton and those who had hitherto followed his lead were a gang of incompetent bunglers' (p. 121). Keynes and Richard Kahn so strongly believed that Pigou was mistaken that they tried to block the publication of an article by him in 1937, in the 'Economic Journal', of which Keynes was editor. It is clear that Pigou had grossly misjudged the revolutionary impact that the 'General Theory' was to make. But in terms of technical economic analysis he had several important points to make concerning, for example, Keynes's cavalier analysis of expectations, his omission of interest rates from the consumption function, and his assumption of nominal wage rigidity. 
The Keynes-Pigou debate points to a misunderstanding about the nature and originality of Pigou's economics. Because he liked to absorb everything into the gigantic sponge of 'The Economics of Welfare' his original contributions tend to be masked. Yet they were original and important. 'The classical stationary state' ('Economic Journal', 53, 1943, 343-51) introduced the 'Pigou-effect' into the literature, and Pigou's awareness of the technical importance of the multiplier became clear in his 'Employment and Equilibrium' (1941), which was a major exercise in comparative statics and developed a whole family of multipliers. In the same book Pigou argued that Keynes's system was simply the classical system together with the assumption of a rigid money wage, thus laying the foundations for the later neo-classical synthesis. These were contributions of the first order by any standard. Pigou's considered statement in his 'Retrospective View' of 1950 was by no means the recantation that Keynesians have taken it to be. 
At the onset of the Second World War Pigou, despite his age and poor health, wished to make some contribution and offered his services in 1940, first (via Keynes) to the government and then to the teaching of 'Hun, Frog and Wop' at Eton College: from what he called his 'funk-hole' at Buttermere in Cumberland he complained that he couldn't just sit there eating the nation's food without any proofs to correct. He also wrote 'Aspects of British Economic History' at this time, which, to his chagrin, the authorities insisted on treating as an official secret so it was not published until 1947. In his old age he revived a facility for the short, popular exposition of abstruse matters. The little book 'Socialism versus Capitalism' (1937) had been a good example of this skill; 'Income' (1946) was outstandingly successful. Other short books from the period include 'Lapses from Full Employment' (1945), 'The Veil of Money' (1949), and the aforementioned 'Retrospective View' (1950). The lightness of these miniatures comes as a relief from some of the earlier pudding-like tomes and they provide a graceful end to a long and distinguished career. 
Pigou retired from his Cambridge chair in 1943 but continued to live at King's College until his death at Cambridge Hospital, on 7 March 1959. 


@@@@@


doc= 35530


Pinero, Sir Arthur Wing (1855-1934), playwright, was born on 24 May 1855 at 21 Dalby Terrace, Islington, London, the second of the three children of John Daniel Pinero (1798-1871), a London solicitor, and his wife, Lucy Daines (1836-1905). His parents were English, but his father's ancestors were Portuguese Jews (named Pinheiro), who had emigrated to London in the early eighteenth century. 
His family's weak finances dictated Pinero's education: he attended Spafields Chapel charity school in Exmouth Street, Clerkenwell, London, until the age of ten, when he left to work in his father's law office. This valuable training demanded careful attention to detail, besides furnishing Pinero with a gallimaufry of clients to observe. His actual interests lay elsewhere, sparked by childhood visits to the old Sadler's Wells Theatre, and by witnessing Irving's performances at the Lyceum and those of the Bancrofts at the Prince of Wales's Theatre. He acquired some theatrical training in the elocution class of the Birkbeck Scientific and Literary Institution (now Birkbeck College) where he was enrolled from 1870 to 1874. His first dramatic role was in the college theatre, and he was subsequently appointed to act as 'reader' to the elocution class. He and his classmates staged various productions and ventured on tours of Ilfracombe, Bristol (1873), Edinburgh, Leith, and Liverpool (1874). 
This experience proved irresistibly seductive. On 4 May 1874 Pinero abandoned the legal profession and signed on for $1 per week as a 'general utility' man with R. H. Wyndham at Edinburgh's Theatre Royal. After immodestly gracing Birkbeck with a farewell performance of Hamlet, Pinero plunged into the rigours of provincial repertory on 22 June 1874 in a production of Wilkie Collins's 'The Woman in White'. He gained rapid experience through supporting E. A. Sothern in 'Our American Cousin', and Charles Mathews in 'A Game of Speculation', as well as many other visiting stars. 
After the Theatre Royal burnt down on 6 February 1875 Pinero secured a berth and more minor roles at the Royal Alexandra Theatre, Liverpool. Although only competent as an actor, he garnered some favourable notices, and fortune smiled when the Liverpool production of Collins's 'Miss Gwilt' transferred to London's Globe Theatre. So, ironically, Pinero's return to the capital on 15 April 1876 saw him playing an elderly solicitor. He was then engaged by Mrs S. F. Bateman for the Lyceum company, and supported Irving on a provincial tour which included 'Hamlet'. A Birmingham critic deemed Pinero's Claudius the worst the city had witnessed. Such withering verdicts aside, Pinero's five years with Irving at the Lyceum were incalculably rewarding, although they included 250 mind-numbing consecutive performances as Salarino in 'The Merchant of Venice' (1879-80). Long runs were also the norm when the Bancrofts invited Pinero to join the Haymarket for 1881-2. This thorough practical grounding yielded other dividends: numerous plays. Pinero had discovered his vocation. 
His first effort was '$200 a Year', a one-act dashed off in an afternoon for F. H. Macklin's benefit performance (Globe, 6 October 1877). Although the play was unremarkable, Macklin rewarded Pinero with a set of gold studs and cuff links. More, rather undistinguished, plays followed quickly, but all exhibited Pinero's concern for the relationships between men and women of the English middle and upper classes, the realm of most of his nearly sixty plays. His first full-length work was 'La comete' (1878), followed by 'Two can Play at that Game' (1878), a curtain-raiser for Irving at the Lyceum. The next year Pinero devised 'Daisy's Escape', in which he acted opposite his future wife, Myra Holme (1851/2-1919). Born Myra Emily Moore, she was the daughter of Beaufoy Alfred Moore, a publican; when she met Pinero, she was married to an ailing captain, John Angus Hamilton. After his death and a protracted courtship Pinero and Myra were married on 19 April 1883. Their marriage was happy but childless; however, Myra brought to the marriage her two children, Myra ('b'. 1875?), and Angus (1876?-1913), later a war correspondent. The marriage lasted until 1919, when Myra Pinero died, aged sixty-seven. 
Pinero's first success, measured by its 308 performances, was 'Hester's Mystery' (1880), written for J. L. Toole at the Folly. 'Bygones' and 'The Money Spinner', also produced in 1880, were succeeded by 'Imprudence' (1881), which launched Pinero's career as a director. (Over the years his directing became increasingly autocratic: actors were instructed about the slightest inflection and were not allowed to stray from the text, which Pinero could recite from memory.) In 1881 'The Squire' created a furore when Pinero was accused of plagiarizing Thomas Hardy's 'Far from the Madding Crowd'. 
The next four years (1881-5) saw nine mostly forgettable plays: of these 'The Iron-Master' (1884) and 'Mayfair' (1885) are noteworthy as Pinero's rare attempts at adapting French plays, the common lot of many nineteenth-century dramatists. However, in 1885 Pinero's career really took off with 'The Magistrate', the first of his famous 'Court' farces, named for the theatre where most of them were staged. In that play, as well as in 'The Schoolmistress' (1886) and 'Dandy Dick' (1887), Pinero attacked facets of Victorian society by creating credible though blinkered characters, trying to preserve their respectability while trapped in a relentless whirlpool of catastrophically illogical events. These farces, which totalled over 900 performances initially, remain among Pinero's best, wittiest work. 'The Hobby-Horse' (1886), 'The Cabinet Minister' (1890), and 'The Amazons' (1893) failed to capitalize on that success because, though they were similar, their tone was more serious. However, the sentimentality of 'Sweet Lavender' in 1888 touched audiences: it gave Edward Terry his best role, and racked up 684 performances, an achievement unmatched by the similar 'The Weaker Sex' (1888) and 'Lady Bountiful' (1891). 
Pinero's desire to rehabilitate the native drama drew him to more serious social topics, especially the double standard of morality, applied unequally to men and women. His first such 'problem play' was 'The Profligate' (1889), in which a husband suffers the consequences of his licentious actions. In 'The Second Mrs Tanqueray' (1893) Pinero focused on 'a woman with a past': the result was a sensational and financial success. The role of Paula Tanqueray established Mrs Patrick Campbell's career, and ensured Pinero's place in theatrical history. Although not as avant-garde as Ibsen's plays, 'Tanqueray' confronted its fashionable St James's audiences with as forceful a social message as they could stomach. Their appetite for similar Pinero plays varied. Less successful at the box-office were 'The Notorious Mrs Ebbsmith' (1895), 'The Benefit of the Doubt' (1895), 'The Thunderbolt' (1908), and 'Mid-Channel' (1909). 'Iris' (1901) and 'Letty' (1903) did reasonably well, while 'His House in Order' (1906) achieved 430 performances and netted over $78,000. 
During this middle period Pinero essayed other genres, again with mixed results. There were comedies of manners such as 'The Times' (1891), 'The Princess and the Butterfly' (1897), and the highly successful 'The Gay Lord Quex' (1899). Pinero attempted a romantic musical, 'The Beauty Stone' (1898), with J. C. Carr and Sir Arthur Sullivan. A fine and enduring achievement was Pinero's homage to T. W. Robertson's mid-century contribution to the theatre in 'Trelawny of the 'Wells'' (1898). Grimly comic and ghastly was 'A Wife without a Smile' (1904). 
Although writing and directing occupied most of Pinero's energies, he had other public-spirited interests. He frequently chaired committees, such as that which arranged the Ellen Terry jubilee celebrations in 1906. From 1893 to 1904 he was an honorary examiner in elocution for Birkbeck, and vice-president of its council from 1899 to 1921. He also served on the council of the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art from 1906 to 1926. Honours also came his way. He was made a member of the Garrick Club (outside which he had stood as an awestruck boy), was awarded a knighthood in 1909 (for which Shaw mischievously claimed credit), and became a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 1910. 
Pinero's friendships were numerous, although he characteristically reserved his intimacy for a few chosen men, particularly the critic William Archer (who championed his work) and Henry Arthur Jones (a fellow labourer). He was close to George Alexander, manager of the St James's, although their strong-willed personalities clashed and disagreements ensued. 
During the last third of his life Pinero's fame was gradually eclipsed. He continued writing plays, sometimes repeating past successful formulas: 'The 'Mind the Paint' Girl' (1912); 'The Big Drum' (1915); 'The Freaks' (1918); and 'Child Man' (1930). However, he was not afraid to experiment, as the whimsy and fantasy of 'The Widow of Wasdale Head' (1912) and 'The Enchanted Cottage' (1922) attest. He even attempted a sort of cinematic treatment of the Jekyll-and-Hyde theme in 'Dr Harmer's Holidays' (1931). But his day had passed, as the failure of his last staged work, 'A Cold June' (1932), proved. 
Indeed, after his wife's death in 1919 Pinero was often despondent, despite his stepdaughter's devoted attention. His own death came somewhat unexpectedly: he failed to survive an operation for a strangulated hernia and died on 23 November 1934 in Marylebone Nursing Home. A memorial service, attended by numerous theatrical figures, was held at St Marylebone parish church on 28 November 1934, after which Pinero's ashes were buried in his wife's grave in the churchyard of Chiddingfold, Surrey, close to their former country home. 
Pinero's appearance was striking: he was virtually bald, had bushy ebony eyebrows and sharp features, and almost invariably wore gloves. His contribution to the English theatre was equally conspicuous, and, after an inevitable critical lull, still commands attention. He was a skilled craftsman, who realized what was acceptable to the fashionable audiences who flocked to see his work. Pinero's ideas lacked high intellectuality, although he remained a step ahead of his audiences, shocking them within acceptable bounds. His best farces, comedies of manners, and serious plays still hold the stage, and his accomplishments, while not radical, are undeniable. 


@@@@@


doc= 35531


Pinsent, Dame Ellen Frances (1866-1949), promoter of the mental health services, was born at Claxby, Lincolnshire, on 25 March 1866, the youngest of the eight children of Richard Parker, rector of Claxby, and his second wife, Elizabeth Coffin; Robert John Parker, first Baron Parker of Waddington, was a brother. There were a further five children from the Revd Parker's first marriage. 
In 1888 Ellen married Hume Chancellor Pinsent (died 1920), a solicitor who became a prominent figure in the university and civic affairs of Birmingham, where she was the first woman to be elected to the city council. Particularly interested in those termed the 'mentally unfit', she chaired the Birmingham special schools subcommittee, personally visiting all fifty-six Birmingham schools to ensure that all children who needed education in special classes ('defectives') received it. She went on to formulate a 'complete scheme of state intervention', including care after school-leaving age, which was published in 'The Lancet' (1903). From 1904 until 1908 she sat on the royal commission on the care and control of the feeble-minded. After the consequent passing of the 'Mental Deficiency Act' 1913 she was appointed an unpaid commissioner of the Board of Control. In that year she and her husband moved to Oxford. In 1921 she became a commissioner and in 1931 a senior commissioner of the board. From 1924 to 1929 she served on the Wood committee which examined the best way to deal with mental defectives, and whose report led to substantial improvements in arrangements for their care, particularly in community services. In 1932 she retired but continued to take an active part in questions of mental health. She received the honorary degree of MA from Birmingham University in 1919, and was appointed CBE in 1925 and DBE in 1937. 
Dame Ellen was a pioneer in promoting legislation and furthering all measures for the welfare of the mentally unfit. Her experience in Birmingham had left her with the conviction that the care and training of defectives were public obligations, both for their own good and for the protection of society. She published four novels between 1892 and 1897, and an important review of the mental health services in Oxfordshire and Berkshire in 1937. Her many friends enjoyed her charm, gaiety, and warmth of heart. She and her husband had three children: a daughter, Hester Agnes, who married Edgar Douglas (later Lord) Adrian, physiologist and Nobel prizewinner; and two sons, one of whom was killed on active service in 1915 and the other in a flying accident in 1918. She died at her home, Rough Lea, Boars Hill, near Oxford, on 10 October 1949. 


@@@@@


doc= 35532


Pippard, (Alfred John) Sutton (1891-1969), civil and aeronautical engineer, was born on 6 April 1891 at Yeovil, the eldest child in the family of three sons and two daughters of Alfred Pippard (died 'c'.1908), a building contractor, and his wife, Alice, the daughter of John Sutton, a glover. He attended Yeovil School (1899-1907) and then Merchant Venturers' College at Bristol where, in 1911, he graduated with first-class honours in civil engineering. (In 1909 the college had become the faculty of engineering of the university.) He then worked as an articled pupil with the consulting engineer A. P. I. Cotterell, and subsequently as assistant engineer with the Pontypridd and Rhondda Valley Joint Water Board. While there he wrote in his spare time an MSc dissertation on 'The masonry dam' which was accepted by Bristol University in 1914. 
Soon after the outbreak of the First World War, having learned that his sight would bar him from a commission in the Royal Engineers, Pippard joined the newly formed technical section of the air department of the Admiralty, to work on aircraft structures and stressing. With men such as Alec Ogilvie, Henry Tizard, and J. L. Pritchard, Pippard made significant contributions to the improvement and safety of aircraft, for which in 1918 he was appointed MBE. He married, in January 1918, (Frances Louisa) Olive Field (1892-1964); they had two sons: Dr John Pippard and Sir A. Brian Pippard, professor of physics at Cambridge. In 1919 Pippard and Pritchard published their well-known book, 'Aeroplane Structures', and in 1920 Pippard gained the DSc degree of Bristol University. From 1919 to 1922 he was in partnership with Ogilvie in the latter's firm of consulting aeronautical engineers and also gave lectures at Imperial College under Leonard Bairstow. This experience convinced Pippard that his proper sphere lay in the academic world. In 1922 he was appointed professor of engineering at University College, Cardiff. Understaffed, with restricted laboratory facilities, the engineering department at Cardiff differed little from those of other British provincial universities at that time. Pippard transformed this situation, turning the teaching of the theory of structures into a scientific discipline, actively promoting and participating in research, and generally raising the intellectual level of civil engineering courses in the country. These activities he continued while professor of civil engineering at Bristol from 1928 to 1933. Pippard was by early training and inclination a civil engineer. So when opportunity arose to go to Imperial College, a large department with close connections with the Institution of Civil Engineers and the profession, he accepted without hesitation. He was professor of civil engineering and head of department there from 1933 until his retirement in 1956. 
During this period chairs were established under his guidance in hydraulics and concrete technology, four readerships were created, flourishing postgraduate courses were set up, and research was undertaken on an unprecedented scale. Pippard himself continued lecturing and directing research in theoretical and experimental structural analysis, notably on arch dams. His work in 1952-4 for Binnie & Partners on the design of the 116 metre high Dokan Dam in Iraq was of special importance and opened a new era in a field to which his research assistant, Letitia Chitty, later Telford gold medallist and fellow of Imperial College, went on to make notable contributions. He also gave much attention to public health engineering, so that a readership in this subject was founded in 1950; he was chairman (1951-61) of the influential government investigating committee on pollution of the tidal Thames. 
His publications include eighty papers and five books. Of these, 'The Analysis of Engineering Structures' (with J. F. Baker, 1936) became a classic in engineering literature. 
Pippard was elected FRS in 1954. He served on the council of the Institution of Civil Engineers from 1944 and was president in 1958-9. In 1964 he received the Ewing gold medal for exceptionally distinguished engineering research. He held honorary degrees from Bristol, Birmingham, and Brunel, and was pro-rector of Imperial College (1955-6) and visiting professor at Northwestern University, USA (1956-7). He died at his home, 1 Dorset House, St Johns Avenue, Putney, London, on 2 November 1969. 


@@@@@


doc= 35533


Pirow, Oswald (1890-1959), lawyer and politician in South Africa, born at Aberdeen, Cape Colony, South Africa, on 14 August 1890, was the eldest of three children. His German parents, Carl Bernhard Ferdinand Pirow (died 1930), the son of a missionary, and his wife, Henrietta Jasmine Marine (Henny) Tomby, went to South Africa in 1888. Pirow's schooling began at Potchefstroom, Transvaal, where his father practised medicine. For further study, Pirow proceeded to the Itzehoe Gymnasium in Germany, then to London to read law, being called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1913. After returning to South Africa he practised as an attorney, and in 1915 transferred to the Pretoria bar. His effectiveness as an advocate soon won wide recognition, and in 1925 he took silk. In 1919 Pirow married Else (died 1975), daughter of Albert Piel, the founder of a cold storage concern; there were two sons and two daughters of the marriage. 
As one of the Afrikaner 'Young Turks' of Transvaal under Tielman Roos, Pirow had meanwhile entered politics. He supported J. B. M. Hertzog and his National Party. After three unsuccessful attempts, dating from 1915, Pirow entered parliament in 1924 as the member for Zoutpansberg. At the next general election in 1929 he unsuccessfully opposed J. C. Smuts in Standerton. After Roos's resignation from the cabinet later in 1929, Hertzog invited Pirow to take his place as minister of justice. Following a spell as a nominated senator, Pirow, in a by-election in October 1929, was returned to the assembly for Gezina, the constituency which he continued to represent until 1943. 
Pirow supported Hertzog in negotiating the coalition with Smuts in 1933. He also approved the fusion of the National and South African parties in 1934. In the new government he held the portfolios of defence and of railways and harbours. With Smuts and N. C. Havenga he was also a member of Hertzog's 'inner cabinet'. Recognizing Pirow's parliamentary skills, Hertzog delegated to him the piloting of several important measures, notably the 'Status Act' of 1934. Pirow, who was a keen amateur flyer, founded South African Airways in 1934, equipping it with German Junker aircraft. Peripatetic by temperament, he was actively interested in the union's external affairs. Seeking solidarity with the local white settler communities, he strove to strengthen South Africa's influence in central and east Africa. Although he was discredited after the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 by Smuts's mockery of his notorious 'bush carts', Pirow was an able administrator and his stewardship of the defence ministry had not earlier been attacked. 
An admirer of Hitler after meeting him in 1933, Pirow, always aggressively anti-communist, saw Germany as the bulwark against Bolshevism in Europe and the world. In October 1938 he began a tour of western Europe. Mainly on his own initiative, and without Neville Chamberlain's backing, Pirow assumed the role of an informal mediator with Hitler. He subsequently claimed that at Berchtesgaden in November he sounded Hitler on an offer of a free hand in eastern Europe in return for an undertaking to allow the German Jews to emigrate. Pirow's tour, during which he also met Mussolini, Salazar, and Franco, profoundly affected his outlook. He returned to South Africa convinced that in the approaching war the forces of national socialism, to which he was shortly to announce his conversion, would triumph. 
With the outbreak of war Pirow supported Hertzog after his defeat in parliament and resignation on the neutrality issue, and in his later reunion, in the Herenigde Nasionale Party (HNP), with the 'Purified' Nationalists of D. F. Malan who had declined to enter fusion in 1934. At the end of 1940, when Hertzog and Havenga broke with the HNP, Pirow remained in the party and in parliament. In September 1940 he launched his New Order for South Africa, a movement based on the Nazi ideology of race and on a rejection of parliamentary democracy. For a time he tried to keep his group within the HNP on the basis of a common republicanism; but the condemnation of national socialism by Malan and J. G. Strijdom forced Pirow and his followers to quit the HNP caucus in January 1942. In the general election of 1943 supporters of the New Order were eliminated, while Pirow himself declined to stand for re-election. He continued to propagate his views in his newsletter until 1958, but his political influence had disappeared long before. 
After leaving parliament Pirow resumed his practice in Pretoria. He retired in 1957, but re-emerged later in the year when he was briefed by the crown in the Pretoria treason trial -- a tribute as much to his consistent advocacy of uncompromising white supremacy as to his legal skills. The trial was still in progress at the time of his death from cardiac failure in Pretoria on 11 October 1959. His ashes were interred at his home, Valhalla Farm, near Pilgrim's Rest, Transvaal. 
At the height of his career in the thirties Pirow's ability and energy had marked him out as Hertzog's lieutenant and possible successor. Turbulent in spirit, brusque, dynamic, and combative, Pirow was a vigorous personality. A notable athlete in youth and a keen hunter, he was also a prolific writer, his most serious work being his biography of Hertzog (1958). After the early promise, Pirow's political eclipse, with its note of wasted talent, reflected not only his misjudgement of the course of world events and of Afrikaner political proclivities in a crisis, but also a streak of undisciplined opportunism in his own character. 


@@@@@


doc= 35534


Pirrie, William James, Viscount Pirrie (1847-1924), shipbuilder and shipowner, was born on 24 May 1847 in Quebec, the son of James Alexander Pirrie and Elizabeth Margaret Swan Montgomery. James Pirrie was the son of Captain William Pirrie, a Belfast shipowner and harbour commissioner, and had moved to Canada in 1844 to enter the timber shipping trade. James Pirrie died in 1849 and his widow took her young son William back to Ireland to live with his grandfather. The younger William Pirrie was educated at the Royal Belfast Academical Institution from 1858 until 1862, at which time he became a premium apprentice at Harland and Wolff, the Belfast shipbuilders. 
During his apprenticeship Pirrie displayed an aptitude not only for shipbuilding and design but also for financial management. In 1868 he was appointed chief draughtsman, and he helped to design the first Atlantic liners for the White Star Line of Thomas Henry Ismay. By 1874 both Edward Harland and Gustav Wolff, the founders of the firm, wished to pursue other business interests and Pirrie, aged only twenty-seven, was made a partner in the firm. The serious recession of the mid-1870s made it difficult to win orders; but prospects had improved by the end of the decade when a large engine works was constructed. On 17 April 1879 Pirrie married his cousin Margaret Montgomery Carlisle (died 1935), daughter of John Carlisle, headmaster of the Royal Belfast Academical Institution; the couple had no children. His wife was a well-educated woman with an interest in business, and Pirrie quickly came to rely on her advice and judgement. In particular, Margaret Pirrie concerned herself with welfare provision in the firm. Pirrie, a small and charming man with sparkling blue eyes, was said to be remarkably persuasive in selling ships. However, despite this reputation, he won many orders only by offering very generous financing or in recessions building at almost cost. 
The Irish home rule crisis of 1885-6 posed a serious threat to the firm. The partners made emergency arrangements to move the yard to Seacombe on the Mersey. Pirrie was outspoken in his attack on home rule and publicly threatened to move the business to the Clyde. It is not known if he had any hand in the expulsion of Catholic workers, but he did nothing to prevent it or to discourage riots by the protestant workforce. With the defeat of the 'Home Rule Bill', expansion continued at Belfast with investments in a new yard and extensions to the engine works. By the late 1880s, on Pirrie's initiative, the firm was building large liners on 4 per cent commission, in return for all the customer's repair work and future contracts. Pirrie also developed, as a result, close relations with several large shipping companies, notably the White Star Line, Baltimore Steerage and Lighterage Company, Elder Dempster, and the African Steamship Company. This arrangement brought a large number of contracts, which puzzled competitors with similar cost structures. Pirrie himself became a director of the African Steamship Company in 1892. The following year, with help from Wolff, he formed an alliance with the Hamburg-Amerika Line and the Union Steamship Company. 
During the second home rule crisis in 1892-3, Pirrie served as honorary treasurer of the Ulster Defence Union. As a leading Ulster businessman he was propelled into political life, being elected to the Belfast corporation in 1894. Although opposed to independence he was not a 'stone wall Unionist', and favoured some measure of devolution. This did not prevent his financing Unionist candidates in Scotland in the 1896 election. At the same time he became a harbour commissioner. These commitments took him away from the shipyard, which in the politically uncertain climate combined with a recession was forced to offer generous finance to gain orders. After Harland's death in 1895, Pirrie became chairman of Harland and Wolff. He was also elected lord mayor of Belfast and immediately renounced his political affiliations by proposing some measure of representation for the nationalist and Labour parties. This softening of his attitudes was entirely characteristic and not out of tune with some elements of protestant opinion. Both he and his wife had been influenced by liberal attitudes since their childhood. 
At the end of the century the business boomed. As Britain's leading shipbuilder Pirrie shifted his operational headquarters to London in 1898; and he and his wife made a glittering social debut in the capital, renting Downshire House in Belgrave Square. Part of his motive for making this move was to help bring about the formation of International Mercantile Marine (IMM), in collaboration with the American financier J. Pierpont Morgan. The Syndicate, as it was known, was formed in 1902 and included many established customers of Harland and Wolff, including White Star, Hamburg-Amerika, the Baltimore Steerage and Lighterage Company, and the Atlantic Transport Company. From the beginning Pirrie had doubts about its likely success and immediately began seeking new customers for the yard, including P. & O., Elder Dempster, and the Royal Mail. Contracts from the Royal Mail brought him together with Owen Cosby Philipps, and the two men were to work closely together for the rest of their lives in creating the Royal Mail group. 
Apart from this new interest, Pirrie worked hard to rescue IMM by securing the appointment of J. Bruce Ismay as president of the company. This led directly to an order from White Star for three enormous liners for the north Atlantic service. Before these could be built the yard had to be greatly enlarged. At the same time, to gain access to turbine technology and supplies of steel forgings, Pirrie formed an alliance with John Brown & Co. The first giant liner, the 'Olympic', was delivered in 1911 and her sister ship, the 'Titanic', in 1912. The 'Titanic' sank on her maiden voyage, with a loss of more than 1500 lives. Pirrie was not on board, as he was recovering from a prostate operation. The tragedy was the culmination of a difficult period for Pirrie, who had been raised to the peerage in 1906, as Baron Pirrie of Belfast, by the incoming Liberal government. From 1907 to 1913 he served as comptroller of the household of the lord lieutenant at Dublin Castle. He steadfastly supported the government's plans for home rule and tried to mobilize Ulster opinion against Sir Edward Carson. This made him unpopular and at one point, after a meeting in Belfast, he was pelted with rotten eggs as he left for England. These events helped to undermine his health, and by the winter of 1912 he was spending most of his time in London or at Witley Park, near Godalming, Surrey, which had been built by the fraudulent company promoter Whittaker Wright. 
Pirrie had not, however, lost interest in his work. During 1911 he purchased a shipyard on the Clyde and while he was recuperating made arrangements to build diesel engines under licence in Glasgow. His style of management was becoming increasingly dictatorial. His senior staff reported directly to him and none of them knew on what terms orders had been accepted. On the outbreak of the First World War, Pirrie, who had always refused to tender for Admiralty contracts, began constructing a series of monitors to be used in support of landings and to bombard the enemy coast. A mass of further orders followed, including some for aircraft. When the unrestricted U-boat campaign began to take its toll of merchant shipping in 1917, the government inaugurated a standard ship programme. In March 1918 Pirrie was appointed controller-general of merchant shipbuilding to expedite the implementation of this programme, against the opposition of much of the industry. Following the Easter rising he returned to the Unionist fold and was created a viscount for his wartime services in 1921 when he joined the senate of the Northern Ireland parliament. 
As early as 1916 Pirrie had begun planning for peace and had embarked on a massive series of acquisitions, buying five yards on the Clyde, as well as the Scottish steel makers, Colvilles. By the end of the war he was intending to spend over $20 million on refurbishing his yards and on new plant. He believed passionately that demand for new tonnage in the aftermath of the war would be unprecedented. At first the order-book seemed healthy, largely supported by the Royal Mail group. Now in his seventies, he found it hard to come to terms with the onset of the recession, which forced him to abandon some of his grander schemes. He used his old charm to secure sufficient business to keep the yards open until 1923; but even he was forced to admit that some rationalization, particularly in the steel industry, was inevitable. He was rapidly losing control of the business and had no one in whom to confide the extent of his problems. He was taken ill after a fall in his hen-run in late 1923 and died of pneumonia, aged seventy-seven, on 7 June 1924 on the liner 'Ebro' in the Caribbean, near the coast of South America. He was buried in Belfast city cemetery overlooking his yard. He had made no practical arrangements for his death or retirement, and this negligence wreaked havoc with his businesses. Pirrie's dictatorial ways had blinded him to the need to educate his managers, most of whom lacked strength of character; and there was no son who had been groomed to take over the reins. The chaos in which he left his affairs aggravated the problems of the Royal Mail group. It is hard to judge his career, which was a curious combination of ruthless ambition and a deep desire to bring work and prosperity to Belfast. After his death his wife, Margaret, Viscountess Pirrie, became honorary president of Harland and Wolff. 


@@@@@


doc= 35535


Pissarro, Lucien Camille (1863-1944), artist and printer, was born in Paris on 20 February 1863, the eldest of the eight children of the impressionist painter (Jacob Abraham) Camille Pissarro (1830-1903) and Julie Vellay (1838-1926). His father, though born in the Virgin Islands, was a Jew of Franco-Portuguese stock; his mother, who married Camille Pissarro in Croydon, Surrey, in June 1871, was French, from Burgundy. 
Apart from December 1870 to June 1871, when Camille Pissarro sought refuge from the Franco-Prussian War in Upper Norwood, near London, Lucien Pissarro grew up in France. From 1878 until 1882 he worked in the Paris office of an English textile firm but showed little aptitude for business. In 1883 he stayed in London for a few months to learn English. He visited museums and exhibitions, contemplated enrolling at the Slade School of Fine Art, was dismayed by the works shown at the Royal Academy annual exhibition and delighted by the graphic art of Charles Keene, and met his future wife, Esther Bensusan (1870-1951). He spent a further three months in London early in 1884, before going to Eragny, the village in Normandy where his father and his family moved in April. 
Working alongside Camille Pissarro over the next six years, Lucien laid a solid foundation for his painting. His mentors were his father's friends and colleagues: Edgar Degas, Paul Cezanne, Vincent Van Gogh, and Paul Gauguin. With his father, Georges Seurat, and Paul Signac he was party to the evolution of pointillism, the technique of painting in meticulously juxtaposed dots of different colours and tones to express divisionist colour theories. He showed paintings in this style at the eighth and last impressionist group exhibition in Paris in 1886. 
Meanwhile, Pissarro developed his skills as a wood-engraver under the guidance of Auguste Lepere. In 1886 several issues of 'La Revue Illustree' included his work in black and white. From 1887 to 1890, working at Manzi's art-publishing firm in Paris, he learned the techniques of making and printing colour blocks. However, his forthright style influenced by Keene was not especially admired in Paris where more finely worked prints were in vogue. 
In November 1890 Lucien Pissarro settled in London, encouraged by the revival of wood-engraving and book and type design by William Morris and others within the English arts and crafts movement. Although he continued to pay long visits to Normandy, the balance tipped in favour of commitment to his life and work in England. He married Esther Bensusan, daughter of a City merchant, at the register office in Richmond, London, on 11 August 1892. Their only child, Orovida -- who also became a painter -- was born in October 1893. After Pissarro's lecture in 1891 to the Art-Workers' Guild entitled 'Impressionism in art', he was sought out by Walter Sickert and Philip Wilson Steer. However, instead of exploiting his impressionist pedigree to build his contacts with painters in London, he concentrated on developing an independent career as an illustrator and printer. His introduction in 1890 to Charles Ricketts and Charles Shannon, who had invited him to contribute woodcuts to 'The Dial' (founded by Ricketts in 1889), was crucial. In 1894 he and his wife established the Eragny Press at their cottage in Epping, Essex, and he published his first illustrated book, 'The Queen of the Fishes' by Margaret Rust, with a handwritten text reproduced from line blocks. In 1896 he published 'The Book of Ruth and Esther', printed -- as were his next fourteen books -- in the Vale typeface created by Ricketts. After moving to The Brook in Stamford Brook, west London, in 1902, he designed his own Brook typeface and used it for the sixteen books published between 1903 and 1914, the year in which the Eragny Press closed. During twenty years at the Eragny Press he produced thirty-one fine books uniquely distinguished by their illustrations and initial letters in which the combination of firm contour, taut composition, and delicate colour enriched with gold leaf recalls the art of medieval illumination. 
Lucien Pissarro's career as a painter proceeded more fitfully. During the 1890s, in France at Eragny and at home in Epping, he produced some especially vigorous paintings. However, after suffering three strokes in 1897 he painted little until 1903, when he accompanied his father to Le Havre on what was to be their last working trip together. With Camille Pissarro's death in November of that year, the marvellously instructive and moving correspondence between father and son about art and life on both sides of the English Channel necessarily terminated. This bereavement may also have persuaded Lucien to throw himself more energetically into the art life of London. He first exhibited with the New English Art Club in 1904, was elected a member in 1906, and thereafter remained a faithful contributor to its exhibitions. In the autumn of 1907 he joined the group of painters who, led by Sickert, congregated on Saturdays to discuss, exhibit, and sell their work at 19 Fitzroy Street. His role as mentor to this group was defined by Sickert: 'Pissarro, holding the exceptional position at once of an original talent, and of the pupil of his father, the authoritative depository of a mass of inherited knowledge and experience, has certainly served as a guide, or, let us say, a dictionary of theory and practice on the road we have elected to travel. ('Whitechapel', 'New Age', 28 May 1914)' In 1911 he was a founder member of the Camden Town Group and in 1913 of the London Group. From the outset he held views at odds with the ruling cliques. He did not share the Camden Town Group's antagonism to the New English Art Club, nor did he agree with the exclusion of women from membership. He recoiled as Fitzroy Street, in the build-up to the creation of the London Group, was taken over by ever more aggressive artistic factions, in particular the cubists led by Wyndham Lewis and Jacob Epstein. He disliked Sickert, as a man and as an artist. He resigned from the London Group before its first exhibition, in March 1914, and in June celebrated his secession with an exhibition at the Carfax Gallery held jointly with several disciples, including James Bolivar Manson. In 1919, again with Manson, he established the more congenial Monarro Group to represent those artists who derived inspiration from the leaders of French impressionism, Claude Monet and Camille Pissarro. 
After the closure of the Eragny Press in 1914, Pissarro devoted more time to painting. Over his lifetime, his technique and style remained consistent in its impressionist derivation. Using a palette of fresh, clean colours, he painted over 550 landscapes of England and France in a close-textured web of separated brushmarks, representing light, shadow, and local colour. From 1914 until his death in 1944 he kept a catalogue of all his paintings, recording what he painted, and where and when. He was confined to England during the First World War and in 1916 took British nationality. After the war he usually spent the winter months in France, venturing south after 1922. In 1929 he bought a farmhouse in Toulon. His paintings became less densely worked, drier in texture, and chalkier in colour; and he abjured varnish. 
Pissarro's landscapes were widely admired during his lifetime. In 1913 Frank Rutter, the influential critic and founder of the Leeds art collection fund, bought 'Well Farm Bridge, Acton' (1907), a painting of a railway cutting reminiscent of Camille Pissarro's 'Lordship Lane, Upper Norwood' (1871); the painting was acquired by the Leeds City Art Gallery in 1925. From 1922 the Leicester Galleries in London regularly showed his work. The Manchester City Art Gallery arranged an important touring exhibition in 1935. 
After some years of declining health, Lucien Pissarro died on 10 July 1944 at Hill Cottage, Hewood, Dorset, where he had lived since 1940. He was survived by his wife. A memorial exhibition was held at the Leicester Galleries in 1946 and the Arts Council of Great Britain organized a centenary retrospective in 1963. Works by Lucien Pissarro are in the Tate collection, the more important regional galleries, and in public collections abroad. 


@@@@@


doc= 35536


Pitman, Sir Henry Alfred (1808-1908), physician, was born on 1 July 1808 in London, probably at 41 Howland Street, St Pancras, the youngest of the seven children (four boys and three girls) of Thomas Dix Pitman (died 1817/18), a solicitor in Furnival's Inn, and his wife, Ann Simmons of Worcester. He was educated at home until aged seven, and then at Dr Lord's school, Tooting, and Dr Nicholas's school, Ealing. From 1824 to 1827 he was tutored privately at Ware, Hertfordshire, and then entered Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated with a BA in 1831. After a year's travel abroad he spent six months in his family's own solicitor's office, and thus obtained a training in business methods. He then turned to medicine, studying at Cambridge for a year and then at King's College medical school and St George's Hospital in London. In 1835 he graduated MB and passed in 1838 at Cambridge the necessary additional examination for a licence to practise. In 1840 he became a licentiate and in 1845 a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of London. He proceeded to a Cambridge MD in 1841 and commenced practice the following year as attendant physician to the duke of Grafton at Euston Hall, Suffolk. After only nine months he returned to London, where he worked at St George's Hospital. In 1846 he was elected assistant physician at St George's, and in 1857 physician and lecturer on the principles and practice of medicine, a post he retained until 1866, when he was the first there to be elected consulting physician. 
While at the hospital Pitman's knowledge of chemistry helped in 1845 to convict John Tawell, who had committed a murder using prussic acid, and in 1854 a cholera outbreak severely tested Pitman's stamina and medical skills. Throughout this period he was also consulting physician at the St Pancras Royal General Dispensary, a post he held for over thirty years. In 1852 Pitman married Frances Wildman (died 1910), only daughter of Thomas Wildman of Eastbourne, and their family eventually consisted of three sons and four daughters. 
Pitman was a great administrator and during a long registrarship guided the Royal College of Physicians of London through many changes. In 1856-7 he was censor, and in 1858 was elected registrar in succession to Dr Francis Hawkins. The 'Medical Act' of 1858 entailed numerous changes in the organization of the college, which then surrendered the power to confer the exclusive right to practise in London. Pitman was largely responsible for the translation of the old Latin statutes of the college into English by-laws and regulations in harmony with the 'Medical Acts' of 1858 and 1860. He helped to prepare the first edition of 'Nomenclature of Diseases' (1869) and, with Francis Anstie, compiled a report for Disraeli on improving housing for the poor. He was also largely responsible for the initiation and organization of the conjoint examining board in England of the Royal College of Physicians and the Royal College of Surgeons. In recognition of his work on this and the new diplomas (LRCP, MRCS), he was knighted in 1883. He also took an active part in the institution of a special examination and diploma in public health. From 1876 to 1886 he was the college representative on the General Medical Council, and from 1881 chairman of the executive committee of the council. He resigned this post in 1886 and the registrarship of the Royal College of Physicians in 1889, when he was elected emeritus registrar. 
Pitman was a deeply religious man with a serious manner about him, although this was moderated by humour and kindliness. He was an excellent administrator and long identified with the management of the Royal College of Physicians, but he should especially be remembered for his work in reorganizing medical education. 
In July 1908 Pitman celebrated his hundredth birthday, but then died of heart failure at his home, Cranbrook, 33 Bycullah Road, Enfield, Middlesex, on 6 November 1908. He was buried in Enfield cemetery, Lavender Hill, Enfield, on 11 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 35537


Plaskett, John Stanley (1865-1941), astronomer, was born at Hickson, near Woodstock, Ontario, Canada, on 17 November 1865, the eldest son of Joseph Plaskett, a farmer, and his wife, Annie Stanley. He was educated at the local village school and at the high school in Woodstock. He was about sixteen when his father died, leaving him to help bring up a family of younger children; this strengthened the tradition of hard work and self-reliance in which he had been reared. His first employment was with a Woodstock engineering firm; he was a natural mechanic, with a talent for improving any device that came into his hands. In 1885 he moved to Schenectady, New York, where he spent four years with the Edison Electric Company. In 1889 he became foreman of the workshop and mechanical assistant to James Loudon, professor of experimental physics at Toronto University, where his task was to design and build instruments. His family and friends persuaded him to enrol as a student in 1895, and he graduated in 1899 with first-class honours in mathematics and physics at the late age of thirty-three. 
Meanwhile, in 1892, Plaskett had married Rebecca Hope (1867-1967), the daughter of Alexander Hemley, and in his later success paid frequent tribute to her staunch assistance through the hard struggles of his earlier years. They had two sons, of whom the elder, Harry Hemley Plaskett, became Savilian professor of astronomy at Oxford in 1932. 
While at Toronto, Plaskett became a skilful photographer, and it was partly on this account that he was appointed in 1903 to the staff of the small, but rapidly growing, Ottawa observatory. Few observatories have been so fortunate. In the seven or eight years after his joining the staff he created the astrophysical department of the observatory, designed and installed several new instruments, including two stellar spectrographs, and initiated work on solar rotation and the measurement of stellar radial velocities. This work was carried on with a 15 inch refractor, which did not satisfy Plaskett for long. The task of persuading the Canadian government to build the Dominion Astrophysical Observatory at Victoria, British Columbia, and its 72 inch reflector, was considered by some of Plaskett's astronomical colleagues to be a political feat in its way as remarkable as the engineering achievement of constructing the telescope itself. Approval was obtained in 1913, and when the new instrument was finished in 1918 it was the largest telescope in operation. Several of its features, novel at the time of construction, have since become standard practice, and there is little doubt that the successful completion of this project was due largely to Plaskett's genius. 
The new observatory concentrated on stellar spectroscopy, especially the determination of radial velocities, carrying on at a high standard essentially the same work which had been so ably begun in Ottawa. Leading a small but energetic staff, Plaskett made the observatory known throughout the world as a centre for his chosen line of work, and during his directorship it produced a large volume of first-class observational material. He retired in 1935, but was still sought out for advice with regard to the construction of new large telescopes elsewhere. 
Plaskett had a strong constitution, a great capacity for hard work, indomitable determination and optimism, and very great skill in the construction and use of scientific instruments. Those who worked with him remembered also a most attractive personality, kindly, happy, young in mind even into old age, with a keen sense of humour. He knew how to enjoy life, and a close associate remarked that he never knew a man who extracted more genuine satisfaction from his later years. He had a host of friends, and for many years was a popular and familiar figure at astronomical gatherings in both America and Europe. 
Plaskett received many honours, among them the gold medal of the Royal Astronomical Society (1930), the Bruce medal of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific (1932), the Rumford premium of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1930), the Flavelle medal of the Royal Society of Canada (1932), and the Draper medal of the National Academy of Sciences, Washington, DC (1935). He received honorary degrees from Pittsburgh, Toronto, British Columbia, McGill, and Queen's. He was George Darwin lecturer of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1930 and Halley lecturer at Oxford in 1935. He was elected FRS in 1923 and appointed CBE in 1935. He died at Esquimalt, near Victoria, British Columbia, on 17 October 1941. 
R. O. Redman', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35538


Plater, Charles Dominic (1875-1921), Roman Catholic priest and social worker, was born at Brook Green, London, on 2 September 1875, the third son and youngest child of Edward Angelo Plater and his wife, Margaret Harting. His paternal grandfather, Charles Edward Plater (who was of Polish ancestry), was co-founder of Marlborough College; his father, who resigned a War Office clerkship in 1878 in order to devote himself to music, had been received into the Roman Catholic church in 1851 by John Henry Newman. The Harting family, which had always remained Catholic, was distinguished in historical research and natural science. Hereditary qualities -- Christian zeal, sense of scholarship, unconventional geniality, love of music, and especially the brilliancy, controlled emotionalism, and intuition of his maternal grandmother, a Scotswoman -- were startlingly visible in Charles Plater. One brother was a stockbroker; another manufactured bicycles in Paris. His sister joined the Sisters of Charity. 
At Stonyhurst College, where he was educated from 1887 to 1894, Plater was precociously clever and an audacious leader; he might have become a journalist, actor, or diplomat. He records that at the age of three he wanted to be a priest, at five a clown, but, sincerely pious, he entered the Jesuit noviciate at Manresa College, Roehampton, in 1894. After four years spent there as a novice and studying the classics, he pursued philosophical studies for two years at St Mary's Hall, the Jesuit seminary at Stonyhurst. 
In 1900 Plater went to his order's house of studies, Pope's Hall (afterwards Campion Hall), at Oxford. A second class in classical moderations (1902), and in Greats (1904), rewarded him accurately; but scientific archaeology disciplined his imagination, and vacations in the Netherlands, Belgium, and France enriched his sympathies and revealed his vocation -- namely to foster and apply Catholic social principles in England and to create a system of spiritual 'retreats' for the laity, especially for working men. 
While finishing his philosophical studies and subsequently teaching classics at St Mary's Hall (1904-07), Plater displayed much journalistic endeavour and became connected with every kind of Catholic social work. During four years of theological studies in Wales, at St Beuno's College, St Asaph (1907-11), he was influential in the opening of retreat houses and the foundation of the Catholic Social Guild -- a remarkable achievement for one who was not yet a priest and was stationed in the remote countryside. Plater was ordained in 1910, and in 1911 went to St Stanislaus College, Tullabeg, Ireland, where he remained until the following year. From 1912 to 1915 he taught psychology and philosophy at Stonyhurst, the next year classics at Wimbledon College. In 1916 he was appointed master of the Jesuit hall at Oxford. In 1918 he obtained a university statute to convert his hall into a 'permanent private hall' of Oxford University, and it then took the name Campion Hall; the Benedictines of Ampleforth were granted the same status for their St Benet's. Plater took an energetic share in the social work of Oxford. He also visited his own Catholic Social Guild study circles, especially on Tyneside and in the north, and did creative work in many military centres, labouring not least for colonial and American soldiers. At the same time he conducted a very large number of retreats and wrote constantly on social subjects, his 'Primer of Peace and War' (1915) being his best-thought-out book. His personal influence, especially among the working classes, seemed unlimited and his remarkable output of work was matched by the affection which he inspired. Even as a boy the intensity of his exertions caused him mental strain, and finally his health broke down in 1920. After a useless sojourn in the west of Ireland, Plater went to Malta in November of that year. While visiting the sick at the Blue Sisters' Hospital in Sliema, he died of a cerebral haemorrhage on 21 January 1921. He was buried two days later at the Addolorata cemetery. The former Catholic Workers' College in Oxford was renamed Plater College in his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 35539


Platts, John Thompson (1830-1904), orientalist, was born on 1 August 1830 at Calcutta, India, the second son of Robert Platts of Calcutta. His father's death left Platts's mother with a large family in straitened circumstances. Platts was educated at Bedford School but returned to India in early manhood. At Lahore in 1856 he married Alice Jane Kenyon; they had three sons and four daughters. During 1858-9 he was a teacher of mathematics at Benares College. He was in charge of Saugor School in the Central Provinces from 1859 to 1861, when he became mathematical professor and headmaster of Benares College. In 1864 Platts was transferred to the post of assistant inspector of schools, second circle, North-Western Provinces, and in 1868 he became officiating inspector of schools, northern circle, Central Provinces. He retired on 17 March 1872, owing to ill health. 
Platts then returned to England. His first wife died in 1874 and on 4 October 1876 he married Mary Elizabeth, only daughter of Thomas Dunn, architect and surveyor, of Melbourne, Australia, and widow of John Hayes, architect and surveyor, of Croydon; they had one son. Platts settled at Ealing where he occupied himself with teaching Hindustani and Persian. He had closely studied both languages and had thoroughly mastered their grammars and vocabulary. On 2 June 1880 he was elected teacher of Persian in the University of Oxford. He matriculated from Balliol College on 1 February 1881, and on 21 June of that year was made MA 'honoris causa'. On 19 March 1901 the degree of MA was conferred upon him by decree. 
Platts wrote books on the grammar of Hindustani and Persian, as well as compiling dictionaries of Indian languages. He also translated from Persian and Hindustani. Thirty years after their publication, his grammar books were still thought superior to any previously published on the subject. He died suddenly at Garlants Hotel, Suffolk Street, London, on 21 September 1904, and was buried on 26 September at Wolvercote cemetery near Oxford. He was survived by his wife who was awarded a civil-list pension of $75 in 1905. 


@@@@@


doc= 35540


Playfair, Sir Nigel Ross (1874-1934), actor and theatre manager, was born in London on 1 July 1874, the younger son of William Smoult Playfair (1835-1903), obstetric physician, and his wife, Emily Kitson; there were also three daughters. A paternal uncle was Lyon Playfair, first Baron Playfair of St Andrews; a maternal uncle was James Kitson, first Baron Airedale. He was educated at Winchester (briefly), at Harrow, and at University College, Oxford, where he took a third in modern history (1896) and gained early stage experience with the Oxford University Dramatic Society. He was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1900 but was soon performing with two famous amateur societies, the Old Stagers and the Windsor Strollers. 
Playfair's first professional appearance was in July 1902 as Mr Melrose in 'A Pair of Knickerbockers'. He acted in F. R. Benson's company for a while, touring in the West Indies, chiefly in comic Shakespearian parts. In 1904, at the Royalty, he played his favourite role, that of Ralph, in 'The Knight of the Burning Pestle' (which he reprised in his own production at the Kingsway in 1920), and, at the Court, Hodson in Shaw's 'John Bull's other Island' and Bohun in Shaw's 'You Never can Tell'. He married in 1905 Annie Mabel Platts, the daughter of Francis Thomas Platts, a district superintendent of police in Dacca, India. She was an actress under the name May Martyn. They had three sons. In 1907 Playfair toured with Laurence Irving and, at the Savoy, appeared again in 'You Never can Tell', this time as Finch McComas. Through the next eleven years he played a large number of varied roles including Max in Granville Barker's production of the 'Anatol' dialogues (1911); Sir Benjamin Backbite in 'The School for Scandal', Cayley Drummle in 'The Second Mrs Tanqueray', and Cutler Walpole (one of his best roles) in 'The Doctor's Dilemma' (all 1913); Bottom in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' and Mr Dick in 'David Copperfield' (both 1914); and Dangle in an operatic version of 'The Critic' (1916). 
In 1918 Playfair formed a syndicate with Arnold Bennett and Alistair Tayler which purchased a long lease of the Lyric, Hammersmith. It was to soon to be transformed from a derelict building in a run-down area to a highly successful drama venue. It opened with A. A. Milne's first play, written for Playfair, 'Make Believe', a Christmas entertainment. For its first major production the theatre was cleverly let to Barry Jackson, who brought the Birmingham repertory theatre's 'Abraham Lincoln'. After opening in February 1919, it ran for over a year, and Playfair's own first Lyric production, 'The Beggar's Opera', ran for 1463 performances. There followed many successes including 'The Way of the World', with Edith Evans, and 'The Duenna' (both 1924); 'Lionel and Clarissa' -- its first playing since 1768 -- and 'The Rivals' (both 1925); 'Riverside Nights', a revue co-written with A. P. Herbert (1926); 'When Crummles Played' and 'The Beaux' Stratagem', again with Evans (both 1927); 'She Stoops to Conquer' and 'The Critic' (both 1928); and 'The Importance of being Earnest', with John Gielgud (1930). Often abetted by Lovat Fraser's designs, Playfair 'established a distinctive style of simplified realism, stylized gesture and formalized composition in a brilliant series of elegant productions' (Banham, 655). After 'Derby Day' (1932) he relinquished active management of the Lyric. 
Playfair blended original comedy and contemporary satire in a manner perfectly adapted to the taste of the time. He appeared in many of his Lyric productions with a style 'broad and loose, personal rather than interpretative' ('The Times', 20 Aug 1934) and gathered there a loyal and happy team of young players, musicians, and designers who, under his genial leadership, not only began to make their reputations and confirm his, but also helped to create a specific Lyric style, all with 'a sanity of judgment together with a freshness of interest' ('The Times', 15 March 1935). Throughout this fruitful period he had also been busy producing and acting at other London theatres, including appearances in 'Prisoners of War' at the Playhouse and 'The Green Hat' at the Adelphi (both 1925); 'The Duchess of Elba' at the Arts (1927); 'The Lady of the Camellias' at the Garrick (1930); and 'Vile Bodies' at the Arts (1931). His own personal contribution to the theatre was recognized by a knighthood in 1928. 
Playfair also had a brief film career. He made several silent films, and four indifferent 'talkies'. These were 'Perfect Understanding' and 'Crime on the Hill' -- perhaps his best, a country-house murder mystery in which he played the murderer (both 1933), and 'Little Stranger' and 'The Lady is Willing' (both 1934). 
Playfair and his wife made their Chiswick waterfront home, Said House, a centre of welcome to artistic people, both young and old. Away from the theatre his interests were golf and tennis, but he was widely cultured with an interest in many subjects. He was the author or co-author of several plays, such as 'Shock-Headed Pete' and 'Amelia', the adapter or co-adapter of a number of foreign plays, and a frequent contributor to leading London magazines. In 1925 he published 'The Story of the Lyric Theatre, Hammersmith', and in 1930, 'Hammersmith Hoy: a Book of Minor Revelations', two volumes of reminiscence. He also did much work for London voluntary hospitals and was a member of the propaganda committee of King Edward's Hospital Fund. 
After a short illness Playfair died at King's College Hospital, London, on 19 August 1934. According to his known wishes, Lady Playfair presented his fine collection of printed plays and books, relating to the art and history of the stage, to the British Drama League. Said House was sold shortly thereafter. The following March his close friend from university days, the foreign secretary Sir John Simon, opened a memorial exhibition at the Victoria and Albert Museum comprising designs for scenery and costumes, playbills, and other objects representing Playfair's theatrical work. 


@@@@@


doc= 35541


Playfair, William Smoult (1835-1903), obstetric physician, was born on 27 July 1835 at St Andrews, the son of George Playfair (1782-1846), inspector-general of hospitals in Bengal, and his wife, Janet (died 1862), daughter of John Ross. His brothers included Sir Lyon Playfair and Sir Robert Lambert Playfair. His grandfather was James Playfair (1738-1819), principal of St Andrews University. He was educated first at St Andrews and became a medical student at Edinburgh in 1852, graduating MD in 1856, then worked in Paris. In 1857 he entered the Indian Medical Service and was an assistant surgeon at Oudh during the mutiny. In 1859-60 he was professor of surgery at the Calcutta Medical College, but retired for reasons of health. He practised for six months in St Petersburg, then returned to London without definite plans but was soon elected assistant physician for diseases of women and children at King's College Hospital. In 1872, on the retirement of Sir William Overend Priestley, he was appointed professor of obstetric medicine in King's College and obstetric physician to King's College Hospital, posts which he vacated after twenty-five years' service in 1898, and was elected emeritus professor and consulting physician. In 1863 he became MRCP and in 1870 was elected FRCP. On 26 April 1864 Playfair married Emily, daughter of James Kitson of Leeds and sister of the first Lord Airedale; they had two sons, including the actor and theatre manager Sir Nigel Ross Playfair, and three daughters. 
Playfair became one of the foremost obstetricians in this country at a time when physicians rather than surgeons controlled obstetrics. He refused to hand over obstetric operations to the rising general surgeons, and continued to perform them himself. He was a prolific writer with a clear and graceful style. He was the author of the popular 'Treatise of the Science and Practice of Midwifery' (1876) and co-editor with Clifford Allbutt of a 'System of Gynaecology' (1896). Playfair introduced the Weir-Mitchell or 'rest-cure' treatment into Britain; it was soon widely adopted and later widely criticized, especially by feminists. 
Playfair is of particular interest to modern readers because his unintended contribution to medical ethics reveals how attitudes have changed towards medical confidentiality. In the medical literature of his time (and in his entry in the 'Dictionary of National Biography'), the event is brushed off as trivial but its significance is now seen to be much greater. 
In 1896 Playfair was involved in a famous court case. He saw a patient, Linda Kitson, who was also his wife's youngest brother's wife. She had been persuaded to consult him because of gynaecological symptoms, and during her examination Playfair found evidence that she had recently had an abortion, although she had been separated from her husband for a year and a half. Outraged, he decided that he could not allow his immoral relative to associate further with his wife and grown-up daughters and therefore he revealed what had happened to both his wife and one of her other brothers Sir James Kitson. Linda Kitson sued him for breach of professional confidence. The case attracted considerable publicity and Victorian society was riveted by the idea of a middle-class woman's adultery being exposed by a man who was both her physician and her brother-in-law. Playfair asserted in court that he continued to regard Linda Kitson as guilty of 'unchastity', that it was his duty to protect his family's honour, and that his medical conclusions were infallible. Nearly all the doctors who gave evidence supported him. The distinguished doctors who testified that they approved of what he had done included Francis Champneys, Sir William Priestley, Sir William Broadbent, and Sir John Williams. But public, if not medical, opinion increasingly favoured secrecy in medical consultation. The judge was hostile to the suggestion that a doctor had the right to betray a patient's confidences whenever he chose and in his summing-up he depicted a doctor informing on a woman who had aborted as a 'monstrous cruelty' (McLaren, 137). The jury found for Linda Kitson, who was awarded $12,000, reputedly the largest settlement for libel and slander ever made in a British court. (It was later reduced to $9200.) The verdict was greeted in court with loud applause, clapping, and stamping of feet and there was rejoicing in the public press. 
The case left doctors in an ethical muddle and it is not surprising that the establishment tried to play it down. It revealed and exacerbated the confusion that existed about medical confidentiality and displayed how preoccupations of class and gender shaped the practices of both law and medicine. The popular press damned Playfair as a 'moral inquisitor' and took the view that a woman's character (by which was meant a middle-class woman's character) should never be decided on medical evidence alone. A letter in 'The Times' referred to Playfair as 'an Englishman of the very highest standing torturing a feeble and lonely woman by threats of revealing what he thought he had learned' (7 April 1896, 6). Yet the medical profession did little to improve the situation. 'The Lancet' criticized Playfair mildly (1896, 1.1292); the 'British Medical Journal' declared that he had acted as any honourable man would, to protect his family (1896, 1.861). It was widely asserted in medical circles that Playfair had been guilty only of an 'indiscretion' and that his practice and reputation did not suffer as a result. Yet the evidence is to the contrary and, despite his prominent position, he received no honour from the queen. He was, however, appointed physician accoucheur to the duchess of Edinburgh and to the duchess of Connaught, an honorary LLD degree of the universities of Edinburgh (1898) and of St Andrews (1885), an honorary fellow of the American and of the Boston gynaecological societies, and of the Obstetrical Society of Edinburgh. He was president of the Obstetrical Society of London (1879-80). 
Playfair suffered a stroke at Florence in 1903 and was brought home at the end of July. He died on 13 August 1903 at Webster House, St Andrews, and was buried on 15 August in the east cemetery at St Andrews, where his two distinguished brothers lie. Money was collected to found a memorial to him in the new King's College Hospital at Denmark Hill, London. Among Playfair's possessions at his death was a diamond ring presented to him by the emperor of Russia. 


@@@@@


doc= 35542


Plender, William, Baron Plender (1861-1946), accountant, was born at Low Felling, Gateshead, co. Durham, on 20 August 1861, the eldest of the nine children of William Plender, a grocer and draper, and his wife, Elizabeth Agnes Smallpiece, the daughter of John Edward Smallpiece Varday. Educated at the Royal Grammar School, Newcastle upon Tyne, he was denied what he later described the 'supreme advantage' of an Oxbridge education, and joined a Newcastle firm of accountants, John G. Benson & Sons. On qualification as a chartered accountant, in 1884, he joined the London office of Deloitte, Dever, Griffiths & Co. at $100 per annum, the then rate of remuneration for newly qualified accountants. He complained, later, 'how hard it was to climb the ladder that led to a Partnership' (Kettle, 83), but he reached the top in 1897, and seven years later became senior partner of the firm, which was renamed Deloitte, Plender, Griffiths & Co., under which label it conducted business until 1971. 
Deloittes had opened its first overseas branch in New York in 1890, but under Plender's leadership expanded rapidly, with ten branches scattered through North America and southern Africa by 1911, and thirty-four by 1931. The number of staff, though minuscule by late twentieth-century standards, grew from thirty in 1882, to four partners and a staff of 189 by 1914, and a total staff of 351 by 1939. Plender's talents were exploited by the accounting profession, large public companies, and the government. He became a member of the council of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales in 1903, and was the first president to have qualified by examination when appointed to that position, for the first time, at the age of forty-nine in 1910. He remained on council for forty-three years, and served twice more as president, in 1911-12 and in the institute's jubilee year, 1929-30. In 1903 he acted for the Metropolitan Water Board, which acquired the London water companies, and in 1908 for the purchasers in the establishment of the Port of London Authority. In 1911 he officially investigated conditions of medical work and remuneration under the 'National Insurance Act', and the same year received a knighthood. He served on the royal commission on railways in 1913. 
The war period 1914-18 immensely increased the volume of Plender's public commitments, and he found himself at the centre of a political controversy following his appointment as controller of the large London branches of the German, Austrian, and Turkish banks. Their affairs were complicated, and the liquidation was necessarily slow. A degree of criticism of Plender's administration was led by Lord Northcliffe through the medium of 'The Times', which he controlled. A government inquiry fully vindicated Plender, but Northcliffe's response was to carry out his earlier threat to sack Plender's firm as auditors of Associated Newspapers Ltd. Evidence of government satisfaction with Plender's work is reflected in the fact that he continued to be showered with commissions which resulted in a list of public appointments truly amazing in terms of its length and variety. 
In speeches, presidential addresses, and papers Plender made a significant contribution to the theory of accounting practice. In particular, in a paper delivered in 1926 to the International Congress of Accountants at Amsterdam, he reflected on the nature of the auditor's responsibility. The reputation of a professional accountant depended, he argued, not just on the adherence to legal principles, but on his 'much wider moral duty and responsibility' ('DBB'). The issue came to the fore in 1931 when Owen Cosby Philipps, Lord Kylsant, chairman of the Royal Mail Shipping group, was charged with publishing balance sheets which were false and fraudulent. In the aftermath of the trial, in a number of speeches, Plender urged the profession to adopt a moral, rather than a purely technical, approach to accounting practices. 
Plender was appointed GBE in 1918, and awarded a baronetcy in 1923, and a barony in 1931. He was high sheriff of Kent (1928-9) and of the county of London (1927-8), and he also served as lieutenant and deputy lieutenant of the City of London. He received an honorary degree of LLD from Birmingham University in 1927. He was a knight of justice of the order of St John of Jerusalem, a governor of St Thomas's Hospital and of the King's School, Canterbury, and chairman of the board of governors of the City of London College (1935-41). 
Plender had a very wide and diverse circle of friends, and was noted for his calm demeanour, his great courtesy, and his far-reaching sympathies. His ability to stay calm under pressure proved invaluable during the war. According to an obituary, 'Never flustered or irritated at a time when the nerves of so many good workers were on edge, Plender was one of the figures that made all with whom he came into contact feel that victory was assured to a country that had such imperturbable advisers. ('The Times', 21 Jan 1946)' His relaxations were shooting and golf, but perhaps his most absorbing outside interest was the collection of pictures and antique furniture which, it has been said, he displayed with great taste in his town and country houses. He was an active freemason, being a member of a number of masonic lodges, and one of the founder members and first master of the chartered accountants' lodge in 1906.Plender married, first, on 8 October 1891, Marion Elizabeth, the daughter of John Channon of Woodford Green, Essex, at a Wesleyan ceremony in West Ham. She died at Cannes on 31 December 1930, and he married Mabel Agnes, the widow of George Norton Stevens, a publisher, and the daughter of Peter George Laurie, a stockbroker, on 27 April 1932 at St Margaret's, Westminster. In 1940 he was persuaded to leave London for the relative safety of Torquay for the duration of the Second World War. It was not a happy time. Both his London and country homes were rendered uninhabitable by bomb damage, and much of his collection of seventeenth-century furniture and 'objets d'art' was badly damaged. His health was poor, and he died in the Lonsdale Nursing Home in Tunbridge Wells on 19 January 1946 at the age of eighty-four. There were no children from either of his two marriages and, on his death, his titles became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 35543


Plimmer, Robert Henry Aders (1877-1955), biochemist, was born at Elberfeld, Germany, on 25 April 1877, the eldest son of Alfred Aders (died 1885), a Manchester businessman, and his German wife and first cousin, Bertha Helena Aders. The child was brought to England when a few months old, and soon afterwards the Aders settled in Surrey on the southern outskirts of London. Alfred Aders died in 1885 and in 1887 his widow married Henry George Plimmer FRS (1857-1918), who later became professor of comparative pathology at Imperial College. By example and advice Plimmer greatly influenced the lives and characters of the Aders children, especially the eldest son, who later acknowledged his indebtedness by adopting the surname of Plimmer by the wish of his stepfather. 
Educated at Dulwich College and University College, London, where he studied chemistry under William Ramsay, Plimmer graduated BSc in 1899; then, on his stepfather's advice, turned his attention to the chemistry of living organisms. A year at Geneva University was followed by two years at Berlin University under Emil Fischer, where began his lifelong interest in the chemistry of proteins. He obtained a PhD (Berlin) and DSc (London) in 1902, and was awarded a Grocers' Company research studentship which enabled him to work for two years at the Lister Institute of Preventive Medicine. His work in Germany was summarized in his book 'The Chemical Changes and Products Resulting from Fermentations' (1903). 
In 1904 Plimmer returned to University College as an assistant in the department of physiology under W. M. Bayliss, and E. H. Starling. His duties were to teach physiological chemistry and to engage in research. He soon became well known in both spheres. Practical notes for his students developed into a textbook of 'Organic and Bio-Chemistry' (1915) and his contributions to scientific journals drew attention to his researches into the chemistry of proteins. With Frederick Gowland Hopkins he was co-editor of an extremely valuable series of monographs on biochemistry to which he himself contributed 'The Chemical Constitution of the Proteins' (1908). 
Plimmer was elected a fellow of University College in 1906, assistant professor of physiological chemistry in 1907, and university reader in 1912. In the same year he married Violet Geraldine (died 1949), daughter of Frederick Sheffield, solicitor; they had one son and three daughters. 
Biochemists of Plimmer's generation remembered him with affection for the part he played in the founding of the Biochemical Society and in nursing it through the early difficult years. He and his friend J. A. Gardner were the co-founders in 1911 of the Biochemical Club, which became the society in 1913. Plimmer was the first secretary (1911-19), was made an honorary member (1943), and wrote the 'History of the Biochemical Society' (1949). 
During the First World War, Plimmer, with the rank of captain, was attached to the directorate of hygiene at the War Office, and analysed common foodstuffs, the results being published in 1921 as 'Analyses and Energy Values of Foods'. This work stimulated his interest in nutrition, and in 1919 he left University College to become head of the biochemical department at the Rowett Institute for Research in Animal Nutrition, Aberdeen, where he was able to take part in feeding experiments on a large scale. But in 1922 he returned to London as professor of chemistry at St Thomas's Hospital medical school, a position which he filled with great distinction for twenty-one years. He continued his research work with great vigour, producing a steady stream of papers. In addition to his teaching duties, examinerships, and service on numerous university boards and committees, he found time to give public lectures on topics such as diet and vitamins, and with his wife to write popular books on nutrition, balanced diets, vitamins, and the choice of foods. 
Plimmer reached retirement age in 1942, when he was made honorary consulting chemist to the hospital; in 1944 the title of professor emeritus of chemistry was conferred upon him by the University of London. In January 1943 he joined the staff of the British Postgraduate Medical School, Hammersmith, to assist Professor E. J. King in the biochemistry department. It was intended to be a temporary appointment but lasted for more than twelve years. 
A tall, lean figure, with strong, deeply lined face and kindly eyes beneath bushy eyebrows, Plimmer loved entertaining his many friends and enjoyed good music, art, literature, theatre, cricket, and motoring. He died in Hammersmith Hospital, London, on 18 June 1955. 
John Lowndes', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35544


Plucknett, Theodore Frank Thomas (1897-1965), legal historian, was born on 2 January 1897 in Bristol, the only son of Frank Plucknett, boot stock keeper, who became a shoemaking technologist and taught and wrote books on that subject, and of his wife, Caroline Thomas. Plucknett went from Alderman Newton's School, Leicester, to the Bacup and Rawtenstall School at Newchurch, Lancashire, working there for an external degree of London University and graduating with second class honours in history in 1915. His father then apparently moved to London to make it financially possible for him to become an internal student at University College; and before he was twenty-one he had gained not only his MA but also the Alexander prize of the Royal Historical Society, both for work on the fifteenth-century council. 
In 1918 Plucknett went to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, with a research exhibition, and under the supervision of H. D. Hazeltine wrote a thesis published as 'Statutes and their Interpretation in the First Half of the Fourteenth Century' (1922). This began the conversion of Plucknett from a constitutional historian to a historian of private law; and the LLB degree which it gained in 1920, under regulations later superseded by those for the PhD, lent colour to the impression that he was a lawyer. In this conversion the decisive event was his nomination in 1921 to the Choate memorial fellowship, which took him to the Harvard law school where he was first a student, though doing only research and taking no courses, then from 1923 to 1926 instructor, and from 1926 to 1931 assistant professor. 
Plucknett's appointment to the Harvard faculty was the doing of Roscoe Pound, with whom he edited a volume of readings on legal history; and his leaving Harvard for the London School of Economics seems to have been the doing of Harold Laski. The reputation which Plucknett had made by his Harvard courses, and partly also by his 'Concise History of the Common Law' which was written by dictation in a matter of weeks and published in the United States in 1929, was that of a historian with a creed and a sense of style, both caught in his own later words: 'It is only in text-books that constitutional, economic and legal history are set apart from one another. In real life they are simultaneous, and one man lives all his histories concurrently' ('The Mediaeval Bailiff', 1954, 2). 
This was the reputation which brought Plucknett home in 1931 as first holder of the LSE's chair of legal history. He held it for the rest of his working life; but from his colleagues in the law faculty Plucknett became increasingly remote. He steadfastly denied that his subject was any use to lawyers: 'It is still too often said that English law can only be understood historically. Now English law may be bad, but is it really as bad as that?' (T. F. T. Plucknett, 'Early English Legal Literature', 1958, 17). His courses for law students were attended by the interested few, which to him was as it should be; and the remainder of his teaching and all of his professional discourse was directed to historians. His presidency of the Society of Public Teachers of Law in 1953-4 seemed a pleasant incongruity, very different from his term as president of the Royal Historical Society from 1948 to 1952. Plucknett was elected FBA in 1946, fellow of University College, London, in 1950, honorary fellow of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1952, and was awarded the honorary LLD of Glasgow (1958) and Birmingham (1963), and in 1959 an honorary LittD of Cambridge (a perceptive recognition of the pure historian). His last years were clouded by illness and he resigned prematurely in 1963. He died at home, 17 Crescent Road, Wimbledon, on 14 February 1965. 
In Cambridge, Massachusetts, Plucknett met (Anne) Marie, daughter of Ferdinand Guibert; and in 1923 they were married at her home in Clermont-Ferrand, France. This became a second home where, unless prevented by war or illness, they spent part of every year; and there he was buried. Apart from these visits he was never long away from their Wimbledon house, next door to which their only son settled after his marriage. Outside his family Plucknett was solitary by habit, having few intimates, all historians; and even with them he kept in touch mainly on professional matters and by correspondence. Formal in speech and dress, amiable and absent in manner, he became elusive to casual enquirers. But to those with a claim on his time he was encouraging and helpful; and his professional life was conducted with a firmness and method unsuspected by most of his colleagues. 
Apart from articles and contributions to books by others, Plucknett advanced his subject in two main ways. He was joint literary director of the Selden Society from 1937 and alone from 1946; and though he played a named part in few volumes, a substantial proportion of the society's publications and the continuation of the enterprise itself owed much to his faith in the value of such intractable materials. And then there are his own books. The 'Concise History' went into five editions and several languages; and though increasingly daunting to students it remains an essential part of the literature. The other works grew out of special lectures. The Ford lectures in Oxford in 1947 became 'Legislation of Edward I' (1949); the Maitland memorial lectures in Cambridge, commissioned for the centenary in 1950 of the birth of F. W. Maitland, became 'Early English Legal Literature' (1958); his Creighton lecture of 1953 was published as 'The Mediaeval Bailiff' (1954); and the Wiles lectures in Belfast in 1958 became 'Edward I and Criminal Law' (1960). 
The last work was written when Plucknett was failing; and though full of ideas, it lacks the realism and immediacy of his best work. If he underestimated the strength of legal logic, he never fell into the converse and more common error of connecting one abstraction only with another. The book on literature is about lawyers; the book on legislation is about social problems, themselves seen as real people in concrete situations. His lack of legal training probably helped as well as hindered, and perhaps his lack of historical training helped too; apart from the supervision of his graduate work, and some early help with documents from Hubert Hall, Plucknett had no instruction after his school days. It may turn out that sometimes he saw wrong, but he always saw for himself; and at least in that, and in the vividness and humour which that alone can generate, he was a true follower of Maitland. 
S. F. C. Milsom', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35545


Plumer, Herbert Charles Onslow, first Viscount Plumer (1857-1932), army officer, was born on 13 March 1857 at Sussex Place, Kensington, London. He was the younger son and second of four children of Hall Plumer (1827-1888) of Maplas Lodge, Torquay, and his wife, Louisa Alice Hudson (died 1903), daughter of Henry Turnley, also of Kensington. The Plumers traced their origins indirectly to north Yorkshire landholders: Plumer's great-grandfather was Sir Thomas Plumer (1753-1824), master of the rolls 1818-24, whose brother (another Hall Plumer) had briefly owned the manor of Bilton in Ainsty, north of York. 
The most important period of Plumer's military life was his command of 2nd army on the western front for most of the First World War. Plumer kept no diary, published only two short works, and had his papers destroyed before his death. His official biography, 'Plumer of Messines' (1935), was written by his friend and wartime subordinate General Sir Charles H. (Tim) Harington, chiefly to refute claims that Plumer had disagreed with Field Marshal Sir Douglas Haig over the conduct of the third battle of Ypres, portraying Plumer as throughout his career a paragon of loyalty and military propriety. Harington's diary and papers disappeared following the publication of his own memoirs in 1940. Letters from Plumer to his wife quoted by Harington have also disappeared, and he may not have seen the originals. Much of what Harington wrote about Plumer is therefore now unsupported, particularly for the period before 1915 when they first met. Other than a few remaining sources, the version of Plumer left to history is very much the one that he and those closest to him strove to present. While not necessarily false, it cannot be taken as authoritative. 
Plumer was educated at Mr King's Preparatory School, Brighton, and Eton College (1870-76), where Charles A Court (later Colonel Repington) was an exact contemporary, and Henry Rawlinson and Julian Byng were his juniors. In September 1876 Plumer was commissioned as a sub-lieutenant directly into the 65th foot (renamed the 1st battalion, the York and Lancaster regiment in 1881), and joined the battalion in India the following spring. In 1879 he was appointed adjutant, and in 1882 promoted captain, just before the battalion was posted to Aden. Significant for Plumer's early career was the presence in the battalion of Major George Wolseley, brother of Sir Garnet Wolseley. 
Plumer's first active service was in 1884 in the Sudan, when his battalion helped defeat the Mahdists at the battles of al-Teb on 29 February and Tamai on 13 March. Plumer received his only medals for bravery, the Mejidiye (fourth class with clasp) and the khedive's star, together with the first of numerous mentions in dispatches. The battalion then returned to Britain, and on 22 July 1884 at St Andrew's Church, Wells Street, London, Plumer married Annie Constance (died 1941), daughter of his father's cousin, the successful merchant George Goss of 5 Devonshire Place (and later 10 Park Crescent), London. An ambitious, snobbish, and sometimes vindictive woman, Plumer's wife played an important but discreet role in promoting his career. Their first child, Eleanor Mary (principal of St Anne's College, Oxford, 1940-53; died 1967), was born in 1885, followed by Sybil Margaret in 1887, Marjorie Constance in 1889, and their only son, Thomas Hall Rokby Plumer 
(later second Viscount Plumer; died 1944)
, in 1890. An estrangement between Plumer and Thomas, apparently at Lady Plumer's instigation, led to their not meeting or communicating after 1919. 
From 1885 to 1887 Plumer attended the army Staff College at Camberley. Like many officers of the period he seemed most concerned with sport, chiefly cricket, which became a lifelong interest. Plumer considered himself financially poor compared both to his fellow officers and to his own aspirations, and occasionally considered leaving the army because of financial constraints. He saw staff appointments as the key to his future, and lobbied hard for them. After regimental duty he was appointed in May 1890 as deputy assistant adjutant-general to the governor of Jersey, on the recommendation of Garnet Wolseley. However he failed to secure a further staff appointment, and on promotion to major joined the 2nd battalion of his regiment in Natal in November 1893. 
After the failed Jameson raid (December 1895 to January 1896), Plumer was sent with the local rank of lieutenant-colonel as special commissioner to Bulawayo, capital of Matabeleland, to disarm the troops of the British South Africa Company, returning successfully to Cape Town in March 1896. Almost immediately, the Matabele (Ndebele) rose in revolt, and Plumer returned to Bulawayo in May, having raised in Mafeking the Matabeleland relief force of about 750 mounted riflemen, together with 200 Zulu and Xhosa infantry. Scouting for Plumer's force was provided by Lieutenant-Colonel Robert Baden-Powell. A guerrilla campaign with brutalities on both sides wore down the Matabele, and led to peace negotiations in August between their chiefs and a delegation led by Cecil Rhodes, which has passed into imperial folklore. In December Plumer returned to Britain as a brevet lieutenant-colonel, and at the instigation of General Sir Redvers Buller he was appointed a deputy assistant adjutant-general at Aldershot. 
In July 1899 Plumer was sent back to Bulawayo to raise irregular troops in anticipation of war with the Boer republics. The South African War broke out on 9 October, by which time Plumer had raised and was ready to command the Rhodesia regiment of mounted riflemen. Plumer came under the overall command of Baden-Powell, who ordered him both to defend Rhodesia against a possible Boer incursion and to mount diversionary raids into the northern Transvaal. Baden-Powell was cut off and besieged by the Boers at Mafeking on 14 October, leaving Plumer with a largely free hand. By December Plumer had driven the few Boers who came his way back from the Rhodesia-Transvaal frontier, and began to move westward to help relieve Baden-Powell. The siege of Mafeking was not closely maintained, with the Boers often breaking away to skirmish with the various relief columns. In one such skirmish, at Vryburg on 31 March 1900, Plumer was slightly wounded. His force finally linked up with the main relief column under Colonel Bryan Mahon on 15 May, two days before it reached Mafeking and ended the siege. Plumer was promoted brevet colonel and local brigadier-general in August. For a further two years of guerrilla war his role was secondary but successful, securing him a modest reputation as determined and reliable. 
Plumer returned to Britain in April 1902 to command a brigade at Aldershot. In November he was promoted to major-general, and in August 1903 he was appointed to command part of the Colchester garrison. Having a higher public profile than both his battles and rewards might have suggested, in February 1904 he was advanced to high office as quartermaster-general on the new army council, on the recommendation of the outgoing commander-in-chief, Lord Roberts. Plumer gave enthusiastic support to the plans advanced by the Unionist secretary of state for war, H. O. Arnold-Forster, to restructure the army into virtually two separate branches of long-service and short-service troops. But with the change of government in November 1905 Plumer abruptly left his post and went on half pay. It was believed until his death that he had resigned rather than support the policy of the new Liberal secretary of state for war, R. B. Haldane. But in preparing his biography, Harington was told by Leopold Amery that Haldane had dismissed Plumer after lobbying by other senior officers, including Sir Charles Whittingham (adjutant-general 1904-9). 
Historians have speculated about the enemies who ruined Plumer's career and their motives. Most probably, in supporting Arnold-Forster's radical reforms, Plumer had simply identified himself too closely with a policy and a politician unpopular with many military and political power brokers. This incident seems to have been his guiding experience: from then on he took great care to present himself always as loyal both to his military superiors and to the army as an institution. After a year Plumer began to rebuild his career, commanding 5th division at the Curragh in Ireland 1906-9, and being promoted lieutenant-general in 1908. After a further two years on half pay, during which he again considered leaving the army, he took over northern command at York in August 1911. 
On the outbreak of the First World War in 1914, Field Marshal Sir John French, commanding the British expeditionary force (BEF), requested Plumer as commander of his 2nd corps in succession to General Sir James Grierson, who had died on 17 August, but was overruled by Lord Kitchener, secretary of state for war, who sent out General Sir Horace Smith-Dorrien. Plumer eventually arrived on the western front in January 1915 to command 5th corps, part of 2nd army under Smith-Dorrien, which was holding the southern sector of the Ypres salient. 
Plumer's next advancement came as the result of French's lack of confidence in Smith-Dorrien during the second battle of Ypres, a German attack beginning on 22 April which used poison gas for the first time on a large scale on the western front. On 27 April French ordered Smith-Dorrien to surrender command of all British and imperial troops in the Ypres sector to 5th corps' command, later officially designated as Plumer's Force, and on 6 May he replaced Smith-Dorrien in command of 2nd army with Plumer, who was given the rank of full general. The battle ended on 25 May with the German threat to Ypres itself thwarted. Although Plumer had commanded well, his promotion owed as much to French's feud with Smith-Dorrien, and his own reputation for loyalty and reliability, as to his fighting skill. 
For the next two years 2nd army front was used for diversionary operations and training. The marching cry, 'Take us back to Daddy Plumer's Army!' (Powell, 152), often quoted to suggest Plumer's popularity or military ability, could equally well have reflected the troops' desire to be going to a rest sector. In December 1915 the commander of 1st army, Sir Douglas Haig, succeeded French in command of the BEF. Plumer had been discussed as an actual or potential rival to Haig, and on 18 February 1916 Haig confronted Plumer in a private meeting, letting him know that he was on probation. Haig also later noted that he was himself under pressure to remove Plumer from command. This time Plumer survived the test, becoming a model of political support for Haig and army conventionality, although relations between them remained correct rather than cordial. 
Plumer's career had not previously been associated with artillery, but with his 2nd army staff he developed a fighting style based on calculated artillery fire plans and limited infantry advances, which was meant to gain ground systematically at the lowest possible loss. Contemporaries spoke of the mathematical calculations which went with this method as the beginnings of a true science of war. Later called the 'set piece battle', it became the prevailing style of the British army during the Second World War. How much of this was due to Plumer himself cannot be determined. One contemporary criticism, going back to Matabeleland, was that his success came from the selection of good subordinates and that he was lost without one. On 13 June 1916 Tim Harington was appointed by Plumer as his major-general general staff (chief staff officer), and supplied whatever was missing in Plumer's personal military abilities. As Brigadier-General John Charteris, Haig's chief intelligence officer, observed in 1917, 'No-one knows where Plumer ends and Harington begins' (J. Charteris, 'At GHQ', 1931, 228). 
Plumer's first major attack on the western front was the battle of Messines of 7-14 June 1917, from which he later took his title. This was a preliminary operation to secure the Messines Ridge south of Ypres before the main British offensive of the year, the third battle of Ypres (or Passchendaele). It was based on the simultaneous explosion of 450 tons of explosives placed underneath the German positions in twenty-one mineshaft tunnels. The eruption of these mines (two of which failed to detonate) at 3.10 a.m. on 7 June was the loudest man-made sound up to that date, and was clearly audible in London. The battle was effectively won on its first day, with Plumer's forces advancing 3000 yards for comparatively low casualties. 
After a disappointing opening to third Ypres, which began on 31 July under General Sir Hubert Gough of 5th army, Haig transferred command of the main battle front to Plumer, whose methodical approach offered a solution to the German defensive tactics. In three separate attacks, on which Plumer's military reputation largely rests, the battles of the Menin Road Ridge (20 September), Polygon Wood (26 September), and Broodseinde (4 October), 2nd army punched a broad hole some 5000 yards deep through the strongest German defences, offering the real hope that further attacks might breach them altogether. But renewed attacks by both 2nd and 5th army in the deteriorating autumn weather and ground conditions failed to deliver either a breakthrough or a German collapse. The immensely controversial and costly third battle of Ypres ended on 10 November. 
Already on 7 November Plumer had left with Harington to command the British contingent on the Italian front. Plumer's name was already being canvassed as a possible replacement for either Haig or General Sir William Robertson, the chief of the Imperial General Staff, and Lloyd George offered Plumer Robertson's post after his resignation in February 1918. Plumer declined, but developed a correspondence with the new chief of the Imperial General Staff, General Sir Henry Wilson, which reveals some political sophistication. 
After a comparatively uneventful winter in Italy, Plumer returned to command 2nd army at Ypres once more in March 1918. In the crisis of the German spring offensives, Plumer again acted as Haig's trusted subordinate, first thinning out his front to provide reinforcements, then defending the Ypres sector against the 'Georgette' offensive of 9-29 April, in the course of which he gave up all the gains of 1917. The defence of Ypres, during which Haig issued his famous 'backs to the wall' order, confirmed Plumer's skill in fighting a defensive battle. 
Harington left 2nd army on 8 May, after the line was once more stable. Thereafter, 2nd army played only a subsidiary part in the final allied offensives, as part of a larger formation commanded officially by King Albert of Belgium, which began its attacks on 28 September and had liberated Ghent by the war's end. 
However much he was bound by army conventionality, Plumer has always stood out from the traditional stereotype of British generals on the western front as incompetent and indifferent to their men's deaths. He appears to have made a genuine effort to plan on the basis of holding his own casualties down, although not at the expense of jeopardizing his own position with his superiors. During the war the main point in his favour was often that he was not someone else. But his reputation as a general seems always to have been high, and since his death it has grown in comparison with other twentieth-century commanders. 
For his war service Plumer received the thanks of parliament and a $30,000 grant. In December 1918 he arrived in Cologne as commander of the British army of occupation, relinquishing the post in April 1919. His next appointment was as governor of Malta, arriving with his wife in June. Next month he received promotion to field marshal and in October was created Baron Plumer. He firmly assuaged discontent, and oversaw the introduction of the first elected legislative assembly for Malta, inaugurated on 1 November 1921 by the prince of Wales. In 1922 during the Chanak crisis he lent significant political support and reinforcements to Harington, who commanded the allied occupation forces in Turkey. 
On leaving Malta in May 1924, although ageing and in ill health, Plumer accepted a further appointment as high commissioner to Palestine from August 1925 until July 1928 (including high commissioner for Transjordan in his last year). Although all his appointments had their difficult moments, his political enemies and critics paid tribute to Plumer's way of smoothing things over. He retired from public life in 1928 to 22 Ennismore Gardens, Knightsbridge, London, his permanent address since 1903. 
In addition to numerous unofficial and foreign awards, Plumer was made CB and aide-de-camp to the queen in November 1900, KCB in 1905, GCMG in 1916, GCVO and aide-de-camp general to the king in 1917, GCB in 1918, and GBE in 1924. He received honorary doctorates from Cambridge and Oxford. On 24 July 1927 he presided at the ceremony of dedication of the Menin Gate memorial at Ypres to the British missing of the salient. He took particular pleasure in being made president of the Marylebone Cricket Club in 1929, the same year that he was raised to the viscountcy as Viscount Plumer of Messines and Bilton. 
Plumer gave his own height as 5 feet 91/2 inches in 1896, but always appeared shorter to contemporaries, spindly legged, and pot-bellied. His pompous appearance and sometimes petulant behaviour earned him nicknames throughout his life, apart from the inevitable Little Plumer. The Dandy Plumer of his early career gave way to the Daddy Plumer of the First World War, together with Plum, sometimes lengthened to Plum and Apple from the ration jam supplied to the troops. Even Haig, who was only four years his junior, habitually called him 'the old man'. From early in his career he affected both a monocle and a bushy moustache, which together with his hair went grey in South Africa, and snowy white by the end of 1917. He has been suggested as the model for David Low's cartoon character Colonel Blimp. Plumer died at his Knightsbridge home on 16 July 1932 and was buried with a state funeral at Westminster Abbey on 20 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 35546


Plummer, Henry Crozier Keating (1875-1946), astronomer and mathematician, was born at St Giles's Road, Oxford, on 24 October 1875, the eldest son of William Edward Plummer (1849-1928), the new senior assistant at the University of Oxford's observatory, and later director of the Liverpool observatory, and his wife, Sarah Crozier. Plummer was educated at St Edward's School and Hertford College, Oxford. He obtained a first class in mathematical moderations (1895) and finals (1897) and, after winning an open scholarship, second class in natural science (physics, 1898). After a year as assistant lecturer in mathematics at the University of Manchester, and another year as assistant demonstrator in the Clarendon Laboratory, Oxford, he was in 1901 appointed by H. H. Turner second assistant in the University of Oxford's observatory. The first graduate to assist there, he was valued highly by Turner, who in 1907 recommended Plummer for a travelling fellowship to Lick Observatory, California, where for a year he practised spectroscopy and astrophysical observations. In 1912 Plummer was appointed Andrews professor of astronomy in the University of Dublin, royal astronomer for Ireland, and director of the Dunsink observatory. 
Plummer published a large number of original papers. Initially concerned with Oxford's participation in the 'Astrographic Catalogue', he also produced papers dealing with dynamical astronomy, the dynamics of globular clusters, stellar motions, and cometary motions (including non-gravitational forces), and on photographic astrometry. In his papers on the theory of correlation, with typical courtesy and determination, he effectively demolished the conclusions reached by the redoubtable Karl Pearson respecting the photometric observation of variable stars. Plummer pointed out the danger of using correlation analysis without due regard to the physical nature of the quantities involved. 
In 1912, by succeeding Sir Edmund Whittaker at Dunsink, Plummer became the only Oxford graduate between 1842 and 1939 to direct a British observatory. Plummer had recognized the limitations of Dunsink but was ambitious. Since 1896 the assistant was Charles Martin, who had been sent over from the Royal Greenwich Observatory. Since 1905 Dunsink had taken only meridian observations for time; their visual parallax observations with the 12 inch South refractor of 1868 had been superseded by photographic methods. The only useful instrument was the 15 inch Isaac Roberts photographic reflector of 1889. Keen to undertake some spectroscopy Plummer made repeated requests for modern instruments, but the university could not afford them, and war intervened. 
Whittaker had devised an ingenious method for using the 15 inch to provide extremely accurate comparisons of stellar magnitudes for variable stars. Plummer and Martin began an extensive programme of photoelectric photometric observations of short period variable stars. Their determinations of changes in brightness achieved a high accuracy of about 0.03 magnitude. Plummer's analysis of the periodicity in the light curves revealed some curious relationships between the phases of the harmonics of some of them. In 1913 he made an important analysis of the cepheid variable Zeta Geminorum. The observed Doppler displacements were inconsistent with earlier theories that this star was a binary, and Plummer showed that the discrepancies could not be attributed to the gravitational action of a third body. This led him to the important conclusion that the Doppler displacements were due, at least in part, to radial displacements of the stellar atmosphere, which he took to indicate a new physical class of stars. He was not then more explicit, but two years later an analysis of the observations of another variable, RR Lyrae, included the first attempt at a theoretical investigation of pulsation, and thereby made a founding contribution to establishing the pulsation theory of cepheid variable stars. He became an authority, and this sound and original work assisted A. S. Eddington to develop his theory of stellar structure. 
It must have been a hard decision for a keen practical astronomer to end his career after only twenty years. But Plummer was not happy in Ireland. He was a bachelor and townsman. Dunsink was 5 miles from the city, and the frustrations of the climate compounded poor equipment, enforcing a preoccupation with theoretical topics. It left him time to write the work for which he is best known, his valuable 'Introductory Treatise on Dynamical Astronomy' (1918), a stylish and thorough text on celestial mechanics. The political troubles in 1918 prompted him to leave. Although elected FRS in 1920, the possibility of the Glasgow observatory directorship failed to materialize that year. In 1921 Plummer was glad to accept the chair of mathematics at the Ordnance College, Woolwich (later the Military College of Science), which ended his astronomical career. He was not replaced at Dunsink; Martin was acting director until his death in 1936, when the observatory was closed. At Woolwich, Plummer produced two textbooks. 
In 1940 Plummer retired and settled in Oxford, where he was Halley lecturer in 1942. A fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society (RAS) since 1899, he was a council member (1935-42), twice vice-president, and president (1939-41); he did much to steer the RAS through the war years. In 1940 he undertook the preparation of a complete edition of Newton's works for the Royal Society but did not live to complete the task. 
Plummer was modest, calm, and self-effacing. As a mathematician interested in dynamics, the accuracy of measurements, and the theory of errors, he was competent; as an astronomer he was both competent and devoted to his true vocation. On 21 November 1924 he married an old friend, Beatrice Howard (1866/7-1946), former wife of Llewellyn Oliver and daughter of Henry Howard Hayward, a surgeon. She predeceased him by a few months, and this blow probably hastened his own death at his home at 3 Canterbury Road, Oxford, on 30 September 1946. They had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 35547


Plunkett, Edward John Moreton Drax, eighteenth Baron Dunsany (1878-1957), writer, was born on 24 July 1878 at 15 Park Square, Regent's Park, London, the son of John William Plunkett, seventeenth Baron Dunsany (1853-1899), MP for South Gloucestershire (1886-92), and his wife, Ernle Elizabeth Louisa Maria Grosvenor Burton (died 1916), daughter of Colonel Francis Augustus Plunkett Burton, of the Coldstream Guards. The Burtons were distant relatives of the Dunsany family and of Sir Richard Burton. Sir Reginald Aylmer Ranfurly Plunkett-Ernle-Erle-Drax was Plunkett's younger brother. 
After a first-rate education at Cheam School, Eton College, and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, Plunkett entered the Coldstream Guards in 1889 and served as a junior officer in Gibraltar and in the South African War. He succeeded as eighteenth Baron Dunsany on his father's death in 1899 and on 15 September 1904 he married Lady Beatrice Child-Villiers (1880-1970), daughter of the seventh earl of Jersey; they had one son. In 1905 Dunsany published 'The Gods of Pegana', the first of his many books of dreamlike stories. Unsuccessful in his bid to become MP for Wiltshire in the parliamentary election of 1906, and encouraged by W. B. Yeats, AE, and others, he took up literature rather than politics. The general public liked the gentleman author better than the critics did. His popular short stories include the thriller 'A Night at an Inn' and the shocking 'Two Bottles of Relish'. With their 'sting in the tail' endings, they were applauded for their plot twists. Most of Dunsany's fiction, however, gets by on his graceful escapism and the fairy-tale qualities found even in his easy, genteel essays on life and literature. 
Dunsany's plays were sometimes recycled from his short stories and longer fiction. Though slightly fey, they could be focused, for Dunsany had a firm grasp of the theatrical. 'The Glittering Gate', in which two burglars go to heaven and find nothing within but laughter, was performed at the Abbey Theatre in 1909. It was his first contribution to the Irish theatre movement. The Abbey also staged 'King Argimenes and the Unknown Warrior' in 1911. London premieres were given to 'The Gods of the Mountain' (1911) and 'The Golden Doom' (1912). 'The Gods of the Mountain' is perhaps Dunsany's best tragedy. In it a group of beggars impersonate the gods who turn them to stone for their insolence. The populace imagines it is their unbelief that has killed them and they beg forgiveness of the new idols. Some of his plays were also staged by amateur theatres and opened in the provinces: 'The Lost Silk Hat' premiered in Manchester in 1913 and 'The Tents of the Arabs' in Liverpool in 1914. Dunsany's 'Five Plays' were collected in 1914. 
During the First World War, Dunsany served as captain with the 5th Inniskilling fusiliers in France and was wounded during the Easter rising in 1916. He continued to write and publish: 'Fifty-One Tales' appeared in 1915 and 'Tales of War' in 1918. A number of his plays were first staged in the United States, including 'A Night at an Inn' and 'The Queen's Enemies' (New York, 1916), 'Laughter of the Gods' (New York, 1919), and 'The Murderers' (Indianapolis, 1919). These dramas came from an age in which productions, even with exotic settings and costumes, were relatively inexpensive to mount and tickets were affordable for most audiences. Dunsany warned critics not to dig too deep into his works, which were meant (he said) simply to entertain. Yet those who dig find more intellectual substance than expected lying underneath the grotesque and the fanciful or the sentimental. 
Dunsany lived with his wife at Dunstall Priory in Kent, but he wrote about his Irish estates, including a castle in co. Meath, and about the ascendancy's sports of hunting, shooting, and fishing. The land of the little people, leprechauns, fairies, and banshees continually fascinated him. Dunsany thought of himself chiefly as a poet, but his poetry was not much better than his amateur pottery. He published seven volumes of verse as well as a collected edition, and T. S. Eliot (whom he thought inferior to Walter de la Mare) appreciated his technical mastery. Yet Dunsany's verse was more gossamer than good; fame, which Dunsany portrayed in his play 'Fame and the Poet' (1924) as a cheap Cockney harridan, eluded him on that score. 
From his excellent first novel, 'The Chronicles of Rodriguez' (1922), Dunsany showed more promise in fantastic novels of mauve, if not purple, prose. Set in elfland and the spirit world of Welleran with gods older than human history, these chronicle the strange journeys of his eccentric characters Joseph Jorkens (who claimed to have wedded a mermaid) and Colonel Polders. His hero of the age of Don Quixote looks through magic windows into the past and the future and, thanks to a magician, visits distant planets. Joseph Wood Cotton found all this rosy romance too easy and compared Dunsany to a little old lady who cheats at solitaire. 
Dunsany's plays continued to be produced throughout the 1920s, including 'If' and 'Cheezo' (1921), 'His Sainted Grandmother' (1926), 'The Jest of Hahalaba', and 'Mr Faithful' (1927). These imaginative works were easily adapted for broadcast to attentive radio fans. Dunsany described his life in such novels as 'The Curse of the Wise Woman' (1933) and in autobiographical works in the 1930s: 'My Ireland' (1937) and 'Patches of Sunlight' (1938). He liked to pose as a prolific amateur, dashing off fantasies with a quill pen, but he was Byron professor of English literature at the University of Athens from 1940 to 1941, a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature, and a member of the Irish (and other) academies. He was also president of the Authors' Society and a recipient of an honorary DLitt from Trinity College, Dublin (1940), and of the Harmsworth literary award. He published two further autobiographical pieces during the Second World War: 'While the Sirens Slept' (1944) and 'The Sirens Wake' (1945). 
In Dunsany's only science fiction novel, 'The Last Revolution' (1951), computers grow so intelligent they turn on their masters. What is man to do when his technological creatures attain the ability to think for themselves and to reproduce themselves? Having created fairy worlds all his life, 'in 'The Last Revolution', Dunsany toys with a dystopia' (Ashley, 153). His contribution to science fiction, small but significant, has never been properly assessed, nor has his later influence on television and cinema fantasies. While snobbery had something to do with a lord of Ireland becoming a lord of literature, Dunsany nevertheless possessed a vivid imagination and an entrancing if mannered style, and, in his day, he enjoyed a loyal and enchanted public. 
While dining with friends at Dunsany Castle, Dunsany had an attack of appendicitis and after an unsuccessful operation died at 97 Lower Leeson Street, Dublin, on 25 October 1957. He was buried at Shoreham, Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 35548


Plunkett, Sir Francis Richard (1835-1907), diplomatist, born at Corbalton Hall, co. Meath, on 3 February 1835, was sixth son of Arthur James, ninth earl of Fingall, and Louise Emilia, only daughter of Elias Corbally of Corbalton Hall. Educated at the Roman Catholic St Mary's College, Oscott, he was appointed attache at Munich in January 1855, and transferred in July of that year to Naples, where he remained until diplomatic relations were broken off on 30 October 1856. After a few months of service at The Hague he was transferred to Madrid, and in July 1859 was promoted to paid attache at St Petersburg. In January 1863 he was transferred as second secretary to Copenhagen, where he served during the troubled times of the war of Austria and Prussia against Denmark. After service at Vienna, Berlin, Florence, and again at Berlin, he was promoted to secretary of legation at Tokyo in 1873, then at Washington, DC, in 1876, and became secretary of embassy at St Petersburg in 1877. He was transferred to Constantinople in 1881, but after a few months of service, during part of which he was in charge of the embassy in the absence of the ambassador, Lord Dufferin, he was moved to Paris, with promotion to the titular rank of minister-plenipotentiary. 
In July 1883 Plunkett was appointed British envoy at Tokyo, and while there in 1886 he was made KCMG. In 1886 and 1887 he took part as the senior British delegate in the conferences on the very difficult question of the revision of the treaties between Japan and the European powers. These conferences considered the conditions on which the rights of extra-territorial jurisdiction enjoyed by those powers over their nationals resident in Japan should be abandoned. The conditions agreed upon at the conference were considered by the Japanese government to be too onerous, and it was not until 1894 that a definitive agreement was reached. In 1888 Plunkett was transferred to Stockholm, and in 1893 to Brussels, where in 1898 and 1899 he took part in the conferences for the abolition of bounties on the export of sugar and for the regulation of the liquor trade in Africa. In September 1900 he was appointed British ambassador at Vienna, and held that post until his retirement on pension in October 1905. He was made GCMG during his residence at Brussels in 1894, GCB in 1901, and GCVO in 1903. He was made a privy councillor on his appointment as ambassador, and received from the emperor Franz Josef the grand cross of the order of Leopold on leaving Vienna, where his natural kindliness and urbanity had made him universally popular. 
Plunkett married on 22 August 1870 May Tevis, daughter of Charles Waln Morgan, of Philadelphia, with whom he had two daughters. He retired to Paris, where he died on 28 February 1907 in his home, 76 avenue Malakoff, and was buried at Boulogne-sur-Seine. His wife survived him. He was an orthodox career diplomat who reached ambassadorial level but had no major effect on British policy. 


@@@@@


doc= 35549


Plunkett, Sir Horace Curzon (1854-1932), agricultural reformer and politician, was born at Sherborne House, Gloucestershire, on 24 October 1854, the third of four sons and sixth of seven children of Edward Plunkett, sixteenth Baron Dunsany (1808-1889), and his wife, the Hon. Anne Constance Dutton (1816-1858), younger daughter of the second Baron Sherborne. Plunkett's mother died of consumption when he was three years old, and his father then moved the family from England to his hereditary home in Ireland, Dunsany Castle, co. Meath, where his remaining childhood was overshadowed by death and a depressing evangelical religious environment. Consumption also lost him a younger brother when he was ten, a sister when he was twelve, and his eldest brother when he was thirty. He was educated at Eton College and at University College, Oxford, where he obtained a second class in modern history in 1877. After Oxford he returned to Dunsany Castle, where he acted as agent for his father. Plunkett participated fully in the social life of the countryside, and particularly enjoyed hunting. Less typically for his social class, he established, in 1878, in association with the tenants on the estate, a Dunsany co-operative society, the germ of the idea that was to dominate his later life. In 1879, however, he left for America, after the threat of tuberculosis had dictated a drier climate. There, at Wyoming in the Rockies, he took up ranching, which he continued until the late 1880s. This gave him an experience of agriculture dramatically different from that of Ireland and contributed a perspective that was profoundly to influence his later attitudes. 
It was primarily family responsibilities that brought Plunkett back to Ireland. His sole surviving brother, who lacked the aptitude for business, succeeded their father as Baron Dunsany in 1889, and the responsibility for the estate and other business activities then fell on Plunkett's shoulders. In addition, Plunkett had become guardian to his eldest sister's children after the death of their father in 1884. In recognition of the responsibilities likely to accrue to him, Plunkett's father left him a more substantial inheritance than he might otherwise have expected, and this gave him the financial independence to pursue the cause of agricultural co-operation, in which, he believed, lay the key to the future stability and well-being of Ireland. 
Influenced by the ideas of the British co-operative movement, the robust and egalitarian life of the American west, and the agricultural modernization of Denmark, Plunkett evolved a model of co-operation to meet the particular conditions of Irish agriculture. Believing that the Irish small farmer required greater independence and autonomy, he set about building up a movement of mass participation in which rural communities could establish co-operatively the infrastructure for improved agricultural production, processing, and distribution. This ideal he encapsulated in the slogan 'Better farming, better business, better living'. He saw in this method not only the prospect of greater material prosperity and a moral regeneration based on a new sense of community, but also an alternative social and moral order to the landlord system now in its demise. 
However, Plunkett's efforts attracted the hostility of powerful forces in Irish politics and society. To his own class he appeared to be joining those arrayed against its traditional authority and continuing interests; to the nationalist party he was deflecting popular energies away from the overriding imperative of political independence; for the shopkeeper and money-lending class which provided much of the rural leadership of the parliamentary nationalist movement his ideas represented a threat to their business interests. He responded by taking a perverse pride in this multi-partisan opposition: he compared his own popularity with that of 'a dog on a tennis court', and cited it as evidence of the unwillingness of Irish politicians to confront the real practical issues that faced their society. In publishing the first comprehensive exposition of his philosophy, 'Ireland in the New Century', he included -- against the advice of friends -- attacks upon the role in Irish society of the Catholic clergy and on the Irish people in general for their 'lack of moral fibre', thus further isolating himself. Despite these problems, the Irish Agricultural Organization Society, which he founded in 1894, introduced into Irish agriculture new technical and business methods and created many local co-operative societies which themselves added a significant institutional component to the fabric of a relatively impoverished rural environment. 
While Plunkett tended to disparage politics, it was a necessary means for the achievement of his ideals. He sought to find a middle ground upon which he could build his agricultural work, but showed a singular lack of political skill in negotiating a position for himself. He made that task the more difficult by standing, successfully, as the Unionist candidate for the South County Dublin constituency in 1892. He thus acquired the parliamentary position he wanted for the advocacy of his ideas, but at the cost of confirming the distrust of nationalist politicians, among whose supporters he had principally to work in order to achieve his goals. He was able, however, in parliament and through his good relations with the Unionist chief secretaries for Ireland, Arthur and Gerald Balfour, to advance his cause in significant ways, especially in the creation in 1899 of an Irish department of agriculture and technical instruction, with himself as its first vice-president. His work in the interests of a predominantly Catholic and nationalist population inevitably involved him in considerable conflict with Irish Unionists, in whose cause he had been elected, and in 1900 the opposition of a rival Unionist lost him his seat. He had thus managed in a short parliamentary career to earn the enmity of very large and influential sections of both major communities in Ireland. He had also left himself extremely vulnerable in his role as agricultural reformer. The vice-presidency of the new department had been specifically linked to membership of parliament and junior office in the government, and although he was left in the position by the Unionists, and even for a short time by the Liberals, this was clearly anomalous, fiercely resented by the nationalist party, and eventually brought to an end by his resignation in 1907. 
Plunkett's achievements in Irish public life were dogged by an ambivalent attitude to nationalism. Sympathetic in private, he seemed to believe that opposition to nationalism publicly and retention of his formal unionism secured for him a detachment helpful in his work, but in reality it greatly diminished his influence and made him subject to suspicion on both sides. In part this was the product of a real dilemma. Deeply hostile to the hold of the post-Parnell parliamentary nationalist movement on the political structures of Ireland, he discerned in its organization an underlying sectarianism and an abuse of patronage that he considered profoundly anti-national; there was thus good reason for his aloofness from it. Significantly it was in Sinn Fein, and especially in the ideas of Arthur Griffith, that Plunkett found a nationalism with which he was much more able to identify, especially in the common attachment to ideas of self-reliance and moral regeneration. His diverse public activities demonstrated a major commitment to Irish nationality, even if not to the specific forms taken by nationalism. He had been instrumental in the creation in 1895 of the Recess Committee, a multi-party forum for the consideration of issues of importance to Ireland; the creation of the department of agriculture grew out of its initiatives. The representative Council of Agriculture, which advised this department, he sometimes characterized as an Irish parliament in embryo, and he became increasingly inclined to define Ireland's interests in terms of a distinctive nationality. By the time he was appointed to chair the Irish Convention of 1917-18, his nationalism had become overt and his primary, but by then futile, hope was to avoid partition. In 1919 he founded the Irish Dominion League, in a further attempt to stop partition. He was a member of the Congested Districts board from its inception in 1891 until 1918, a role that complemented his other agricultural and industrial interests. In 1922 he became a senator of the Irish Free State, and thus a target of its republican opponents during the civil war; his house, Kilteragh, at Foxrock in co. Dublin, was burnt down in 1923. This, and failing health, caused him to move to England, where he lived until his death. 
While deeply committed to the interests of Ireland, Plunkett's vision extended well beyond its boundaries. His views on agricultural co-operation greatly influenced the development of the co-operative movement throughout the world, and the Plunkett Foundation for Co-operative Studies, which he endowed, and Plunkett House, now the headquarters of the Irish Co-operative Organisation Society, remain as living tributes to his work. His breadth of vision was also a product of the multi-national influences upon him; to his natural affinity with both Ireland and England was added his extensive experience of life and work in America. This, linked to the theories and policies he promulgated, made him a much respected adviser of agricultural leaders and governments in the United States, and he enjoyed an especially close relationship with President Theodore Roosevelt. His American associations also enabled him to play a role in relations between the British and United States governments during the First World War. 
Plunkett was sworn of the Irish privy council in 1897, knighted in 1903, and elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1902 and of the Royal Irish Academy in 1929. He received honorary degrees of the universities of Oxford (1906) and Dublin (1908), and was elected an honorary fellow of University College, Oxford, in 1909. He was by nature an innovator -- his motor car was the first ever brought into Ireland and in his seventies he learned to fly. He never married, apparently not through lack of inclination, as he often wrote of his wish for wife and children. He played an important part in the lives of the children of his close relatives, especially those of whom he was guardian. The closest relationship in his life was that with Elizabeth, countess of Fingall, the wife of his cousin the earl of Fingall. Loyalty to his cousin appears to have set very strong limits to that association, but its emotional and personal importance may have made impossible for Plunkett marriage with anyone else. Plunkett's final years were greatly affected by ill health, in part the consequence of bungled X-ray treatment in 1916. He died at his home, the Crest House, St George's Hill, Weybridge, on 26 March 1932, aged seventy-seven, and was buried in St Mary's churchyard, Byfleet. 


@@@@@


doc= 35550


Drax, Sir Reginald Aylmer Ranfurly Plunkett-Ernle-Erle- (1880-1967), naval officer, was born in London on 28 August 1880, the second of the two sons of John William Plunkett, later seventeenth Baron Dunsany (1853-1899), and his wife, Ernle Elizabeth Louisa Maria Grosvenor Burton (died 1916), only child of Colonel Francis Augustus Plunkett Burton, of the Coldstream Guards. In 1916, on inheriting estates from his mother, he assumed by royal licence the additional names of Ernle-Erle-Drax. Thereafter he was usually known by the surname of Drax. His elder brother was Edward John Moreton Drax Plunkett, eighteenth Baron Dunsany. 
After attending Cheam School Plunkett joined the training ship 'Britannia' and began service at sea in 1896. He was promoted lieutenant in 1901 and went on to specialize in torpedo. His request to attend the Staff College, Camberley, was granted and there he took an intense interest in 'the subject of staff training and its application -- then quite unthought of in higher naval circles -- to the needs of the navy' ('The Times', 12). In 1912 he received early promotion to commander and when in 1913 Admiral Beatty was given command of the battle-cruiser squadron, he chose Plunkett as his war staff officer. In this capacity he served in the 'Lion' at the actions of Heligoland Bight, Dogger Bank, and Jutland. He was promoted captain in 1916 and ended the war in the cruiser 'Blanche' which was employed in laying minefields in the Heligoland Bight close to the enemy's main ports. For his services in the 'Lion' he was mentioned in dispatches and he was appointed to the DSO when commanding the 'Blanche'. On 15 April 1916 he married Kathleen (died 1980), only daughter of Quintin Chalmers MD and sister of the future Rear-Admiral W. S. Chalmers, the naval biographer. They had four daughters and one son. 
Prior to the war Drax had been a founding member of the Naval Society which from 1913 had issued the quarterly 'Naval Review' to encourage new ideas on naval matters. He was one of the group of younger officers of the Grand Fleet known as the Young Turks who increasingly criticized the defensive approach of the Admiralty. During the later years of the war Drax privately wrote at length on what he saw as the failings of the navy leadership. In 1917 he noted of the strategies adopted by the Admiralty that 'Masterly strategy, deep knowledge of the Art of War, keen and rapid brain-work -- these were pitiably absent' (Marder, 5.325). Drax kept up such criticism of ineffective policy throughout and following his career, and later wrote 'The Art of War' (1943) and other works which attacked aspects of defence strategy. 
Intellectually Drax 'stood out among his brother officers' ('The Times', 12), and his talents were recognized within the navy. In 1919 he became first director of the new Royal Naval Staff College at Greenwich where he served until 1922. Having proved himself a brilliant staff officer and thinker and also as a fine captain of a cruiser, he was the ideal person for this appointment as he showed it was possible to be both. He did much to make staff work respectable in a navy where thinkers were apt to be regarded with suspicion. He went next as president of the Inter-Allied Naval Control Commission in Berlin until 1924. In 1926-7 he commanded the 'Marlborough' in the 3rd battle squadron. 
In 1928 Drax was promoted rear-admiral and in 1929 appointed to command the 1st battle squadron in the Mediterranean. As director of manning at the Admiralty (1930-32) he was involved in the recovery of the navy's morale after the Invergordon mutiny, an episode for which he had had no responsibility. In 1932-4 he was commander-in-chief, America and West Indies, where he cruised widely in his flagship and did much to promote friendly relations with the United States navy. He was promoted vice-admiral in 1932 and admiral in 1936, having been appointed CB in 1928 and KCB in 1934. In 1935-8 he served as commander-in-chief, Plymouth. In 1939 he headed the British section of the ineffectual Anglo-French military mission to Russia to attempt to gain agreement on opposition to German aggression. But John Weitz wrote of this mission that it 'had no real power to negotiate... Drax was, politically speaking, a eunuch' (Weitz, 195). The British and French were outmanoeuvred by Ribbentrop, the German foreign minister, who negotiated a Russo-German treaty of non-aggression while Drax's group was engaged in vague staff talks in Leningrad. 
In 1939-41 Drax was commander-in-chief at the Nore. He was involved in the evacuation of British troops from Dunkirk and the preparation of defensive measures for the anticipated German invasion. In 1941 Drax retired and returned to his estates in Dorset where he served as a private in the Home Guard. In the spring of 1943 he volunteered for duty as a commodore of convoy and served until 1945, with the distinction of never losing a ship. 
Drax was in many ways a radical, with his belief in the study of war and promotion of new ideas, and the additional concern he exhibited for the welfare, and training, of junior officers and men. In retirement he remained busy with the management of his estates at Charborough Park, near Wareham, Dorset, and wrote articles on a range of subjects. He developed ideas for the solar-heated swimming pool. He died in Poole, Dorset, on 16 October 1967. 


@@@@@


doc= 35551


Pode, Sir (Edward) Julian (1902-1968), steel executive, was born in Sheffield on 26 June 1902, the only son of Edward Pode (died 1902), a master at the Royal Grammar School, and his second wife, Lilla Telfer. His father died shortly before he was born and, at the age of six, he was taken in by his uncle, John Pode, at Slade in Devon. He then began as a weekly boarder, later becoming a full boarder, at the Mount House Preparatory School at Plymouth. In April 1916 he joined the training ship 'Conway', leaving in April 1918 in a senior position with a report noting his very good executive ability. After an adventurous period in the navy, including the need to jump onto the deck of a destroyer from the sinking armed merchant cruiser 'Otranto' in October 1918, he was discharged in March 1919, his eyesight having deteriorated badly under the strain of war. In April 1919 he joined a firm of chartered accountants in Sheffield, qualifying in 1924. 
In 1926 Pode entered the steel industry by joining the staff of Guest, Keen and Nettlefolds Ltd (GKN) at the Dowlais works, as district accountant. In 1930, when the heavy steel interests of that company were amalgamated with those of Baldwins Ltd to form the British (Guest Keen Baldwins) Iron and Steel Company Ltd (GKB), he was appointed secretary of the new company. In that same year he married Jean, daughter of Frank Finlayson, colliery owner of Gwynfa, Caswell, Swansea, and they set up home at Great House, Bonvilston, Glamorgan, where they brought up their son, John, and daughter, Judith. John, a Frazer scholar from Winchester, obtained a first in chemistry at Balliol College, wrote two chemistry books much used in schools, and became a housemaster at Eton College. 
In 1938 Pode became secretary and joint commercial manager of GKB, subsequently being appointed assistant managing director (1943) and joint managing director (1945). When, in 1947, the Steel Company of Wales Ltd (SCW) was formed for the purpose of modernizing the sheet-steel and tin-plate industries of south Wales, he was appointed managing director of the new company. For fifteen years Pode guided the company through one of the biggest development projects ever carried out in the steel industry, not only raising ingot steel output from 0.5 to 3 million tons per annum, but also converting the old tin-plate industry of Wales to the new cold-reduced method. 
These achievements reflected the construction of two new tin-plate works at Trostre, near Llanelli, and Felindre, near Swansea, and of a large-output sheet complex alongside the new strip mill at Port Talbot. In addition, the SCW, at its Orb works, Newport, and Richard Thomas and Baldwins jointly introduced the manufacture of the highly sophisticated electric sheet known as grain oriented. Pode's final major project, only completed after his death, was the construction of the new port for large ore carriers at Port Talbot. In May 1961 he was appointed deputy chairman of the SCW in addition to his position as managing director, becoming chairman in February 1962. In February 1967 he retired from the board. 
Across all the areas of business with which he was connected, Pode was notable for his quality of leadership combined with a certain humility. He was at all times a good listener, yet in handling people he was fearless and ever ready to set an example if a difficult human decision had to be taken. He took a leading part in the energy advisory council of the Ministry of Power, becoming chairman of the National Industrial Fuel Efficiency Service in 1965, and the shipping policy and ore investment committee of the British Iron and Steel Federation. His business interests were many: among them, in addition to those already noted, were directorships of GKN, the Steetley Company, and Lloyds Bank (where he was also chairman of their south Wales district committee). In addition he was deputy chairman of the Hodge Group, and chairman of France, Fenwick & Co. and the Prince of Wales Dry Dock Company, Swansea, Ltd. 
Pode was high sheriff of Glamorgan in 1948 and a JP from 1951 to 1966; in 1957 he became an honorary freeman of the borough of Port Talbot, in recognition of the prominent part his industrial activities had played in the advancement of the town's prosperity, this being one of the honours he prized most. He was knighted in 1959, and became a commander of the order of St John of Jerusalem in 1963. From 1962 to 1964 he was president of the Iron and Steel Federation, having been a council member since 1945, during which time he exerted great influence on the steel trade and was a particularly outspoken opponent of nationalization, even to the extent of threatening to quit the industry in 1964 if Labour won the general election. 
Pode was a man of wide interests in other fields, with a vivid sense of enjoyment in everything he did, accompanied by considerable skill. He was a keen competitive golfer throughout his life, at one time having a handicap of only 4, and always proved a difficult man to beat. An enthusiastic bridge player, his favourite hobby was undoubtedly racing. It was only in later years, however, when he started breeding bloodstock, that his ownership of racehorses yielded much success. He was also a keen farmer, and owned a fine pedigree herd of Guernsey cows. Towards the end of his life he also started to collect paintings, including those by William Stubbs and Richard Wilson. Never a great reader of books, he could absorb a brief with remarkable rapidity and recall the salient points accurately. There was much humour in him, and his business colleagues always hoped that he would be in to lunch for 'one knew it would be very entertaining'. 
In the last few months of his life, Pode suffered poor health. He died at his home, Great House, Bonvilston, Glamorgan, on 11 June 1968, and was buried in the village three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 35552


Podmore, Frank (1856-1910), writer on psychical research, was born at Elstree, Hertfordshire, on 5 February 1856, third son of the Revd Thompson Podmore (1823-1895) and his wife, Georgina Elizabeth, daughter of George Grey Barton and Sarah Barton. After attending Elstree Hill School from 1863 to 1868, Podmore won scholarships to Haileybury College (1868-74), and to Pembroke College, Oxford (1874-8), where he obtained a second in classical moderations (1875) and a first in natural science (1877; BA, 1877; MA, 1883). In 1879 he was appointed to a higher division clerkship in the London post office. He developed an early interest in spiritualism, and during his undergraduate days contributed to the spiritualist periodical 'Human Nature'. He joined the newly founded British National Association of Spiritualists, and was profoundly impressed by a sitting which he had in September 1876 with the notorious slate-writing medium Henry Slade. But disillusion gradually set in (see his address to the association in 'The Spiritualist', 26 March 1880) and he turned to other related interests. 
At a spiritualist seance in 1881 Podmore met Edward Pease, a young stockbroker. They discovered a mutual interest in socialism, and joined the Progressive Association, founded in November 1882 to promote 'moral awakening' in a secular context. The following year they were captivated by the utopian philosophy of Thomas Davidson, a visiting Scottish sage, and with a few others formed a society, the Fellowship of the New Life, to promote Davidson's ideals. However, in January 1884 those who, like Pease and Podmore, had more concrete political aims formed a breakaway group which, at Podmore's suggestion, was named the Fabian Society. Podmore drafted the founding resolutions, and became secretary. But although he collaborated with Sidney Webb on a Fabian tract, 'Government Organisation of Unemployed Labour' (1886), his energies were soon transferred elsewhere. 
The Society for Psychical Research (SPR) had been founded in February 1882 to investigate certain kinds of ostensibly paranormal phenomena 'without prejudice or prepossession' and in a scientific spirit. Podmore and Pease joined at once, and shortly became council members. Podmore devoted himself especially to the collection of first-hand testimony concerning apparitions, poltergeists, and the like. His name was added as a co-author to Edmund Gurney's immense 'Phantasms of the Living' (2 vols., 1886). Thereafter Podmore developed in numerous contributions to the SPR's 'Proceedings' a position best described as minimalist. He accepted telepathy, but beyond that he would not go. 'Veridical' apparitions or correct mediumistic communications, where not otherwise explicable, might be set down to telepathy with living persons. Paranormal physical phenomena, such as poltergeists or the more notorious phenomena of the darkened seance room, were all fraudulent. This minimalist position Podmore defended with considerable (some thought excessive) ingenuity for the rest of his life. 
On 11 June 1891 Podmore married Eleonore Oliver Bramwell, the sister of his SPR colleague Dr J. Milne Bramwell, a well-known hypnotic practitioner. Over the next two decades Podmore published a series of books on psychical research which, whether aimed at the general or the more academic reader, maintained a consistently high standard. 'Apparitions and Thought-Transference' (1894) follows the lines of 'Phantasms of the Living', while 'Studies in Psychical Research' (1897) deals with a wider range of topics. 'Modern Spiritualism: a History and a Criticism' (2 vols., 1902) exhibits a wide-ranging scholarship, a force and lucidity of exposition, a coolly critical judgement, and a dry humour that have left it still unsuperseded. The same qualities are evident in his only extensive contribution to the literature of social reform, 'Robert Owen: a Biography' (2 vols., 1906). 
In 1907 Podmore was compelled to resign without pension from the Post Office because of alleged homosexual involvements. He separated from his wife, and went to live with his brother Claude, rector of Broughton, near Kettering. In quick succession Podmore published 'The Naturalisation of the Supernatural' (1908), a wide-ranging exposition of his views; 'Mesmerism and Christian Science' (1909), which, though in part drawn from 'Modern Spiritualism', constituted the most scholarly history of mesmerism and its offshoots to that date; 'Telepathic Hallucinations: the New View of Ghosts' (1909), a brief but well-constructed popular book; and 'The Newer Spiritualism' (1910), a thoughtful attempt to explain in his minimalist terms the cross-correspondences and related automatic writings which were occasioning great interest in the SPR. 
Podmore died by drowning in the New Pool at Malvern on the night of 14 August 1910. Despite certain odd circumstances, a verdict of 'found drowned' was returned. He was buried in Malvern Wells cemetery. There is no description of him, though a photograph has been a number of times reproduced from E. R. Pease, 'The History of the Fabian Society' (1925). He seems to have been a cheerful and sociable person. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35553


Poel, William (1852-1934), actor, director, and author, was born at 3 Storey's Gate, Westminster, London, on 22 July 1852, the third son and fourth child of William Pole (1814-1900), an accomplished engineer and musician, and his wife, Matilda (died 1900), the daughter of Henry Gauntlett (1762-1833), vicar of Olney, and the sister of the famous organist H. J. Gauntlett (1805-1876). 
The young William was influenced by his father's admiration for the Pre-Raphaelites and by other family members' artistic sensibilities. His youthful, graceful features induced Holman Hunt to paint him as Christ in 'The Finding of the Saviour in the Temple' (Birmingham Museums and Art Gallery) and Sir F. W. Burton to paint him as 'L'ecuyer' (Victoria and Albert Museum). Poor health denied him a formal education: he was tutored privately and never attended university. At the age of seventeen he was apprenticed to the building contractors Lucas Brothers, where he enjoyed the craftsmanship but loathed the office work. At the late age of twenty, he saw 'The Merchant of Venice' -- his further attendance was inhibited by his posting to Lucas Brothers' Sussex office. 
Pole returned to London in 1873 and resumed theatregoing. He rejected Henry Irving's famed production of 'The Bells' as blatantly sensational; more appealing to him was Charles Mathews's natural, graceful work in Sheridan's 'The Critic'. He was further impressed by visiting French companies, whose actors obeyed the rhythm of words, the reverse of Irving's practice with Shakespeare. Equally inspiring was Tommaso Salvini's performance as Othello at Drury Lane (1875), because Salvini studied the text scrupulously. Pole was possibly a supernumerary for Salvini, although when is unclear. 
After an abortive attempt to go on the stage in 1875, Pole joined Charles Mathews's company at Bristol in February 1876. When his original name was mis-spelt on a programme as Poel, he adopted the error permanently, possibly to spare his father, who had objected emphatically to his son's theatrical ambitions. Poel deliberately sought the regimen of provincial touring in order to study the stage closely; he was a general utility actor in Dublin and Liverpool, and then toured with Osmond Tearle for the remainder of 1876. For nine months in 1877 he was with James Scott's fit-up company, which led a precarious existence and frequently did not have sufficient funds even to rent a hall for performances: indeed, Poel's adventures with Scott around Yorkshire make for Dickensian reading. He rounded out his theatrical education with lessons from Edward Stirling and Edward Terry in London. By winter 1878 he was again touring the provinces, giving solo recitals. 
By now, perhaps influenced by the bare-bones experience with Scott's company, Poel believed that Shakespeare's plays were harmed by the proscenium arch, realistic sets, and extended intervals. He thought Shakespeare should be performed under Elizabethan conditions which encouraged the audience's own imaginative powers. This vision dominated Poel's life; he was oblivious of differing opinions, and was frequently dubbed an eccentric. In June 1879 he formed his own company, the Elizabethans, which gave costume recitals around England during the summer months. Its repertory comprised scenes from Shakespeare and the English classics. Performances were simple, convincing Poel that the text was pre-eminent and that Shakespeare had become obscured by self-serving theatrical practices. This led him, in 1880, to correspond with F. J. Furnivall, the president of the New Shakspere Society, about the text of 'Hamlet'. Poel conjectured that the first quarto edition was an intentional acting version, a theory which could be sustained through performance. The latter was given on 16 April 1881 at St George's Hall, London, where Poel employed a draped but otherwise bare platform stage. The cast, with Poel as Hamlet, comprised amateurs, including Maud Holt (later Lady Tree) as Ophelia. The audience was not particularly sympathetic, while the critics, cruelly derogatory, stressed the enterprise's experimental and educational aspects. Poel's understanding of Elizabethan staging was immature, but he had studied the text carefully to elicit what performance requirements the play manifested, and he eschewed innovation and startling effects. However, this obscure 'Hamlet' production failed to impress. 
Poel widened his experience from October 1881 until Christmas 1883 as manager of the Royal Victoria Hall and Coffee Tavern (later the Old Vic Theatre), Emma Cons's experiment to provide a respectable, teetotal place of amusement at reasonable prices. Poel was effective in reducing expenses, maintaining the tone of the amusements, and attracting larger audiences. In 1884 he gained valuable experience as stage manager of F. R. Benson's touring company. Benson also bought his adaptation of W. D. Howells's novel 'A Foregone Conclusion', which, as 'Priest or Painter', was first performed at the Olympic, London (1884). Like Poel's other plays, it was never particularly successful, although Benson included it in his 1886 and 1887 seasons at the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre, Stratford upon Avon. 
After leaving Benson, Poel formed the Little Comedies company in 1885 to give recitals and one-act plays at various private events. The company, which variously included Kate Rorke, Rosina Filippi, and Elizabeth Robins, was enlarged in April 1888 to include Frederick Berlyn as Poel's partner. The repertory included six playlets and eleven adaptations by Poel, none of which, perhaps surprisingly, was at all highbrow. 
Poel was also affiliated with the Shakespeare Reading Society, founded in 1875 by students at University College, London, with Henry Irving as its first president. He was appointed instructor in 1887 and remained with the society until 1897. Intense preparation preceded each of the society's staged readings of minimally edited plays without act and scene divisions. The readings, occasionally costumed, were given at various halls and institutes in London, which emphasized their adult educational purpose. 
By now, Poel believed that Shakespeare's speeches should be spoken rapidly, with proper inflection but exaggerated emphasis. For this theory he was indebted to Samuel Brandram (1824-1892), who could recite entire Shakespeare plays from memory. Poel also theorized that the original sound of Elizabethan plays could be captured through 'tuned tones' and key words in each speech. He was vague in defining these tones or tunes, although they were a form of inflection. He preferred working with amateurs, particularly women, because he believed their voices were more flexible than, and without the ingrained habits of, professionals. He quickly dismissed any actor who could not 'take the tones' he drilled into every cast. Lewis Casson, in several Poel productions, was adept at demonstrating Poel's principles, while Elsie Fogerty (1865-1945), another Poel performer, developed her elocution theories from him at the Central School of Speech Training and Dramatic Art (where Laurence Olivier was an early pupil). 
The apogee of the Reading Society's achievement was a performance of 'Measure for Measure' (1893), for which the stage of the Royalty was converted to resemble the Fortune Theatre of Shakespeare's day. However, the ultimate effect created was still of one stage picture within another. Nor, despite his commitment to textual integrity, could Poel overcome his puritanical Victorianism, as he excised all the play's bawdry: for example, he changed 'he has got a wench with child' to 'he will shortly be a father'. 
On 28 April 1894 Poel married Ella Constance Locock ('c'.1862-1950), the eldest daughter of Revd Alfred Locock (died 1923) of Putney Heath. She had considerable intellectual powers and was an accomplished musician. Although an invalid for many years, she assisted and encouraged Poel in his work; their only daughter died before Poel. In 1894 Poel also founded the Elizabethan Stage Society, a development of the Shakespeare Reading Society. Before its dissolution in 1905, the society gave thirty productions of plays by Shakespeare, Marlowe, Jonson, Beaumont and Fletcher, and some modern playwrights. 
For the society's first production of 'Twelfth Night', at Burlington Hall (21 June 1895), Poel purchased a valuable wardrobe of Elizabethan costumes and asked Arnold Dolmetsch, the researcher of early music and instruments, to provide authentic music. (Interestingly, for a 1897 revival, Poel conceived each role in the singing range: for example, Malvolio as a baritone, Sir Andrew a falsetto.) The 1895 production, however, provoked the first of several attacks from William Archer, who found the society's acting amateurish, but who did recognize that Poel had rescued Shakespeare from inappropriately elaborate scenery and spectacle. Archer was dubious about using Elizabethan costumes, which would be decidedly anachronistic in, say, 'Julius Caesar'. In fact, Poel often ignored anachronisms, as when he incorporated Schubert's music into 'The Two Gentlemen of Verona' later that year. This play was to attain distinction in 1910 when Herbert Beerbohm Tree, usually antagonistic to Poel, surprisingly invited him to contribute to the annual Shakespeare festival at His Majesty's. The revival featured a stage extended over the orchestra pit, and included in its production staff were two subsequent adherents, William Bridges-Adams and Nugent Monck. On this occasion A. B. Walkley thought some of the Elizabethan conventions quaint, but that Poel had captured the play's atmosphere. Poel also received support from Bernard Shaw, who found 'The Comedy of Errors' (1895) delightful and the amateurs quite good. 
When Poel tackled other dramatists the results were equally mixed. He liked Marlowe's 'Dr Faustus', but, again contrary to his avowed principles, did not hesitate to cut and rearrange the middle section, which he considered weak structurally. The play was performed on a reproduction of the Fortune stage within St George's Hall in July 1896. Again Shaw praised the result, declaring Poel's the only way to stage Elizabethan drama. A production of Poel's adaptation of 'Arden of Feversham' in 1897 was unsuccessful. Poel pared down the text of John Ford's 'The Broken Heart' (1898) and employed semi-classical costumes. With well-acted leading roles, the production avoided the often-made charges of pedantry. More success followed in 1899 with Jonson's 'The Alchemist', the tight text of which required little alteration. 
Poel turned to contemporary drama in 1899 with his production of Swinburne's 'Locrine', which failed because of Swinburne's verse and the cast's rendition of it. In comparison, and despite a philistine audience, Milton's 'Samson Agonistes' was a success in 1900; the piece was recited rather than acted, but a strong pictorialism was still conveyed. Poel had produced it because he believed drama should educate rather than merely entertain, and he took it subsequently to Manchester, Bedford, and Cambridge. His range also embraced Calderon's 'La vida es sueno' and Kalidasa's Hindu classic 'Sakuntala' (both 1899). 
The death of his mother in 1900 preyed on Poel's mind, for he had been a devoted son. The outcome was his most successful and money-making venture, the morality play 'Everyman'. Although it was finally produced in the Master's Court of the Charterhouse on 13 July 1901, he had tried first to use Westminster Abbey and then Canterbury Cathedral, but was denied permission. After the initial two performances Poel revived it in Oxford and Brighton, and in July 1902 presented it for a month at the Imperial Theatre, London. Afterwards he frequently toured it in numerous provincial cities with Philip Ben Greet as his partner. The play brought Poel (who played Adonai) instant recognition, and his seriousness and simplicity of method, together with his ingenuity and discretion, were received enthusiastically. 
Despite the financial and artistic success of 'Everyman', the Elizabethan Stage Society continued to lose money. Its last production was 'Romeo and Juliet' (1905), which was notable for the casting of teenagers as Romeo and Juliet (Esme Percy and Dorothy Minto). Thereafter, the society's assets were auctioned. 
Poel remained undefeated. In 1906 he visited America to promote tours of 'Everyman' given by Ben Greet. Later that year he undertook the role of Father Keegan in Shaw's 'John Bull's other Island', and impressed Shaw deeply. Shakespeare was never far away. Ben Iden Payne (1881-1976), the director of Annie Horniman's new Gaiety Theatre in Manchester, invited him to stage the little-performed and controversial 'Measure for Measure' as the inaugural production on 11 April 1908. C. E. Montague of the 'Manchester Guardian' praised both Poel's performance of Angelo and the overall production, which was taken to Stratford ten days later. The following year Poel produced a 'Macbeth' notable for a feminine, humanized Lady Macbeth and the innovation of Duncan replacing Banquo as the second apparition, which Bridges-Adams adopted. Much less successful was the 1912 'Troilus and Cressida'. Poel cut the text insensitively, ignoring the play's poetry, and cast females as Aeneas, Paris, and Thersites, the last played as a clown with a Scottish accent. However, he discovered Edith Evans (then a milliner), who made her first London stage appearance as Cressida. In 1914 he revisited 'Hamlet' for the third time, rearranging the text to mirror the English political conditions of 1600. More successful was his 1924 staging of 'Fratricide Punished', an Elizabethan burlesque version of 'Hamlet'. 
The Elizabethan Stage Society was resurrected in 1927 as the Elizabethan Stage Circle, founded specifically to produce a play on a full-sized platform stage. This was built inside the Holborn Empire, where the stage extended out over the stalls. Characteristically, Poel chose a play of dubious dramatic merit, Samuel Rowley's 'When you See me, you Know me', because of its relevance to the contemporary controversy over the revision of the prayer book. Later, in 1931, the circle produced 'Coriolanus', which was notable for the eccentricities in costuming Poel employed: Coriolanus wore a leopard skin, Volumnia a Gainsborough dress, and Virgilia a Pre-Raphaelite dress, while the citizens were clothed as French railway porters. 
When not producing plays, Poel was a fervent polemicist, and wrote countless articles, letters to the press, and books, including 'Shakespeare in the Theatre' (1913), 'What's Wrong with the Stage?' (1920), and 'Monthly Letters of William Poel' (1929). Always on the theatrical fringe himself, he frequently attacked the commercial theatre for suppressing good productions. He fought against the censor, believing public opinion provided sufficient control. He complained about speculation in theatre rents, and inveighed against long runs, which tied up theatres and were bad for actors. He thought provincial repertory theatres provided good training, particularly for a national theatre, which he supported ardently. One cherished goal was to build a replica of the Globe Theatre as a memorial to Shakespeare, which only became a reality more than sixty years after his death. 
There were, too, honours and recognition. Harley Granville-Barker (who had played Richard II for Poel in 1899 and who embodied Poel's theories in his 'Prefaces to Shakespeare'), along with numerous distinguished guests, assembled on 1 December 1912 for a dinner at the Trocadero to honour Poel. In spring 1916 he was an invited lecturer in the drama department of the Carnegie Institute of Technology, Pittsburgh, and he returned there the same autumn to direct Jonson's 'The Poetaster'. In 1924 he received a $300 grant (the largest possible) from the Royal Society of Literature and a $100 civil-list pension. In 1929 he petulantly declined a knighthood because he would not share an honour conferred on other actors with whose staging practices his own disagreed. His eightieth birthday was celebrated with a portrait commissioned from Henry Tonks as Keegan in 'John Bull's other Island', which captures him well. He saw Gielgud's Hamlet in November 1934. Shortly afterwards he contracted bronchitis, and he died at his home, 85 Howard's Lane, Putney, on 13 December 1934. He was cremated at Golders Green. 
Poel's greatest contribution was to the modern tradition of staging Shakespeare, which was founded on his ideas. Harley Granville-Barker, W. Bridges-Adams, Robert Atkins, Tyrone Guthrie, Nugent Monck, John Gielgud, and countless directors have been influenced, knowingly or unconsciously, by him. Ironically, Poel is remembered more for what people think he achieved than what he actually accomplished. He was right in his vision of how the principles of Elizabethan staging could be applied in the modern theatre, but his cranky perfectionism made him the wrong person to implement it. 


@@@@@


doc= 35554


Poland, Sir Harry Bodkin (1829-1928), barrister, was born in London on 9 July 1829. He was the sixth son of Peter Poland, furrier, of Bread Street and Winchester Hall, Highgate, and his wife, Sarah Selina, daughter of Edward Matless Jackson, of London. He was educated at St Paul's School from 1841 to 1846 and was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1851. He took chambers first at 7 King's Bench Walk and afterwards at 5 Paper Buildings with his friend Hardinge Giffard. The two shared these chambers until Giffard became lord chancellor in 1885. Poland followed his uncle Sir William Henry Bodkin to the criminal bar, at the Old Bailey and at the Middlesex sessions at Clerkenwell. 
In 1855 Poland appeared for the crown in the successful prosecution of the bankers Sir John Dean Paul, William Strahan, and Robert Makin Bates for misappropriation of securities. This case, according to Poland's own account, made his fortune. In 1865 he was appointed counsel to the Treasury at the central criminal court and adviser to the Home Office in criminal matters; he held these offices for twenty-three years. He was a lucid and forceful prosecutor, who was regarded as being scrupulously fair. 
During his term of office Poland was necessarily engaged for the crown in most of the important criminal trials of the day. In 1876 he appeared for the crown against the 'Lennie' mutineers who were tried for the murder of the captain and two mates of their ship. In this case he came to the conclusion that one of the prisoners, an Austrian named Giuseppe Lettis, was not a party to the murder. He therefore withdrew the case against him and accepted his evidence for the crown. After the conclusion of the case the Austrian consul enquired whether Poland would accept a decoration from the Austrian government as an expression of its appreciation of his fairness to this prisoner. Poland declined the honour. 
Poland was also engaged for the crown in the 'Franconia' case ('R. v. Keyn', 1876) which raised the question of the jurisdiction of the English courts as regards crimes committed at sea. He also appeared on occasion for the defence: in 1868 he appeared for Edward John Eyre, governor of Jamaica, in both the criminal and the civil proceedings. 
Besides his criminal work, Poland acquired a considerable practice in other common-law work, especially rating and licensing. He became a bencher of the Inner Temple in 1879. In 1888 he took silk and resigned as Treasury counsel. He now appeared as leading counsel for the defence in criminal cases. His quiet and unimpassioned style was successful with juries, and he was probably assisted by the reputation for fairness which he had acquired as a prosecutor. He is said to have been one of the earliest exponents of the defence of kleptomania. In 1895 he retired from practice and was knighted. He was said to have refused the offer of a High Court judgeship. In 1874 he had succeeded Sir W. H. Bodkin in the recordership of Dover, an office which he retained until 1901 when he was succeeded by his cousin, Sir Archibald Henry Bodkin, afterwards director of public prosecutions. 
During his retirement Poland was a frequent correspondent of 'The Times' on matters of legal and antiquarian interest, and he was a familiar and picturesque figure, in his black skull cap and slightly old-fashioned garb, in the library of the Inner Temple, where he spent much time verifying his references. 
Poland never married. His main interest in life until his retirement was his practice, although in his earlier years he was fond of the theatre and of swimming. He was, however, an alderman of the London county council from 1893 to 1901, and gave useful evidence at governmental inquiries into the law of licensing and rating and the defence of poor prisoners. He was also an influential advocate of the reform which was ultimately achieved by the 'Criminal Evidence Act' of 1898 under which accused persons and their wives or husbands were permitted to give evidence for the defence. He was, however, an opponent of the creation of a court of criminal appeal. He published a handbook on trade marks in 1862 and 'A Century of Law Reform' in 1901. 
Poland survived into his ninety-ninth year, with his mental capacity intact until long past his ninetieth birthday. He died in his sleep at his house, 28 Sloane Gardens, Chelsea, London, on 2 March 1928. 


@@@@@


doc= 35555


Pole, Sir Felix John Clewett (1877-1956), railway manager and industrialist, was born at Little Bedwyn, Wiltshire, on 1 February 1877, the second son of Edward Robert Pole, the local schoolmaster and an active churchman, and his wife, Emma, the youngest daughter of Charles Clewett of Wincanton, Somerset. He attended school in the villages of Little Bedwyn and Ramsbury. 
At the age of fourteen, upon the nomination of Walter Hume Long, MP for North Wiltshire and later a director of the Great Western Railway (GWR), Pole joined the GWR as a telegraph lad clerk. After two years he was promoted to the company's headquarters at Paddington in London, where he served in the offices of the telegraph superintendent, chief engineer, and (from 1904) general manager. In 1899 Pole married Ethel Maud (died 1966), the daughter of Horace Flack, a shoemaker in the West End of London; they had one son and two daughters. 
The general manager's office was a promising department for a man who was not qualified in technical subjects and who had a flair for verbal and written communication and negotiation. Pole edited and revived the moribund staff magazine ('Great Western Magazine') and became deeply involved from 1909 in the work of the conciliation boards. His abilities brought him rapid promotion. He was made head of the staff and labour department in the general manager's office in 1912 and in June of the following year was appointed chief clerk, a position he retained until 1919. He was rejected for military service in the First World War owing to poor eyesight. By March 1919 he was assistant to the general manager, then in the following August, after the death of the general manager (Frank Potter), he became assistant general manager to Charles Aldington. Aldington's ill health provided Pole with many opportunities to show his abilities. When Aldington was forced to retire Pole succeeded him in June 1921, at the age of forty-four, at $6000 a year. 
Two major tasks confronted Pole: to weld together the thirty-three companies which, under the 'Railways Act' of 1921, were now to form the enlarged GWR and to restore financial stability after wartime government control. The first was relatively straightforward because of the much greater size of the GWR compared with the other merging companies. In a number of cases the GWR already had financial and operational links and similar organizational structures and practices. However, Pole's skilful reconciliation of differing traditions and personalities helped to minimize friction and delay. The second he sought to accomplish through firmer control of departmental expenditure, with fixed targets, more intensive use of rolling stock, and a drive for increased traffic. Good customer relations and publicity were also given high priority. He frequently addressed chambers of commerce, rotary clubs, and civic functions. 
Receptive to new ideas, Pole pursued an imaginative, progressive policy, supported by his board. Strengthening of track and bridges enabled the most powerful (King class) locomotives in the country to be designed to haul heavier, high-speed trains. However, he largely failed in his efforts to persuade the industrialists and coalowners of south Wales to adopt larger capacity wagons. Fundamental to all of these initiatives was Pole's attempt to reform, with some success, the existing administrative arrangements, so that his office would have more control over major decisions and expenditure and there would be better co-ordination between departments. During his general managership there were substantial fluctuations in profitability. However, in Pole's last full year with the GWR (1928) the returns on revenue and capital, and the level of dividends, showed an improvement over the position he had inherited in 1921, despite the depressive effect on revenues of the ailing south Wales coal industry. 
Pole's understanding of the importance of good human relations was evident in his efforts through the 'Great Western Magazine', official meetings, and staff functions to foster a sense of 'family' among all ranks and to reinforce this through the attention which, for example, was given to reducing the accident rate among employees and the establishment of housing schemes. However, although he accepted the legitimacy of trade unions in normal negotiations, he was a firm negotiator. During the general strike (May 1926), when he was chairman of the railway General Managers' Conference, his energetic and resourceful action helped to break the strike. He regarded the strike as a 'deep conspiracy against the state' ('Great Western Magazine', 38, June 1926, 215) and as a betrayal of the corporate paternalism which he had advocated throughout his career. Returning workers were dealt with severely by the company. 
When he left the GWR to become the executive chairman of Associated Electrical Industries Ltd (AEI) in July 1929, Pole was earning $8000 a year. He received a gratuity of $5000 and a pension of $1000. His new salary was $10,000. He was retained by the GWR as a consultant but not, to his regret, as a director. However, he maintained some of his transport interests: in 1931 he revisited the Sudan and visited Egypt and Palestine to advise on railway policy and development; in 1933 he became a director of Airports Ltd; in 1934 he reported to the Northern Ireland government on transport conditions in the province (advocating co-ordination); and he was chairman (1936-45) of the government's Central Housing Advisory Committee on private enterprise housing. 
AEI was a newly formed group of companies (British Thomson-Houston, Ferguson Pailin, Edison Swan, Metropolitan-Vickers, and others), the second largest electrical group in the country in the late 1920s. The group was a full-line producer and innovator of electrical goods. Pole's first task was the integration of these large undertakings, with their conflicting traditions, practices, and capital structures. Initially he pursued a policy, supported by the group's American parent, of retaining autonomous units, with central direction through an executive committee of the holding company's board and inter-company committees. Pole sought to kindle a sense of identity within the group but the recession of the early 1930s revived old rivalries, delaying the co-ordination of manufacturing and marketing activities. However, a start was made by combining British and American interests in Australia, establishing AEI (India) Ltd, and concentrating the manufacture of electric motors, traction equipment, lamps, and so on. By frequent consultation with the key managers, Pole won their co-operation. Staff welfare was improved and a pension scheme was introduced. The group's involvement in national and international rings (which led Pole to travel very widely), the revival of the home market, and the group's improved efficiency and record of product innovation led to good profits from the mid-1930s. 
Disillusioned with 'laissez-faire', Pole came to believe in planned capitalism based on large competing firms, joining the executive committee of Harold Macmillan's Industrial Reorganisation League in 1934. AEI benefited from the rearmament boom and made a large contribution to the war effort of 1939-45. The Trafford Park works, Manchester, materially assisted in winning the battle of Britain by producing radar. 
Pole resigned the chairmanship in 1945, owing to blindness, but remained a director to 1955. He mastered braille and continued many former activities, including the chairmanship of the 'Reading Standard' and his lifetime pastimes -- fishing and natural history. Like his father he was a conscientious Anglican. He had been knighted in 1924 in Stanley Baldwin's dissolution list (Baldwin had been a GWR director, 1908-18). Selected for the office of high sheriff of Berkshire in 1947, he renounced the honour because of his disability. Pole died at 16 Bath Road, Reading, on 15 January 1956. 


@@@@@


doc= 35556


Pollard, Albert Frederick (1869-1948), historian, was born in Ryde, Isle of Wight, on 16 December 1869, the second son of Henry Hindes Pollard, a pharmaceutical chemist, and his wife, Emily May Cave. The family was Methodist in religion and Liberal in its politics. Pollard was to jettison Methodism, but not Liberalism, which marked his scholarship with something rather stronger than respect for the British parliamentary constitution. His elder brother Henry Bargman Pollard of Christ Church, Oxford, a biologist of great promise, was accidentally drowned at the age of twenty-six. From Felsted School, where he was taught by John Sargeaunt, Pollard went up to Jesus College, Oxford, in 1887 as an exhibitioner. He was captain of boats, and throughout his life would retain an athletic temperament, as a vigorous walker, swimmer, and cyclist. At first he was a classicist, reading for honour moderations, in which he was placed in the second class in 1889. In his old age he told his daughter that that had been a good way to start, and that he doubted the wisdom of letting boys specialize in history at school. But he had no interest in the philosophical part of 'literae humaniores' and transferred his allegiance to modern history, under the tuition of R. L. Poole. He won first-class honours in 1891, but was advised not to look for an academic career in Oxford. (His election to an All Souls research fellowship would come later, in 1908.) 
Instead, Pollard made his living by coaching in London, and from the 'Dictionary of National Biography', which he joined as an assistant editor in 1893; he remained with the project until 1901, when he fell out with Sir Sidney Lee. The 500 lives which he contributed (the equivalent of one whole volume of the original edition) made his historical apprenticeship. His salary was a meagre $200 a year, but marriage in 1894 to Catherine Susanna, daughter of William Lucy of the Eagle ironworks, Oxford, brought with it a house at Putney. 
In 1903 Pollard was elected to a new part-time chair of constitutional history in University College, London, where he remained until retirement in 1931. He had an unrivalled impact on his subject and profession, both in the University of London and nationally. The condition of history in the University of London at the time of his appointment was parlous in the extreme. There was a professor, the classicist F. C. Montague, who, it has been said, prolonged the nineteenth century in the history department until 1927. The Astor bequest gave Montague that title, in 1902. But at that time only fifteen students had ever graduated in the subject, at the rate of one or two a year. Since Pollard's salary derived from student fees (which were shared with the professor of constitutional law, Sir William Holdsworth, appointed in the same year) his remuneration in his first year was a miserable $25 14's'. 6died Pollard's inaugural lecture contained a withering attack on the city of London for neglecting its university, and on the university for neglecting history. It also contained a manifesto for the establishment and expansion of the subject, not least at the postgraduate level. Sir Charles Firth had attempted to create a doctoral programme on the Germanic pattern in Oxford, but with very mixed success, and Pollard believed that London, home to the Public Record Office and the British Museum, was better placed to foster a postgraduate school of historical research. In the early 1920s, when 250 undergraduates were reading history, his dream was realized in the Institute of Historical Research (IHR), of which he was the only begetter, with the help of a $20,000 contribution from a neighbour in Putney, Sir John Cecil Power. In three parliamentary elections of the early 1920s, Pollard stood unsuccessfully as Liberal candidate for the University of London, opposed, as the Labour candidate, by H. G. Wells. 
It is hard to imagine what the condition of academic history in Britain in the twentieth century would have been without the IHR, which Pollard directed from its foundation until his retirement, after which he continued as honorary director until 1939. From its first year of life, the institute reached across the Atlantic, where Pollard had good contacts, and became home to an annual Anglo-American conference of historians, which still flourishes. It is equally hard to think of history without the Historical Association, which Pollard was instrumental in founding in 1906, and of which he was an early president, for the association has always made an invaluable bridge between teachers of history in schools and universities. In 1916 Pollard persuaded the Historical Association to acquire a derelict periodical, 'History', which he edited for six years, raising it to a high level of quality, circulation, and influence. As director of the institute, he was also responsible for founding and editing its house journal, the 'Bulletin of the Institute of Historical Research' (now 'Historical Research'). 
A version of Pollard's inaugural was included, with other lectures, in 'Factors in Modern History' (1910), where his ideas about the shape and meaning of history are best encountered. (He also wrote on 'Factors in American History', 1925.) 'Factors' was not, he explained, 'yet another of those miserable text-books of English history, which may be necessary but are certainly evil' ('Factors in Modern History', 1), putting knowledge before understanding. (Yet in the same year Pollard published a very fine textbook indeed, his 'History of England from the Accession of Edward VI to the Death of Elizabeth', the sixth volume of Hunt and Poole's 'Political History of England'!) Pollard's understanding of history is suggested by some of the chapter titles in 'Factors': 'Nationality', 'The advent of the middle class', 'The new monarchy', 'Henry VIII and the English Reformation', 'Parliament'. For the most part, Pollard addressed these 'factors' in the context of Tudor England, although in his Darwinian-whiggish 'The Evolution of Parliament' (1920) he ventured back into earlier centuries. Pollard was responsible for the dominance of Tudor history in London, and of London in Tudor history, from his advent at the beginning of the century until about 1960. It was, supremely, in the reign of Henry VIII that Pollard's factors coincided and interacted to set England on its predestined course towards greatness and a kind of political perfection. Either his best or his second-best book was his 'Henry VIII' (1902). (He also wrote a book on 'England under Protector Somerset', 1900, and, what some regard as his masterpiece, the Ford lectures of 1927-8, which became 'Wolsey', 1929.) Sir Geoffrey Elton wrote that Pollard almost worshipped Henry VIII, whom he saw as a statesman of superb judgement, great subtlety, long vision and deep insight, and virtually invariable success, profoundly at one with the nation's destiny: opinions which Elton thought 'bemused', but which were no doubt to be expected of an Asquithian Liberal born in 1869. 
Pollard's bible, without which none of this would have been written, was the thirty-five huge volumes containing the 'Letters and Papers of Henry VIII', an enterprise begun by J. S. Brewer of King's College, London, not long before Pollard was born, and still incomplete when he published his 'Henry VIII'. 'Letters and Papers' remains indispensable, and no other reign in English history is serviced by anything like it. However, today's Tudor historians go behind ''L and P'' to the original documents, mostly but by no means all to be found in the Public Record Office, on which it was based. Pollard's lack of dependence upon manuscripts has sometimes been exaggerated. Elton alleged that he had rarely darkened the doors of the PRO, and wrote 'Pollard, to put it bluntly, did not use manuscripts' ('Studies in Tudor and Stuart Politics and Government', 1, 1974, 113), which was one of the causes of the rift between Elton and Pollard's pupil Sir John Neale, who remained ever faithful to his old master. But it is certainly true that the narrative pace of Pollard's biographies would have been held up by the minute investigation of problems which the chronological ordering of the documents in 'Letters and Papers' tended to obscure, and which Elton spent his life sorting out. 
There is little affection shown for Pollard in the obituaries and other memoirs written about him. No doubt he enjoyed the exercise of power, and A. G. Dickens has remarked that he 'seldom proved receptive of opinions which diverged from his own' (Dickens, 'Wolsey', xiii), while G. N. Clark wrote that 'as a teacher he relied rather on force than on sympathy' ('DNB'). There is no risk of Pollard being made the patron saint of university teachers of history, for in his inaugural lecture he attacked the principle of academic tenure and recommended hiring lecturers for a year at a time at $100 each. He received many academic honours, including honorary doctorates from the universities of Manchester, London, and Oxford. He became a fellow of the British Academy in 1920 and a corresponding member of the Academie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres in 1930. But he was not covetous of public distinctions, and is said to have declined the knighthood which was offered to him at about the time of his retirement. 
The Pollards had two children: a son, (Henry) Graham Pollard, the bibliographer, and a daughter, who married Harold Edgeworth Butler, professor of Latin at University College. Catherine Pollard died in 1934, and in 1942 Pollard married Marjorie, daughter of Thomas Orchardson, a silk merchant of Bingley, Yorkshire. Since his retirement, Pollard had lived at Milford-on-Sea; he died at the Old Manor, Salisbury, on 3 August 1948. His second wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35557


Pollard, Alfred William (1859-1944), bibliographer and scholar of English literature, was born at 1 Brompton Square, Kensington, London, on 14 August 1859, the youngest son of a physician, Edward William Pollard, and his second wife, Emma Louisa, daughter of George Edward Thompson, a shipowner, of Woodbridge, Suffolk. It was from John Wesley Hales at King's College School, the Strand, London, which he attended for seven years, that he acquired his interest in Chaucer and Shakespeare. At King's he also became a friend of W. R. Sickert, the painter. In 1877 he went with an open scholarship to St John's College, Oxford, where he achieved first classes in classical moderations (1879) and 'literae humaniores' (1881). Here he also gained the intimate friendship of A. E. Housman. Debarred by a stammer from teaching, in 1883 Pollard entered the printed books department of the British Museum, where, attracted by the artistic quality of early printing, he soon became a recognized authority able to take charge of the antiquarian work of the department. In 1893 he was joined by R. G. C. Proctor, who already had an established reputation as an incunabulist. 
Pollard's very happy marriage to Alice (died 1926), daughter of George England, of Crediton, Devon, on 17 May 1887, made it necessary to supplement a modest salary by literary work and led to his long association with 'The Guardian' under Daniel Conner Lathbury. Pollard had already edited several of Chaucer's 'Canterbury Tales' (1886-7); in 1893 he produced a Chaucer primer; in 1898 he edited the Globe edition of Chaucer in collaboration with H. F. Heath, W. S. McCormick, and M. H. Liddell, himself undertaking the 'Canterbury Tales'. His edition of Sir Philip Sidney's 'Astrophel and Stella' was published in 1888 and a selection of 'English Miracle Plays, Moralities, and Interludes', a pioneer work often revised, first appeared in 1890. These works were followed by editions of Herrick's poems (1891), of 'The Towneley Plays' with George England (1897), and of 'The Macro Plays' with F. J. Furnivall (1904). 
In 1889 J. Y. W. MacAlister founded 'The Library', and Pollard, at first a contributor, was acknowledged as co-editor in January 1904. The partnership lasted until 1920, when 'The Library' became the journal of the Bibliographical Society under Pollard's control. MacAlister was also largely responsible for the founding in 1892 of the Bibliographical Society, which Pollard joined the next year as honorary secretary, and as such directed its work for over forty years. He also edited a series of 'Books about Books', himself writing that on 'Early Illustrated Books' (1893), and the handsome and scholarly quarterly 'Bibliographica' (1895-7). These were followed by 'Old Picture Books' (1902), 'Fine Books' (1912), and contributions to an important series of catalogues of books in private libraries, including those of J. P. Morgan (1907), Rush C. Hawkins (1910), C. W. Dyson Perrins (1914), and William Andrewes Clark (1921). His interest in fine printing led to an involvement with the private press movement and an association with William Morris and T. J. Cobden-Sanderson and, in America, with John Henry Nash. 
R. G. C. Proctor's particular abilities prompted the trustees to undertake a 'Catalogue of Books Printed in the XVth Century now in the British Museum', designed by him and Pollard; after Proctor's death in 1903, loyalty to his friend and to the trustees induced Pollard to shoulder a task for which he confessed he had no innate taste or aptitude. It was this rigorous discipline, however, which turned a gifted amateur into a bibliographer of high technical attainment. The first volume appeared in 1908, and Pollard carried on the work until administrative duties forced him to hand it over to his principal assistant, J. V. Scholderer. 
It was in the bibliography and textual criticism of Shakespeare that Pollard made his chief contribution to scholarship. His attention seems to have been accidentally turned in this direction about 1902; the outcome, in 1909, was his 'Shakespeare Folios and Quartos: a Study in the Bibliography of Shakespeare's Plays, 1594-1685', which remains a milestone in Shakespearian criticism. In it he controverted the views on the transmission of the text which had prevailed since Edmond Malone condemned all quartos as surreptitious, arguing on the contrary that some may even have been printed from autographs. Another orthodoxy established by Malone, that Shakespeare served an apprenticeship revising the plays of other men, was challenged twenty years later in Peter Alexander's 'Shakespeare's Henry VI and Richard III' (1929), an investigation inspired and sponsored by Pollard. These two books laid the foundation of most modern textual criticism of Shakespeare. In line with them are Pollard's lectures as Sandars reader in bibliography in the University of Cambridge (1915), 'Shakespeare's Fight with the Pirates and the Problems of the Transmission of his Text' (1917; rev. edn, 1920), his detailed analysis of the text of 'Richard II' (1916), his census in the same year (with Henrietta C. Bartlett) of quarto editions of Shakespeare's plays, his British Academy lecture on 'The foundations of Shakespeare's text' (1923), and his article on 'Shakespeare's text' in 'A Companion to Shakespeare Studies' (1934). Significant too is the volume of studies he promoted and edited on the question of 'Shakespeare's Hand in the Play of Sir Thomas More' (1923), claiming that three pages of Shakespeare's autograph survive in British Library, Harley MS 7368. From 1919 to 1932 Pollard was honorary professor of bibliography in the University of London and took students of King's College, of which he had been a fellow since 1907, through some of the most disputed fields of Shakespearian criticism. He was treasurer (1906-10) and a member of the council (1910-44) of the Malone Society. 
To the Oxford facsimile of the Authorized Version of the 'Bible', issued for the tercentenary of 1911, Pollard contributed a historical introduction and edited a collection of documents relating to the translation of the 'Bible' into English, which is of permanent value for biblical studies. 
Pollard became keeper of printed books in 1919 at an administrative crisis, and in five years of strenuous work left his mark on the organization of the department. He retired in 1924. In 1919 the Bibliographical Society had laid plans for 'A short-title catalogue of books printed in England, Scotland, and Ireland, and of English books printed abroad, 1475-1640', and much preliminary work had been done by Gilbert Richard Redgrave. In 1924 Pollard took charge, and two years later the first edition of this invaluable reference work appeared. Other interests too engrossed him, and after the death of Sir Israel Gollancz, a fellow Shakespearian scholar, in 1930 he took an active part in the work of the Shakespeare Association and became director of the Early English Text Society, until 1937. He also took part in the founding of the Central Library for Students (later the National Central Library). 
In 1934 Pollard resigned the secretaryship of the Bibliographical Society and the editorship of 'The Library'. His work had won him many academic honours; he became an honorary fellow of St John's in 1923, and he received honorary degrees from the universities of Durham (1921) and Cambridge (1934). He was elected FBA and appointed CB in 1922. In 1935 he suffered a fall while gardening, which seriously incapacitated him, but he lived another nine years and died at Wimbledon Hospital on 8 March 1944. 
A humane man and a sincere churchman, Alfred Pollard was deeply religious in an individual way. In 1911 he published anonymously a small book of practical morality, 'Life, Love and Light', and he often wrote on religious and social matters, sharing his wife's interest in women's emancipation. Pollard left only a daughter; both his sons were killed in the First World War. 


@@@@@


doc= 35558


Pollen, John Hungerford (1820-1902), decorative artist and Roman Catholic convert, was born at 6 New Burlington Street, London, on 19 November 1820. He was the second son of Richard Pollen (1786-1838), a gentleman of Rodbourne, Wiltshire, and his wife, Anne Cockerell (1784-1865), whose brother was Charles Robert Cockerell, architect of the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. Another uncle was John Walter Pollen, second baronet, of Rendenham, Hampshire. Pollen was educated at Durham House, Chelsea (1829-33), and at Eton College (1833-8). In 1838 he matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford. After taking his BA he became a fellow of Merton College in 1842. He then spent a year travelling in the Middle East with his elder brother, Hungerford. 
Pollen returned to England in September 1844, and was ordained deacon in Oxford on Trinity Sunday 1845. He became curate of St Peter-le-Bailey, Oxford (dem. 1872), where he first tried his hand at large-scale design, with his decorative scheme for the ceiling of the church, which he carried out in 1844. 
Although buffeted by the Tractarian debates at this time, he was ordained priest by the bishop of Oxford, Dr Samuel Wilberforce, in June 1846. In the summer of 1847 Pollen travelled to France with two Oxford friends, the Revd Thomas William Allies and John Wynne, in order to discover how the Roman Catholic church succeeded in bringing faith and hope to the poorest parts of the community. They then moved on to Italy and Germany, where Pollen had an opportunity to study the ancient churches of Ravenna, and the newly built basilica of St Boniface in Munich. He was to adapt this architectural style to his own purposes in the 1850s and 1860s. 
On his return to Oxford, Pollen worked closely with Dr Pusey and Charles Marriot with the aim of reinvigorating the Church of England, by offering sacramental religion and practical support to 'the multitude in the depth of the abyss' (A. Pollen, 63). In 1847 he agreed to act as pro-vicar during an interregnum at St Saviour's Church, Leeds, a Puseyite foundation. During this time, he also maintained his fellowship at Merton, serving at various times as dean, bursar, and garden master. The church in Leeds had recently been accused of Romanism after a disagreement with the bishop of Ripon over the use of intercessory prayer to the saints. This led to the three curates converting to Roman Catholicism, and the vicar, Richard Ward, was forced to resign. Pollen responded enthusiastically to the challenge. He encouraged the community of celibate clergy who lived and worked together in the parish, and this collegiate life proved particularly valuable during the cholera outbreak of 1849. 
Although Pollen was offered several comfortable livings at this time, he felt unable to accept them, and instead threw his energy into another artistic scheme, by painting the ceiling of Merton College chapel. His design included minstrel angels, prophets, and church fathers, based on portraits of his family and friends. His depiction of Pope Gregory the Great was criticized by the anti-Tractarian warden, Robert Bullock Marsham (died 1880), but the work was generally well received. Additional decorations made in 1877 were whitewashed in the 1960s and the drawing of the figures now appears rather clumsy. Pollen always seemed to have difficulty in translating the artistic talents shown in his spirited watercolour sketches into larger-scale paintings. 
This artistic interlude could not distract Pollen indefinitely from the theological difficulties that he had to face. The controversial use of auricular confession at St Saviour's meant that on Christmas eve 1850, Pollen and his colleagues were all inhibited from practising their ministry, in Leeds and in Oxford. The other clergy and several members of the congregation seceded to Rome, but Pollen was prepared to argue his case with the bishop of Oxford, and was reinstated. However, by the summer of 1852 he too had decided that he could no longer remain within the Church of England. His reasons were partly explained in his 'Narrative of Five Years at St. Saviours' (1851), a defence of Catholic practices that he believed should be compatible with the doctrines of the Anglican church. Pollen and many of his friends now found themselves isolated. After a solitary journey around Ireland, he was received into the Roman Catholic church in Rouen on 20 October 1852. He wrote to a friend: 'Every doubt is at rest, and I have found that kind of calm which one needs repose and reflection to enjoy in full. I cannot tell you how great an advantage I think it to have been able to do this out of England. (A. Pollen, 235)' Pollen's conversion meant that he forfeited his fellowship at Merton. He had recently been a popular senior proctor of the university (1851-2). He decided not to be ordained within the Roman church, and therefore had to embark on a new career. During the time he spent in Rome immediately after his conversion, Pollen was introduced to William Thackeray, who described Pollen as 'the most interesting man I have met here... and I try to understand from him what can be the secret of the religion for which he has given up rank, chances and all the good things in life' (A. Pollen, 246). He also met there the Revd Charles John LaPrimaudaye, who was also a recent convert. In the summer of 1854 Pollen became engaged to his daughter, Maria Margaret (1838-1919), known as Minnie. Born on 10 April 1838 in Leyton, Essex, Minnie was the third child of this Huguenot family. She was seventeen years younger than Pollen, who was now unemployed and recently disinherited by his uncle, but she was apparently charmed by his good looks, intelligence, energy, and liveliness. They were married a year later, in the church of Woodchester monastery, near Stroud, Gloucestershire, on 18 September 1855. 
Meanwhile Charles LaPrimaudaye wrote to John Henry Newman on Pollen's behalf, and in November 1854 Pollen was offered the professorship of fine arts at Newman's new university in Dublin. The offer also included Pollen's first architectural commission, to design the university church, St Stephen's Green. Pollen's plan was for a plain basilican structure, decorated internally with coloured Irish marbles and an ornate apse. This Byzantine style was a radical choice at a time when the Gothic dominated new church building, but Newman agreed with Pollen's verdict that 'the Pugin school delighted in satiating us with all the weak and mannered features of their Gothic and never attained to a broad appreciation of what was beautiful and noble in itself' (J. H. Pollen, unpublished letter to John Henry Newman, priv. coll.). The church was consecrated on ascension day, 1 May 1856. That year Pollen's lectures on art were also published in 'Atlantis', the university magazine. He also contributed to 'The Tablet' as an art critic, where he established himself as a supporter of both Turner and Whistler. 
In the summer of 1857 Pollen moved to London, living first in Hampstead, and from late 1858 in Bayswater. He became an enthusiastic member of the artistic community, joining the Hogarth Club, a rallying point for the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood. Pollen had met J. E. Millais while working on the ceiling of Merton College chapel and this renewed friendship with members of the brotherhood led to Pollen's involvement in the decoration of the Oxford Union debating chamber. D. G. Rossetti, who co-ordinated the project, believed that Pollen was 'the only man who has yet done good mural painting in England' ('Memoirs... of Coventry Patmore', 2.328). Unfortunately, Pollen's experience proved inadequate, and the murals quickly degenerated. At the Oxford Union he found himself working alongside the young Edward Burne-Jones, and their friendship continued well into the 1880s. Pollen's daughter Anne is recognizable as the girl in Burne-Jones's oil painting 'King Cophetua and the Beggar Maid' (1880-84, Tate collection). 
Pollen's next artistic challenge was offered by John Ruskin, as his support for Turner's work had attracted the critic's attention. In 1858 Pollen was commissioned to design the carvings for the facade of the new University Museum of Natural History in Oxford. He reflected both the contents of the museum and the current evolutionary debates in his design for the tympanum over the main door, which depicted an angel holding both the spiritual book of life and the biological cell. Unfortunately, lack of funds meant that the scheme was only partially carried out. He was awarded several other commissions in the early 1860s, mostly decorative schemes for interiors, which included a library ceiling at Blickling Hall, Aylsham, for William Kerr, eighth marquess of Lothian (1860), and several rooms at Clontra, Dublin (1862). He designed a new Roman Catholic church at Rhyl, north Wales, for his friend John Wynne, which incorporated Celtic revival motifs into the carved altar (1863). Pollen also acquired antique furniture and other decorative objects for his patrons, and his developing knowledge in this area proved useful in a new career that opened up for him. He was one of the jurors for the International Exhibition held in London in 1862, and in December 1863, on the recommendation of Thackeray, he was appointed assistant keeper at the South Kensington Museum. This new position provided some security for his growing family; his sixth child, George, had been born in May 1863, and another four were to arrive before the end of the decade. 
Pollen was instrumental in many of the acquisitions for the new museum, travelling across Europe at least twice a year on public and private business. Although many of his attributions have been superseded his catalogues of furniture, sculpture, and metalwork have provided the ground work for all subsequent research. He also taught in the Government School of Design at South Kensington. He served on the juries of international exhibitions in Dublin (1865) and Paris (1867), where the first part of his 'Universal catalogue of books on art' was awarded a gold medal. 
Despite this professional success, the Pollen family was struggling financially, and in January 1871 Minnie took the five eldest children to live in Munster, Westphalia, Germany, where schooling was cheaper and Roman Catholic. In 1872 the younger children also left England to join them. Pollen continued to work in London, and visited his family as often as he could. In the autumn of 1875 they returned to England, and moved to Newbuildings Place in Sussex. Their landlord was Wilfrid Scawen Blunt, a childhood friend of the LaPrimaudaye girls. Elizabeth Longford's biography of Blunt suggests that he and Minnie were involved in a long liaison; however, Blunt's report of this relationship is uncorroborated, although the two families certainly enjoyed unusual intimacy. Relations between the two families broke down irretrievably in 1888 when Blunt's daughter, Judith, accused Pollen's sixth son, Arthur Joseph Hungerford Pollen, of over-familiarity. During the ensuing quarrel, Blunt's wife, Anne, claimed that the Pollen family were conspiring to take advantage of Judith's fortune. The tenancy of Newbuildings had to be given up in 1889. 
In the meantime, in 1876 Pollen left his position at the museum. He had been invited to join Lord Ripon's staff as his private secretary. A recent Catholic convert, Ripon succeeded Lord Lytton as viceroy of India in 1880. Pollen remained in London to deal with Ripon's affairs, visiting India only in 1884, during the last few months of the viceroyalty. During his time in India Pollen developed his artistic connections, commissioning exhibits for the forthcoming Indian and Colonial Exhibition of 1886, and advising the maharaja of Kuch Behar on the decoration of his palaces. 
In 1889 Pollen was a founder member of the United Arts and Crafts Guild. He continued to accept commissions for interiors and private chapels, and in 1896 was asked to design a mosaic for the nave vault of Westminster Cathedral. The plans were never executed. In the last years of his life, as notary apostolic, he examined the documents supporting the beatification of the Elizabethan English martyrs. 
Pollen died suddenly at home, 11 Pembridge Crescent, London, on 2 December 1902, and was buried in the family vault at Kensal Green cemetery. Newman had remarked that 'he wears a beard, like other men of genius' (A. Pollen, 275). He was remembered by his friends as a patient man, with a good ear for music and a gift for mimicry and spontaneous conversation. After his death, Minnie continued to develop their joint interest in antique textiles, lecturing and exhibiting her collection of lace; she published 'Seven Centuries of Lace' in 1908. 


@@@@@


doc= 35559


Pollitt, George Paton (1878-1964), chemical industrialist and farmer, was born on 23 August 1878 at Ravenswing House, Mellor, near Blackburn, Lancashire, the younger son and middle child of Joseph Seddon Pollitt, a bank manager, and his wife, Charlotte Paton. He was at school in Bruges, where he learned to speak fluent French and German, and in 1899 took a BSc with honours in chemistry at the Victoria University, Manchester. He gained a PhD in the University of Basel in 1902, after three years' study at Zurich, and in the following year an MSc at Manchester. 
On completion of his education he entered the field of industrial chemistry and in 1907 joined the staff of Brunner, Mond & Co., manufacturers of heavy chemicals. On the outbreak of war with Germany in 1914 Pollitt enlisted as a motorcycle dispatch rider and was sent on active service with the British expeditionary force immediately. He soon obtained a commission and served with the intelligence corps, the special brigade the Royal Engineers, and the infantry. His promotion was rapid: in early 1918 he was appointed to command the 11th battalion the Lancashire Fusiliers. He had been in command only for a fortnight when he was wounded and taken prisoner, and he remained in captivity for the rest of the war. His record as a non-professional soldier was remarkable. He was wounded four times, mentioned in dispatches four times, and was appointed DSO with two bars. On demobilization he was granted the rank of lieutenant-colonel. 
On leaving the army Pollitt rejoined Brunner Mond and was elected a director. At this time the company was considering taking over from the government a wartime project to manufacture synthetic ammonia. The government was interested in the project as a basis for the manufacture of explosives, but the company was more interested in it as a basis for the manufacture of nitrogenous fertilizers. Not all the Brunner Mond directors were in favour of the take-over, but Pollitt was and his view prevailed. A new company, Synthetic Ammonia and Nitrates, was formed with a capital of $5 million, and Pollitt was appointed managing director. The company took over a site of 266 acres, which the government had bought at Billingham in Durham, near the mouth of the River Tees and, under Pollitt's energetic direction, design and construction work was started. The factory at Billingham later became one of the largest chemical manufacturing complexes in the world. 
In 1926 Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd was formed by a merger of the major chemical manufacturing companies in the United Kingdom, including Brunner Mond and Synthetic Ammonia and Nitrates. Pollitt took part in the negotiations leading to the merger and became a director on the first board of the new company, being one of the very few technically trained directors in its early days. Probably his most important contribution to its success was his insistence on the importance of adequate scientific research. In 1927 he was awarded the gold medal of the Society of Chemical Industry for 'conspicuous services to applied chemistry by research, discovery, and invention'. Pollitt resigned as an executive director of ICI in 1934 but remained on the board until his retirement in 1945. 
In 1932 Pollitt became interested in farming and acquired some 900 acres in Shropshire. He raised cattle by feeding them on fresh-cut grass in the summer and on hay in the winter. In 1937 he was awarded the silver medal of the Royal Society of Arts 'for the encouragement of arts, manufacture, and commerce' for his paper 'Recent developments in grass drying'. In 1942 he published a booklet entitled 'Britain Can Feed Herself', in which he claimed that if all the ploughable land in Britain were farmed up to the best standards there would be no need to import food, and that the total cost of the food produced would be no greater than the cost of most of the food imported. Although he was convinced that there was no agricultural reason why the plan should not succeed he realized that, for various reasons, political and social, it was unlikely to be adopted. During the Second World War he was appointed zone commander of the Home Guard with the rank of colonel. He was high sheriff of Shropshire in 1945-6. 
In 1947 Pollitt emigrated to Southern Rhodesia where he had bought a farm. He was no longer a young man, and his health began to suffer. He contracted cancer of the larynx and returned to England in 1952 for surgery. The operation was successful but as a result he found it difficult to speak and make himself understood. He went to live at Nansavallon, St Mawes, in Cornwall and became a recluse. He died there on 9 March 1964. 
Pollitt never married. He was not averse to the company of women and always treated them with courtesy and consideration. He had two nephews, the sons of his brother, whom he treated as his own sons after his brother's death. Both boys took diplomas in agriculture and worked with their uncle on his farms in Shropshire and Rhodesia. 
Pollitt was a tall man with a good physique, fair complexion, blue eyes, and close-cut sandy hair and small moustache. He was fond of outdoor exercise and always kept himself in good physical condition. His manner has been described as 'bluff, tactless, and masterful'. 
F. T. Woolner', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35560


Pollitt, Harry (1890-1960), political organizer, was born on 22 November 1890 at 14 Wharf Street, Droylsden, near Manchester, the second of six children of Samuel Pollitt (1863-1933), blacksmith's striker, and his wife, Mary Louisa (1868-1939), a cotton spinner, daughter of William Charlesworth, joiner. Pollitt's parents were socialists and freethinkers and it was his mother, a member of the Independent Labour Party, who provided the youngster with his first induction into the principles and local networks of socialism. Theirs was an especially close relationship and Pollitt found in his mother both a confidante and a model of working-class dignity in the face of affliction. His own sense of injustice at family poverty, as three of his siblings died in infancy, was likewise fundamental to the visceral identification with his class that lay at the root of his political philosophy. 
Pollitt's formal education, at the local British school, ended when he was thirteen, after a final year spent as a half-timer in a cotton mill. In 1905 he began his apprenticeship at the Gorton Tank locomotive works, also attending evening classes for his City and Guilds qualification. In January 1912 he was admitted as a time-served member of the Boilermakers' Society. This was among the most conservative and exclusive of craft unions, and Pollitt was to remain deeply affected by its traditions of skill and respectability. Nevertheless, his earliest years as a craftsman were ones of acute labour unrest which had a formative influence on so many of his generation. Already Pollitt was an active figure in the Openshaw Socialist Society, and on the outdoor speaking pitches of northern England he had begun to establish his own reputation as one of the finest orators of his generation. Moving from home during the First World War, he had his first real blooding as an industrial militant in the Southampton Boilermakers' strike of 1915. By the time of the Bolshevik revolution two years later, he had moved to east London with its vibrant and heterodox movement of syndicalists and revolutionaries. Through Sylvia Pankhurst and the Workers' Socialist Federation he became heavily involved in the Hands Off Russia movement, briefly as its full-time organizer, as well as holding positions in his union and the River Thames shop stewards' movement. 
It was as a leader of the Communist Party of Great Britain (CPGB) that Pollitt came to national prominence. A member of the party from its foundation in mid-1920, he remained for some time primarily an industrial activist, but with the expanded range of contacts and organizational resources that communism provided. In June 1921 he made the first of his many trips to Russia as a delegate to the founding congress of the communist-organized Red International of Labour Unions (RILU). The impact of the visit was vividly described in his memoirs, as was that of his fourth visit some two and a half years later, which coincided with the death and obsequies of Lenin. That early loyalty to the Soviet state and leadership was never to waver. 
During the 1920s, as secretary of the RILU-affiliated minority movement and as Boilermakers' delegate to labour and TUC conferences, Pollitt was generally recognized as the communists' most effective labour movement figurehead. His wider prominence was further secured in 1925-6, first by his kidnapping by fascists, a brief 'cause celebre', and then by his sentencing to a year's imprisonment as one of twelve communists charged with sedition. His credibility as a mass leader must greatly have assisted his advancement to the secretaryship of the Communist Party in 1929, though his penchant for plain-speaking also made him a somewhat unpredictable instrument of Moscow's control. Riven by internal disputes and following the Comintern down crazily sectarian paths, the CPGB was at this time at its lowest ebb and Pollitt evinced a robust and sometimes outspoken pragmatism in reorientating it towards the realities of British working-class politics. He also knew better than most how to take Comintern instructions with a pinch of salt. His party's recovery during the 1930s to a position of considerable influence on the British left was due in no small part to these qualities. Well connected with such left-wing luminaries as Harold Laski, Victor Gollancz, and Stafford Cripps, Pollitt succeeded better than any of them in articulating the passionate anti-fascism most famously attested by the communists' efforts for republican Spain. Himself five times a visitor to the British volunteers fighting in Spain, Pollitt's intense commitment to the anti-fascist cause had a sequel in his last and most memorable conflict with the Comintern when in September 1939 it instructed the CPGB to oppose the British war with Germany. With a call to 'smash the fascist bastards once and for all', Pollitt defied both his own comrades and his superiors in Moscow, and for his recalcitrance on this occasion -- almost without parallel among his counterparts elsewhere -- he was inevitably removed from his position as party secretary (Morgan, 109). 
Instead of breaking with his party, as several non-communist associates hoped or expected, Pollitt in due course issued the recantation demanded of him and gave his voice to the anti-war policy he found so repugnant. It was a defining moment of communist discipline, and in this respect the episode may be said to have broken him. Restored as party secretary with the Russians' entry into the war, he did enjoy a new lease of life as an anti-fascist tribune of the left. Having stood unsuccessfully on several occasions as a Communist parliamentary candidate (Seaham, 1929; Stepney, 1930, 1931; Clay Cross, 1933; West Ham, 1940), he came very close to wresting from Labour its parliamentary stronghold of Rhondda East at the 1945 general election. Nevertheless, what Pollitt now lacked was the ability to finesse the 'international line' when it took the British party into the disastrous backwater of cold war Stalinism. After a period of remarkable wartime growth, the CPGB now entered an apparently inexorable cycle of decline which Pollitt could neither arrest, understand, nor even acknowledge. Seemingly a permanent fixture at the margins of British politics, he needed the shock of Khrushchov's 1956 secret speech before at last he stood down as party leader. 
It was not however because of the crimes of Stalinism which Khrushchov revealed. For Pollitt more than most British communists, it was not entirely news that all had not been right with Stalin's communism. Most poignantly, he had several times in the 1920s proposed to a communist research worker called Rose Cohen, who was sucked instead into the maelstrom of Stalin's terror through her ill-fated preference for the Comintern representative Petrovsky. Her sentencing by the Soviet authorities, though not her death, was made known to British communists in 1937, but even in the case of a woman he had loved, Pollitt's private representations were not accompanied by any public protest or disavowal. Having maintained his discipline in these most testing of circumstances, he was barely to waver when news or rumours reached him of similar outrages after the war. Morally he was inured to Stalinism, and Khrushchov's revelations disillusioned him not in Stalin but in Khrushchov himself for telling the story of his crimes. 'He's staying there as long as I'm alive', he said of the portrait of Stalin that hung in his living room, and stay there he did (Morgan, 176). 
Personable and well-liked by non-communists, Pollitt somehow linked the open, generous socialist culture of the industrial Britain of his youth with the harsher disciplines of international communism and the sheer brutal cynicism of the Stalin era. In his tastes and in his famously down-to-earth demeanour he was the 'true son of the British working class' that communist propaganda claimed, but no less true in his devotion to Stalinism. His private life, on the surface, was less complex. In 1925, rejected by Rose Cohen, he married Marjory Edna Brewer ('b'. 1902), a communist schoolteacher, and they had a son and a daughter, the first of whom alone inherited his father's communist convictions. Harry Pollitt died of a cerebral haemorrhage, after years of worsening health, while returning on SS 'Orion' from a speaking tour of Australia on 27 June 1960. He was cremated at Golders Green on 9 July, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35561


Pollock, Bertram (1863-1943), headmaster and bishop of Norwich, was born at Hanworth, Middlesex, on 6 December 1863, the youngest of seven children of George Frederick Pollock (1821-1915), senior master of the Supreme Court and later queen's remembrancer, and his wife, Frances Diana Herbert (died 1891). His was a distinguished legal family; his elder brother E. M. Pollock, Viscount Hanworth, became master of the rolls, and his first cousin was the jurist, Sir Frederick Pollock. But from youth Bertram Pollock knew that he wanted to be a priest. He won scholarships to Charterhouse, and Trinity College, Cambridge, and took a first in the classical tripos in 1885. (He was made DD in 1903.) He also represented Cambridge at athletics. 
Pollock was prepared for ordination in 1891 by Brooke Foss Westcott, whom he revered. He taught at Marlborough from 1886 to 1893, when he was appointed master of Wellington College. He was not yet thirty. He inherited a school whose standards, finances, and prestige had all declined since the days of its founding headmaster, E. W. Benson. He energetically set about restoring all three, reforming the scholarship system, increasing pupil numbers, and erecting new buildings. A shy and aloof man, he found it easier to make friends with pupils than with his staff, from whom he was distant. But he found that teaching offered an outlet for his innate flamboyance. His former pupil Harold Nicolson later described the exhilaration of being taught Greek poetry by Pollock as he sprawled on a lawn or in front of a fire. 
Another aspect of his mastership which gave Pollock intense pleasure was the school's close association with the royal family. He loved to choreograph royal visits to Wellington, and devoted six chapters of his memoirs, 'A Twentieth-Century Bishop' (1944), to recounting them in exhaustive, and rather Pooterish, detail. The visit of Edward VII to the college for its silver jubilee in 1909 symbolized both the recovery of its fortunes and the crowning glory of Pollock's mastership. The king appointed him CVO the same year; he was made KCVO by George V in 1921. 
In 1910 Pollock became bishop of Norwich. He was concerned that he lacked any experience in parochial ministry, but was assured by Archbishop Randall Davidson that this did not matter. He was in any case an adept administrator, and developed a scheme to endow poor benefices. But Pollock's reforming zeal did not extend to liturgy and church government, and in 1927-8 he led opposition to the revised prayer book in the House of Lords. His identification with this predominantly evangelical campaign led many people to conclude that he was an evangelical, but he denied this, saying that he owed his churchmanship to Westcott. Pollock objected to prayer book revision because he believed that it would undermine the comprehensiveness of the national church. His attachment to establishment, and to parliamentary control of the church, had also led him to oppose the creation of the church assembly in 1919. Pollock's opposition to the revised prayer book made him an isolated figure on the bench, and his chief episcopal antagonist, Hensley Henson, waspishly likened him to the hermit Simeon Stylites, sitting on his pillar. He remained a bishop until his resignation in 1942. In addition to his memoirs, Pollock published several volumes of sermons, as well as a number of books attacking prayer book revision and defending the national church. 
Pollock's character was an awkward amalgam of austerity and flamboyance, hauteur and warmth. In his memoirs he recounted how, as a boy, he had become a teetotaller after an incident in which he drank a glass of ale and hit a policeman in Regent's Park. He remained a lonely bachelor for much of his episcopate, missing the companionship which he had enjoyed at Wellington, but in 1928 he married Joan Florence Helena, daughter of the Revd Algernon Charles Dudley Ryder, with whom he had one daughter, Rosalind. His wife outlived him. He died at Gissing, Norfolk, where he was living, on 17 October 1943, and was buried at Blyford, Suffolk. 


@@@@@


doc= 35562


Pollock, Ernest Murray, first Viscount Hanworth (1861-1936), judge, was born on 25 November 1861 at Wimbledon, Surrey, the fifth, but fourth surviving, son of George Frederick Pollock (1821-1915), queen's remembrancer, and his wife, Frances Diana (died 1891), daughter of Henry Herbert, rector of Rathdowney, Queen's county. Bertram Pollock, later bishop of Norwich, was his youngest brother. Pollock was grandson of Sir Jonathan Frederick Pollock, lord chief baron of the exchequer, great-nephew of Sir David Pollock and Sir George Pollock, nephew of Sir William Frederick Pollock and Sir Charles Edward Pollock, and first cousin of Sir Frederick Pollock. He was a scholar of Charterhouse School and in 1880 passed from there to Trinity College, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1883 having been placed in the third class of part one of the classical tripos. In 1885 he was called to the bar by the Inner Temple, of which he became a bencher in 1914 and treasurer in 1936. 
On 12 April 1887 Pollock married Laura Helen (died 1954), eldest daughter of Sir Thomas Salt, first baronet, a Staffordshire banker; they had a son and a daughter. He met his future wife at Stafford in 1884, when he was marshal to Mr Justice Manisty. The other judge, Baron Huddleston, insisted on the lodgings being kept at a very high temperature, and the result was a fire. Salt entertained both judges and marshals at Weeping Cross, his home nearby. 
Pollock had a fairly good practice as a junior, and took silk in 1905. At the general election of January 1910, after two unsuccessful efforts (1900 and 1906) at Spalding, he was elected Conservative member of parliament for Warwick and Leamington and held the seat until 1923. He was appointed KBE in 1917. On 15 January 1919 he was appointed solicitor-general, and on 8 March 1922 attorney-general, resigning that office when the coalition government broke up in October. He had been sworn of the privy council in February, an unusual honour for a law officer. 
As an advocate Pollock never attained the front rank. Indeed, he was deemed fortunate in being nominated law officer, there being a dearth of eminent advocates among politicians of the Conservative Party when he was appointed. Nor can it be said that as law officer he rose to the occasion so far as practice in the courts was concerned. Yet both his circumstances and his qualities were calculated to produce an advocate of the first class. He was born to one of the best-known legal names of the period, and inherited the Pollock face, which his great-grandmother Sarah Homeria Parsons, the wife of the saddler from Berwick, transmitted to so many of her descendants. Moreover, he had a fine presence, infinite zest, an excellent memory, and a quick, although not a deep, intelligence. He always sought to help others. He was never at a loss for a word, had plenty of confidence, and a resounding if somewhat strident voice. Finally, he was scrupulously honest, a quality which was more valuable to the advocate than was generally understood, at any rate outside the profession. Yet in the conduct of difficult and complicated cases such as fall to the lot of law officers he was often obviously outclassed by the counsel who opposed him. Particularly in the 'Armstrong case' (1922), an action in which the accused was charged with poisoning his wife, his handling of the prosecution was much criticized. He appeared to prefer intuition to close reasoning in his arguments, a course which did not assist the court. 
When the revolt of the Conservative Party occurred in 1922, and the coalition was wrecked at the famous meeting of that party at the Carlton Club (19 October), Pollock stood by the coalition and went into exile. He was a man of complete integrity and loyalty, of simple but honourable conduct. Even the offer of the woolsack did not tempt him. When he formed his government the new Conservative prime minister, Bonar Law, through Lord Cave offered Pollock the option of continuing as attorney-general. Having formed and expressed a definite opinion against the break-up of the coalition, Pollock preferred to stand aside on the ground that it was contrary to the public interest, and that it was inconsistent with constitutional propriety for him to accept office in the new government, though it was a pang to depart. Accordingly, Pollock returned to the bar, and to many it seemed that his career was at an end. He was neither essential to the government, nor a danger to it if left out. For he was too serious and loyal a Conservative to be a nuisance to his party. He reluctantly accepted a baronetcy in November 1922. 
A year later (1923) Pollock was offered by Baldwin the post of master of the rolls, the third highest post in the legal hierarchy. The appointment was unexpected and was much criticized both in the press and at the bar. Indeed, he was not legally or intellectually of the same calibre as the eminent holders of that office during the previous twenty years. Nevertheless, in the ordinary run of appellate work in the Court of Appeal over which he presided, he was effective and justified his appointment. He was a good president and courteous to the bar. His wide knowledge of the world enabled him to pick up the facts of a case quickly. If his judgments were sometimes rather long, they were clear and decisive, though Lord Buckmaster had a poor opinion of him as a judge ('Jonesco v. Beard', [1930] AC 298). 
Perhaps Pollock's greatest service to his generation and to posterity lay in the industry and enthusiasm which he brought to the execution of his duty as custodian of records, especially manorial records. The 'Law of Property Amendment Act' (1924) by its second schedule added to section 144 of the 'Law of Property Act' (1922) a new section (144 A) conferring on him powers which in other hands might have been left unused. Here was a field in which Pollock's conservative outlook and veneration for the past found a welcome and useful outlet. He used these powers to the full, and inspired others to join in a movement to save, before it was too late, the contemporary records of manors which lay rotting in the offices of country solicitors, in manor houses, or on the rubbish heap. He was always willing to spend his leisure in addressing meetings far and wide as to the mine of contemporary medieval documents which this country was so fortunate as to possess. Scholars and historians owe much to his unflagging efforts in this direction. Nor was the awakening of interest and pride confined to purely manorial records, and this country can no longer be reproached for being the repository of medieval documentary evidence unique in quality and quantity, but cared for by none and explored mainly by the scholars of foreign countries. 
In January 1926 Pollock was raised to the peerage as Baron Hanworth, taking his title from the village in Middlesex where his grandfather, the lord chief baron, had bought an estate in 1834. In 1935 he resigned as master of the rolls owing to increasing ill health, and in January 1936, at the request of Lord Chancellor Sankey, was advanced to a viscountcy as a reward for services, notably on law reform committees, and as gratitude for favours to come. He died at his home, 2 Marine Parade, Hythe, Kent, on 22 October 1936 and was buried at Saltwood, Kent, two days later. 
In 1929 Hanworth published a life of his grandfather, 'Lord Chief Baron Pollock', which supplies a key to his character. A tenacious memory, coupled with an exceptional gift of mimicry, made him an ideal raconteur and endeared him to his fellow benchers of the Inner Temple. He was a keen sportsman, fond of shooting and fishing, and of the country generally. He was a good and religious man, whose simple piety was not obscured by a slight tendency to pomposity. Indeed, Lord Hewart, an acute critic of his fellow men, described him as the model of a Christian gentleman. Hanworth's son was killed in action in France in March 1918, and he was succeeded as second viscount by his grandson David Bertram Pollock (1916-1996). 


@@@@@


doc= 35563


Pollock, Sir Frederick, third baronet (1845-1937), jurist, was born in London on 10 December 1845, the eldest of the three sons of Sir William Frederick Pollock, second baronet (1815-1888), queen's remembrancer, and his wife, Juliet, daughter of Henry Creed, rector of Corse, Gloucestershire. He was the grandson of Sir (Jonathan) Frederick Pollock, first baronet, lord chief baron of the exchequer. Pollock received his initial education at Eton College, where he won distinction as a king's scholar. He then matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1863, where he was elected a scholar in 1865. He was placed second in the classical tripos of 1867 and sixth among the senior optimes of the mathematical tripos of that same year. He won the first chancellor's medal in 1867 and he was elected a fellow of Trinity in the following year. Pollock determined to make the law his profession and he was called to the bar by Lincoln's Inn in 1871. 
For the rest of his life Pollock devoted himself to the study of the law as an essayist, professor, and editor. His primary goal was that law should be established as a science; in other words, that legal scholarship should aim in every field of the law to present the principles that must be extracted from the diverse mass of reported cases. To this endeavour he had been introduced by Nathaniel Lindley and Sir James Shaw Willes. Under their inspiration Pollock sought to lead the way in depicting the common law not as a series of disparate cases, but as a body of scientific principles open to rational inquiry. Viewing the common law in this fashion justified its practical role over the centuries and its status as an appropriate object of academic study. Pollock's insistence on both functions kept him among practising as well as academic lawyers, though he rarely appeared in court. 
Pollock produced two treatises that were typical of this enterprise. In 1876 he published 'Principles of Contract at Law and in Equity'. This remarkable book laid down in organized form the basic principles essential for those in practice, yet Pollock also presented his precepts in a manner that made the book valuable to beginning students, and he even managed to infuse some speculative issues that attracted attention from the nascent body of academic lawyers. In 1887 a companion work appeared, 'The Law of Torts', which was marked by the same wealth of legal learning and thought, combining the philosophy of law with its practical aspects. These two books became instant classics, went through numerous editions in Pollock's lifetime, and continued to exercise influence through posthumous editions in the hands of other scholars. As models for the legal literature Pollock sought to inaugurate, both works acquired substantial authority. 
Pollock married Georgina Harriet Deffell in 1873, a union distinguished by a harmony that lasted for sixty-two years. The marriage produced one daughter and one son. Georgina Pollock shared the wide variety of her husband's interests, and provided a haven to which Pollock could escape from the heavy burden of work he had voluntarily assumed. Georgina Pollock died in 1935, predeceasing her husband by two years. A naturally shy individual, Pollock rarely alluded to his domestic life, though there are some references in his memoirs of a long life, 'For my Grandson: Remembrances of an Ancient Victorian' (1933). 
In 1883, one year after standing unsuccessfully for the Vinerian chair against Albert Venn Dicey, Pollock became Corpus professor of jurisprudence at Oxford (with a fellowship at Corpus Christi College); he held the chair until 1903. In the three decades between 1882 and 1912 Pollock produced a remarkable series of books on jurisprudence and politics that established him as a leading analyst and historian of the common law. Among the best-known of these are 'Essays in Jurisprudence and Ethics' (1882), 'English Opportunities and Duties in the Historical and Comparative Study of Law' (1883), 'An Introduction to the History of the Science of Politics' (1890), 'Oxford Lectures and other Discussions' (1890), 'The Expansion of the Common Law' (1904) and 'The Genius of the Common Law' (1912). These books were marked by an exploration of the intellectual foundations of law, not merely an explication of a single branch of the law. Pollock's capacity to succeed so effectively in both areas indicated the breadth and depth of his learning. 
Pollock drew upon a wide variety of influences in the formulation of his own legal philosophy. He combined an understanding of the political and social realities that law reflected with a critical intelligence that gave to him an air of legal omniscience. He accepted little on faith except the strength of the common law itself. Pollock championed the comparative method of scholarly investigation with respect to law, in particular the utility for the common lawyer of familiarity with Roman law. The justification for this approach was twofold. In the first place Roman law provided a model for the consolidation of the common law into a rational system, so that its development might be understood as a whole. Secondly, proficiency in Roman law and its attendant scholarship promoted better understanding of common-law doctrines, rescued the common lawyer from insularity, and gave to the student of the common law a comparative perspective before such methodology became academically fashionable. 
Pollock was the foremost admirer of Sir Henry Maine's historical jurisprudence, which provided for him an enduring antidote to the analytical jurisprudence of John Austin and a scientific basis for law different from the narrow confines afforded by the utilitarian tradition. Pollock thought that Maine's stimulus to the intelligent investigation of the common law, especially the refusal to depict the common law as simply a dogmatic, technical system, could not be overrated. Maine had forged intellectual links that bound together law, history, and anthropology, an achievement that made the rational basis of law more discernible. Pollock's concern for historical record made him sympathetic to Maine's emphasis upon evolution in the development of legal systems. 
A substantial portion of Pollock's jurisprudence was drawn from his ambivalent reaction to the then prevailing Austinian jurisprudence. Pollock rejected Austin's premises for two principal reasons: the unhistorical nature of Austin's conclusions as revealed by Maine; and the failure to perform the promised separation of law and morality -- Austin having, in Pollock's view, substituted utilitarian ethics for conventional morality. In addition, Pollock detested the plodding literary style Austin had imposed upon legal philosophy, a fault that impeded realization of Pollock's desire for clarity in the law. Pollock did, however, accept the intellectual utility of analytical jurisprudence's stress upon the necessity to separate morality from legal analysis, even if he felt that Austin had not followed his own prescription. But for Pollock the separation was a methodological imperative only: as a tool for the scientific study of law, Austin had been correct to attempt to separate law from morality, but in the real world law and morality intersected through the medium of public opinion. Pollock was eclectic in his intellectual preferences, and pragmatic in the way in which he attempted to reconstruct the history of the common law. 
Another classical work of scholarship with which Pollock was associated was that made in collaboration with Frederic Maitland, whom he had met through Leslie Stephen's Sunday Tramps: the two-volume 'History of English Law before the Time of Edward I' (1895). Despite its fame as 'Pollock and Maitland', Pollock readily conceded that most of the credit for this great work belonged to his colleague. This famous partnership succeeded despite personal and professional disagreements. Indeed S. F. C. Milsom refers to 'the bizarre need to finish 'Pollock and Maitland' before Pollock could write any more of it' ('F. W. Maitland', 'Proceedings of the British Academy', 66, 1982, 277). Pollock desired to place law at the centre of the research, while Maitland wished to discuss the historical context without which the understanding of law would be impossible. Pollock contributed the section on Anglo-Saxon law, notable in its own right for its rejection of the view that legal institutions were transmitted genetically through the Germanic race. Pollock had little admiration for the work of William Stubbs, for example, precisely because it attributed English constitutional liberties to such a transmission. The affiliation with Maitland worked in spite of their different intellectual attitudes, and their complementary relationship in the end produced a masterpiece of scholarship on the history of medieval English law. 
The founding editor of the 'Law Quarterly Review' in 1885, Pollock served until 1919, when the journal had taken its place as the premier vehicle for legal scholarship in the world. Under his guidance the periodical not only published articles of note from leading scholars, it kept readers abreast of important treatises through its book review section. In addition to his editorial duties, Pollock contributed many original articles to its pages. He also wrote notes on current decisions and never hesitated to criticize or to praise when he thought it appropriate. The 'Law Quarterly Review' set a standard of excellence in the common-law jurisdictions that became much admired and imitated. 
Pollock also acted as chief editor of the 'Law Reports' from 1895 to 1935, relinquishing his sole jurisdiction only at the age of ninety. This duty, supervising a most important portion of the English system, indicated his commitment to the practical workings of the law. Of the Oxford professoriate in the 1880s and 1890s that included such academic luminaries as Albert Venn Dicey, Thomas Erskine Holland, and James Bryce, it was Pollock who best kept in touch with the bar. Further practical involvement came with his public work: he drafted the 1890 'Partnership Act' and several Indian bills, and he served on several royal commissions, including those on labour (1891-4) and public records (1910). Perhaps better than any other individual who moved between academic law and practice, Pollock never forgot that the law was untidy, constantly changing, and beyond the ability of a single individual to change dramatically. His humility in the face of the law's majesty sustained his role as the primary mediator between theory and practice of his generation. 
Pollock is now remembered chiefly for his famous epistolary friendship with justice Oliver Wendell Holmes of the United States supreme court. For more than half a century these two individuals, both major figures in the legal development and jurisprudence of their respective countries, exchanged letters on every conceivable subject, not just on legal matters but across the impressive variety of interests each man possessed. The publication of these letters in 1942 gave an insight into Pollock's personality which was surprising to many people. At the same time, however, even after the length of their friendship, the letters revealed a restriction on intimacy that was part of each man's reserve. 
Pollock presented to the world a facade of immense dignity, especially on public occasions, which was often mistaken for coldness or snobbery. In truth he was not much for small talk nor did he suffer fools gladly. While on cordial terms with individuals, he did not permit familiarity; the result has been a paucity of personal memoirs. His formidable appearance notwithstanding, Pollock was a devoted husband and father whose private conduct belied his public image. 
The learning that Pollock possessed was truly prodigious. Whether it was about fencing, mountaineering, the Persian language, classical philosophy, or architecture, he acquired an expert's knowledge of these discrete fields. His son quoted an anonymous Oxford professor's conclusion that Pollock had been the most learned Englishman since Francis Bacon (Pollock, 'Time's Chariot', 48). In letters to Gilbert Murray, for example, Pollock never hesitated to suggest alternative translations of Greek literature to his friend. Pollock remained both intellectually and physically active until the end of his long life. 
In his time Pollock earned universal recognition for the remarkable position he had acquired by his mastery of both legal practice and legal theory. Since his death in London on 18 January 1937, however, he has received only passing evaluations from subsequent scholars. This is in part because he was too much an academic lawyer for the practitioners and too devoted to practice for the academic jurists; moreover, the diversity of his scholarly activity has prevented a greater appreciation of its specific parts. A fair assessment of Pollock's place in the history of English law and jurisprudence came from C. H. S. Fifoot: Pollock 'was for sixty years at the heart of the law' (Fifoot, 'Judge and Jurist', 136). His faith in the ultimate beneficence of the historic common law, and his courage to record its failures, made him a notable publicist for the English legal system and its accomplishments in other countries. 


@@@@@


doc= 35564


Pollock, Hugh McDowell (1852-1937), businessman and politician, was born in Bangor, co. Down, on 16 November 1852, third and youngest son of James Pollock, master mariner, and his wife, Eliza McDowell. Educated at Bangor endowed school, he served a shipbroking apprenticeship, then moved to McIlroy, Pollock, flour importers, which became the central vehicle of his business career, and which, under the name Shaw, Pollock & Co., grew into the largest such enterprise in Ireland. His business interests included directorships in manufacturing, shipping, and linen companies, and it was his acumen in this field that brought him to public prominence during the latter part of the First World War. 
In 1917 Pollock was appointed director of wheat supplies under the food controller for the north of Ireland, and, having been elected president of the Belfast chamber of commerce for that year, he was nominated 'ex officio' to the Irish Convention (1917-18). His mastery of Anglo-Irish financial complexities quickly earned him respect and nomination to the convention's inner committee of nine. In 1918 he was appointed chairman of the Ulster selective committee, of the Ministry of Labour, a post he held until 1921, and during these same years (1918-21) he became president of the Belfast harbour commission (which he served from 1899 to 1937 as a member). His contribution to the commission, and especially to its works, law, and finance committees, led in 1933 to its naming after him its new Pollock Dock and basin. 
Unsurprisingly, therefore, when Northern Ireland was established by the 1920 'Government of Ireland Act', Pollock emerged as one of the principal figures of the new administration. Elected Unionist MP for South Belfast in 1921, he held this seat (altered and renamed Windsor in 1929) until his death, and he was chosen by Sir James Craig to be his first minister of finance and deputy premier. Thus, at the age of sixty-nine, Pollock embarked on a political career, in circumstances of communal violence and acute financial difficulty. He was to retain both responsibilities for the rest of his life, earning a reputation for probity in public office and emerging as a champion of self-reliance for his province. 
The optimistic economic assumptions of the immediate post-war period had already been confounded by the time Pollock took office. His input to the Northern Ireland special arbitration committee (1923-5), established to review the province's funding and chaired by Lord Colwyn, ensured that Northern Ireland would be able to keep parity of social benefits with the rest of the United Kingdom, but he was unable, in the depressed conditions of the inter-war years and under the newly agreed formula, to bring Northern Ireland's underdeveloped services, in education, health, housing, and general infrastructure, up to the national level. Still, his judicious use of the loans guarantee acts, well into the 1930s, did keep up a measure of activity in a shipbuilding industry that might otherwise have perished. In 1932 he attended the Imperial Economic Conference at Ottawa as an advisory member of the British delegation. 
One of the province's leading educationists, Pollock had given evidence to the viceregal committee of inquiry into primary education (Ireland) in 1918 and in 1922 he chaired a committee to provide for teacher training in the north. For many years he served as chairman of the board of Victoria College, one of the United Kingdom's pioneering institutions of female education. 
In 1885 Pollock married Mrs Annie Robinson, daughter of Andrew Marshall, of Brooklyn, USA; they had four sons and a daughter. A privy councillor (1921), a doctor of laws (from Trinity College, Dublin, 1935), and a Companion of Honour (1936), Pollock was also a deputy lieutenant and justice of the peace for Belfast. Throughout, he was an orthodox finance minister, to whom a deficit represented moral as well as financial bankruptcy. Courageous, kindly, a doughty but fair debater, a disciplined intellectual, and a devout Presbyterian, his life was characterized, above all, as one of service: the integrity of that service emerged at his death in sincere tributes from political opponents (socialist and nationalist) and supporters alike. Widely travelled and read, he enjoyed golf and shooting and belonged to the Ulster Reform Club and to the Overseas League, in which he played a prominent part. Pollock died on 15 April 1937 at his home, 26 Windsor Avenue, Belfast, and was buried in Belfast city cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 35565


Pollock, Sir (John) Donald, baronet (1868-1962), industrialist, was born at Galashiels on 23 November 1868, the elder surviving son of the Revd John Barr Pollock, minister of the United Presbyterian church, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of John Donald JP, of Edinburgh. He was educated by his father, studied science at Glasgow University, and medicine at Edinburgh where he gained his MB, CM in 1892, and MD in 1895. After qualifying he spent a year or two as a ship's doctor before setting up in practice in the Earl's Court Road, London (1895-1908). He then became private medical adviser and companion to the duke of Leinster, an epileptic, with whom he travelled extensively until the outbreak of war in 1914, when they settled in Edinburgh. Pollock gave his services to the naval hospital at Granton; he was appointed OBE in 1919 and in 1922 received the honorary rank of surgeon-commander RNVR. 
After the war and the duke's death in 1922, Pollock joined with S. J. L. Hardie and R. W. McCrone in the formation in 1922 of a ship-breaking company, Metal Industries Ltd, of which he remained chairman until 1951. In 1925 the company was asked by the Admiralty if it was interested in salvaging the sunken German ships at Scapa Flow. This task was beyond its resources and another company raised all the small ships, some of which, as well as five battleships, were purchased by Metal Industries. In 1933 Pollock's company took over the salvaging and raised another six battleships before work was stopped in 1939. In 1936 the company was able to obtain from the Admiralty a lease of part of Rosyth Dockyard which enabled it to deal with much larger ships. 
At the outset it was realized that it was essential for the company to make its own oxygen and Pollock and McCrone went to Germany to study methods of production before a plant was set up at Charlestown on the Forth. Later they purchased the patent rights for a new method which delivered oxygen in liquid form, to be converted into gas at the user's works. Having recognized the wider applications of the new method, Pollock, who was a very good negotiator, overcame the initial reluctance of the large steel works to adopt it, and factories were opened in Sheffield and Birmingham to manufacture liquid oxygen. Alarmed at this development the British Oxygen Company raised an action against Pollock and McCrone for revocation of their patent rights. But before the case was finished British Oxygen asked Pollock and his colleagues to amalgamate with them, which they accordingly did in 1932. Pollock was chairman of British Oxygen from 1932 until 1937 when he became honorary president. 
Although his business interests took him frequently to London, Pollock was always active in the public life of Scotland. He was, for instance, a member of the Scottish Milk Marketing Board, the Carnegie Trust for the Scottish Universities, and the economic committee of the Scottish National Development Council. In 1936 he gave $250,000 to form a trust for educational and religious purposes in Scotland and a few years later he founded the $70,000 Pollock Memorial Missionary Trust to provide homes for missionaries of all denominations. He was a generous benefactor of Edinburgh University, of which he was lord rector in 1939-45 and where he is commemorated by the halls of residence, Pollock Halls. He received the honorary degrees of LLD from Edinburgh (1935) and DSc in 1937 from Oxford, where he had established a readership in engineering science and also enabled the Clarendon Laboratory to carry out its research into low temperatures. As a great friend of A. L. Smith he became a member of the senior common room at Balliol College. He was a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh and in 1951 a vice-president of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. He was created a baronet in 1939. 
Pollock was a man of simple tastes, almost a teetotaller, and certainly a non-smoker. He spent little on himself except on etchings, of which he had one of the finest collections in the country. He had only two cars in forty years, and never had a chauffeur or even a full-time gardener. He took no interest in sports except rugby and sailing and listed as one of his recreations the 'nautical training of young lads', the others being gardening and engineering. He took a lot of exercise, never put on weight, and was always very fit. He died at his home, Manor House, Boswall Road, Leith, Edinburgh, on 4 June 1962. He was unmarried and the baronetcy became extinct. 
R. W. McCrone', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35566


Ponsonby, Arthur Augustus William Harry, first Baron Ponsonby of Shulbrede (1871-1946), politician and peace campaigner, was born on 16 February 1871 in Windsor Castle, the third and youngest son of Sir Henry Frederick Ponsonby (1825-1895), Queen Victoria's private secretary, and his wife, Mary Elizabeth Ponsonby (1832-1916) ['see under 'Ponsonby, Sir Henry Frederick], the daughter of John Crocker Bulteel MP. Frederick Edward Grey Ponsonby, first Baron Sysonby, was his elder brother. The Ponsonbys came from Cumberland, where they were established in the thirteenth century; an Irish branch of the family became the earls of Bessborough. His paternal grandfather, Sir Frederic Ponsonby, served in the Peninsular War and miraculously survived the battle of Waterloo. Arthur Ponsonby grew up in the courtly atmosphere of Windsor Castle, served as page of honour to the queen, and went to school (1885-90) in Warre-Cornish's house at Eton College, of which he became captain, and was elected to 'Pop', the Eton society. After two years at Balliol College, Oxford (1890-92), he went abroad to learn German and French and in 1894 passed into the diplomatic service. Following service in Constantinople and Copenhagen he moved to the Foreign Office in 1900. 
While still in the diplomatic service Ponsonby married, on 12 April 1898, Dorothea 
(Dolly; 1876-1963)
, the daughter of the composer Sir Charles Hubert Hastings Parry, bt. They settled down at Shulbrede Priory, Sussex, which Ponsonby was able to buy in 1905. Restoring this semi-ruined Augustinian priory turned farmhouse became a lifelong interest, about which he wrote in 'The Priory and Manor of Lynchmere and Shulbrede' (1920). The couple's first child, Elizabeth, was born in 1900 and their son, Matthew, in 1904. All the family are musically portrayed in Hubert Parry's delightful piano pieces 'Shulbrede Tunes'. While at Oxford in the 1920s Matthew became a friend of Evelyn Waugh, and his sister, Elizabeth, whose exotic life in the social set known as the bright young people caused her parents much anguish, became in part the model for Waugh's heroine Agatha Runcible in his novel 'Vile Bodies'. 
Ponsonby resigned from the Foreign Office in 1902 in order to further a career in politics. He served first in the Liberal Central Association office and then in 1906, after defeat at Taunton, was appointed principal private secretary to the prime minister, Campbell-Bannerman. When Campbell-Bannerman died in 1908, Ponsonby won the resulting by-election for the Stirling burghs, a seat he held until 1918. He achieved notoriety almost immediately after his election by voting against the king's proposed visit to Russia and in consequence found himself excluded from the guest list of the king's garden party. This storm in a teacup established Ponsonby as a radical, opposed to Liberal Imperialism. 
Ponsonby's move to the left was evident in his reflections on luxury and poverty, 'The Camel and the Needle's Eye' (1910), and 'The Decline of the Aristocracy' (1912), which, in spite of its title, was a critique of the upper classes' continued social dominance. About 1908 he gave up the Anglican faith into which he was born. His particular interest was in foreign affairs. The radicals had some success in creating parliamentary machinery to control defence spending and were working on the creation of a foreign affairs committee before being overtaken by events in 1914. 
In 1914 Ponsonby, who had refused appointment as a junior whip in the previous year, was leading a small group of radical Liberals opposed to Grey's foreign policy, and he was one of only five MPs who spoke out against war in the debate of 3 August 1914. After the declaration of war, together with E. D. Morel, Norman Angell, C. P. Trevelyan, and Ramsay MacDonald, Ponsonby founded the Union of Democratic Control, a pressure group whose actions during the war not only sustained the dissenting tradition in English politics but significantly shaped the debate on war aims. Planning a new international order to replace the balance of power became an overriding objective. Ponsonby was a member of the Bryce group that began in late 1914 to formulate proposals that would eventually lead to the covenant of the League of Nations. He argued in vain against coercive sanctions, believing only in moral force as a basis for international authority. 
Wartime pacifism inevitably entailed defeat for Ponsonby, who stood for election at Dunfermline as an independent democrat in the torrid atmosphere of the 'coupon' election of 1918. He was now free to join the Labour Party and was elected to represent Sheffield Brightside in 1922. When the first Labour government was formed in 1924 Ponsonby was appointed parliamentary under-secretary at the Foreign Office. The 'Ponsonby rule' was soon on the statute books, establishing the constitutional convention that all treaties should be laid on the table of the House of Commons for twenty-one days before ratification. Ponsonby was also instrumental in providing government sanction for the publication of 'Origins of the War', the British diplomatic record before 1914. His major achievement was the successful negotiation of a treaty with the Soviet Union, but it was never ratified as the government, caught out by the Campbell case, opted for a dissolution and lost the 'Zinoviev letter' election. 
Out of office and once again a back-bencher, Ponsonby found his invidious position as an aristocratic socialist who was in the party but not of it was further emphasized by his failure to get elected to the shadow cabinet. He decided to go outside the party in his ambitious solo effort to make the democratic control of foreign policy a reality through his peace letter campaign. Without any organization he succeeded, by 1927, in collecting over 100,000 signatures, enough pledges to encourage him to continue but nowhere enough to influence foreign policy. By far his biggest success at this time was his book 'Falsehood in Wartime' (1928), which exposed many atrocity stories of the war as propaganda lies. 
Ponsonby was never afraid to propose alternative policies and, when disarmament became an issue in 1928 at Geneva, he called for unilateral disarmament. In doing this without Labour Party sanction, he so distanced himself from MacDonald that in the new government he was offered only the position of under-secretary for the Colonies and Dominions Office. He later became parliamentary secretary to the Ministry of Transport before his elevation to the peerage (17 January 1930) as Lord Ponsonby of Shulbrede and his appointment in 1931 as chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster. 
On the creation of the National Government of 1931 Ponsonby became the Labour leader in the House of Lords. Outside Westminster he was active in the 'no more war' movement, and, with the Revd Dick Shepherd, he founded the Peace Pledge Union (PPU). These two movements amalgamated in 1937, but the PPU was hardly more successful in collecting peace pledges than had been the earlier solo effort of the peace letter campaign. Ponsonby collaborated with Lansbury in the War Resisters' International, and supported disarmament in opposition to Labour's official policy of collective security. This policy difference led him in September 1935 to resign the leadership of the Labour Party in the House of Lords. Ponsonby supported Chamberlain's efforts to negotiate a settlement with Hitler's Germany and for a short time found himself again in public view in an unholy alliance with 'The Times' and even some right-wing Conservative appeasers. Once war broke out he virtually withdrew from active politics, resigning from the Labour Party on 15 May 1940 when Labour became part of the national government. His last active years were devoted to preparing a life of his father, 'Henry Ponsonby: his Life from his Letters', which, when it was published in 1942, won the prestigious James Tait Black memorial prize. 
Although Ponsonby was often the subject of cartoonists, most were not successful. As he himself described it, his characteristic look of thoughtful melancholy gave him a reputation for solemnity when inwardly he laughed to himself and at himself and at life's comedy. Although an accomplished actor and broadcaster, Ponsonby was never a great speaker in the House of Commons; that he was always listened to, considering the unpopularity of what he often had to say, suggests the respect which his personal integrity gained for him. George V's quarterdeck reprimand to Ponsonby's elder brother, John, that he knew before he opened his 'Times' in the morning he would see Arthur's name doing something wrong, would probably have been regarded by Ponsonby as a compliment. His political career was sustained in spite of all its varied setbacks by a private life centred on Dolly, Shulbrede, and a lifelong circle of friends. The family seem to have an acting gene in their make-up. Although an amateur, Ponsonby was good enough to act in the copyright performance of Israel Zangwill's play 'The Melting Pot' and to be consulted about the plot of Granville Barker's play 'Waste'. His skills in watercolours brought him membership in the New English Art Club. His chief talent lay in writing, not only about pacifism and diarists, but in his own diary, which is a remarkable document. Altogether he wrote seventeen books and more than forty major articles and pamphlets. He contributed regularly to a number of newspapers and journals, especially 'The Nation' before the war and the 'Manchester Guardian' after it. 
Beatrice Webb wrote in her diary for 2 November 1936 that she thought Ponsonby's career both queer and nondescript, of little apparent importance -- queer in the sense that he began life as an aristocratic establishment insider and ended it as an excluded pacifist outsider, nondescript in that he failed to achieve even moderately high office. But of little importance? While it is true that his contributions to the peace movement have not received any general recognition, it should be remembered that he was one of the 'troublemakers' to whom A. J. P. Taylor credits all changes and advances in history. 
Ponsonby suffered an incapacitating stroke in September 1943 from which he never recovered. He was living at the Heather Bank Nursing Home, Hindhead, Surrey, when he died of natural causes on 23 March 1946. 


@@@@@


doc= 35567


Ponsonby, Vere Brabazon, ninth earl of Bessborough in the peerage of Ireland and first earl of Bessborough in the peerage of the United Kingdom (1880-1956), governor-general of Canada, was born in London on 27 October 1880, the eldest son of Edward Ponsonby, eighth earl of Bessborough (1851-1920), and his wife, Blanche Vere (died 1919), daughter of Sir Josiah John Guest and his wife, Lady Charlotte Guest (later Schreiber). He went to Harrow School in the family tradition, then in 1898 to Trinity College, Cambridge, and after taking his degree in 1901 was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1903. Bessborough, co. Kilkenny, still remained the family home; there his father, who succeeded to the title in 1906, established a pack of hounds to hunt the neighbouring country, and Viscount Duncannon, as he then became, carried the horn. 
Duncannon held a commission in the Buckinghamshire hussars and in 1906 stood for parliament unsuccessfully at Carmarthen as a Unionist. During these years, he might well have been spoilt in the role of an eligible and good-looking 'parti', but he was level-headed and industrious: after failing for parliament, he put in three useful years (1907-10) representing Marylebone East on the London county council. In January 1910 he was returned to parliament for Cheltenham, but he lost his seat in the election of December. On 25 June 1912 he made the happiest of marriages with Roberte (died 1979), only daughter of Baron de Neuflize, banker, of Paris, and in June of the next year, at a by-election, he was returned unopposed to parliament for Dover. 
In the First World War Duncannon served in Gallipoli as GSO3 and afterwards held a staff post in France under his close friend Sir Henry Wilson. He was appointed CMG in 1919. He held his Dover seat at the general election of 1918, but relinquished it on his father's death in December 1920, when he succeeded as ninth earl of Bessborough. 
After the war Bessborough went into the City and became chairman of the Sao Paulo Railway, deputy chairman of De Beers, and chairman of the Margarine Union until its merger in 1929 into Unilever, of which he became a joint chairman with D'Arcy Cooper. 
In 1923 the family home in Ireland was burnt down in the political troubles there, but prudence had earlier dictated that pictures and other treasures should gradually be removed to England, and thus a number of them were saved. Bessborough spent a year or so looking round for another home and settled on Stansted Park, Rowland's Castle, on the Hampshire border of Sussex. A fine Queen Anne replica in a wide and classic setting, it possessed a 400-year-old chapel, with literary and historic associations, which he restored. Inheriting also the family flair for acting, he built a theatre, and soon enough performances of a high order were annually given before the neighbourhood. He encouraged cricket and maintained an excellent shoot. 
Before all these matters were completed, Bessborough accepted in 1931 the post of governor-general of Canada. The appointment caused surprise in some quarters, not least in the dominion itself, where he was virtually unknown, but he could offer as qualifications his service on the London county council and in parliament, his business experience, an innate dignity, proven thoroughness, and industry. In his wife, a French protestant, he had a specially attractive consort, while his own command of French commended him also to the important French-Canadian community. He was sworn of the privy council and advanced to GCMG in 1931 and remained in Canada until 1935. 
During his time there Bessborough was fortunate in not being called on to deal with constitutional problems of the gravity which had faced his predecessors. Throughout his term he proved a valuable cultural influence all over Canada, encouraging the arts generally and drama in particular; he promoted a revival of the National Drama Festival, which became an annual event. His monthly 'duty' letters to the sovereign were well written, full, and lucid, and received the king's careful attention, and he conducted the office with great dignity. He did however have to adapt himself to the manners and customs of a new world with which he was unfamiliar. A habitual shyness, compounded by a quickness of temper, lent a certain reserve to his governor-generalship in its early days, and his insistence upon the detail of ceremonial etiquette contrasted unfavourably with the more relaxed regimes of his immediate predecessors. On one occasion in 1934 he rebuked the mayor of Toronto after arriving in the city for a public function and finding no official welcoming party there to greet him. Bessborough was discomfited by the outspoken press criticism that this incident attracted, and he afterwards made greater efforts to secure public acceptance. In June 1937 his Irish earldom was raised to an earldom of the United Kingdom in recognition of his services as governor-general. 
On his return to England, Bessborough resumed many of his City interests and in 1936 became president of the Council of Foreign Bondholders and director (he was later chairman) of the Rio Tinto Company. Among his voluntary activities he was chairman of the board of governors of Cheltenham Ladies' College and president and chairman of the council of the British Hotels and Restaurants Association. He found time, too, to edit some of the family archives, and in 'Lady Bessborough and her Family Circle' (1940) he presented with considerable literary skill the first authentic portrait of his great-grandmother Henrietta and dismissed some of the inaccuracies which malice and gossip had piled up round her and her daughter Caroline Lamb. He also edited (1950-52) two volumes of diaries and papers of his grandmother Lady Charlotte Schreiber. 
With the influx into Britain from France of refugees and the Resistance after 1939 Bessborough was an obvious choice to organize a department at the Foreign Office to co-ordinate all activities concerned with the welfare of the French in Great Britain. This he did very well (1940-45), and he later became chairman of the Franco-British Society, serving this cause with constant interest until his death. Among other foreign decorations, Bessborough received the grand cross of the Legion d'honneur in 1950. 
As he grew old, Bessborough's activities did not lessen but became more local. He was instrumental in the foundation of both the regency exhibitions in the Brighton Pavilion and the Regency Society. In the diocese of Chichester he was for years chairman of the board of finance and did a great deal of more general work for the church in Sussex and in the empire, to which his friend and bishop, G. K. A. Bell, paid unqualified tribute after his death. He was a conscientious landlord, knowing the family details of his tenants and neighbours and taking a deep interest in their affairs. 
Bessborough and his wife suffered two separate and grievous tragedies in the accidental deaths of their two younger sons; that of his youngest in 1951 was a blow which must have shortened Bessborough's life. Yet he never surrendered to grief and continued his activities to the end. Nor did his own tragedies ever reduce his interest in the children of others or the sympathy he showed them. He died on 10 March 1956 at Stansted Park and was succeeded by his eldest and surviving son, Frederick Edward Neuflize (1913-1993). His daughter, Moyra Blanche Madeleine (Lady Moyra Browne), was created DBE in 1977. 


@@@@@


doc= 35568


Poole, Reginald Lane (1857-1939), historian, was born at home at 4 Hereford Road, Paddington, London, on 29 March 1857, the younger son and second of three children of Edward Stanley Poole (1830-1867) ['see under 'Poole, Sophia Lane], civil servant and Arabic scholar, and Roberta Elizabeth Louisa (1828-1866), daughter of Charles Reddelien, a naturalized German merchant. After the early deaths of their parents the children were brought up by their grandmother Sophia Poole and her brother Edward William Lane, the orientalist. Reginald and his brother Stanley Edward Lane-Poole were educated privately by classical tutors and were taught Arabic and Hebrew by their great-uncle. 
The atmosphere in their home at Worthing was one of evangelical religion and oriental learning. In 1874 Reginald went up to Balliol College, Oxford, as a commoner. At this time his main interest was in Hebrew, which was then studied in the honour school of theology. During his first term he won the Busby theological prize at Balliol, and shortly afterwards he was elected to a Hody Hebrew exhibition at Wadham College, to which he migrated. He spent the long vacation of 1876 at Leiden over a translation from the Dutch of Land's 'Principles of Hebrew Grammar', which was published the same year. In 1877 he returned to Balliol to read modern history under J. F. Bright and William Stubbs. His classes in the schools, a third in classical moderations (1876) and seconds in theology (1878) and modern history (1879), by no means represented his intellectual quality, and in 1879 he won the Lothian prize with an essay subsequently published as 'The History of the Huguenots of the Dispersion' (1880). 
In 1880 Poole was appointed as assistant in the department of manuscripts at the British Museum, but he resigned the post in 1881 on being awarded a Hibbert travelling scholarship. On 4 August 1881, shortly before leaving for Leipzig under the terms of the scholarship, he married Rachael Emily Malleson ['see below'] with whom he was to have two daughters and two sons; their youngest child was Austin Lane Poole (1889-1963), historian and president of St John's College, Oxford, from 1947 to 1957. Poole's early marriage and consequent inability to live in college were, more than his examination record, probably the chief reasons for his not being elected to a college fellowship until long afterwards. In 1882 he took the degree of PhD at Leipzig and published the first of his numerous contributions to the history of music, 'Sebastian Bach'. After a year in Zurich, he published some of the results of his studies in his 'Illustrations of the History of Medieval Thought' (1884; 2nd edn, 1920), which had a significant influence in encouraging the study of medieval scholarship and political thought in England. 
In 1883 Poole returned to England and settled in Oxford, where he remained for the rest of his life. From 1886 to 1910 he was a lecturer at Jesus College; from 1898 to 1933 he was a research fellow, and from 1933 an honorary fellow, of Magdalen College; from 1896 to 1927 he was university lecturer in diplomatic; and from 1909 to 1927 he was keeper of the university archives. His election to the keepership coincided with a revision of the university's archives statute that redefined the functions of the office. Poole resented these changes and protested against them; he described them in 'The Delegacy of Privileges and the Keepership of the Archives: a Letter to the Vice-Chancellor' (privately printed, 1909), as a 'glaring falsification of history' ('The Delegacy of Privileges', 6). He also disagreed with several of his predecessors in his very narrow definition of what should constitute archives and in his 'Lecture on the History of the University Archives' (1912), he lamented 'the fatal inability of Keepers to destroy things when they are done with' ('Lecture on the History of the University Archives', 5). 
The focus of the greater part of Poole's professional life was the 'English Historical Review', established in 1886, of which he was successively assistant editor (1886-95), joint editor (1895-1901), and sole editor (1901-20). His high standards, exact editorial method, and responsiveness to the needs of the emerging historical profession, in the development of which the 'Review' itself played a part, established its identity and reputation. Poole's influence as editor was far-reaching and not limited to his selection of articles, which he would sometimes improve to the point of rewriting, and generosity in sharing knowledge with contributors, especially those junior to him; under him the 'Review' became an informal training ground for young historians and, owing to his wide range of contacts throughout Europe, the origin of networks of communication between researchers in related fields. The heavy burden of its production, the main part of which Poole carried from its foundation, prevented him from writing substantial works of his own, but his output of articles, editions, and calendars of manuscripts was very large. The 'Lectures on the History of the Papal Chancery', which he delivered as Birkbeck lecturer in Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1912/1913 and published in 1915, forms his largest single contribution to the study of diplomatic history. 
A full bibliography of Poole's works to 1927, in which year his edition of John of Salisbury's 'Historia pontificalis' was published, is printed in the volume 'Essays in History', presented to him to celebrate his seventieth birthday. His health was then already failing, and for several years at the end of his life he was unable to leave his house. An important collection of his 'Studies in Chronology and History' was edited by his son in 1934. Elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1904, Poole received in his later years many academic honours, including honorary doctorates from Oxford, Cambridge, Louvain, and Leipzig. 
Poole's great learning was based on hard work and an exceptional memory. He had an instinct for tracing the connections of related facts in widely disparate fields, and for systematizing his wide-ranging knowledge. He read Latin, Greek, Hebrew, and Arabic with ease, as well as at least five modern European languages. He knew not only medieval Europe, but also the older literatures in which medieval Europeans were versed. His earlier studies were in the field of the history of ideas, but as he grew older his precise knowledge of chronology and the forms of documents increasingly formed the basis of his researches. 
Slightly built, of medium height and upright carriage, Poole was a most entertaining, and at times pungent, talker, who delighted in the amenities of civilized academic life, and especially in the historic traditions of Magdalen and of his university offices. From his middle age he was strongly conservative in all his views and 'settled down into a steady churchmanship of the old-fashioned Anglican type' (Webb, 320). He died at his home, 19 Banbury Road, Oxford, on 28 October 1939 from cystitis and enlargement of the prostate and was buried three days later at Wolvercote cemetery. 




@@@@@


doc= 35569


Poole, Stanley Edward Lane- (1854-1931), oriental numismatist and historian, was born in London on 18 December 1854, the elder son of the Arabic scholar Edward Stanley Poole (1830-1867) ['see under 'Poole, Sophia Lane] and his wife, Roberta Elizabeth Louisa, daughter of Charles Reddelien, a naturalized German. Since first their mother then their father died prematurely, he and his brother Reginald Lane Poole (1857-1939) were brought up by their grandmother Sophia Lane Poole (1804-1891) and their great-uncle, the Arabic scholar Edward William Lane (1801-1876) in Worthing. They were educated privately under their great-uncle's supervision. Stanley entered Corpus Christi College, Oxford, in 1874 and became an exhibitioner in 1875, graduating in 1877 with a third in modern history. This poor result was probably due to his other activities: he had already begun studying oriental coinage with his uncle Reginald Stuart Poole (1832-1895), keeper of coins and medals in the British Museum, and from 1874 was employed cataloguing the museum's Islamic coins under his uncle's editorship. On the death of his great-uncle in 1876 Lane-Poole undertook to complete his great 'Arabic Lexicon', issuing the sixth part, with a memoir of Lane's life, in 1877 and the fragmentary seventh and eighth parts in 1885 and 1893. 
On 15 May 1879 Lane-Poole married Charlotte Bell Wilson, second daughter of David Wilson, of Ballymoney, Antrim; they had three sons, the eldest of whom predeceased his father, and a daughter. Lane-Poole remained at the British Museum until 1892, completing the 'Catalogue of Oriental Coins' (11 vols., 1875-91) and the 'Catalogue of Indian Coins' (3 vols., 1884-92). At the same time he also catalogued the 'Mohammedan Coins Preserved in the Bodleian Library, Oxford' (1888). In 1883 he was sent by the Department of Science and Art on an archaeological mission to Egypt, and in 1886 to Sweden, Russia, and Turkey to study Islamic numismatics. Between 1895 and 1897 he was engaged in archaeological research for the Egyptian government, and catalogued the 'Arabic Coins Preserved in the Khedival Library at Cairo' (1897). From 1898 until his retirement in 1904 he was professor of Arabic at Trinity College, Dublin, from which he received the degree of DLitt in 1900. In 1901-2 he served as secretary to the Royal Irish Academy, and as examiner in Arabic to the University of Wales. 
The years 1875-1903 were very productive for Lane-Poole. Apart from his sixteen volumes of catalogues, he published numerous books on the life and history of the Muslim world, especially Egypt and India, and edited several works of his great-uncle Lane, including the famous translation of 'The Thousand and One Nights' (1883, 1891, 1906). He also edited some of Jonathan Swift's works, notably his 'Letters and Journals' (1885). In 1885 he edited the biography of his wife's great-uncle, General Francis Rawdon Chesney, and subsequently wrote biographies of other Englishmen associated with the East: Stratford Canning (1888, 1890), Sir Richard Church (1890), Sir Harry Parkes (1894, 1901), and 'Watson Pasha' (Sir Charles Moore Watson, 1919). With his gift for condensing his sources in a simple and attractive style, several of these became standard works and were frequently reprinted. He was a versatile writer, able to produce both academic reference works such as the coin catalogues and 'The Mohammedan Dynasties' (1894), and popular versions of his biographies and introductions to historical subjects, notably four contributions to the 'Story of the Nations' series ('The Moors in Spain', 1887; 'Turkey', 1888; 'The Barbary Corsairs', 1890; 'Medieval India', 1903). 
His wife died in 1905, and Lane-Poole lived in retirement at 10 Brompton Square, London, until his death there on 29 December 1931. He was cremated at Golders Green crematorium on 1 January 1932. 


@@@@@


doc= 35570


Pooley, Sir Ernest Henry, baronet (1876-1966), arts administrator, was born on 20 November 1876 at 91 Portsdown Road, Paddington, London, the elder of the two sons of Henry Fletcher Pooley (1841-1924), barrister, who became an assistant secretary to the Board of Education, and his wife, Susan (died 1937), daughter of Edward Bond of Hampstead, London. He was educated at Winchester College and, from 1895, at Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he obtained second classes in the classical tripos (1898) and the law tripos (1899). He was called to the bar by Lincoln's Inn in 1901 and joined the Board of Education as a legal assistant in 1903. In 1905 he was appointed assistant clerk to the Drapers' Company and in 1908 became clerk. On retirement from office in 1944 he was elected master (1944-5), an unusual honour; and in 1952-3 and 1962-3 he was warden. In 1945 he published 'The Guilds of the City of London', in the Collins 'Britain in Pictures' series. 
During the First World War Pooley served in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve and the Royal Garrison Artillery and fought in France and Gallipoli. He became involved with King Edward's Hospital Fund for London in 1928, and was one of those who advised the government on the nationalization of the hospitals after the Second World War. Through the connection of the Drapers' Company with Queen Mary College, London, he sat on the senate and court of the University of London, which in 1948 conferred the honorary degree of LLD upon him. He was a member of several committees, among them the Goodenough committee on medical education and the Fleming committee on public schools, both appointed in 1942. 
In 1946, on the death of John Maynard Keynes, founder of the Arts Council, which grew out of the wartime Council for the Encouragement of Music and the Arts, Pooley was appointed chairman. It was said that Pooley was chosen by Hugh Dalton, the chancellor of the exchequer, in preference to Sir Kenneth Clark (who had expected the job) because he had no particular interest in the arts, and so could be relied upon by the government not to press the claims of the arts too strongly. Under Pooley the Arts Council gave more attention than before to the arts in the regions, but with limited resources it concentrated on helping the best that had already developed, rather than encouraging new ventures. The council played an important part in organizing the 1951 Festival of Britain, fostering local arts festivals in twenty-two centres in Great Britain as well as a London season of the arts, but Pooley warned representatives of the local authorities at a meeting in Central Hall, Westminster, in 1949, that the arts must not necessarily be subsidized, and that many events could and should be self-supporting. Already knighted in 1932, and appointed KCVO in 1944, Pooley was created a baronet in 1953, on his retirement from the Arts Council. 
Pooley was a companionable individual, popular at his club -- the Savile -- and fond of good hospitality, a game of bridge, a night out at the ballet, opera, or theatre, or even an evening at the Folies Bergere. On 8 June 1953 he married Winifred Christabel (1882/3-1976), the widow of his old friend H. C. Marillier, expert on tapestries, and daughter of Arthur Hopkins, artist; Pooley's previous marriage had been dissolved. Pooley died in the Royal West Sussex Hospital, Chichester, on 13 February 1966. 


@@@@@


doc= 35571


Poore, George Vivian (1843-1904), physician, was born at Andover on 23 September 1843, the youngest of ten children of Commander John Poore RN (retired) and Martha Midlane. In his early days he was destined to follow his father's profession, and after education at home was sent at the age of ten to the Royal Naval School at New Cross, where he stayed until he was nearly seventeen. Here he gained a medal for good conduct but, having determined to enter the medical profession, he declined a marine cadetship. 
Poore began his medical training with an apprenticeship at Broughton, near Winchester, to Luther Fox, father of the dermatologist William Tilbury Fox. On leaving Dr Fox he matriculated at the University of London and entered as a student at University College Hospital, qualifying MRCS in 1866. During the same year he acted as ship's surgeon to the 'Great Eastern' while it was employed in the laying of the Atlantic cable. Poore graduated MB and BS at the University of London in 1868, and took his doctorate in 1871. In 1870 he was admitted a member of the Royal College of Physicians and in 1877 he was elected a fellow. 
During 1870 and 1871 Poore travelled as medical attendant with Prince Leopold, duke of Albany, and he remained in charge of his health until 1877. In 1872 he was chosen by Queen Victoria to accompany the prince of Wales during his convalescence in the south of France, after his severe attack of typhoid fever. In the same year, Poore became lecturer in medical jurisprudence at Charing Cross Hospital, and gave a course of lectures entitled 'Medical uses of electricity', the study of which was then in its infancy. In 1876 he was elected assistant physician to University College Hospital and professor of medical jurisprudence and clinical medicine. Among his colleagues were Sir William Jenner, Sir John Russell Reynolds, Sir John Erichsen, Tilbury Fox, Grailly Hewett, and Sir Henry Thompson. In 1876 he also published his 'Text Book of Electricity in Medicine and Surgery'; at that time this was the most complete and useful English work on the subject. 
Poore was recognized by his contemporaries as a highly competent lecturer. His lectures on medical jurisprudence were published as 'A Treatise on Medical Jurisprudence' (1901; 2nd edn, 1902). In 1883 he was elected full physician to the hospital, and he held this post with his professorship until May 1903, when failing health forced his retirement to his country house at Andover. 
Outside his purely medical work Poore was well known both to the medical profession and to the public as an ardent sanitarian. In 1891 he was general secretary of the sanitary congress. In his garden at Andover he proved that living humus had a powerful disinfecting property. Poore put forward this idea with a characteristic charm of style and a wealth of illustration in 'The living earth', the fourth chapter of his 'Essays on Rural Hygiene' (1893). He dealt with sanitation and with the wastefulness of the carriage of sewage by water in his Milroy lectures for 1899, 'The Earth in Relation to the Destruction and Preservation of Contagia' (1902, with appendix of public addresses), and in 'The Dwelling House' (2nd edn, 1898). His views were regarded by many sanitary authorities as heretical, but he proved their practical value as far as the rural dwelling was concerned. Along with many contributions to medical journals, largely on dietetic and sanitary matters, Poore also published works on subjects as diverse as the diseases of the throat, mouth, and nose, and nervous diseases of the hand. Poore died at Andover on 23 November 1904 from cardiac failure due to aortic disease. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 35572


Pope, George Uglow (1820-1908), missionary and Tamil scholar, was born on 24 April 1820 in Prince Edward Island, of devout Methodist parents: his father, John Pope (1791-1863), of Padstow, Cornwall, emigrated to Prince Edward Island in 1818 and then moved to Nova Scotia, where he abandoned trade to become a missionary; his mother was Catherine Uglow, of Stratton, north Cornwall. In 1826 the family returned to Plymouth, where John Pope became a prosperous merchant and shipowner, and prominent in municipal affairs. George and his younger brother, William Burt Pope, attended Wesleyan schools at Bury and Hoxton, and by fourteen George had already committed himself to missionary service in south India. In 1839, just nineteen years old, he landed in Madras, having already taught himself Tamil during the voyage. In 1841 he married Mary, daughter of J. Carver, an Anglican priest; in the same year he was ordained in the Church of England and joined the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel (SPG), which sent him to Tinnevelly. 
Twenty years earlier, the SPG had taken responsibility for works in India previously supported by the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK), including those involving the Tamil congregations founded by Christian Friedrich Schwartz and other German missionaries in Tanjore, and in Tinnevelly further south. Pope's wife, Mary, died at Tuticorin, in 1845, and Pope remained in the region until 1849, after which he returned to Madras; in the same year he married Henrietta Page, daughter of G. Van Someren, and sailed for England. Staying for two years, mainly at Oxford, he developed relationships with leading Anglo-Catholic figures of the Oxford Movement, such as Cardinal Manning, Archbishop Trench, Bishop Wilberforce, Bishop Lonsdale, E. B. Pusey, and John Keble. After returning to India in 1851, he went back to Tanjore. There he became embroiled in acrimonious and bitter conflicts with Tamil congregations, mainly over cultural and ecclesiastical differences, legacies of German Lutheran (Halle/Royal-Danish/Tranquebar) missionaries which he could not tolerate. Finally, in 1855, when members of old Tamil congregations, led by such Vallalar luminaries as Vedanayakam Shastri (a Schwartz disciple and friend who had served as court poet to Maharaja Serfoji), had been subjected to public abuse and humiliation (including floggings), so that they broke away to form separate (Tamil-Hindu) churches free from Anglican mission control, Pope resigned in disgust. 
Pope's legacy in Tanjore were his 'reforms' in the old schools at St Peter's Church (which Schwartz had founded and where Vedanayakam Shastri had taught for most of his life). In Sawyerpuram (Tinnevelly district), Pope founded a new seminary for training Anglican Tamil clergy; however, the troubles between 'old' and 'new' Tamil clergy did not end. Eventually, in 1859, he went to the hill station of Ootacamund and founded a grammar school for European children, in which he was headmaster. 'Ooty', at 7000 feet in the Nilgiri hills, was the seat of the government of Madras during the hot season, and, again in 1859, Pope was also made a fellow in the newly established Madras University, for which he often served as an examiner. An honorary (or Lambeth) degree of DD was conferred upon him in 1864 by the archbishop of Canterbury, Charles Longley. In 1870 his reputation for severity with the cane caught up with him, and he moved on to become principal of Bishop Cotton's School (and college) in Bangalore. Owing to its climate, this cantonment city within the princely state of Mysore was by that time attracting a sizeable European community. 
A decade later Pope left India for good and in 1881 settled in Oxford. Here he won recognition, appointments, and honours: as diocesan secretary of the SPG; as university lecturer in Tamil and Telugu (1884); as honorary MA (1886); as chaplain and fellow at Balliol College (1888), where he enjoyed the friendship of two masters, Benjamin Jowett and Edward Caird; and, at the age of eighty-six, a gold medal from the Royal Asiatic Society (awarded every three years to an orientalist of distinction). Pope died on 11 February 1908 at his home, 26 Walton Well Road, Oxford, and was buried at St Sepulchre's cemetery, Oxford. Friends and former students in India, including many Hindus, subscribed to a monument for his grave; founded a memorial prize in Tamil studies at the University of Madras; named a gymnasium after him in Bishop Cotton's School, Bangalore; and built a memorial hall and library at the seminary he founded in Sawyerpuram, Tinnevelly. A portrait by Alfred Wolmark, painted under a subscription gathered by his Madras pupils, was hung in the Indian Institute at Oxford. 
Pope was one of the greatest European scholars on Tamil, along with Joseph Constantius Beschi, Francis Whyte Ellis, and Bishop Robert Caldwell. Never as interested in other Dravidian languages and literatures as in Tamil, he saw Tamil as the key to understanding south India and its cultures, histories, peoples, and religions. His first work, 'A Catechism of Tamil Grammar' (1842), published just three years after his arrival in India, was reissued in 1895 by the Clarendon Press, Oxford, with an English translation and notes; and again by Oxford University Press in his series of 'Handbooks to the ordinary dialect of the Tamil language' (1904-6), which also included Tamil-English and English-Tamil dictionaries, and readings in poetry and prose. What brought him widest scholarly acclaim, however, were his critical editions of famous works in classical Tamil literature: first, in 1886, the 'Kural', a thousand-year-old metrical poem on common morality attributed to the Paraiyar poet, Tiruvalluvar; second, in 1893, the even older and no less renowned 'Naladiyar', consisting of four hundred quatrains of morally edifying aphorisms; and, third, in 1900, the 'Tiruvaragam', a collection of the sacred utterances of Manikka-Varagar, to which Pope prefixed a summary of the life and legends of the author and added appendices on 'Saiva Siddhantha' philosophy and praxis. This last work, celebrating Pope's eightieth birthday, was dedicated to the memory of Jowett. 
Each of Pope's works was accompanied by an English translation, a Tamil lexicon, and a copious commentary. Apart from their obvious erudition, they reflected Pope's respect for Tamil culture, language, and literature. Pope also left manuscript editions and translations of other Tamil works, together with a vast amount of material which he had been collecting for the production of a standard Tamil dictionary, something he hoped that Tamil scholars in Madras would complete after his death. He had, moreover, begun work about 1890 on a catalogue of the Tamil printed books in the British Museum (later completed by L. D. Barnett). Numerous pamphlets and sermons, published during his early days in India, included 'An Alphabet for All India' (Madras, 1859), a visionary plan for putting all the languages of India into a romanized alphabet. 
An ardent student of all fine literature, Pope was especially fond of Robert Browning, to whose achievements he paid tribute in his 'St John in the Desert' (1897; 2nd edn, 1904, with introduction and notes on Browning's 'A Death in the Desert'). He knew Browning personally, and gave the poet a 'square old yellow book with crumpled vellum covers', which was to form the basis of Browning's major poem, 'The Ring and the Book', which Pope presented to the library of Balliol College. Keenly interested in philosophy and religion, he welcomed developments of modern (higher-critical) Christian thought, moving ever further from the Wesleyanism in which he had been brought up. Known for his lively and colourful conversation, his preoccupations reflected a wide variety of intellectual interests and an increasing catholicity of outlook. 
After Pope's death his second wife, Henrietta, and two daughters received a civil pension of $50, in 1909; after her death at Forest Hill, London, on 11 September 1911, she was buried alongside her husband. Three sons won distinction in government service: John Van Someren Pope was director of public instruction in Burma for seventeen years; Arthur William Uglow Pope CIE was a railway engineer and manager in India and China; and Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas Henry Pope IMS was a professor of ophthalmology at Madras Medical College. 


@@@@@


doc= 35573


Pope, Samuel (1826-1901), barrister, born in Manchester on 11 December 1826, was the eldest son of Samuel Pope, a merchant of London and Manchester, and his wife, Phebe, daughter of William Rushton, merchant, of Liverpool. After private education Pope was employed in business, and in his leisure he attended debating societies, developing an aptitude for public speaking. He studied at London University, and entered at the Middle Temple on 13 November 1855. 
During the 1850s Pope became a member of the temperance organization, the Alliance, of which he later became secretary. At the 1857 election, Pope stood as a candidate for the Alliance at Stoke-on-Trent, withdrawing before the poll because of failing support for a permissive bill. Two years later in 1859 Pope once again unsuccessfully contested Stoke, this time as a Liberal candidate. 
On 7 June 1858, Pope was called to the bar. For a few years he practised with success in Manchester, but he moved to London in 1865. In the same year, and again in 1868, he unsuccessfully contested Bolton as a Liberal candidate. In 1869 he was, however, made recorder of the town and took silk. He was noted for his eloquence and commanding personality and in London he soon devoted himself to parliamentary practice; in particular he acted as parliamentary counsel for several railway companies. By the time of his death in 1901 he was the leader of the parliamentary bar. He was chosen a bencher of his inn on 27 January 1870, and was treasurer in 1888-9, when he made a valuable donation of books to the library. 
During his career, Pope held several company posts, including chairman of the England Association of American Bond and Share-Holders and also of the New York Belting and Packing Company. He was also a freemason, becoming senior grand deacon in grand lodge in 1886. He was married to Hannah, daughter of Thomas Bury of Timperley Lodge, Cheshire, in 1848; she predeceased him in 1880, leaving no children. Pope died at his home, 74 Ashley Gardens, Westminster, on 22 July 1901, and was buried at Llanbedr in Merioneth, of which county he was a JP and deputy lieutenant. 


@@@@@


doc= 35574


Pope, William Burt (1822-1903), Wesleyan Methodist minister and theologian, was born at Horton, Nova Scotia, on 19 February 1822, the son of John Pope (1791-1863), Wesleyan missionary, and Catherine, 'nee' Uglow, who was originally of Stratton, Cornwall. His elder brother was George Uglow Pope. After education in England at a village school at Hooe, Devon, and at a secondary school at Saltash, Cornwall, near Plymouth, he spent a year (1837-8) at Bedeque, Prince Edward Island, assisting an uncle, who was a shipbuilder and general merchant. He devoted his leisure to the study of Latin, Greek, French, and German, and was accepted in 1840 by the Cornwall district synod and by the Wesleyan Methodist Connexion as a candidate for the ministry; he entered the Wesleyan Theological Institution at Hoxton, London. There he added Hebrew and Arabic to his stock of languages. In 1842 he began his active ministry at Kingsbridge, Devon, and served for short periods at Liskeard, Jersey, Sandhurst, Dover, and Halifax, and for longer periods in London (City Road), Hull, Manchester, Leeds, and Southport. He married in 1845 Ann Eliza Lethbridge (died 1894), daughter of a yeoman farmer of Modbury, near Plymouth. Two of their nine children died in early life, leaving four daughters and three sons. 
In 1867 Pope succeeded John Hannah the elder as tutor in systematic theology at Didsbury College, Manchester. He received the degree of DD from the Wesleyan University, USA, in 1865 and from the University of Edinburgh in 1877. In 1876 he visited America with James Harrison Rigg as delegate to the general conference of the Methodist Episcopal church at Baltimore. In 1877 he was president of the Wesleyan Methodist conference at Bristol. He resigned his position at Didsbury in 1886. He died, after much suffering from mental depression, on 5 July 1903, at his home, 3 Huddlestone Road, Willesden Green, London, and was buried in Abney Park cemetery, Stoke Newington, London. 
Pope's industry was unflagging. He began his day at 4 a.m., and made notable contributions to theological literature, which were deemed authoritative by his own church, and all the while he was actively engaged in the ministry and in teaching. His chief work was the 'Compendium of Christian Theology' in three volumes (1875; 2nd edn, 1880). His Fernley lecture, 'The person of Christ', delivered in 1871, was translated into German. In 1860 he became editor of the 'London Quarterly Review', to which he was already a contributor; his co-editor from 1883 to 1886 was J. H. Rigg. Pope translated from German, in whole or part, three important books for T. and T. Clark's 'Theological Library', and he contributed to 'Schaff's Popular Commentary' expositions of 'Ezra', 'Nehemiah' (1882), and the epistles of 'St John' (1883). 
Pope's massive erudition and sympathy for the mystical tradition in Christianity sometimes combined to produce opaque prose which baffled congregations, students, and readers alike. An early biographer recorded Pope's reaction on reading a section of his own work: 'I don't quite know what that means; but the more I think about it, the nearer I come to knowing what I must have meant at the time I wrote it' (Moss, 87). Contemporaries united in paying tribute to his gentleness and sanctity; he was 'the quiet man who walked with God' ('Minutes', 158). 


@@@@@


doc= 35575


Pope, Sir William Jackson (1870-1939), chemist, was born on 31 March 1870 at 89 New North Road, London, the eldest of the eight children of William Pope, a City merchant who came from Biggleswade, Bedfordshire, and his wife, Alice, daughter of William Hall, of Prudhoe, Northumberland. He was educated at the Central Foundation School, London (1878-85), the Finsbury Technical College (1885-7), and the Central Institution (which became the Central Technical College while he was there), where he was a pupil of H. E. Armstrong. After having been successively assistant to Armstrong, working with Professor Frederick Stanley Kipping, head of the chemistry department of the Goldsmiths' Institute at New Cross (1897-1901), and professor of chemistry in the municipal school and faculty of technology of the University of Manchester (1901-8), he obtained the chair of chemistry at Cambridge University and was a professorial fellow of Sidney Sussex College until his death (1908-39). 
Although Pope's crystallographic studies leading to the announcement of the valency-volume theory (with William Barlow, 1906) and his investigations in general organic chemistry deserve attention, it is chiefly the advances which he made in stereochemistry, depending on the application of the principles of symmetry to molecular structure, which remain associated with his name. 
When Pope began his stereochemical investigations the phenomenon of optical activity among naturally occurring organic compounds had been correlated with the asymmetry of their molecular structure, whereby enantiomorphism or mirror-image isomerism of the molecule results. This had come to be interpreted narrowly in terms of the presence in the molecule of at least one 'asymmetric' carbon atom, around which four different univalent atoms or groups of atoms (radicals) are spatially arranged. It was also assumed that at least one carbon atom, in addition to the 'asymmetric' one, must be present in the molecule of the compound exhibiting optical activity. 
In 1897 Pope began his research by introducing improvements in the methods and new strong acids (derived from camphor) for the resolution of externally compensated compounds, chiefly organic bases, into their optically active isomerides. By his resolution (1899-1902) of synthetic benzylphenylallyl-methylammonium iodide, methylethylthetine bromide, and methylphenylselenetine bromide, Pope demonstrated that a compound can exhibit optical activity which contains not an 'asymmetric' carbon atom but another atom, nitrogen, sulphur, or selenium, which has an asymmetric environment. During the same period he also showed that the atom of tin may be an asymmetric centre, by obtaining methylethylpropylstannic iodide in an optically active form. The experimental proofs that atoms other than carbon could also be centres of asymmetry and give rise to optically active compounds constituted the greatest advance in stereochemistry since the work of Pasteur and the later work of J. H. van't Hoff and J. A. Le Bel. 
Much later (1914), by his synthesis and resolution into its optically active forms of chloroiodomethane sulphonic acid, a compound containing only one, 'asymmetric', carbon atom, Pope established that a carbon atom attached to four different univalent atoms or radicals, none of which need contain a carbon atom, was sufficient to determine the possibility of a compound exhibiting optical isomerism. 
Pope was the first to demonstrate (1908-35) the basic principles on which depend the enantiomorphism and hence the optical activity of chemical compounds. By his resolution into its optically active isomerides of 1-methyl- 'cyclo'hexylidene-4-acetic acid, Pope proved that a compound which does not contain an asymmetric atom but the molecular structure of which, as a whole, exhibits no element of symmetry, has a non-superposable mirror image and therefore can give rise to optical activity. No less remarkable was Pope's demonstration of the persistence of optical activity through a series of derivatives of the optically active parent compounds; some of these derivatives also had asymmetric molecular structures. Extending this work, Pope successfully investigated the synthesis and optical resolution of 1:1'-diamino- 'cyclo'butane'spirocyclo'butane, which has an axis of twofold symmetry, and thereby established the mirror-image isomerism of molecules possessing certain elements of symmetry. This conclusion was emphasized by the results of the investigation of related substances. Pope had, therefore, established the broad principle concerning mirror-image isomerism, namely, that the molecular configuration may be 'dissymmetric' and may possess any elements of geometrical symmetry excepting a centre of symmetry and a plane of direct symmetry, and that the molecular configuration of an optically active, or potentially optically active, compound need not be asymmetric or lacking geometrical symmetry. 
During the First World War, Pope was a consultant to the board of invention and research. He worked on the preparation of photographic sensitizers, to extend the effectiveness of photographic plates, and elucidated the structure and preparation of the main sensitizer, pinacyanol. He also prepared mustard gas from ethylene and sulphur chloride, a process quicker than the German method. He studied the first organic compounds of gold and platinum, and also co-ordination compounds of the metals of groups I and VIII of the periodic table. 
Among Pope's collaborators were Professor Kipping, W. H. Perkin, Stanley J. Peachey, A. H. D. Neville, C. S. Gibson, John Read, and F. G. Mann. The results of Pope's investigations appeared chiefly in the publications of the Chemical Society and the Royal Society, and in various French and German chemistry journals. 
Pope occupied a leading position in chemistry and he received numerous honours, including several medals. He was president of the Chemical Society (1917-19), of the Society of Chemical Industry (1920-21), of the Union internationale de Chimie (1922-5), and of the Solvay chemical conferences in Brussels (1922-36). He was elected FRS in 1902 and was awarded the Davy medal in 1914. For his war services he was appointed KBE in 1919 and grand officer of the Belgian order of Leopold in 1937. 
Pope, who did not marry, died at his home, Holmleigh, West Road, Cambridge, on 17 October 1939 after a long illness. With his death the professorship of chemistry in the University of Cambridge came to an end. In its place the chair of organic chemistry was established. During Pope's tenure of his chair and through his influence, the chairs of physical chemistry, theoretical chemistry, colloid science, and metallurgy within the department of chemistry in the University of Cambridge were established. 


@@@@@


doc= 35576


Popham, Arthur Ewart (1889-1970), museum keeper, was born at Plymouth on 22 March 1889, the only son of Arthur Frederick Popham (1859/60-1906) and his wife, Florence Amelia (1858-1905), daughter of George David Radford, of Mannamead, Plymouth. His parents were cousins, the families being connected in a long-established draper's business, Popham and Radford, in Plymouth. His mother's brother, Sir George Heynes Radford, was a Liberal MP for East Islington and a senator of London University, and her sister Ada Radford married the sociologist Graham Wallas. His father studied architecture, and worked for a time for the Doves Press in the bookbinding department. Popham, known to his friends as Hugh, was educated at Dulwich College and University College, London; but Sir George Radford, who had taken charge of his education after his parents' death, sent him from there to King's College, Cambridge, where he took a second-class degree in classics in 1911. In July 1912 he was appointed assistant in the department of prints and drawings at the British Museum, being promoted to deputy keeper in 1933, and he remained in that department until he retired as keeper in 1954. During the First World War he served in the Artists' Rifles, and then in the Royal Naval Air Service, as a pilot. He later became a captain in the newly formed Royal Flying Corps. He was awarded the croix de guerre. 
The official museum publications for which Popham was wholly or chiefly responsible between his return to duty after the war and his retirement in 1954 were: 'Netherlandish Drawings of the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries' (1932), completing the catalogue of Dutch and Flemish drawings, of which four volumes by A. M. Hind, whose notice Popham wrote for the 'Dictionary of National Biography', had already appeared; 'A Handbook of the Drawings and Watercolours' in the department (1939), a very valuable general historical and stylistic guide; 'Italian Drawings of the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries' (1950, with Philip Pouncey); and 'Drawings of the School of Parma', which appeared in print only after Popham's retirement, in 1967. Independently of the museum, he was honorary secretary of the Vasari Society (for the reproduction of drawings) from 1925 to 1935, and in 1926 he collaborated with his colleague, K. T. Parker, in launching the periodical 'Old Master Drawings', something of a landmark in the history of the study of draughtsmanship, which lasted through fourteen volumes, with Parker as editor, and many contributions by Popham, until the outbreak of the Second World War. His own independent publications during this period were: a small book, 'Drawings of the Early Flemish School' (1926); a revised and enlarged catalogue of the drawings exhibited at the Italian exhibition of 1930 at the Royal Academy (1931); and the catalogue of the Phillipps Fenwick collection of drawings (1935), much of which afterwards found its way, through the generosity of an anonymous donor, into the British Museum. Between 1921 and 1935 he also published several notable articles in 'Print Collector's Quarterly'. 
During the war Popham was at Aberystwyth, in charge of the collections which had been removed there for safety; this gave him an exceptional opportunity to study at his leisure not only the drawings from his own museum but also the treasures from the Royal Library at Windsor and from Chatsworth; and as a result he was able to produce, after his return to London as keeper of the department, a general book entitled 'The Drawings of Leonardo da Vinci' (1946, rev. 1994), and in 1949 (with Johannes Wilde) the catalogue 'Italian Drawings of the XV and XVI Centuries at Windsor Castle' in the series published by the Phaidon Press. During Popham's keepership the most extensive acquisitions were the Phillipps Fenwick collection of some 2000 Italian drawings and a large quantity of prints from the collection of Prince Lichtenstein, as well as single drawings which included fine examples by Leonardo da Vinci, Bosch, Raphael, Correggio, and Rembrandt. 
After his retirement Popham acted in succession to A. P. Oppe as European adviser to the National Gallery of Canada, Ottawa, for the acquisition of drawings, and his catalogue of all the European drawings (other than British) in that collection, on which Kathleen Fenwick collaborated, appeared in 1965. Two other important independent books must be mentioned: his 'Correggio's Drawings' (1957) sponsored by the British Academy, and the great three-volume corpus 'Drawings of Parmigianino' (published in 1971, shortly after his death) for the Pierpont Morgan Library, New York -- a subject on which he had already produced a small book for the Faber series in 1953. 
In 1949 Popham was elected FBA. He was appointed CB (1954) on his retirement and was elected an honorary fellow of King's College, Cambridge (1955). He would not have called himself an art historian in the modern academic sense; like most museum men of the days before the history of art was taught in British universities, he was self-trained by his daily work, and it was his unrivalled knowledge of the great British Museum collection, as well as of those at Windsor, Chatsworth, Holkham, Christ Church, Oxford, and elsewhere, that gave special authority to his judgements. As an expert cataloguer, he was interested above all things in establishing the authorship of the works he had to consider rather than in making pronouncements on an artist's wider significance. His style of writing was fluent and clear, strictly disciplined, and free of technical or theoretical terminology: only very seldom did he allow the natural humour that was evident in his conversation to appear in his published work, which was almost entirely confined to the study of drawings and prints and the history of collecting. Apart from his contributions to 'Old Master Drawings' many of his findings on the history of collecting were concisely summarized in the introductory remarks and entries for the section on drawings in 'Italian Art and Britain' (1960). But he had many other interests: calligraphy and carpentry, for instance, and many sorts of sport. His handwriting was distinctive -- exquisitely clear although minute in scale -- rendering his notebooks and correspondence works of art in their own right. He was tall and dignified in appearance, with a somewhat melancholy expression enhanced by his slow, drawling voice, which belied his character. On 3 October 1912 he married Brynhild (1887-1935), daughter of Sydney Olivier, governor of Jamaica, later Baron Olivier. There were three children, one of whom, Anne, married the painter and writer Quentin Bell. On 11 January 1926 Popham married Rosalind Baynes (1891-1973), divorced wife of Helton Godwin Baynes and daughter of Sir Hamo Thornycroft the sculptor. There were no children of the second marriage. His wives were first cousins. He died at his home, 4 Canonbury Place, Islington, London, on 8 December 1970. 


@@@@@


doc= 35577


Portal, Melville (1819-1904), politician, born on 31 July 1819 at his father's second seat of Freefolk Priors, Hampshire, was the eldest surviving son of John Portal of Freefolk Priors and Laverstoke, Hampshire, head of the Huguenot family of that name, and his second wife, Elizabeth, only daughter of Henry Drummond and Anne Dundas, daughter of Henry Dundas, first Viscount Melville. He was sent to Harrow School in 1832 to the house of Archdeacon Phelps, and left in 1837. He matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 30 May 1838, graduated BA in 1842 with a pass degree, and proceeded MA in 1844. He was treasurer in 1841 and president next year of the Oxford Union, and was an admirer of John Henry Newman, whom he venerated throughout life and who occasionally wrote to him, though Portal's convictions never advanced further towards Rome. With four other young Oxonians he provided the funds for the building of the church of Bussage, a neglected village in Gloucestershire. 
Entered a student of Lincoln's Inn on 15 April 1842, Portal was called to the bar on 24 November 1845, and went the western circuit. He succeeded to his father's estate in 1848, and at a by-election on 6 April 1849 was elected MP for North Hampshire as a Peelite with a majority of 331 over William Shaw. In July 1852 Portal was re-elected without opposition, and sat until the next general election in 1857, when he retired when faced with two Conservatives. His first speech in the House of Commons was on 25 March 1851, on the 'Ecclesiastical Titles Bill'. He described it as 'the hasty effusion of an off-handed premier' and voted against it. On 9 October 1855 he married Lady Charlotte Mary (died 1899), fourth daughter of Gilbert Elliot Murray Kynynmound, second earl of Minto (1782-1859), and his wife, Mary. They had three sons and three daughters. Lady Charlotte was the sister of the wife of Lord John Russell, whom Portal befriended. 
Having made no significant national political mark, Portal devoted himself to local affairs in Hampshire. He lived at Laverstoke, and from 1846, when he was appointed a county magistrate, took a prominent part in the judicial and administrative work of the county. In 1863 he was high sheriff and he was deputy lieutenant from 1852, acting as vice-lieutenant in 1887. He was chairman of the judicial business from 1865 to 1889 and of quarter sessions from 1879 to 1903, during which time he reformed the treatment of prisoners in the county gaol. In 1871 Portal persuaded the quarter sessions to order the restoration of the great hall of the castle of Winchester, where the assizes were held, and the work was carried out under his supervision. He published 'The Great Hall of Winchester Castle' in 1899 and left an unfinished history of Laverstoke church. He died at Laverstoke on 24 January 1904, and was buried in the mortuary chapel in Laverstoke Park. Sir Gerald Herbert Portal, diplomatist, was one of his sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 35578


Portal, Wyndham Raymond, Viscount Portal (1885-1949), paper manufacturer and public servant, was born at Southington House, Overton, Hampshire, on 9 April 1885, the elder son of Sir William Wyndham Portal, second baronet (1850-1931), paper manufacturer, and his wife, Florence Elizabeth Mary (died 1931), daughter of St Leger Richard Glyn, second son of the first Baron Wolverton. Educated at Eton College and at Christ Church, Oxford, Portal married in 1909 Lady Louise Rosemary Kathleen Virginia Cairns, only child of the second Earl Cairns; they lived at Laverstoke House, Whitchurch, Hampshire. There were no children from the marriage. 
Commissioned in the 9th lancers Portal then transferred to the 1st Life Guards, from which he resigned in 1911. On the outbreak of war in 1914 he returned to the Life Guards; he became a lieutenant-colonel in 1915, and commanded the Household battalion in France. He was appointed to the DSO in November 1917 and the MVO in 1918, and was four times mentioned in dispatches. 
After returning to Hampshire to the family business of Portals Ltd, Portal became managing director in 1919 and chairman in 1931 on the death of his father, whom he succeeded in the baronetcy. Portals had manufactured watermarked banknote paper for the Bank of England at Laverstoke Mill since that privilege had been granted in 1724 to Henri Portal, a young Huguenot refugee. The advent of paper money during the First World War in place of gold coinage enormously increased the demand for high-quality banknote paper. Portal was determined that his firm should become the leading manufacturer in the world, and through his immense energy and resource this position was achieved in less than twenty years. In 1919 Portals introduced the cylinder-mould process for the manufacture of the $1 and 10's'. notes. The Bank of England gave permission in 1920 for the firm to manufacture banknote paper for other countries, and by the time of Portal's death the firm made watermarked paper for more than eighty different countries and banks of issue. Another new development, introduced on the eve of the Second World War, was the insertion of a line of security thread into the body of the banknote. 
The firm had also expanded its production of commercial paper, but in 1930 these interests were sold to Wiggins, Teape & Co. This allowed Portals to concentrate on the manufacture of mould-made and handmade banknote paper. Wyndham Portal nevertheless became chairman of Wiggins, Teape & Co., a position which he held until 1940. He was also a director of the Great Western Railway Company and of the Commercial Union Assurance Company. 
A conservative and also a self-made millionaire Portal, along with a number of other prominent businessmen, briefly flirted with Sir Oswald Mosley's New Party (in its pre-fascist period). Mosley later wrote that he was 'well-known in a wide circle to be associated with us and to be engaged in raising money for the New Party' (Mosley, 345). Nevertheless, Portal was an astute and 'shrewd observer' (Chandos, 324), and he subsequently had a successful mainstream career as a public servant. In 1932 he was made a member of a commission on the pig industry; in the following year he was chairman of a committee set up in connection with the pigs and bacon marketing boards; and in 1935 he became chairman of the Bacon Development Board. Meanwhile the government had called upon him in 1934 to report upon the distressed areas in south Wales. 
In an authoritative survey Portal emphasized the need for exceptional measures to attract other and more varied industries in a region where economic deterioration was caused by a single and depressed industry. In 1936, as an industrial adviser to the government on distressed areas, Portal was involved in the creation of the new financial institutions he had called for; and he subsequently served as chairman of the Special Areas Reconstruction Association, and of the Nuffield Trust and the treasury fund to finance the establishment of industries in these areas. His efforts were greatly appreciated, particularly in Wales, where he was given the freedom of both Cardiff and Merthyr Tudful and in 1937 received the honorary degree of LLD from the University of Wales. He was created a baron in 1935. 
In April 1939 Portal was nominated regional commissioner for civil defence in Wales. He resigned in December and in 1940 became chairman of the Coal Production Council. In the autumn of that year he became an additional parliamentary secretary to the Ministry of Supply, with responsibility for the control of all raw materials. Closely associated with Winston Churchill, in 1942 Portal became minister of works and buildings (later works and planning) and first commissioner of works and public buildings, and he was sworn of the privy council. He subsequently initiated the programme of prefabricated houses which became known as 'Portal houses'. This made Portal well known throughout the country, and 'The Times' later noted that this type of house aroused 'great interest, admiration, and some criticism' ('The Times', 7 May 1949), even though his one thought, according to Viscount Addison, had been 'for the comfort of the housewives who would have to live in it' ('The Times', 11 May 1949). Towards the end of 1944, however, it was felt that the minister of works must be in the House of Commons and Portal left the government. Raised to a viscountcy in 1945, in the same year he returned to industry, rejoined the board of the Great Western Railway, and became its chairman. At the end of 1947 he became lord lieutenant of Hampshire. 
Portal was a very keen sportsman, and a particularly good partridge shot. The shoot at Laverstoke became famous under his organization, and the standard which he required of his guests was exacting. He remained to his last day a first-rate shot, and for a man of his bulk was still amazingly quick. There were few finer dry-fly fishermen. Many of Portal's happiest hours were spent on the banks of the Test, which he knew intimately. Moreover, he kept an excellent stud. His association with the Jockey Club towards the end of his life was most active, for he took part in the activities of the club both financial and otherwise, which affected racing throughout the country. He was also a keen yachtsman. 
As vice-chairman of King George's Jubilee Trust from 1936 until his death Portal did much for the welfare of the younger generation, and the benefit of his sound advice was always available to those concerned with youth organizations. He had an instinct and genius for surmounting difficult obstacles and persuading difficult people. His generosity was lavish and usually anonymous. He was a 'big' man in every sense of the word. In 1935 he accepted the chairmanship of the British Olympic Association and it was largely due to his munificence that so large and representative a British team was able to attend the Olympic games held in Berlin in the following year. He subsequently presided over the Olympiad held in London in 1948, and he was appointed GCMG in 1949. 
Portal died on 6 May 1949 at his home at Laverstoke. There is a memorial to him at Newtown Road cemetery, Newbury. He was survived by his wife. Having no children, he was succeeded in the baronetcy by his uncle, Sir Spencer John Portal (1864-1955). A number of the tributes to Portal mentioned his sureness of touch and successful approach, whether as businessman or public servant. Viscount Addison described him as 'kind, clear-headed and competent' ('The Times', 11 May 1949). 'Extremely generous and public spirited', recalled Clement Attlee, 'he won the hearts of Labour by his work for the distressed areas before the war' (Attlee, 140-41). Portal was widely regarded as one of the ablest of the businessmen who joined the wartime government. 


@@@@@


doc= 35579


Porter, Sir Andrew Marshall, first baronet (1837-1919), judge and politician, was born in Belfast on 27 June 1837, the eldest son of the Revd John Scott Porter (1801-1880), Presbyterian minister, and his wife, Margaret (1812-1879), daughter of Andrew Marshall MD, a surgeon in the Royal Navy, who had served with Nelson. Educated at the Belfast Academical Institution, Porter graduated with distinction at Queen's College, Belfast, in 1856. He was called to the Irish bar (King's Inns, Dublin) in 1860, and joined the north-east circuit. His sound legal knowledge and exceptional aptitude for commercial cases gained early recognition and secured him a fine practice as a junior. He became QC in 1872, and a bencher in 1878, and soon established his position as a leader, proving himself a great advocate among the many great advocates, his contemporaries, at the bar of Ireland. Natural gifts enhanced his legal attainments: his fine presence, good voice, and lucid, attractive style made him a most effective orator. 
Porter's political affinities were with the Liberal Party, which possessed a great and growing influence in Ulster until its disruption as the result of Gladstone's adoption of the policy of home rule. He represented Londonderry in parliament from 1881 to 1883, and he was appointed solicitor-general for Ireland in 1881, and attorney-general and privy councillor in 1883. Porter entered the Commons as the Land League achieved its maximum force. Porter's sagacity and firmness in administration and his imperturbability in debate greatly impressed his colleagues, and Gladstone more than once urged him to adopt a political career. Following the resignation of W. E. Forster in May 1882, Gladstone offered Porter the Irish chief secretaryship with the prospect of further advancement (Lord Frederick Cavendish accepted the office and was immediately murdered in Phoenix Park). Porter's rejection of the Irish secretaryship was an important if little-noticed moment in the history of Ulster politics. 
As attorney-general Porter prosecuted the Phoenix Park murderers, as well as the ringleaders of the Invincibles and other secret societies; his conduct of these remarkable trials further advanced his reputation at the bar. In December 1883, when Sir Edward Sullivan, the master of the rolls in Ireland, became lord chancellor, Porter was raised to the bench as his successor. Although his practice had been mainly on the common-law side, he proved himself a great chancery judge, and many of his judgments embody illuminating expositions of doctrines of equity. Few of his decisions were ever successfully challenged on appeal. He took great care, also, to expedite the administrative progress in chambers of the causes in his court. He was in temperament sensitive and retiring, and a reserved demeanour coupled with a commendable impatience of irrelevancy sometimes led to his judicial attitude being misinterpreted as austere. But the bar regarded him with affectionate admiration, and his retirement in 1906, after he had held the mastership of the rolls for the unprecedented period of twenty-three years, was regretted as a public loss. 
Porter was created a baronet in 1902. He married in 1869 Agnes Adinston, daughter of Colonel Alexander Horsbrugh, of Horsbrugh, Peeblesshire; they had four sons and two daughters. His second son, Andrew Marshall, a promising scholar of Trinity College, Dublin, was killed on active service in the South African War. Porter died in Dublin on 9 January 1919; he was succeeded in the baronetcy by his eldest son, John Scott Porter ('b'. 1871), who assumed the additional name of Horsbrugh. 


@@@@@


doc= 35580


Porter, Samuel Lowry, Baron Porter (1877-1956), judge, was born in Headingley, Leeds, on 7 February 1877, the younger son of Hugh Porter ('b'. 1877), warehouse manager, and his wife, Mary Ellen Lowry. He was educated at the Perse School, Cambridge, and Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he later became an honorary fellow in 1937. He obtained a third class in part one of the classical tripos (1899) and a second in part two of the law tripos (1900), and he was awarded a half-blue in tennis. He was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1905, and, having first worked up a good general practice, later specialized in the commercial court. His practice was interrupted by the First World War, when he served as a captain on the general list, and was appointed MBE. He took silk in 1925, was recorder of Newcastle under Lyme in 1928-32, and Walsall in 1932-4. In 1934 he was appointed a judge of the King's Bench Division and knighted on 23 November, and in 1938 he became a lord of appeal in ordinary without passing through the Court of Appeal. He received a life peerage as Baron Porter of Longfield, co. Tyrone, a reminder of his family's roots in Ireland. He was also sworn of the privy council. 
Porter's judgments in the King's Bench Division were always very sound. They were not spectacular, as he aimed at conciseness, and avoided the utterance of an unnecessary word. The two most notable are perhaps 'Mutual Finance Ltd v. John Wetton & Sons Ltd' (1937), and 'Lloyds Bank Ltd v. Bank of America etc. Association' (1937). The former is a valuable contribution to the doctrine of undue influence, and lays down that a transaction can be avoided if it has been procured by a threat to prosecute any person whose safety, for whatever reason, was desired by the promisor, such desire being known to the promisee. The latter, which was affirmed by the Court of Appeal (1938), concerns agency. It enunciates the proposition that where B pledges documents relating to merchandise to A, and A hands them back, to enable B, in conformity with a course of dealing pursued between the parties over several years, to sell the merchandise as trustee for A, but B, instead, pledges the documents with C, who takes them in good faith, A cannot recover them from C. 
Although Lord Porter never courted publicity, as a lord of appeal he inevitably achieved it by the very high standard of his speeches. The two by which he should perhaps be best remembered are speeches of dissent: in 'Joyce v. Director of Public Prosecutions' (1946) and 'National Anti-Vivisection Society v. IRC' (1948). In the former, a treason trial, the crown based its case on the dubious ground that the mere renewal by William Brooke Joyce of his British passport on 24 August 1939, for the customary period of one year, necessarily imposed on him, although an alien resident outside the realm, the duty of allegiance to the crown. The trial judge left to the jury simply the question whether Joyce, in delivering his broadcasts from Germany during the war, had or had not adhered to the king's enemies, a question which could clearly be answered only in one way. The court of criminal appeal, and the majority of the House of Lords, regarded this as an adequate direction, but Lord Porter unhesitatingly pointed out the error, which lay in the placing of the onus of proof. It should, in his view, be incumbent on the crown to prove not only the renewal of the passport, but also its retention and use on and after 18 September 1939, when Joyce was first employed as a broadcaster to Great Britain. His speech concluded with a serious warning that, especially in a case of treason, the jury should never, even in wartime, unless under statutory authority, be ousted from a function that is rightly its own. Of the speeches in 'Joyce', Lord Shawcross later commented that he had 'always considered that of the Law Lords concerned, Lord Porter was the most learned and responsible' (Shawcross, 82). 
The other case is one of the most important authorities on the law of charitable trusts. Here again, Lord Porter was the sole dissentient. The majority held that the objects of the Anti-Vivisection Society could not be charitable because (a) they contemplated legislation, and therefore were of a political character, which necessarily excluded them from the charitable field, and (b) they were not beneficial to the community, because any benefit to public morals obtained by their success would be outweighed by the detriment which would inevitably be suffered by medical science. Lord Porter dissented on both grounds. On (a) he would exclude from the charitable definition only those trusts whose objects could be attained by no other means than by legislation. On (b) his view may be summarized as suggesting that a judge need not take upon himself the burden of weighing against one another the possible advantages and disadvantages which may accrue from the success of the objects of a trust, which, if it once satisfies the definition of charitable, does not cease to satisfy it merely because it may bring harm as well as benefit to the community. 
Other leading cases in which Lord Porter was involved included 'Duncan v. Cammell, Laird & Co. Ltd' (1942), 'Adams v. Naylor' (1946), and 'Franklin v. Minister of Town and Country Planning' (1948). He also sat in numerous cases before the judicial committee of the privy council, and these included 'Commonwealth of Australia v. Bank of New South Wales' (1950), which (as he saw it) raised 'important and difficult questions' as to the legislative authority of the Commonwealth government. Lord Porter consistently showed himself during his judicial career to be a learned lawyer, who could turn his mind with equal facility to any branch of the law. He cared about the clear use of language and confined himself in his judgments and speeches to the precise issues raised in a case. He avoided generalizations and he did not seek to offer restatements of the law over and above what a case demanded. His style was undemonstrative but he was firm, patient, and invariably courteous. 
Porter was active outside as well as inside the courts. He achieved prominence, early in his judicial career, through his extra-judicial role as chairman of a tribunal of inquiry that sat in 1936 to consider allegations of a budget leak. The other members of the tribunal were Gavin Simonds KC and Roland Oliver KC. The tribunal's report ('Parl. papers', 1936, 7, Cmd 5184) resulted in the resignation of the colonial secretary, J. H. Thomas, and Sir Alfred Butt MP. There were some misgivings about the procedure adopted, because the examination of the various witnesses was borne by the tribunal, especially Porter himself, and in later tribunals of inquiry corrective measures were taken to avoid or lessen the appearance of a hostile attitude adopted by a tribunal from the outset. The problem was recognized by Porter and it was referred to explicitly in the report. He was greatly interested in international law, and did much valuable work for the International Law Association, of which he was president in 1946. He was chairman of the committee on the law of defamation, which reported in 1948 and was the precursor of the 'Defamation Act' of 1952. For some years he was involved in wage negotiations. He received the honorary degree of LLD from Birmingham (1940) and, in company with such fellow honorary graduates as Earl Wavell and Ernest Bevin, from Cambridge (1947). He received an honorary LLD from Queen's University, Belfast, in 1949. In 1951 he was appointed GBE. 
Bombed out of his London flat during the war, Lord Porter (invariably known to friends and colleagues as Sam Porter) returned to Emmanuel College where he had rooms up to and beyond his resignation (through ill health) as a law lord in 1954. He worshipped at St Columba's Presbyterian Church (his mother's church) in Cambridge. A considerable amount of time was spent in London, of course, but his attachment to his college was unusual and close. In an obituary, Edward Welbourne, the then master of Emmanuel, said that he: 'gave to our young men an example of modesty in success, of success by desert, of equality without assertion, of regularity at chapel, of infallible courtesy to all he met, of consideration to the college servants... and of loyalty to this house, to which he thought he owed a debt, not knowing how greatly he had repaid us for the little we had done in his youth. ('The Times', 28 Feb 1956)' Sir Norman Birkett, also an honorary fellow of Emmanuel, wrote of his 'great personal qualities' despite his 'rather shy and retiring and self-effacing' personality; and he concluded by stating that Lord Porter 'will be remembered as a great lawyer and his decisions will be quoted by generations of lawyers' ('Emmanuel College Magazine', 38, 1955-6, 9-11). Lord Porter, who never married, died at the London Clinic, 20 Devonshire Place, London, on 13 February 1956. Had he lived, he would have become treasurer of the Inner Temple in 1957. 


@@@@@


doc= 35581


Power, Eileen Edna Le Poer (1889-1940), economic historian, was born at home at Parkdale, Dunham Massey, Altrincham, Cheshire, on 9 January 1889, the eldest of three daughters of Philip Ernest Le Poer Power (1860-1946), stockbroker, and his wife, Mabel Grindlay Clegg (1866-1903). She was the granddaughter of the Revd Philip Bennett Power (1822-1899), originally from Waterford, Ireland, who made his name as a prolific writer of evangelical tracts. Philip Power was imprisoned for fraud in 1891, and Mabel Power, faced with scandal and financial ruin, moved with her daughters to Bournemouth. There they lived with and were financially supported by her father, Benson Clegg. Eileen Power and her sisters started school in Bournemouth, but on Mabel Power's death in 1903, Benson Clegg moved with one of his spinster daughters and his granddaughters to Oxford. There Eileen and her sisters Rhoda Dolores Le Poer Power and Beryl Millicent Power attended the Oxford High School for Girls, founded by the Girls' Public Day School Company. 
Eileen Power went to Girton College, Cambridge, from 1907 to 1910, on a Clothworkers' scholarship, and took a first in both parts of the historical tripos. She was awarded the Gilchrist research fellowship, and studied at the University of Paris and the Ecole des Chartes from 1910 to 1911. On her return to Britain she was awarded the Shaw research studentship at the London School of Economics (LSE) (1911-13), where she studied medieval women. She became director of studies in history at Girton in 1913, and remained there until 1921, but during that time also held the Pfeiffer research fellowship, (1915-18). She wrote her book 'Medieval English Nunneries' (1922) and the early versions of several major essays on medieval women during the time she was in Cambridge. She was awarded the Albert Kahn travelling fellowship in 1920-21, and reported on her world travels during that year, which included China, in her 'Report to the Trustees of the Albert Kahn Travelling Fellowship, September 1920 - September 1921' (1921). In 1921 she was appointed lecturer in economic history at the London School of Economics, and remained there until her death: she became reader in 1924 and professor in 1931. She was made a corresponding member of the Medieval Academy of America in 1936, and was Ford lecturer in English history at Oxford in 1938-9. She was awarded an honorary LLD at Manchester in 1933, and another at Mount Holyoke College in 1937. 
While Eileen Power was a student at Cambridge she was a close friend of Margaret Garrett (later Spring-Rice), niece of Millicent Garrett Fawcett, and of Karin Costelloe (later Stephen), niece of Alys Russell. These friendships took her into suffrage politics, and onto the edges of the Bloomsbury circle. She campaigned for the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies, and joined the women's peace movement. Her interests in women's medieval history and in internationalism were formed in this context, and in her personal response to the First World War. Her experience in the Kahn travelling fellowship, especially in India and China, also developed a new interest in comparative and world history. From this time she also argued for the role of history in spreading internationalist political ideals, and undertook the series of editions for children the 'Broadway Travellers' (1926-38), the 'Broadway Medieval Library' (1928-31), and the 'Broadway Diaries, Memoirs and Letters' (1929-31). With her sister Rhoda she wrote children's history books, of which the most famous was 'Boys and Girls of History' (1926). She was part of literary London, wrote widely in the press, and was a popular lecturer. During the 1920s she also started the memorable BBC schools history broadcasts which she made with Rhoda. The international aspects of medieval history, medieval trade, comparative economic history, and world history, as well as women's and social history, which Eileen Power made her own, were always made immensely attractive and immediately accessible to broad audiences by her extensive use of literary references and personal portraits. Her broadcasts continued until 1936, when she came into conflict with her producers over the political and pedagogical directions of the programmes. 
When Eileen Power moved to the LSE the predominantly literary, cultural, and social framework of her history was challenged under the influence of the social sciences then being fostered there. She became part of a remarkable group of scholars developing the social sciences in new directions. She reshaped the economic history courses and seminars in partnership with R. H. Tawney, and later with Sir Michael Moissey Postan, whom she later married. Academic collaboration and friendship with Harold Laski, Bronislaw Malinowski, and Charles Webster developed in the pre-departmental days at the LSE, and in the social gatherings in both Tawney's and Power's houses in Mecklenburgh Square. Power also worked closely with several of these in working groups and other initiatives to foster close connections between economic and social history and the social sciences. From the early 1930s she ran the famous medieval economic history seminar together with Postan. 
Eileen Power made a number of significant contributions to her discipline. She developed economic history within the framework of medieval history. She avoided the contemporary traditions of legal and constitutional history, and initially followed an inclination towards literary history and the history of religious life. Her early work had a clear political framework in her commitment to the women's peace campaigns of the inter-war years. Her book 'Medieval English Nunneries', major essays on medieval women's history, especially the well-known chapter 'The position of women' in C. G. Crump's and E. F. Jacob's 'The Legacy of the Middle Ages' (1926), and other essays brought together long after her death in 'Medieval Women' (ed. M. M. Postan, 1975), were conceived and written in this framework. Her most successful and famous work of social history, 'Medieval People' (1924), which went into ten editions, was the culmination of the first phase of her approach to social history. Its genesis lay in her feminist and pacifist political commitment, and in the methodology she developed of history as literature. The book was a social history deploying literary devices, but even more significantly it was a social history written to spread a message of internationalism. 
At the LSE, Power worked in partnership with R. H. Tawney to develop an extended course structure for economic history, as well as graduate seminars, social science discussion groups, and collaborative research projects. Economic history was enormously popular during the time she taught, and indeed it came for a time to be identified with the LSE. Her personality contributed to this success. Tawney commented that it was not just 'her brilliance as a lecturer, it was personal contact which best revealed her magic. She possessed to an extraordinary degree the gift of not merely drawing out different personalities, but of fusing them into an organic group' ('DNB'). The keynote of Power's teaching at the LSE remained internationalism and comparative history, especially that between the East and the West. In another collaboration with M. M. Postan from the later 1920s she also moved economic history forward into discussion with the social sciences, especially sociology and anthropology. She developed her comparative method through analogies between current underdeveloped economies, especially China and India, and medieval societies, and she also drew on the comparative regional studies developed by historians from the German historical school, especially the Austrian Alfons Dopsch. Her project should be seen as parallel to the work in France of Marc Bloch and Lucien Febvre, founders of the 'Annales' school of history, and Bloch and Power recognized the similarity of their goals. 
Throughout this period Power concentrated on the study of long-distance trade and merchants. The inspiration on which she drew for this work, and for the place she saw for it in explanations for the transition out of feudal economic limitations to capitalist development, was Henri Pirenne. Pirenne attributed to the medieval merchant-entrepreneur the origins of the dynamism which would eventually lead to economic growth. For Power this position provided further connections between economic history and her internationalist political views. She associated trade and merchants with international connection and peace. Her research and publications over this period reflected this search for the origins of merchant capitalism before industrialization: 'English Trade in the Fifteenth Century' (ed. E. E. Power and M. M. Postan, 1933), 'The Wool Trade in English Medieval History' (published posthumously in 1941), and the first volume of 'The Cambridge Economic History of Europe' (ed. E. E. Power and J. H. Clapham, 1941). 'The Cambridge Economic History of Europe' was the first great collaborative project in comparative economic history; it was also a great international enterprise which succeeded despite the Second World War. 
Eileen Power's idea of social history from the time she arrived at the LSE thus developed away from simply revealing the lives of ordinary people towards offering a historical analysis of social structures. Thus she turned to the analysis of the underlying trends of medieval agrarian society and to comparative commercial and industrial development, linking it to the new discipline of economic history. She also took a professional attitude to the development of her discipline. She took a major role in the founding in 1926 of the Economic History Society; she helped to establish its journal, the 'Economic History Review'; and she edited the first wartime number herself. She worked in archives, and raised research funding from the Rockefeller Foundation to start major new archive collections, including a registry and depository of London business archives. She developed research projects, set up her research seminar to pursue these, and left behind a group of research students who in the following two decades published work on medieval trade and commercial history. Other students and colleagues whom she had influenced wrote the big books of social history and women's history which were not overtaken until the 1970s and 1980s -- Alice Clark, Dorothy George, Ivy Pinchbeck, Dorothy Marshall, and H. S. Bennett among them. 
During a second trip to China in 1929 Eileen Power became engaged to Reginald Johnston, the tutor to the last emperor of China. He returned to Britain in 1930, but the engagement was finally ended in 1932. She then turned to a closer involvement with her former student and research assistant, by now a lecturer at the LSE, Sir Michael Moissey Postan (1899-1981), who was ten years her junior. They married on 11 December 1937, and a few months later Michael Postan became professor of economic history at Cambridge. They built a house in Cambridge, but kept on the house in Mecklenburgh Square, as Eileen Power continued to teach at the LSE. 
While Power continued to support the League of Nations, and attended an assembly in Geneva in 1939, she was also a critic of fascism and was part of a prominent anti-appeasement circle in the later 1930s. She turned to lecturing and writing against appeasement, including her famous lecture to the Cambridge History Club 'The eve of the dark ages: a tract for the times', later reprinted in a posthumous edition of 'Medieval People'. At the outbreak of war she returned to Cambridge when part of LSE was evacuated there. She died on 8 August 1940, on the way to the Middlesex Hospital, London, after a sudden heart attack, and was cremated at Golders Green, Middlesex, on 12 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 35582


Postgate, John Percival (1853-1926), classical scholar, was born at Birmingham on 24 October 1853, the eldest son of John Postgate FRCS (1820-1881), of Scarborough, a campaigner against the adulteration of food, and his wife, Mary Ann (1815-1898), daughter of Joshua Horwood of Driffield, a surgeon in the Royal Navy. Postgate was sent to King Edward VI School, Birmingham, where he became head boy, and in 1872 won a scholarship to Trinity College, Cambridge. In 1876 he gained one of the chancellor's medals, and was placed eighth in the first class of the classical tripos, despite suffering from a severe toothache during his examinations. From 1876 to 1884 he coached private pupils for the classical tripos, the field having been left open by the death in 1876 of the leading classical coach, Richard Shilleto. Postgate was elected a fellow of Trinity in 1878, and in 1884 was appointed classical lecturer, an office which continued the fellowship; he was senior lecturer from 1903 to 1909. Since he held the lecturership for the requisite twenty-five years, he remained a fellow until his death. 
Postgate made his scholarly reputation as an editor of Latin poetry. His first book was an edition of the best-known elegies of Propertius ('Select Elegies of Propertius', 1881). Later he produced editions of Lucan (book 7, 1896; book 8, 1917) and a text and translation of Tibullus ('Loeb Classical Library', 1913). His largest such project, however, was the 'Corpus poetarum Latinorum', which appeared first in fascicles and then as two quarto volumes (1893-4; 1904-5). This was a considerable achievement, the product of twenty years' work, which provided texts and critical commentary for the Latin poets, with the exception of the 'Appendix Vergiliana', the 'poetae minores', and such late poets as Ausonius and Claudian. Postgate was criticized for these omissions, as he was for his attempt to rearrange the couplets and poems of Propertius merely by internal evidence. In this, as in his liking for conjectural emendation, he was at once insightful and perverse. 
The combination of scholarship and organizational power evident in the 'Corpus' was also manifested in other spheres. Postgate acted as secretary of the Cambridge Philological Society for several years, and was editor of the 'Classical Review' from 1899 to 1907, and of the 'Classical Quarterly' from 1907 to 1911. By 1911 both journals had been taken over by the Classical Association of England and Wales, founded in 1903, which owed its existence largely to Postgate. In November 1902 he published in the 'Fortnightly Review' an article entitled 'Are the classics to go?', in which he pointed to the curricular debates following the passage of the 1902 'Education Act', and urged defenders of classics to rally before their subject was denied not only the 'lion's share' of the school timetable, but any reasonable provision at all. The correspondence which ensued, notably with Edward Adolf Sonnenschein, led to the foundation of the Classical Association in December 1903. Postgate played a major part in forming its policy in its early years, and acted as joint secretary with Sonnenschein. He was elected president in 1924-5. 
Concurrently with his work in Cambridge, Postgate was from 1880 to 1910 professor of comparative philology at University College, London. The chair had been revived and renamed after the death of its previous incumbent, Thomas Hewitt Key, who had held the title of professor of comparative grammar. The post took little of Postgate's time, but his published output includes works in this area, from his 'New Latin Primer' of 1888, to the introduction he provided for C. K. Ogden and I. A. Richards's 'Meaning of Meaning' (1923). His primer was written with C. A. Vince, a classmate at school and subsequently headmaster of Mill Hill School: it had the misfortune to appear in the same year as the 'Revised Latin Primer' of Benjamin Hall Kennedy, which was adopted by the Headmasters' Conference and became the standard English textbook of Latin grammar. However, through the influence of the Cambridge scholar T. G. Tucker, who had become professor of classics at Melbourne, Postgate's book sold well in Australia. Postgate was a keen advocate of the 'reformed' pronunciation of Latin, his great ally being W. H. D. Rouse, headmaster of the Perse School, Cambridge, and a leading advocate of direct method teaching; Postgate also supported this at first, but like others became sceptical of its value. Late in life he published two works on the accentuation of ancient Greek. 
In 1909 Postgate accepted the chair of Latin in the University of Liverpool. He was then the obvious local candidate to succeed the aged J. E. B. Mayor as professor of Latin at Cambridge, but it may be that he had concluded the chair would go to A. E. Housman, who was elected after Mayor's death in 1910. At Liverpool, Postgate, who had seen Cambridge as a fortress of learning in an increasingly alien world of modernity, entered a 'pays de mission', and carried out his duties with energy. In his inaugural lecture, 'Dead language and dead languages', he mounted a spirited defence of his subject, enlivened by parallels between pure language and pure food which recall his father's medical campaigns. 
While in Cambridge, Postgate had taught the women students at Girton College. His pupils were often seen leaving his composition classes in tears, but one who stood up to him was Edith Allen (1863-1962), daughter of Thomas Bull Allen, tea merchant, and sister of the Oxford classical scholar T. W. Allen (1862-1950). She and Postgate married in June 1891. Before their marriage Edith Allen was a classical mistress at South Hampstead high school. Of a determinedly independent character, she and their children (four sons and two daughters) developed a complicated private language to which Postgate himself seems not to have been privy. The children included Raymond Postgate, later well known as a journalist and as the author of the 'Good Food Guide', and Dame Margaret Cole, who married the socialist economic historian G. D. H. Cole. In her memoirs, she remembered the atmosphere of early family life in Cambridge. Postgate's enthusiasm for learning Latin by the direct method (by speaking the language) was evidenced at mealtimes; at one Sunday dinner Margaret asked 'da mihi bovem' ('give me the ox') instead of 'da mihi bovis' ('give me some beef'), and found the whole vast sirloin thrust at her. The incident also illustrates what was called Postgate's 'vehemence', a trait also evident in his performance in Trinity College cricket matches, where according to M. J. Rendall, 'if he tapped or pushed the ball a few yards, [he] started wildly as if shot from a cannon and inevitably ran his companion out'. 
On retiring from Liverpool, Postgate returned to Cambridge in 1920. By this time his achievements had been recognized by the award of honorary degrees from the universities of Manchester (1906) and Dublin (1907); he was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1907. During the First World War, his relations with Raymond had been strained to breaking point by the latter's pacificism. Raymond and Margaret were cut out of their father's will, and when Raymond married, Postgate refused to acknowledge the marriage or to meet his daughter-in-law. Against this, it must be said that while Raymond was facing prosecution for his beliefs, his father worked hard to protect him, for example by asking Gilbert Murray to bring influence to bear in government circles. The last meeting of father and son was seen by the latter as the beginning of a reconciliation, but Postgate died before the process could be completed. In his final will, he decreed that Raymond and Margaret should receive $100 a year each when they reached fifty-five. 
On 14 July 1926 Postgate was knocked off his cycle by a lorry in Cambridge, and died of his injuries at the Addenbrooke's Hospital on the following day. His last recorded words, 'Take me to Addenbrooke's, I have a subscription there', illustrated his ingrained fear of poverty; he removed the light bulbs to save electricity when he visited his children's nursery. He was comfortably off when he died; a legacy of over $27,000 to Trinity College was refused, and passed to the University of Liverpool. 
Raymond Postgate remembered his father as 'a rather short, dominant man, with prominent blue eyes and a walrus moustache'. Postgate was a typical Victorian father, a kind of rude natural force to be reckoned with. His friend and obituarist, the classical scholar S. G. Owen, while emphasizing his 'exceptional attractiveness', felt obliged to refer to his 'angular personality'. In his scholarly campaigns he was energetic and determined, and though he did not seek controversy, he was a formidable opponent. On a small point, he pursued the editor of the 'Thesaurus linguae Latinae' in the journals of several countries. As a teacher, he was at his best in small groups, while in lectures, his somewhat drawling delivery soon seemed monotonous. 


@@@@@


doc= 35583


Pott, Alfred (1822-1908), Church of England clergyman and college head, was born on 30 September 1822 at Norwood, Surrey, the second son of Charles Pott of Norwood and Anna, daughter of C. S. Cox, master in chancery. From 1838 he was educated at Eton College under Edward Craven Hawtrey, and he matriculated at Balliol College, Oxford, on 15 December 1840. Having been elected to a demyship at Magdalen College in 1843, he graduated BA in 1844 with a second class in 'literae humaniores', and in the following year he won the Johnson theological scholarship. He was treasurer in 1844 and president and librarian in 1845 of the Oxford Union. He proceeded MA in 1847, and BD in 1854. Ordained deacon in December 1845 and priest in the following year, in 1847 he became curate of Cuddesdon, and in 1852 vicar on the nomination of Bishop Samuel Wilberforce. In 1853 he was elected a fellow of Magdalen College. 
In 1851 Wilberforce had given Pott the task of building a theological college opposite the bishop's palace in Cuddesdon, near Oxford. As first principal he stressed the task of 'forming character and moulding habits' (Chadwick, 32), which subsequently influenced theological education far beyond Cuddesdon. Because of his own modesty, his work as rural dean, and his lengthy periods of illness, he was somewhat overshadowed by his far more uncompromising vice-principal, Henry Parry Liddon. As principal he lectured on the 'New Testament' and he also published a number of sermons and addresses he had given to the people of the village; his 'Confirmation Lectures' (1852) reached a fifth edition in 1886. On 5 July 1855 he married Emily Harriet (died 1903), daughter of Joseph Gibbs, vicar of Clifton Hampden, Oxfordshire. Their only daughter was Gladys Sydney Pott (1867-1961), anti-suffragist and civil servant. 
Pott resigned as principal owing to ill health shortly after Charles Pourtales Golightly had called attention to ritualist and Romanizing practices of the Cuddesdon system. Pott's judicious defence against these charges, together with his high standing in the diocese and his appointment of Edward King (1829-1910) as chaplain 'to change the tone' of the college, did much to allay the fears among the clergy, and to secure the future of residential graduate theological education. 
In 1858 Pott accepted the living of East Hendred, Berkshire, though he once again took on the running of Cuddesdon College following his successor's death in 1862 until Edward King's appointment in 1863. He became vicar and rural dean of nearby Abingdon in 1867, remaining so until 1875. Bishop Wilberforce appointed Pott one of his examining chaplains (a position he retained on Wilberforce's translation to Winchester in 1869). He was made an honorary canon of Christ Church in 1868, and in 1869 Wilberforce preferred him to the archdeaconry of Berkshire. Wilberforce had hoped to have Pott elevated to the episcopate, but after his sudden death in 1873, Pott lost his chief mentor. He subsequently held the benefices of Clifton Hampden (1875-82) and of Sonning, Berkshire (1882-99). He resigned the archdeaconry in 1903, but retained his honorary canonry. In convocation, though only an occasional speaker, Pott was a recognized authority on ecclesiastical law; and as archdeacon he showed wisdom, justice, and judgement. Although a high-churchman, he was never a party man and enjoyed the friendship of those of widely divergent opinions. After the publication of R. G. Wilberforce's 'Life of the Right Revd Samuel Wilberforce' in 1882 Pott destroyed all his own private papers and diaries for undisclosed reasons, and wrote a brief autobiographical sketch (now lost) for the use of the family. 
Pott died at his home, Woodside, Windlesham, Surrey, on 28 February 1908, and was buried at Clifton Hampden churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 35584


Potter, (Helen) Beatrix (1866-1943), artist, children's writer, and sheep breeder, was born on 28 July 1866 at 2 Bolton Gardens, South Kensington, London, the elder child and only daughter of Rupert William Potter (1832-1914), a lawyer specializing as equity draftsman and conveyancer until he inherited a large fortune in 1883. A close friend of John Everett Millais and a gifted amateur photographer, Rupert Potter had in 1863 married Helen Leech (1839-1932), the youngest surviving daughter of the late John Leech, a prosperous cotton merchant from Stalybridge, near Manchester. 
Beatrix, known by her second name to distinguish her from her mother, had a lonely childhood, looked after by nurses and taught by governesses. She was delicate and often ill, but she found great comfort in drawing and painting, encouraged by her parents, both amateur artists. When she was nearly six a brother, Walter Bertram, was born, although as soon as he was old enough he was sent away to school. Every summer the family took a large house in Perthshire and at weekends they visited Beatrix's grandfather, Edmund Potter, at his home, Camfield House, Hatfield. Both children soon became fascinated with the natural world, observing and recording the habits of animals and birds and, from an early age, they cared for a variety of pets. From 1881 to 1897 Beatrix kept an encrypted journal which, decoded in 1958 by Leslie Linder, provided valuable details of Potter's formative years, during which she was constantly drawing and painting. 
In 1882 the family spent their first holiday in the Lake District, a part of England with which Potter would become identified. Her interests now included fossil-hunting, photography, and in particular the study of fungi. By 1893 she was painting and recording fungi in detail, encouraged by Charles McIntosh of Dunkeld, and in 1897, with the assistance of Sir Henry Roscoe (1833-1915), who was married to her aunt, Lucy Potter, she submitted a paper to the Linnean Society of London. 'On the germination of the spores of 'Agaricineae'' by Miss Helen B. Potter was read on 1 April 1897, not by Potter herself, as women could not attend. Nor was the paper published -- though on 24 April 1997, one hundred years later, recognition was finally given to Potter's research by the Linnean Society with a lecture by Professor Roy Watling of the Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh, entitled 'Beatrix Potter as mycologist'. 
Whenever she was away from London, Potter sent illustrated letters to the children of her last governess, Annie Moore, and it is the story from one of these, written on 4 September 1893 to Noel Moore, that became her first published book. Rejected by a number of publishers, 'The Tale of Peter Rabbit' was issued privately by Potter herself on 16 December 1901, in an edition of 250 copies, all the illustrations but the frontispiece in black and white. A small reprint followed in February 1902, and then a privately issued edition of 'The Tailor of Gloucester', before Frederick Warne & Co. persuaded Potter to redo the illustrations for 'The Tale of Peter Rabbit' in colour for the publication in a trade edition on 2 October 1902. It was the first of twenty-two uniformly produced 'little books' by her, published by Warne, nineteen of them by 1913. With many of them featuring her own pets -- Peter Rabbit, Benjamin Bunny, Mrs Tiggy-Winkle, and Samuel Whiskers -- Potter's books have become classics of children's literature, with their sharp prose, their strong story lines, and their exquisite, freshly painted, and beautifully observed pictures. 
In 1905 39-year-old Potter became engaged to her editor, Norman Warne, who died only four weeks later of leukaemia. She fled to Near Sawrey in the Lake District, to a working farm, Hill Top, that she had recently purchased with her royalties. It was the start of a new interest in her life, farming. Though still living with her now ageing parents in London, Potter spent as much time as possible at Hill Top, working on new books for Warne, adding to her farm stock, and acquiring land. On 15 October 1913, aged forty-seven, she married a local solicitor, William Heelis (1871-1945), son of the late John Heelis, rector of Kirkby Thore, and settled in Castle Cottage, Near Sawrey, keeping Hill Top as a place in which to draw and to store her treasures. 
Over the next thirty years, Beatrix Heelis built up her Lake District property, improving the stock on her farms and becoming a prize-winning breeder of Herdwick sheep, president-elect of the Herdwick Sheepbreeders' Association, and a notable judge at local agricultural shows. She also bought up extensive tracts of land to save it from development by builders, often working in close association with the National Trust. She alerted them to properties and estates coming on the market and, through the sale of drawings (mainly to the USA), raised the money to buy pieces of land for them. In 1930 she purchased the 5000 acre Monk Coniston estate, on condition that the trust bought half of it from her as soon as they were able to raise the money. She then managed the entire estate herself for the next six years. 
Beatrix Heelis died on 22 December 1943 at Castle Cottage of a heart attack following severe bronchitis. She was cremated in Blackpool nine days later, and her ashes were scattered on her land by her shepherd, Tom Storey. In her will she left everything to her husband, William Heelis, and on his death her fifteen farms, numerous cottages, and over 4000 acres of land to the National Trust. Hill Top was to be preserved as it stood and the sheep stock on her fell farms to be of the pure Herdwick breed. The copyright in all her published work was bequeathed to Norman Warne's nephew, Frederick Warne Stephens, and was ceded to Frederick Warne & Co. in 1970. Over sixty years after her death, Beatrix Potter's original artwork is held in national collections, the largest in the Victoria and Albert Museum in London and the Free Library of Philadelphia. Her books are available in thirteen languages and the characters from them feature on an extensive range of merchandise. The Beatrix Potter Society, formed in 1980, has a worldwide membership. 


@@@@@


doc= 35585


Potter, Stephen Meredith (1900-1969), writer and radio producer, was born on 1 February 1900 at 36 Old Park Avenue, Battersea, London, the only son of Frank Collard Potter (1858-1939), chartered accountant, and his wife, Elizabeth Mary Jubilee (Lilla) Reynolds (1863-1950), who named Potter after George Meredith, whom she was reading while pregnant. He was educated at Clapham high school, Rillo Road preparatory school, and Westminster School, where he did not excel but where, he proudly relates, he 'won the pancake' (Potter) in the annual Shrove Tuesday contest the Greaze, where boys fight to catch a pancake. He left just in time to be trained and gazetted as a second lieutenant in the Coldstream Guards before demobilization returned him to civilian life in 1919. After a few uneasy months in his father's office learning bookkeeping he followed his sister Muriel to Oxford, where he took a second in English language and literature in 1922 at Merton College. In what he called 'Shakespeare's missing years' he taught at a private boys' school and for a time he acted as secretary to the playwright Henry Arthur Jones, until in 1926 he was appointed a lecturer in English at Birkbeck College, London. 
On 7 July 1927 Potter married Marian Anderson Attenborough (1900-1981), the painter, professionally known as Mary Potter and by Potter himself as Att; they had two sons. Potter's first book, 'The Young Man' (1929), was the inevitable autobiographical novel and caused little stir. In 1930 he published a good short study of D. H. Lawrence, then turned his attention to Coleridge, editing the Nonesuch Press 'Coleridge' (1933) and Sara Coleridge's letters to Thomas Poole in 'Minnow among Tritons' (1934). In 1941 he wrote a play, 'Married to a Genius', based on the Coleridge marriage. His main work on the subject, and his most important critical book, 'Coleridge and S.T.C.' (1935), was an acute discussion of the duality in the poet's nature. In 1937 he published 'The Muse in Chains: a Study in Education', a humorous attack on the way English was taught in universities. G. M. Young wrote of it: 'if I were suddenly commissioned by some Golden Dustman to organize a new University, I think I should send for Mr. Potter and offer him the Chair of English literature forthwith' ('Daylight and Champaign', 1937, 130). 
All seemed set for a distinguished career as teacher and critic, but marriage and children made financial demands which these pursuits could not resolve, and in 1938 Potter joined the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) as a writer-producer in the features department (later he became editor of features and poetry). His broadcasting career was long and increasingly successful. Literary features and war documentaries occupied him initially; then in 1943 appeared the first of twenty-nine 'How' programmes, written with Joyce Grenfell. They dealt satirically with everyday subjects, such as 'How to Talk to Children', 'How to Woo', 'How to Give a Party'; and in 1946 'How to Listen to Radio' was the first broadcast heard in the newly created Third Programme (later Radio 3). 
Potter's light touch did a great deal to move radio features on from a rather static form of presentation to an impressionism with natural dialogue and minimal use of sound-effects which was lively, immediate, imaginative, and vivid. Particularly successful were his series of 'Professional Portraits', and 'New Judgments', as well as the broadcast of Nevill Coghill's version of 'The Canterbury Tales'. As a radio producer Stephen Potter was clear and unfussy, inspiring confidence and enthusiasm. 
In 1945 Potter did a stint as theatre critic for the 'New Statesman and Nation', and in 1946 a year as book critic on the 'News Chronicle'. He was also an occasional and useful member of the BBC 'Critics' panel. When he had enjoyed the subject under discussion he said so, in refreshing contrast to the superior and grudging assessments of some of his colleagues. 
A ten-day power-cut at the beginning of 1947 cancelled all broadcasting and gave Potter the opportunity to dash off, on odd scraps of paper, the book which gave a new word to the language and a new concept to the whole world of sport. This was 'The Theory and Practice of Gamesmanship, or, The Art of Winning Games without Actually Cheating', published in November 1947. In it he described how the idea crystallized when he and his friend C. E. M. Joad managed to defeat at tennis two younger and more agile opponents, by subtle and entirely legal ploys which put them off their game. Potter left the BBC after the success of the book, and apart from a short term as editor of 'The Leader' magazine, which folded in 1950, he now faced the prospect of being a full-time writer. From 'Gamesmanship' the idea was extended to many other aspects of life. 'Some Notes on Lifemanship' (1950) was followed by 'One-Upmanship' (1952) and 'Supermanship' (1958). By this time the concept and the suffix '-manship' had travelled the world (Potter himself toured America in 1950), and the foreign policy of the American secretary of state John Foster Dulles was universally known as 'brinkmanship'. Fowler's 'Modern English Usage' notes that Potter invented 'the conceit of making facetious formations by treating -manship as the suffix'. For Potter the joke was played out, but for the rest of his life he found it difficult to speak or write naturally, so accustomed had he grown to the jocose gambits and ploys of his own invention. 
Potter's first marriage was dissolved in 1955 and on 20 May of that year he married Heather Jenner, director of a marriage bureau, whom he had met while editor of 'The Leader'. They had one son who died aged sixteen. A book on his lecture tour of America appeared in 1956 and then 'Steps to Immaturity' (1959), an attractive evocation of his Edwardian boyhood and Georgian schooldays. His choice of title showed a disarming self-awareness, for in many ways he never grew up, and always seemed an immensely likeable overgrown boy. He was such an obsessive games player (squash, tennis, golf, croquet, and always snooker at the Savile Club) that his friends wondered how he managed to do any work at all. Later, and minor, publications included an anthology, 'Sense of Humour' (1954), and 'The Complete Golf Gamesmanship' (1968). 
Potter was tall and rangy, with rough fair hair which stood on end in spite of absent-minded attempts to dampen and flatten it. In a memorial broadcast Roy Plomley said: 'There was something very special about his trousers. Some men have the kind of hips which keep a waist-band neatly in place: Stephen hadn't.' He smoked in a perilous manner, disregarding ashtrays. On 2 December 1969 Potter died at 11 Fellows Road, Hampstead, London, of pneumonia, after suffering bad health for the last few years of his life. 


@@@@@


doc= 35586


Poulton, Sir Edward Bagnall (1856-1943), zoologist, was born at Reading on 27 January 1856, the second child and only son of William Ford Poulton, architect, and his wife, Georgina Selina Bagnall. From a young age he showed a keen interest in natural history, and especially in entomology. However, such interests were not encouraged at Oakley House, Reading, and school was 'a long dreary interval in a happy life' (Carpenter, 665). In addition, his father wished him to become an architect, and only reluctantly allowed him to study science. In 1873 Poulton won a scholarship at Jesus College, Oxford, where he was placed in the first class in natural science in 1876 and where he was president of the union in 1879. 
In 1876 Poulton became a demonstrator in comparative anatomy under George Rolleston, whose brilliant lectures had greatly inspired him. However, the inadequacy of his salary led to him to accept the Burdett-Coutts scholarship in geology in 1878 -- as a result of which he worked for a time under Joseph Prestwich. Thus it came about that his first published researches, in 1880, were on Tertiary remains in a Yorkshire cave. However, geology was not a passion, and he returned to zoology later in 1880 with an appointment as lecturer at Jesus and Keble colleges. The following year he married Emily (died 1939), eldest daughter of George Palmer, biscuit manufacturer and Liberal member of parliament for Reading; they had two sons and three daughters. Poulton quickly attracted attention at Oxford by morphological studies on the tongues of marsupials and by discovering in the embryos of the duck-billed platypus ('Ornithorhynchus') the rudiments of teeth. His last work on vertebrate zoology, in 1894, was a paper on the bill and hairs of 'Ornithorhynchus', with a discussion of the homologies and origin of mammalian hair. 
Poulton's first entomological paper appeared in 1884 -- on his favourite subject, the colours, markings, and protective attitudes of caterpillars. His interest in this was stimulated by finding that some observations he had made as a boy were in accord with the studies of August Weismann. Throughout his life he emphasized the need for observation of the living insect, especially its behaviour. He wrote a series of papers on insects that alter their coloration to camouflage themselves. Essays by A. R. Wallace turned his attention to the importance of protective colouring in all its forms, concealing, warning, and mimetic, and this is the subject of which he became the foremost exponent. 
As a student Poulton had been warned off Darwinism by John Obadiah Westwood, leading entomologist and first Hope professor of zoology at Oxford, because it was too speculative. But under the inspiration of Wallace and Weismann, Poulton made the study of evolution more rigorous by using both careful fieldwork and experiments to analyse adaptation. These methods advanced a newer ecological approach to the study of evolution. Poulton argued for the importance of natural selection as the main mechanism of evolution and, like Weismann, attacked the neo-Lamarckian theory that acquired characteristics could be inherited. He publicized Weismann's work, helping to arrange the publication of 'Essays upon Heredity and Kindred Biological Subjects' (1889), translated from Weismann's original text. In 1890 Poulton produced 'The Colours of Animals', which concisely and simply explained the many forms of coloration in terms of natural selection; these forms he ingeniously summarized in a comparative table introducing terms which became the standard nomenclature. 
The Royal Society elected Poulton a fellow in 1889, and in 1893 he was appointed Hope professor of zoology at Oxford. Over the next forty years he corresponded with many naturalists who, stimulated by his enthusiasm, sent to Oxford the large collections which greatly aided him in the study of warning colours and mimicry, especially in tropical Africa. 
While Poulton always emphasized the need for observation and experiment in the field, he often found it possible to make important deductions from museum specimens. His explanation of the extraordinary differences, found in African 'Precis' butterflies, between the forms occurring in wet or dry seasons was a good example of his careful work. He showed that the form appearing in the dry season, the period of greatest danger to the individual insect, while better concealed than the wet season form, could be seen to be derived from it if the minute details of pattern were carefully traced. Such seasonal forms had hitherto been classed as distinct species, until Guy Anstruther Knox Marshall, in 1898, bred one from the other. Poulton's self-revealing comment on this was: 'Under the shock of Mr. Marshall's discovery... the systematist may well feel doubts about the foundations upon which his science has been erected. In these distracting circumstances a firm belief in natural selection will be found to exercise a wonderfully calming and steadying influence. (Cited in Carpenter, 668)' Poulton also became deeply interested in the study of the wide variations of African mimetic butterflies collected in localities where the species mimicked were much less common than the mimickers. He put forward the suggestion that natural selection was here in abeyance. Mimicry is not maintained in the absence of the models because there is no greater selective pressure upon one variant than upon another. It was a bionomic discovery that gave Poulton great pleasure. As a Darwinian he was greatly interested in sexual selection, and under his influence much knowledge was gained of the courtship of insects and of the special structures used for that purpose. 
After 1900 two new theories, the mutation theory of Hugo de Vries and Mendelian theory, appeared to challenge the Darwinian idea of origin of species by selection of small variations. Poulton disagreed vehemently with the way the proponents of these new theories disparaged traditional lines of research in natural history. He argued that Mendelism merely extended ideas advanced by Weismann, and hence was not an abrupt departure from Darwinism. His critique of the limitations of the new science was published as an introduction to his collection of papers, 'Essays on Evolution, 1889-1907' (1908). Starting in 1913 Poulton began a debate with Reginald C. Punnett, who used Mendelian theory to explain mimicry. Poulton emphasized the compatibility between Darwinism and Mendelism. His work on mimicry influenced Ronald Aylmer Fisher, a founder of theoretical population genetics. Fisher developed the ecological genetics of mimicry in collaboration with Edmund B. Ford, who had been Poulton's student in the 1920s. 
Wide recognition came to Poulton as a leader. He was a vice-president of the Royal Society for 1909-10 and its Darwin medallist in 1914. He presided over the Linnean Society of London from 1912 to 1916 and was awarded the Linnean medal in 1922. He was three times president of the Entomological Society of London, which elected him honorary life president in 1933 when the title 'Royal' was conferred upon it. The second International Congress of Entomology met under his guidance in 1912, as did the Association of Economic (later Applied) Biologists in 1922-3. He was for many years a member of the British Association, and he presided over it in 1937, having been president of the zoology section in 1931. He was a commander of the Swedish order of the Pole Star, and an honorary member of many foreign learned societies. The universities of Reading, Durham, Dublin, and Princeton conferred honorary degrees upon him; he was knighted in 1935. He died at his home, Wykeham House, 56 Banbury Road, Oxford, on 20 November 1943. The only child to survive him was his second daughter. The elder son, Edward Palmer Poulton, a distinguished physician, was on the staff of Guy's Hospital. The younger son, Ronald William Poulton, who took the name Poulton-Palmer, was a famous rugby football blue and international; he was killed in action in the First World War. 
G. D. H. Carpenter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35587


Pound, Sir (Alfred) Dudley Pickman Rogers (1877-1943), naval officer, was born on 29 August 1877 at Park View, Wroxall, Isle of Wight, the eldest child of Alfred John Pound, barrister, and his wife, Elizabeth Pickman, daughter of Richard Saltonstall Rogers of Boston, Massachusetts. Pound received most of his early education at Fonthill School in East Grinstead. In his youth he enjoyed riding and fishing, and had enough family connections to receive an offer from an uncle to find a place for him in the firm of Pierpont Morgan. But close proximity to the sea and the lure of a more glamorous career proved a stronger call. In January 1891 Pound entered the training ship 'Britannia' as a cadet, embarking on a lifelong career as a naval officer. 
Varied service, ranging from China to the channel, from the training squadron under sail to specialization as a torpedo officer and service at the Admiralty, led to promotion to commander at the age of thirty-two in June 1909. Along the way Pound made useful friendships as he expanded his range of experience. His next notable appointment was as instructor at the new Naval Staff College in 1913, where he first encountered a most important factor in his advancement: fate. By accepting an offer from William Fisher to become his commander in the battleship 'St Vincent', Pound found himself at sea under a useful patron when the First World War broke out. Promoted captain in December 1914, he served at the Admiralty in the first half of 1915 as second naval assistant to the first sea lord, the pugnacious 'Jackie' Fisher. Pound thus saw at first hand the titanic struggle between his masters, as Fisher squared off with the first lord, Winston Churchill, in a battle that saw both men ousted from office. Pound surely drew some conclusions about how not to handle ministers, in particular Churchill, which years later he would find useful. 
Later that year Pound returned to sea as flag captain of the Grand Fleet, in the battleship 'Colossus'. In that vessel he fought in the battle of Jutland on 31 May 1916, being commended for his service that day. Then in 1917 fate again brought Pound back to the fast track with an appointment that marked him out for future high command. He was selected to launch what became in due course the plans division of the Admiralty, charged with foreseeing and thinking out operations and problems that the navy might have to face. This was the first such division dedicated to this important task, a major step in the modernization of the navy, and it was a feather in Pound's cap to secure the billet. He soon moved on, at the end of 1917, to be director of operations (home), where he ended what was for him personally a very good war. 
Pound's subsequent peacetime career followed the pattern laid down for those being considered for the very top positions in the navy, a mixture of staff, shore, and sea appointments. In 1920 he took command of the battle cruiser 'Repulse'. In 1922 he returned to the Admiralty as director of the plans division. In 1925 he was named chief of staff to Lord Keyes, who was now the commander-in-chief, Mediterranean Fleet; in that appointment Pound was promoted to flag rank in March 1926. He then spent two more years in the Admiralty as assistant chief of naval staff from 1927 to 1929. He returned to sea in May 1929 to command the battle-cruiser squadron of the Atlantic Fleet. Detached service as a naval representative to the ill-fated general conference on disarmament in 1932 helped bring Pound back to the Admiralty in August of that year as second sea lord. He was appointed KCB in 1933. 
This mix of appointments in a dozen years gave Pound both the sea time he needed to round out his qualifications for high command and staff appointments that brought him in touch with all the great naval and international issues of the time: the naval limitation negotiations, naval aviation, imperial defence, the future of capital ships, to name a few. He succeeded well enough all around to be nominated in September 1935 for one of the two most coveted commands in the service, as commander-in-chief, Mediterranean Fleet. 
The Dudley Pound who accepted this attractive appointment was by now a seasoned 58-year-old full admiral, a character and personality developed through forty-five years of service. The most marked feature of that character was Pound's total dedication to the navy. In 1908 he had married Bessie Caroline Grace (died 1943), daughter of John Livesay Whitehead, a physician from Ventnor, Isle of Wight. Their married life was apparently happy but little is known of it; references to his wife note how much she helped him and the service but little else. They had a daughter and two sons, the older of whom followed his father into the Royal Navy, while the younger took a commission in the Royal Marines. Pound continued to enjoy fishing and now also shooting, but as he rose in rank and responsibility took less and less time off to indulge these interests. The picture seems clear: for this man, the navy was his life. In that service he was seen as sharp but not brilliant, an indefatigable worker, a good listener, a driver rather than a delegator, and above all utterly loyal to his superiors. He had an immense capacity for work and revelled in carrying out in hands-on fashion even the myriad duties of higher appointments. Personally, colleagues found him serious, reserved, not hard to work with but difficult to befriend. Subordinates respected rather than idolized him, many remembering the care he took to look after their interests, enquire after their families, and nurture their careers. Pound seems to have had limited social graces and narrow intellectual horizons. His sense of fun, such as it was, emerged in his other passion: driving automobiles at breakneck speed, especially with a passenger aboard to be suitably unnerved. The image that emerges is of a thorough but narrow professional, entering the service too young and throwing himself into it too completely to develop a fully rounded character. 
It would be quite wrong to see Pound as personally ambitious. For all his faults, he consistently put the service before himself. That was made clear when he offered to delay his appointment to the Mediterranean command in order not to disrupt the fleet; the change of command coincided with the onset of the international crisis provoked by Italy's attack on Ethiopia. Pound acted as chief of staff to Fisher until finally assuming command in March 1936, a situation which must have had awkward moments with two full admirals on the scene but had no apparent repercussions. Pound gave further evidence that personal ambition did not consume him when in 1938 he calmly received the news that he was not seen as a probable first sea lord. Given a choice, he opted to take the offer of a one-year extension in command in the Mediterranean, followed by retirement, rather than a transfer to one of the home port commands for a final three years. As commander-in-chief, Mediterranean, Pound enjoyed perhaps his happiest years in the navy, relentlessly training his fleet for war by leading from the bridge as much as possible. When the fleet was handed over to the command of Andrew Browne Cunningham, he noted that it was 'in great fettle and obviously in a high state of efficiency' (Cunningham, 207). It was left to Cunningham to take this fleet to war while fate, in one last twist, brought Pound to the summit of his service after all. 
A succession of untimely deaths and disabilities left Pound the only possible choice for an appointment the navy had not intended him to assume. Concerns about his physical fitness, his perceived inability to see different sides to a question, and his tendency to take too much into his own hands all had to be set aside when he emerged as the only senior admiral with the range and depth of experience to become the professional head of the service. Pound took office as first sea lord and chief of the naval staff in June 1939, being promoted to admiral of the fleet the next month. Within two months events forced him to lead the navy into the Second World War. The rest of his life was taken up by the demanding job which made him a figure of historical significance, directing the senior service in a global total war which stretched it beyond its strength almost from the start. 
Pound was 'ex officio' a major figure in the central direction of the war as a member of the chiefs of staff committee. It is also fair to say that the strain upon him was greater than that on his army and air force counterparts, for two reasons. First, the war at sea knew no boundaries and only from the centre could it be co-ordinated, the Admiralty acting as an operational headquarters and intervening directly in battle by issuing orders to fleets at sea. Second, geography pushed the Royal Navy to the forefront of both the defence of the home islands and any attempt to carry the war to the enemy. In these circumstances anyone holding Pound's appointment would have become a controversial figure in history. For most of his tenure the allies seemed to be losing the war. As professional head of the navy he had to take or be involved in decisions which many feel aggravated rather than reversed that trend; this plus his own personality and deportment made Pound a uniquely controversial first sea lord. Three themes dominated his direction of the navy in total war: his role in British grand strategy, his role in the conduct of fleet operations, and his working relationship with Churchill. 
As a maker of grand strategy it cannot be said that Pound ever developed a broad outlook or mastered the challenge of seeing problems from other than a naval perspective. On the other hand, he understood that the maritime war must be related to a co-ordinated grand strategy. Colleagues from other services noted, sometimes in exasperation, how stolidly Pound argued any naval brief and how completely prepared he was to weigh in with the naval perspective on any broader issue. Yet his own subordinates sometimes became frustrated at the first sea lord's insistence on reaching a consensus among the chiefs of staff, even at times by making compromises the naval staff considered uncomfortable. But not even his fiercest critics ever denied that he saw from the start the foundation of the maritime dimension of grand strategy: in Pound's own words, 'if we lose the Battle of the Atlantic we lose the war' (Barnett, 460). The struggle to secure the lifeline by which alone the United Kingdom could be maintained, and any great counter-offensive prepared, never strayed from the centre of his efforts to contribute to the central direction of the war. 
The degree to which Pound contributed to a war-winning grand strategy remains a complicated question. The major complication was the relative weakness of the Royal Navy, indeed of British empire forces in general, after the defeat of France in June 1940. Forced now to cope with an expanded surface and submarine threat in the Atlantic, the imminent threat of invasion of the homeland, a new war in the Mediterranean, and possible trouble in the Far East, Pound became markedly cautious. He had to be persuaded to drop a call to abandon the eastern Mediterranean, which secured the Suez Canal and the vital oil supplies of the Middle East, before any direct threat even materialized. Despite his emphasis on the battle of the Atlantic, Pound for too long did not do all he might have done to master that struggle. Not until November 1942 did he appoint a really first-rate commander -- Admiral Sir Max Horton -- to take charge of the pivotal convoy struggle. Above all he allowed the all-important struggle to secure more effective support from the Royal Air Force to drag on so long as to threaten the whole war effort. 
Nevertheless Pound won the confidence, respect, and even friendship of his chiefs of staff colleagues, and was generous enough to make way as chairman of the committee when it became clear the chief of the Imperial General Staff, Alan Brooke, would be more effective. Yet that in itself also indicated that Pound could not translate his understanding of the need to work together into anything more helpful than an ever more defensive emphasis on naval problems. Nor did Pound prove very successful in helping to direct global coalition warfare when the entry of the United States into the war led to the formation of the combined chiefs of staff. He did not really win the confidence of his American opposite number, Admiral Ernest J. King -- admittedly a difficult task for any British naval officer -- and the combined efforts of the two navies to secure a determined commitment to the Atlantic convoy battle as a priority in grand strategy suffered as a result. Not until early 1943 did the battle at last receive the definitive priority, and the air support, that it required. But the most frequent criticism of Pound as grand strategist is that he was too much the navy man, while his most dangerous failure was to take too long to secure full national commitment to the navy's most vital campaign. As a result, only one conclusion seems fair: as a grand strategist, Pound was barely adequate. 
One important mitigating factor was the fact that Pound had the heaviest burden to carry among the chiefs of staff. The tension between fleet commanders at sea wanting to run their own show and a first sea lord at home feeling the responsibility on his shoulders and wanting to play a direct role in operations was nothing new. It was almost assumed wisdom in the Royal Navy that seniority conferred greater insight as well as authority, and only the Admiralty could see the 'full picture'. The fact that Pound and the Admiralty often enjoyed the advantage of more reliable information, provided especially by signals intelligence, only reinforced this assumption. On occasion it was not unjustified, as for example during the hunt for the German battleship 'Bismarck'. But there seems little doubt that Pound was predisposed, by personality as well as naval tradition, to take too much into his own hands. One critic went as far as to argue that he 'ran the Navy as if he were the executive officer of a ship' (Barnett, 732). 
Pound's style in running the Admiralty displayed his strengths and weaknesses. He commanded the respect of his subordinates and helped train his wartime staff to a high level of efficiency; if anything he became too comfortable with them, and was reluctant to suffer changes in his entourage. Nor did he ever shirk from taking personal responsibility for Admiralty decisions great or small, regardless of what advice he received. But it must be said that his inability to delegate was a serious mistake, given the sheer scope and strain of his responsibilities. He blocked the appointment of a deputy chief of the naval staff until July 1942, too long for his stamina to hold up against the strain of the job. His principal fleet commanders respected the frankness with which he discussed matters with them and enjoyed generally satisfactory personal relations with him, but came for the most part to resent what they regarded as his undue and unwise interference in fleet operations. 
As a fighting admiral Pound reflected the conventional wisdom of the navy and adjusted to the lessons of war with reasonable promptness. He entered the war still focused on the dominance of the capital ship and the big gun, paying not enough attention to air weapons and the submarine. But his confidence in the ability of surface vessels to defend themselves against aircraft did not survive the Norway campaign of spring 1940. By 1941 the first sea lord was at least rating the need for stronger antisubmarine forces as of equal importance to maintaining the battlefleet. And only one direct intervention by Pound in an ongoing operation at sea can really be argued to have led to avoidable disaster. The decision to scatter convoy PQ17 in July 1942 on the basis of negative intelligence -- the fear that the battleship 'Tirpitz' might be at sea on its trail in the absence of confirmation by signals intelligence that it was not -- did indeed show Pound at his worst. He never really grasped the limitations of signals intelligence nor how best to apply it, made up his mind too rigidly and readily in the face of conflicting advice, and overruled the commander on the spot without adequate justification. But other heavy defeats suffered by the Royal Navy were not directly attributable to intervention by the first sea lord. The sinking of the 'Hood' hit all as a shock, the decision to send force Z to Singapore was taken over Pound's fierce opposition, and the heavy losses suffered by the Mediterranean Fleet in 1941 did not result from Admiralty intervention. The broadly critical reception of Pound as operations supervisor stemmed more from the general pattern of his behaviour than any specific cases, from the manner of his day-to-day handling of fleet operations and orders from the top which taken in sum unsettled the fleet. Perhaps the single most important cause of this perception was the problem that amounted to Pound's most important challenge and heavily affected all his other tasks: his working relationship with Churchill. 
Pound had to answer to the most self-confident and interventionist political master any first sea lord has ever worked for. Churchill worked hard to maintain control of the broad direction of grand strategy in his own hands, and constantly involved himself in fleet operations even to the point of issuing orders and instructions personally to fleet commanders. The struggle to help harness the positive energy of this human dynamo yet prevent him from making impulsive decisions that might lead to disaster, or meddling in operations to the point where the fleet had no idea to whom it answered nor confidence in its direction, may have been Pound's greatest contribution to victory. Yet it is in his pattern of 'handling' Churchill that many at the time and since found the cause of Pound's most serious errors. 
In general Pound's approach to handling Churchill was never to oppose any idea or suggestion directly unless there was absolutely no other choice. Unwise proposals would be sent to an irritated and overworked staff to be examined thoroughly, while the first sea lord carried on a slow lobby of suggestion to lead his master back to safer ground. Pound tried to strike a balance, to let Churchill vent his frustration on matters not vital, to shield subordinates as much as possible without provoking an open dispute with the prime minister, and to keep control of the maritime war yet retain the confidence of his mercurial boss. This led to subordinates such as Cunningham and James Somerville being shaken in their faith in Pound when they were badgered by unfair telegrams from the top, and there were whispers that sometimes Pound let his personal feelings get in the way when he allowed someone to be damaged by prime ministerial wrath. But Pound never allowed Churchill to remove someone in whom he had confidence, and usually prevented him from changing strategy when he disagreed. 
On some crucial matters Pound did fall short. Force Z went east despite his determined opposition to sending out a force too important to lose but too weak to hold off the Japanese. And the effort to secure consistent and sufficient priority for the Atlantic struggle dragged on in part because he was reluctant to push matters to the point of an open breach. This has to be seen as a judgement call. Pound saw the weapon of a threat to resign as an act of desperation, dangerously close to the abandonment of duty, and indeed it was not to be bandied about lightly amid total war. He also realized that whatever his faults no one else could lead the war with the same fire and resolve as Churchill. Yet critics on both sides have not been fair to Pound on this issue. It was the very manner of Pound's handling of Churchill that provoked the controversy, some inevitably seeing it as, on balance, too compliant. Only on the Atlantic issue does this seem right. When Pound finally did make the ultimate threat, very quietly, in October 1942, results soon followed. But he received little credit for this from a navy already convinced he had allowed Churchill to bully it for too long. To balance this, Pound deserves credit for restraining Churchill as much as he did while retaining his confidence as well as he did. 
Working with Churchill no doubt aggravated the final controversy surrounding Pound, his fitness for the demanding job fate thrust upon him. This arose because of his increasingly obvious fatigue as the war went on, and behaviour that suggested his powers were fading. He suffered from osteoarthritis, a painful condition which must have sapped his energy. Though medically certified fit to assume his appointment in 1939, he rarely took time off for real relaxation. Pound's tendency to put his head down and appear to be asleep in meetings became more pronounced from 1941. His defenders argue that this was in fact a way of concentrating, and insist that whenever any issue bearing on the navy came up, the first sea lord became fully alert and intervened in the discussion. Yet at best this would confirm the argument that Pound's participation in the central direction of the war was too narrow; at worst it spread the belief that he could not bear the strain. 
The death of his wife in July 1943 hit Pound very hard. But the condition that finally killed him was malignant glioma, a slowly developing brain tumour. Pound suffered a stroke in early September and was forced to tell Churchill on 8 September that he was no longer fit to serve. It is not possible to be definitive about whether this was the case. Supporters who argue that Pound remained fit until near the end are offset by critics who insist he was unfit long before. Whatever evidence he himself might have left went up in smoke when his personal papers were destroyed by burning, shortly after the war, by his fellow admirals Cunningham and Geoffrey Blake -- possibly to conform with another naval tradition. 
Death came for Pound in the Royal Masonic Hospital, Ravenscourt Park, London, on 21 October 1943, Trafalgar day -- surely a last and most appropriate intervention by fate for this most devoted servant of the Royal Navy -- and he was buried at sea on 27 October. He refused the late offer of a peerage, further testimony to lack of personal ambition, and died with the tide of war having truly turned. But as it was his lot to guide the navy during the difficult years of overstretch, so it has remained his fate to be a controversial figure among historians. The burning of his papers ruled out a definitive biography and made it more difficult to weigh Pound's role in the controversies of his career. Yet the mass of documentation surrounding any first sea lord has produced a long debate on Pound's life and career. The forgiving reception accorded by the post-war generation, which stressed his part in laying the foundations for victory, has now become a more critical discourse -- should it have taken so long to win and at such cost, were serious errors made, and if so why? Assessments have ranged from calling Pound one of the weakest professional heads of the navy ever to lead the service in war to the claim that he did a more than adequate job when it fell to him. The most balanced view seems to be that for better or worse he was a product of the service to which he gave his life. The navy certainly could have benefited from stronger leadership at the top, but Pound was not a failure. He helped both to build a navy able to contribute to victory and to make sure no irreversible blunder was ever made. Pound's wartime successes and failures were those of the navy he led; he and it were inseparable. 


@@@@@


doc= 35588


Powell, Cecil Frank (1903-1969), physicist, was born in Tonbridge, Kent, on 5 December 1903, the elder child and only son of Frank Powell, gunsmith, of 99 High Street, Tonbridge, and his wife, Elizabeth Caroline Bisacre. His father, from a family long established as gunsmiths in Tonbridge, had been bankrupted by a lawsuit arising from a shooting accident, so family circumstances were severely straitened in Powell's childhood. Nevertheless, encouraged by his grandfather George Bisacre, a schoolmaster, who gave him second-hand (and rather ancient) scientific texts, and inspired by the engineering talents of two paternal uncles, one of whom had constructed the first successful motor car in the Tonbridge district, he contrived to have a garden-shed chemical laboratory while a schoolboy. 
At eleven Powell won a scholarship to Sir A. Judd's Commercial School, Tonbridge, whence state and college open scholarships took him to Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, where he obtained first-class honours in parts one (1924) and two (1925) of the natural sciences tripos, and was placed second in his year for physics. He followed this with research in Rutherford's Cavendish Laboratory, under the direction of C. T. R. Wilson. In 1928 he moved, as research assistant to Professor A. M. Tyndall, to the newly opened H. H. Wills Physics Laboratory of the University of Bristol. There he spent the rest of his career, becoming lecturer (1931), reader (1946), Melville Wills professor of physics (1948-63), Henry Overton Wills professor of physics and director of the H. H. Wills Physics Laboratory (1964-9), and a pro-vice-chancellor of the university (1964-7). He was elected to the Royal Society in 1949 and received the Nobel prize for physics in 1950. He was elected president of the Association of Scientific Workers in 1954 and of the World Federation of Scientific Workers in 1957. He married, in 1932, Isobel Therese (1907-1995), daughter of Johann Artner, an Austrian business executive with I. G. Farbenindustrie. They had two daughters. Isobel was to become an important member of his research team. 
Powell's earliest research work, with C. T. R. Wilson, which aimed at improving the performance of cloud chambers, had an engineering spin-off in application to the discharge of steam through nozzles. With Tyndall, during Powell's first four years in Bristol, the nature of gaseous ions was greatly clarified. His research interests then diverged in two very different directions -- seismology and nuclear physics. In 1935 he went as seismologist on the joint Colonial Office and Royal Society expedition to Montserrat, West Indies. Another such expedition to Dominica was being planned in 1939, but was frustrated by the war, and at that point Powell's career as a seismologist ended. 
Concurrently, Powell undertook the construction of a Cockcroft generator to produce a 700 keV proton beam, and the associated cloud chamber, evidence of his considerable skill and enjoyment in working with his hands. His high-voltage set came into service in 1939 but was dismantled in 1940 because space was needed for other war-related work. However, it was in use for long enough to launch him into what was to be his principal line of research. Before the cloud chamber was ready he recorded his proton beam in the emulsion of a photographic plate, tangentially exposed. Then he used the same technique to determine the energy spectrum of a neutron source by registering the tracks of 'knock-on' protons in the emulsion, and at the same time he participated in experiments registering events produced by the cosmic rays in photographic plates stored on high mountains. 
It was generally thought at the time that the registration of fast particle tracks in emulsion was only suitable for qualitative demonstrations and could give no results of worthwhile precision, but Powell persisted in following his belief that, with better microscopes, better used, with improved processing techniques, and with the development of new thicker and more silver-rich emulsions, the accuracy and sensitivity of the method could be greatly improved. He was correct, and was rewarded with an important harvest of new phenomena observed in the cosmic rays in the years following the war. The method had an intrinsic advantage over all others for the observation of particle transformations occurring after very short time intervals (because of the high magnification under which the tracks were seen). The resolution of the meson paradox in 1947, revealing that there was a strongly interacting greekLetterpi-meson which transformed spontaneously into a weakly interacting and relatively long-lived greekLettermu-meson. won him his Nobel prize. These observations were made in balloon-borne stacks of photographic emulsion, a method which was to reveal a new world of transient 'fundamental' particles during the next decade. 
Powell built up a team of more than twenty researchers from all over the world, and collaborated with many others. An integral part of his group were the dozen or so female 'scanners', headed by his wife and known in the department as 'Cecil's beauty chorus'. He treated all his team as equals and was punctilious in acknowledging co-workers. From his position thus established as a leader in European collaborative research Powell then played a leading role in the establishment of the Conseil Europeen de Recherches Nucleaires (CERN) at Geneva as fundamental particle research entered the era of giant accelerator machines too expensive for any one nation in Europe to develop. He was chairman of the scientific policy committee of CERN from 1961 to 1963. To the end of his life he continued to play an active part both in the science and in the forward planning of research on fundamental particles. 
Powell's politics had been on the left, but in a speech in 1955 on the hydrogen bomb and the future of mankind, later published as a pamphlet by the London Co-operative Society, he said: 'We are in a situation of great difficulty and danger in which it is very important to create a serious and informed body of opinion, all over the world... [which] must, if it is to be effective, embrace people with conflicting opinions on almost all other issues but who can be united on this.' This represented his political position from then onwards. He was importantly involved in the discussions leading up to the Russell-Einstein declaration of 9 July 1955, of which he was one of the eleven original signatories, and in the setting up of the Pugwash series of conferences on science and world affairs, commencing on 7 July 1957. He was elected chairman in 1967 but had in fact been the working chairman from the beginning, as deputy to Bertrand Russell who, prevented by age from attendance, usually guided the conferences from a distance. All such duties Powell performed with great charm, tact, and literary style. 
Of medium height, and cheerfully serious disposition, Powell's hobbies included landscape drawing and making furniture, preferably from a difficult wood like yew. He had a well-developed sense of humour and was a skilled raconteur: at parties he enjoyed being asked to recite 'The Barge' or to tell some story about his inventive Uncle Horace. As chairman of an awkward confrontation he knew how to lower the temperature with a well-timed joke. He was one of Bristol University's leading statesmen at the time of student unrest in 1968, helping to allay suspicions of professors and students alike. He had a love for good English, and particularly liked to find an apposite quotation from the essays of Bacon. One of his greatest joys was an unplanned audience reaction when he gave a lecture on the cosmic rays at Oxford. After he had entered the Sheldonian Theatre with the vice-chancellor and bedells in robed procession, his innocent opening words, 'Coming from outer space', brought the house down. 
The Royal Society awarded Powell the Hughes medal in 1949 (the year of his election as a fellow) and the royal medal in 1961; he gave the Bakerian lecture in 1957, and a tercentenary lecture in 1960. The Physical Society of London awarded him the Charles Vernon Boys prize in 1947, and (as the Institute of Physics and the Physical Society) the Guthrie medal and prize in 1969. He was elected a foreign member of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR in 1958 and received its Lomonosov gold medal in 1967, and was elected a foreign member of the Yugoslav Academy of Sciences and Arts in 1966. He was an honorary member of the Royal Irish Academy (1959) and an ordinary member of the Leopoldina Academy, Halle (1964), and received honorary doctorates from the universities of Dublin (1950), Bordeaux (1952), Warsaw (1959), Berlin (1960), Padua (1965), and Moscow (1966). He was also an honorary fellow of Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge (1966), and of the Institute of Physics and the Physical Society (1962). He was chairman of the nuclear physics board of the British Science Research Council from 1965 to 1968. In addition to many scientific papers and published lectures, Powell published, in 1947, with G. P. S. Occhialini, 'Nuclear Physics in Photographs', and, in 1959, with P. H. Fowler and D. H. Perkins, 'The Study of Elementary Particles by the Photographic Method'. 
On 9 August 1969, eight days after he retired from the Bristol chair, Powell died of a heart attack on an Italian mountainside, at Alpe Giumello, Commune di Casargo, Lago di Como. A commemorative plaque donated by the Clifton and Hotwells Improvement Society marks his place of residence from 1946 to 1954 at 1 Downside Road, Clifton, Bristol. 
Charles Frank', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35589


Powell, Frederick York (1850-1904), historian, born on 14 January 1850 at 43 Woburn Place, Bloomsbury, was the eldest child and only son of Frederick Powell and Mary (died 1910), daughter of Dr James York (died 1882), a physician who was also a Spanish scholar. His father, a commissariat merchant, who had an office in Mincing Lane, came of a south Wales family. Much of Powell's early life was spent at Sandgate, Kent, where he learned to love the sea and formed lifelong friendships with some fishermen. In the autumn of 1859 he went to the Manor House preparatory school at Hastings. In 1864 he entered Dr Jex Blake's house at Rugby, but though he gained a name for esoteric learning he never rose above the lower fifth and left, chiefly for reasons of health, in July 1866. The next two years were fruitfully spent in travel and self-education. There was a visit to Biarritz, and a tour in Sweden which gave Powell, who had read Sir George Webbe Dasent's translation of 'Burnt Njal' at Rugby, occasion to learn and practise a Scandinavian language. At eighteen he began to work on Old French, German, and Icelandic with Henry Tull Rhoades at Bonchurch. He was already a strong socialist and agnostic, and had formed most of the tastes and prejudices which accompanied him through life -- an interest in old armour, a special attraction for the art of William Blake, a passion for northern and medieval literature, and an aversion to philosophy, except for Kant and Schopenhauer. 
Powell went to Oxford in 1868, and after a year spent with the non-collegiate students migrated to Christ Church. He gained a first class in law and modern history in the Trinity term of 1872. After graduating, he spent two years (1872-4) at his father's house in Lancaster Gate in London. He entered the Middle Temple on 8 November 1870, and was called to the bar on 6 June 1874. 
Powell's first academic appointment was to teach one of the few subjects in which he had no enthusiastic interest. In 1874 he was appointed to a lecturership in law at Christ Church, and save for a year's interlude as history lecturer at Trinity College, where his teaching method was felt to be 'too irregular and haphazard' by some of the students (Elton, 1.27), his official teaching in Oxford was, until 1894, confined to the uncongenial subjects of law and political economy. He had, however, attracted the attention of Mandell Creighton, who invited him to contribute a volume on early English history to Longman's 'Epochs of English History', of which Creighton was editor. The book, 'Early England to the Norman Conquest', published in 1876, delighted Creighton, who praised its clarity of style. These were to be the years of Powell's best work. In 1869 he had met Gudbrandur Vigfusson, who had come to Oxford in 1866 to edit the 'Icelandic-English Dictionary' for the Oxford press. In 1877 Powell engaged with Vigfusson upon the prolegomena to an edition of 'Sturlunga saga', 'taking down across the table', said Vigfusson, 'my thoughts and theories, so that though the substance and drift of the arguments are mine, the English with the exception of bits and phrases here and there is Mr. Powell's throughout.' An 'Icelandic Prose Reader', the notes to which were mainly the work of Powell, followed in 1879, and two years later the 'Corpus poeticum boreale', an edition of the whole of 'Ancient Northern Poetry', with translations and a full commentary. The translations were provided by Powell and exhibited his command of a style reminiscent of Dasent's early work. 
The first volume contains the old mythological and heroic poetry: the poems of the 'Poetic Edda' and similar texts. The second volume is a collection of the poems composed, chiefly by Icelanders, in honour of successive kings of Norway and other important figures. Powell here brought to bear his knowledge of Scandinavian history. These poems were used as authorities by the early historians of Norway (such as Snorri Sturluson); the introductions to the different sections, in the second volume of the 'Corpus', containing biographical information about the poets, formed the only original work in English on this portion of Scandinavian history at that time. It is hardly possible to describe the extraordinary variety of contents in the editorial part of the two volumes -- essays on mythology and points of literary history. They show an unsurpassed breadth of imagination, even if they are too unreliable to form any foundation for subsequent scholarship. 
The 'Corpus poeticum boreale' at once made Powell's name as a northern scholar and was intended to be the prelude to an even more ambitious work. In August 1884 he spent a fortnight with Vigfusson in Copenhagen examining Icelandic manuscripts, with the aim of producing an edition and translation of the classics of northern prose, a proposal for which had been submitted to the Clarendon Press. The work advanced steadily and most of the 'Origines Islandicae' was already in proof when Vigfusson died in 1889. So long as Vigfusson was alive Powell was kept steadily working at his Scandinavian task, but with the loss of his friend and associate his study was no longer directed and he gave himself up to miscellaneous reading; 'he missed the double harness in which he had pulled so long' (Elton, 1.106). The result was that the work was never concluded and was only published in 1905 after Powell's death. The Clarendon Press would only allow a list of corrigenda rather than the substantial revision which Craigie felt it needed; consequently it is unusable for serious scholarly purposes. Powell's procrastination was typical of the later period of his life -- projects were initiated but never brought to conclusion. The text of the prose sagas is substantially the work of Vigfusson, 'the ordering, the English, and many of the literary criticisms, portraits, and parallels are Powell's' (Elton, 1.101). Powell seems to have deferred to the Icelander's fine, technical scholarship; but he did not check Vigfusson's wilder speculations nor was he able to provide much philological method. The translation remains readable, if error prone, only occasionally lapsing into archaism; but the notes are 'littered with York Powell's inspired but deluded guesses' (Sutcliffe, 81). 
Meanwhile, in 1884, through the influence of Dean H. G. Liddell, Powell had been made a student of Christ Church. His official duties as law lecturer were to teach for the law school, to look after Indian Civil Service candidates, and to lecture on political economy for the pass school. His real and congenial avocations extended far beyond this narrow circuit. Besides his work on Scandinavian literature, he taught Old English, Old French, and even for a time Old German, for the Association for Education of Women in Oxford, took a leading share in founding the 'English Historical Review' (1885), and published a history of 'England from the Earliest Times to the Death of Henry VII' (1885), designed for 'the middle forms of schools'. A series of little books, 'English History from Contemporary Writers', was begun under his editorship in 1885. 
Powell built for himself a contemporary reputation as one of the most profound scholars in medieval history and literature in England. When J. A. Froude died in 1894, and S. R. Gardiner, the prime minister's first choice, declined the chair, the regius professorship of modern history was conferred on Powell on the recommendation of Lord Rosebery (December 1894). Powell's scout identified the prime minister's letter as a tradesman's bill and put it aside for a while until enquiries from Downing Street brought it to light. The post was accepted with misgivings. Powell had no gift either for public lecturing or for organization. His inaugural lecture was only thirty minutes long and virtually inaudible. He was shy of an audience which he did not know, and although both in his inaugural lecture and upon subsequent occasions he pleaded for the scientific treatment of history, for the training of public archivists, and for the divorce of history and ethics, his practice differed from his theory; in his journalism he frequently relied on opinion and moral feeling rather than historical fact. 
As professor of history, Powell was a disappointment. He made no special contribution to the advance of historical knowledge or method and failed to make any general impression upon the undergraduates as a teacher. Indeed, from the age of forty until the end of his life he published only two works: a translation of the 'Faereyinga saga' (1896), dedicated jointly to H. G. Liddell, dean of Christ Church, and Henry Stone, an old fisherman at Sandgate; and a rendering of some quatrains from 'Umar Khayyam (1901). Powell was, however, the most generous as well as the most unambitious of men. His time was his friends' time, and the hours which might have been spent upon his own work were squandered on helping and advising others. Oliver Elton translated the first nine books of Saxo Grammaticus at his suggestion, and the bulk of the introduction was Powell's work. Again, as delegate of the Clarendon Press, an office which he held from 1885 until his death, Powell was able to render some service to the advancement of learning, though his procrastination and failure to answer letters hindered some projects; his interference with Q's editing of the 'Oxford Book of English Verse' caused the other delegates considerable irritation. 
As professor Powell regularly lectured in his rooms at Christ Church on the sources of English history, and on every Thursday evening was at home to undergraduates. In his pleasant rooms in the Meadow Buildings of Christ Church, with their stacks of books and Japanese prints, he would discourse freely on any subject which came up, from boxing and fencing to the latest Portuguese novel. His knowledge of foreign, especially of Romance, literature was singularly wide. A founder of the Rabelais Club, he had a rich fund of Rabelais stories which he recounted at its monthly dinners. He brought Verlaine to lecture in Oxford in 1891, and as a curator of the Taylor Institution (from 1887) procured an invitation to Stephane Mallarme to give a lecture there on 28 February 1894. Powell found Mallarme most congenial and translated his lecture into English in a single evening. The Belgian poet Verhaeren and the French sculptor Rodin were likewise at different times Powell's guests at Christ Church. He had also studied Old Irish, and was one of the presidents of the Irish Texts Society. On 7 April 1902 he lectured in Dublin to the Irish Literary Society on Irish influence in English literature, and in December of the same year went to Liverpool to speak for the endowment of Celtic studies in the university. Meanwhile, he learned Persian, had dabbled in Maori and Romani, and had assembled a valuable collection of Japanese prints. Robert Bridges described Powell's rooms as 'a veritable knick-knackatory of Japanese carvings, old Psalters, Parisian advertisements, etc. etc.' (Sutcliffe, 82). He wrote numerous reviews for the daily and weekly press, principally for the 'Academy', and after 1890 for the 'Manchester Guardian'. 
The radical side of Powell's versatile nature is illustrated by the preface which he wrote to 'A Penny Garland of Songs of Labour', published in 1893 and written by his Oxford friend William Hines, chimney sweeper, herbalist, and radical agitator, and by the active share which he took in the foundation of Ruskin College, an institution devised to bring working men to Oxford. Powell presided over the inaugural meeting at the town hall on 22 February 1899, and acted from the first as a member of the council of the college. In religion Powell described himself as a 'decent heathen Aryan', in politics as 'a socialist and a jingo'. He was an advocate of home rule, and of the South African War, and the first president of the Oxford Tariff Reform League. He was made an honorary LLD of Glasgow in 1901. 
In 1874 Powell married Florence Batten, 'nee' Silke (died 1888), a widow with two young daughters. Mrs Powell did not live in Oxford; for many years Powell spent the middle of the week during term time in Oxford and the weekend with his family in London. In January 1881 he moved from 6 Stamford Grove West, Upper Clapton, to Bedford Park, an aesthetic urban development in the Queen Anne style, popular with painters, actors, poets, and journalists. Here he resided until 1902; his only child, a daughter, Mariella, was born there in 1884. Four years later Powell's wife died. In the summer of 1894 he visited Ambleteuse on the coast of Normandy for the first time, and for the next ten years spent much of his summers there. In December 1902 Powell gave up his London house and settled in north Oxford with his daughter. The next year came warnings of heart trouble. He died on 8 May 1904 at his home, Staverton Grange, Banbury Road, Oxford. He was buried at Wolvercote cemetery, Oxford, without religious rites by his own desire; the delegates of the Clarendon Press processed from Walton Street to pay their respects. His large library was sold by Blackwells bookshop, which issued three special sale catalogues. 
In appearance Powell resembled a sea captain. He was broad, burly, and bearded, brusque in manner, with dark hair and eyes, and a deep rich laugh, 'a big, untidy, generous man' (Starkie, 22). In the sphere of learning he is chiefly remembered for his services to northern literature, for his support of Vigfusson, and for the general stimulus which he gave to the study of medieval literature in Great Britain, rather than for outstanding or lasting scholarship. 


@@@@@


doc= 35590


Powell, Sir (George) Allan (1876-1948), public servant, was born on 1 February 1876 at Mile End, London, the son of Richard Powell, labourer, later school caretaker, and his wife, Mary Anne Clouter. He was educated at Bancroft's School and King's College, London, and was called to the bar at Gray's Inn in 1907. On 24 May 1904 Powell married Jeannie Jack ('b'. 1878/9), daughter of John Marshall, a Stepney physician and surgeon; they had one son. 
Powell worked for the Metropolitan Asylums Board from 1894, reaching the post of assistant clerk to the board by 1914. Throughout the First World War he was resident officer-in-charge of the government war refugees camp at Earls Court, where he had charge of a shifting refugee community of 4000 allied soldiers and civilians. For this work he was made a CBE in 1920, and was also awarded the order of Leopold of Belgium, the white eagle of Serbia, and the medaille de la Reconnaissance Francaise. He published a book on his experiences, 'Four Years in a Refugee Camp', in 1924. 
During the inter-war years Powell made his name as a distinguished public servant. He was clerk to the Metropolitan Asylums Board from 1922 until its transfer to the London county council (LCC) in 1930, and published its history, 'The Metropolitan Asylums Board and its Work, 1867-1930', in 1930. Between 1930 and 1932 he organized a new department of public assistance for the LCC. Meanwhile, he was a member of the royal commission on food prices from 1924 to 1925, a member of the night baking committee in 1925, and in 1929, after four years as vice-chairman of the National Food Council and chairman of its executive committee (during which time he was knighted, in 1927), came to public prominence as its chairman (1929-32). 
From 1932 to 1939 Powell served full-time on the import duties advisory committee, acting as an unofficial liaison between the chairman of the committee, Lord May, the economic adviser Sir Sydney Chapman, and the consumer. He was appointed president of the state medicine and industrial hygiene section of the Public Health Congress in 1933, and chairman of the Institute of Public Administration conference in 1934, and sat on the committee on key industries duties in 1935. Elected to the council of the royal borough of Kensington in 1932, he was twice mayor, in 1937-8 and 1938-9. 
In March 1939 Neville Chamberlain appointed Powell to the chairmanship of the board of governors of the BBC, where he succeeded R. C. Norman on 18 April 1939. Despite his successful administrative career Powell was not considered an obvious choice for the post: he memorably acknowledged on accepting the appointment that 'I know nothing of radio. Frankly, I don't know how many valves my set has got' (Briggs, 'Governing the BBC', 67). The question of his qualifications to arrange the variety programmes was raised in parliament, and the press did not fail to compare his new job with his previous responsibilities at the Metropolitan Asylums Board. The outbreak of war placed additional and unanticipated burdens on the post of chairman, notably from 1939 to 1941 when the number of governors was reduced from seven to two and the BBC's very independence came under government challenge. 
Powell's role as the wartime BBC chairman remains ambiguous. He maintained a genial and uncontroversial public profile during the war, but his accommodating attitude to the government was a persistent source of concern within the corporation, notably his assurance to the minister of information Lord Macmillan in September 1939 that he accepted the direction of the government in all matters pertaining to the war effort, and his good relations with Churchill (one of the principal advocates of a 'controlled' BBC). Although he worked actively behind the scenes to reappoint a far stronger and more influential full board of governors in April 1941, mistrust persisted as he oversaw the extension of closer ties between the BBC, Ministry of Information, and the intelligence services, assuming powers increasingly greater than those of the BBC director-general himself. In particular his 'feud' with Director-General Frederick Ogilvie and his role in the latter's resignation in January 1942 (in order to facilitate reorganization of the corporation) fuelled internal concerns despite Ogilvie's recognized shortcomings in the post. Nevertheless, the BBC's fears of government control were not ultimately realized and, probably in part owing to Powell's willingness to compromise -- though also to the decision by the minister of information Brendan Bracken not to press home his advantage -- the BBC emerged from the war having played an essential part in maintaining public morale, and with its public reputation and status not simply secure but immeasurably enhanced. 
Describing himself as simply an 'ordinary listener' (Briggs, 'Governing the BBC', 154), Powell impressed contemporaries with his energy and his courtly charm. A large, genial man, Powell was said to be a born chairman of committees, with the ability to bring out the best in others. He believed strongly in the future of broadcasting, and predicted as early as 1943 that television would be in every home after the war. He was reappointed to the chairmanship in 1944 and was made a GBE in the same year. He also maintained his wider interests in the field of public administration. As well as serving as chairman of the radio and cinema section of the British Association conference in 1943, he was a member of the committee on industrial alcohol in 1943, and in 1944 and 1946 again chaired the Institute of Public Administration conferences. Other positions held during his career included chairman of Briggs Motor Bodies Ltd, vice-president of the Royal Sanitary Institute (1939), and honorary fellow of the American Public Health Association. 
Having overseen the opening day of post-war BBC television on 7 June 1946 (during which he -- like many other experienced public speakers new to the cameras -- momentarily 'dried' on air), Powell retired from the BBC and in effect from public life on 31 December 1946. He died at his home, Mead Cottage, Ridgeway, Gerrards Cross, Buckinghamshire, on 24 January 1948. He was survived by his wife and their son Donald. Among many others at his memorial service, at St Mary Abbots, Kensington, were the director-general of the BBC, Sir William Haley, many officials and members of staff of the BBC, officials of the LCC, and the mayor and mayoress of Kensington. 


@@@@@


doc= 35591


Powell, Sir Richard Douglas, first baronet (1842-1925), physician, born at Walthamstow on 25 September 1842, was the second but only surviving son of Captain Scott Powell of the 23rd Royal Welch Fusiliers, and his wife, Eliza, daughter of Richard Meeke. Much of his boyhood was spent at Toft, near Cambridge, and there he laid the foundations of the interest in natural history and sport (fishing and shooting) which were the chief relaxations of his later life. Educated privately at Streatham he gave up his wish to follow his father's profession, entered University College, London, and continued his course at University College Hospital, becoming physician's assistant to Sir William Jenner, to whom he owed much in his early professional career. He graduated MB in 1865 and qualified for the gold medal at the MD (1866) examinations. 
Powell was appointed in 1867 to take temporary charge of out-patients, and in 1869 he applied unsuccessfully for a vacancy as assistant physician at University College Hospital. Two years later (1871) he was elected assistant physician and lecturer on materia medica to Charing Cross Hospital. He resigned both posts in 1878 on being appointed assistant physician to the Middlesex Hospital, becoming physician in 1880 and consulting physician in 1900. Thus for nearly thirty years he taught medical students, being a stimulus to the thoughtful rather than a source of dogmatic answers for those interested only in satisfying examiners. As resident clinical assistant, assistant physician (1868), physician (1875), and consulting physician (1889) he was attached to the Brompton Hospital for Consumption and Diseases of the Chest, and was much in demand as a consultant in thoracic disease. For thirty-eight years he was connected with the court, being appointed in 1887 physician-extraordinary in the place of Wilson Fox, and in 1899 physician-in-ordinary to Queen Victoria, whom he attended in her last illness (1901); he continued to serve in the latter capacity Edward VII and George V. 
A hard worker, Powell's published writings extended over a period of fifty-six years and included articles on diseases of the chest contributed to Russell Reynolds's 'System of Medicine' (1879), and to the two later editions (1898-9 and 1909). His chief work was 'On the Principal Varieties of Pulmonary Tuberculosis with Practical Comments' (1872) which went through six editions up to 1921. His Lumleian lectures, delivered in 1898 at the Royal College of Physicians of London, appeared as 'The Principles which Govern Treatment in Diseases and Disorders of the Heart' (1899). 
In the medical life of London, Powell was continuously at work from the time when he was a junior at the Pathological Society, of which he was secretary (1877-9). Later he was successively president of the Medical Society of London (1891), the Clinical Society of London (1899-1901), and the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society (1904-6), and he was active in the arrangements for amalgamating seventeen metropolitan medical societies into the Royal Society of Medicine (1907). Powell also lent his help to the formation, initiated by Sir William Osler, of the Association of Physicians of Great Britain and Ireland, and was its first president (1907). At the Royal College of Physicians of London he became a member (1867) and a fellow (1873), held several offices, was president (1905-10), and delivered the Harveian oration in 1914. He was deputy chairman (1899-1925) of the Clerical, Medical, and General Life Assurance Society, and in 1896 was president of the Life Assurance Medical Officers' Association. He was closely connected with the Conservative and Unionist Association of the University of London for more than thirty years, and was its president 1909-19. He was created a baronet in 1897 and KCVO in 1901, and received several honorary degrees from English, Scottish, and Irish universities. 
Powell was a striking personality. Tall, slight, with an ascetic, clean-shaven, pale face, charming in manner and voice, reticent, correct, cautious, dignified, and kindly, he was widely recognized as an impressive leader. He married twice: first, on 30 October 1873, Juliet (died 1909), second daughter of Sir John Bennett, sheriff of London and Middlesex, with whom he had three sons and two daughters; second, on 16 October 1917, Edith Mary Burke (died 1935), younger daughter of Henry Wood, of 10 Cleveland Square, Hyde Park, London, where they afterwards lived. He died there after a short illness on 15 December 1925, contributions from his pen to the medical press appearing three days before and two weeks after his death. He was succeeded as second baronet by his eldest son, Douglas (1874-1932), brevet lieutenant-colonel, Royal Welch Fusiliers. The second son was killed in the South African War, the third in the First World War. 


@@@@@


doc= 35592


Power, Sir Arthur John (1889-1960), naval officer, was born in London on 12 April 1889, the son of Edward John Power, corn merchant, and his wife, Harriet Maud Windeler. He entered the 'Britannia' in 1904 and won the king's gold medal for the best cadet of the year. In his sub-lieutenant's courses he gained first-class certificates in each subject and in 1910 he was promoted lieutenant. In 1913 he was appointed to the 'Excellent' to specialize in gunnery. His service in the war included appointments as gunnery officer of the battleship 'Magnificent', the cruiser 'Royal Arthur', the monitor 'Raglan' in which he took part in the Dardanelles operations, and the battle cruiser 'Princess Royal' in the Grand Fleet. 
Power was promoted commander in 1922 and served for two years in the Admiralty as assistant to the director of naval ordnance. He was selected for a staff college course in 1924 and, after passing, joined the battle cruiser 'Hood' as executive officer. From 1927 to 1929 he was on the instructional staff of the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, and after promotion to captain in 1929 became naval member of the ordnance committee. He commanded the cruiser 'Dorsetshire' from 1931 to 1933 as flag captain and chief staff officer to E. A. Astley-Rushton, rear-admiral commanding 2nd cruiser squadron, and to his successor Percy Noble. He was appointed to the Imperial Defence College as naval member of the directing staff in 1933, and from 1935 to 1937 commanded the naval gunnery school 'Excellent'. He was in charge of the naval party which drew the gun carriage at the funeral of George V in January 1936 and was appointed CVO. 
In January 1938 Power was appointed to command the new aircraft-carrier 'Ark Royal' and was still holding this appointment at the outbreak of the Second World War. The target for many attacks by the German air force which claimed her sinking many times, she was torpedoed off Gibraltar in November 1941. Meanwhile Power was called to the Admiralty in May 1940 as assistant chief of naval staff (home) and was promoted rear-admiral one month later. 
In August 1942 Power returned to sea to fly his flag in the 'Cleopatra' as flag officer commanding 15th cruiser squadron, but early in 1943 was appointed flag officer, Malta, as acting vice-admiral, a post of particular importance at that time since it was in Malta that the planning and organization of the invasions of Sicily and Italy were being prepared. Power's keen brain and his gifts of quick decision making and high organizing ability did much to ensure the rapid success of both invasions with remarkably few casualties. After the surrender of Italy he went to sea again in command of the naval force occupying Taranto and was appointed head of the allied military mission for administration to the Italian government. His promotion to vice-admiral was dated 4 August 1943, and for a brief period he acted as second in command of the Mediterranean Fleet. 
In January 1944 Power arrived in Ceylon as second in command of the Eastern Fleet. Many of the bombardments and naval air strikes carried out against the Japanese positions in the East Indies were under his active leadership. On the formation of the British Pacific Fleet in November 1944 Power became commander-in-chief, East Indies, initiating many of the naval strikes and assaults which brought the Japanese to defeat in Borneo and Malaya. Flying his flag in the 'Cleopatra' he entered Singapore on 3 September 1945, the first ship of the Royal Navy to do so since 1942. 
Power returned to England in 1946 and for the next two years was a lord commissioner of the Admiralty and second sea lord, an appointment in which he was in charge of the complicated run-down of the personnel of the navy to its peacetime strength. He was promoted admiral in 1946 and in 1948 took command of the Mediterranean Fleet. In 1950-52 he was commander-in-chief at Portsmouth and while holding this post was promoted admiral of the fleet (1952). He was also in that year allied commander-in-chief, channel and southern North sea. The previous year he had been made first and principal naval aide-de-camp to the king. 
Power was twice married: in 1918 to Amy Isabel (died 1945), daughter of Colonel D. A. Bingham, with whom he had three sons; second, in 1947, to Margaret Joyce, a second officer in the WRNS, daughter of A. H. St C. Watson, of Hendon. Power died at the Haslar Royal Naval Hospital, Hampshire, on 28 January 1960. 
According to his 'Times' obituarist Power was recognized as one of the leading naval officers of his generation. 'Good looks, a strong character, and a complete mastery of every branch of his profession in which he had served, combined to make him a man of mark' ('The Times', 29 Jan 1960). For his war services he was appointed CB (1941), KCB (1944), and GBE (1946). He was promoted GCB in 1950 and held a number of foreign decorations. 
Peter Kemp', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35593


Power, Sir D'Arcy (1855-1941), surgeon and historian, was born at 3 Grosvenor Terrace, Pimlico, London, on 11 November 1855, the eldest of six sons and five daughters of Henry Power, then assistant surgeon at the Westminster Ophthalmic Hospital, and his wife and first cousin, Anne, daughter of Thomas Simpson, a banker and shipowner of Whitby, Yorkshire. Power was educated at Merchant Taylors' School and entered New College, Oxford, in 1874 as a commoner. As biology was not taught at New College he transferred to Exeter College, in 1877, with an open exhibition; he obtained his BA with first-class honours in natural science (physiology) in 1878. That year he entered St Bartholomew's Hospital medical school, and he qualified BM in 1882. Power married in 1883, Eleanor (died 1923), younger daughter of George Haynes Fosbroke, a medical practitioner of Bidford, Warwickshire. They had two sons, the younger of whom died of wounds received in action at the second battle of Ypres in 1915, and one daughter, who died aged two of whooping cough. The elder son became an air vice-marshal in the Royal Air Force Medical Service. 
Power spent the whole of his surgical professional life at St Bartholomew's. He was house surgeon to W. S. Savory, and ophthalmic house surgeon to his father. He served as curator of the museum, as demonstrator in operative surgery, and as demonstrator in surgical pathology. He was appointed assistant surgeon in 1898, surgeon in charge of the throat and nose department from 1902 to 1904, and full surgeon in 1904. He resigned this last appointment in 1920, when he was elected consultant surgeon and a governor to the hospital. In 1934 he was appointed the hospital archivist and began a systematic survey of the hospital's medieval muniments. At the Royal College of Surgeons, Power became a fellow in 1883, served as examiner, was a member of council from 1912 to 1928, and was vice-president in 1921 and 1922. He gave the Bradshaw lecture for 1919, the Vicary lecture for 1920, and was the Hunterian orator in 1925. He was appointed honorary librarian in 1929 and a trustee of the Hunterian Museum in 1930. Power joined the Volunteer Medical Staff Corps in 1888 and was commissioned major on formation of the Royal Army Medical Corps's Territorial Force in 1908. During the First World War he was lieutenant-colonel and surgeon to the officers hospital at Fishmongers' Hall from 1914 to 1916, and then at the 1st London General Hospital until 1920. He published 'Wounds in War' in 1915 and was appointed KBE in the peace gazette of June 1919. 
Power took a leading part in many professional and learned societies. At various times he was president of the section of the history of medicine and of the section of comparative medicine at the Royal Society of Medicine (1926-8), president of the Bibliographical Society (1926-8) and of the Harveian Society, chairman of the Royal Medical Benevolent Fund, and the holder of various offices in the Pathological Society. He was a corresponding member or honorary fellow of many learned societies both at home and overseas. A keen freemason, he served as consultant surgeon to the Freemasons' Hospital (later the Royal Masonic Hospital). He was elected fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1897. Power visited the USA in 1924 and 1930, lecturing on the foundations of medical history, and he went to Australia in 1935. 
As a surgeon Power was a rapid and skilful operator, and an early pioneer of abdominal and paediatric surgery in this country. He was at his best in emergency operations. Power wrote extensively on surgery, including a number of textbooks, but his real mark was as a scholar and historian of medicine. He contributed a historical article to almost every number of the 'British Journal of Surgery' from its beginning in 1913; some 200 'lives' to the 'Dictionary of National Biography'; numerous historical articles (many unsigned) to the 'British Medical Journal'; and he edited the 'Lives of the Fellows of the Royal College of Surgeons of England', published in 1930. He also wrote the entries for the subsequent (1930-51) volume of the 'Lives', between 1930 and 1940, almost up to his death; it was published in 1953. Among his historical publications are 'William Harvey' (1897), one of the best short studies of this subject, 'Portraits of Dr William Harvey' (1913), 'Foundations of Medical History' (1931), 'A Short History of Surgery' (1933), and 'Mirror for Surgeons', an anthology (1939). Power edited and in 1910 published the manuscripts of the English works of the fourteenth-century surgeon, John of Arderne; he also translated his Latin treatises (published in 1922). 
Power was a modest unselfish man. Having been poor in his early life, he remained simple and approachable. He was widely loved and trusted for his integrity and friendliness. Power was of middle height, small featured, wore a moustache, and had keen blue eyes. During the second half of his life, he lived in a small house in Chandos Street, Cavendish Square, next door to the Medical Society of London. His home contained his large collection of books, including a remarkable collection of editions of the 'Regimen of Salerno'. He developed heart failure soon after his eighty-fifth birthday; his house had been damaged in air raids in the autumn of 1940, and he moved to his son's home, 53 Murray Road, Northwood, Middlesex, where he died on 18 May 1941. He was cremated and his ashes were buried in his wife's grave at Bidford, Warwickshire. The following month his library was sold at Sothebys. 


@@@@@


doc= 35594


Power, Sir John Cecil, first baronet (1870-1950), company director and public benefactor, was born at Eldon, co. Down, on 21 December 1870, the younger son of William Taylor Power and his wife, Cecilia, daughter of Colonel John Burgoyne. At ten Power went to London where, with his brother, he was later to enter the firm of Power, Power & Co., export merchants with considerable business in the East. 
As a young man Power was delicate and had to spend three years in Italy, a sojourn which implanted in him a love of other countries and of travel which he was later to indulge whenever possible. In 1902 he married Mabel Katherine Louisa, daughter of John Hartley Perks JP of London and Wolverhampton; they had two sons and three daughters. After his marriage he bought a villa in the south of France to which he would go as often as business and, subsequently, parliamentary duties allowed. He paid a series of visits to the United States and went to Canada, India, and South Africa, afterwards lecturing and writing on his experiences. He served for many years as a member of the executive of the Travel and Industrial Development Association. 
Real estate soon tempted Power away from the family business; he had an unerring flair for property, together with considerable financial talent. His name is associated particularly with Kingsway, a London thoroughfare which opened up what had hitherto been slum property between Holborn and Aldwych. A number of its imposing buildings, such as Adastral House, were of Power's provenance. 
Power's success in real estate made him a wealthy man and enabled him to become a generous benefactor. His first great gift was in 1920, an anonymous benefaction prompted by the historian A. F. Pollard of $20,000 towards the founding of an institute of historical research in London. Next, in 1923, came a gift of $10,000 to the British (later Royal) Institute of International Affairs, for the erection of a lecture hall at the rear of the mansion (given by Colonel and Mrs R. W. Leonard) in St James's Square, London, which became known as Chatham House. Power was honorary treasurer of the institute from 1921 to 1943 and during his long association made many other gifts to the organization which included, in 1938, the leasehold premises of his own house in Chesham Place. This house he had hitherto made available to the British Council (before it moved to larger premises) of which he was honorary treasurer from 1934 to 1950. On the outbreak of war in 1939 the house in Belgrave Square, in which he was then living, was lent to the government for use as offices. 
Power was for many years associated with the League of Nations Union, serving on the executive committee from 1929 to 1936 and, at various times, on its appeals, finance, and parliamentary committees. In addition he was a member of the committee of the Royal Humane Society and, from 1934 to 1949, a director of the Royal Insurance Company. 
Politics early claimed Power's attention and in 1924, the year in which he became a baronet, he was elected Conservative member for Wimbledon, a seat which he held until 1945 when, his health beginning to fail, he withdrew to his country home in Hampshire. 
Power's friends came from all walks of life; he enjoyed good company and was a generous host. The personal tastes of this tenacious and indomitable Irishman were simple; apart from golf and cricket, he had few hobbies save music. He had fallen under the spell of the opera as a young man and would talk nostalgically of the days when he had frequented the gallery of La Scala. Opera remained his abiding delight, and he was regularly to be seen at Covent Garden in the London season. He never fully recovered from the shock of his wife's death in 1945. He continued, however, to make occasional visits to Villa Fressinet at Grasse, where he died on 5 June 1950. He was succeeded, as second baronet, by his elder son, Ivan McLannahan Cecil (1903-1954). 
I. S. Macadam', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35595


Power, Sir William Henry (1842-1916), epidemiologist and civil servant, was born at 1 Tillotson Place, London, on 15 December 1842, the eldest son of William Henry Power (1811-1877), surgeon, and his wife, Charlotte Smart. He was educated at University College School, London, and was one of the fifth generation in his family to take up a medical career. After serving an apprenticeship with his father he undertook further study at St Bartholomew's Hospital, and in 1864 he qualified MRCS and LSA. In 1871, after various hospital appointments, he became an inspector in the medical department of the Local Government Board. He made his subsequent career within the department, becoming assistant medical officer in 1887 and medical officer in 1900. He retired in 1908, retaining an active interest in public health and epidemiology. On 8 June 1876 he married Charlotte Jane (1849/50-1882), daughter of Benjamin Charles Godwin, a solicitor. They had two daughters. 
Power's distinctive abilities as an epidemiologist were demonstrated during his time as a medical inspector between 1871 and 1887. A keen ornithologist and the possessor of an extremely logical mind (there was a strong mathematical streak in the family), Power used his knowledge of natural history and his analytical abilities to elucidate the epidemiological puzzles presented to him. Four investigations from this period stand out for their original contributions to epidemiological knowledge. First, in 1876, his inquiry into a diphtheria outbreak at Brailes, Warwickshire, demonstrated not only that the disease was passed on mainly by personal contact, but also that the village day school had played a central part in the spread of the infection. As a result of this discovery, 'school influence' was widely recognized as a critical factor in the spread of children's diseases. Second, between 1881 and 1886 Power was involved in investigating the causes and incidence of smallpox in London. He demonstrated an association between local incidence and isolation hospitals, which led to the latter being moved out of London. Third, and in these years also, he detected and described the transmission of streptococcal infections from cows to humans through milk from infected animals, at a time when bovine tuberculosis infection was still disputed, and the transmission route of Malta fever was as yet unknown. Finally, between 1887 and 1892 Power originated and co-ordinated an extensive investigation into lead poisoning through public water supplies derived from moorland sources, which had caused widespread plumbism in several Yorkshire cities. Also in 1887 he used his knowledge of natural history to resolve the longstanding problem of eels in the East London Water Company's water pipes. 
Power's translation to 'headquarters' work in 1887 ended his active career as an epidemiologist. From then on he concentrated his energies on educating and assisting the department's junior staff, and in consolidating the wider work of the department. He fostered among the staff a policy of inquiring so thoroughly into subjects that its investigations became standard works, and as back-up to the royal commission on sewage disposal he supported a scientific research programme that revolutionized the understanding and practice of sewage disposal. He was instrumental in guiding the Local Government Board to the creation of the sub-department of food inspection in 1905, and he took an active part in the royal commission on tuberculosis. Yet Power's profile during his years at the centre of public health administration was decidedly low: contemporaries were unanimous in the opinion that the extent of his influence on international public health was immense, but that it would never be fully known or appreciated. Power loathed publicity of any kind; he would accept no acknowledgement of his work or assistance; he would not appear at any occasion where he would be prominent before an audience; and he would not allow himself to be photographed. 
Despite Power's intensely private attitude he received due recognition from his peers. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1895, created CB in 1902, and knighted on his retirement in 1908. He was a formidable figure -- 6 feet 5 inches tall, with a fine physique; in his youth he had a distinguished sporting record. His favourite recreation was duck shooting from a small yacht off the east coast, and in retirement and illness his principal occupation was the study of birds through a pair of powerful field-glasses. He died at his home, Holly Lodge, East Molesey, Surrey, on 28 July 1916, and was buried on 1 August at Brookwood cemetery, Woking. 


@@@@@


doc= 35596


Powicke, Sir (Frederick) Maurice (1879-1963), historian, was born at Alnwick, Northumberland, on 16 June 1879, the eldest child of Frederick James Powicke (1854-1935), a Congregational minister and historian of seventeenth-century puritanism, and his wife, Martha, youngest daughter of William Collyer of Brigstock, Northamptonshire. He was named Maurice after F. D. Maurice. In 1886 the family moved to Hatherlow, near Stockport, and Powicke was educated at Stockport grammar school until, in 1896, he went to the University of Manchester. There he came under the influence of T. F. Tout, who turned him into a historian. It was in these years also that Powicke first experienced the pleasure of working in a scholar's library among the books of E. A. Freeman, whose library formed one of the earliest departmental libraries in an English university. 
In 1899 Powicke went to Balliol College, Oxford, Tout's old college. He became a Brackenbury scholar of the college and read classics with only moderate success, obtaining a second class in 'literae humaniores' in 1902. He then returned to history and achieved a first class in that subject in 1903. Meanwhile he had become a Langton research fellow at Manchester University, a fellowship which he held from 1902 to 1905. This allowed him to do his first serious piece of historical research on Furness Abbey for the 'Victoria county history' of Lancashire. 
With the exception of Tout, who supported him throughout, Powicke at this time was undervalued by those who made academic appointments. From 1905 to 1906 he was assistant lecturer at the University of Liverpool, but he failed to get his position renewed, and Tout brought him back to Manchester as assistant lecturer from 1906 to 1908. His election to a prize fellowship at Merton College, Oxford, in 1908 was the turning point in his career and Powicke never ceased to feel a warm attachment to the college which had rescued him from obscurity. A series of important articles in the 'English Historical Review' from 1906 to 1909 laid the foundations of his academic reputation and from this date his troubles in getting employment were over. From 1909 to 1919 he was professor of modern history at Queen's University, Belfast; from 1919 to 1928 professor of medieval history at Manchester; and from 1928 until his retirement in 1947 regius professor of modern history at Oxford. After his retirement he received 'Studies in Medieval History Presented to Frederick Maurice Powicke', edited by R. W. Hunt, W. A. Pantin, and R. W. Southern (1948), which contains a full bibliography of his publications to that date. He was given a room in Balliol where he continued to work until shortly before his death. He left his books to Balliol College. 
In his inaugural lecture at Oxford, Powicke described his ideal of a degree in history as combining the 'two kinds of experience which historical study can provide, namely the lessons suggested by the historical treatment of political science and of general historical developments, and the discipline implied in the careful intensive study of a special historical subject' ('Historical study in Oxford', reprinted in F. M. Powicke, 'Modern Historians and the Study of History', 1955, 173), but his persistent failure to get the undergraduate course divided into two parts on the Manchester model clouded his Oxford years. His individual genius as a teacher ensured that he made a greater contribution to the study of history at the university than any professor since Stubbs, and that Oxford replaced Manchester as the leading centre for medieval studies. Illuminating and suggesting rather than explaining, and encouraging graduate students to follow their own way while remaining the most important single influence in their work, he produced a generation of distinguished medievalists often very different in style from himself. 
In his writing Powicke showed himself the first influential British historian to be aware of the range of continental scholarship. He seems to have reacted against the record-based English administrative history of Tout, and of his own successor in the regius chair, V. H. Galbraith, whom he had taught at Manchester. His interest he declared to be 'the interplay of experience and ideas in the formation of medieval political societies' (F. M. Powicke, 'Ways of Medieval Life and Thought', 1949, 5), and his method can be described as a narrative of events, explained in terms of the personalities and values of the people who shaped them. His first book, 'The Loss of Normandy' (1913), attributed Philip Augustus's ability to seize Normandy from King John in 1204 -- an event which he saw as crucial to the formation of both the French state and the English nation -- to the chivalry, art, and intellect of France. 
In Powicke's next book, 'Stephen Langton' -- his Ford lectures at Oxford in 1926-7, begun as a study of Langton's part in the struggle for 'Magna Carta' -- he found himself seeking to bring his subject: 'into relation with the common man in England and with the intellectual life of Europe, [and] to break down the barriers which prevent us from considering as a whole, in the light of the influences that played upon them, the men and affairs of politics and religion. ('Langton', 161)' Langton's 'clear, sensible, penetrating, but not original mind' (ibid., 160) was seen as being sharpened in the schools of Paris, in disputations about the extent of papal power, the duty of the church to aid kings in a just and urgent cause, and the restraints which natural law and judicial custom placed on monarchy. In 1936 he produced in collaboration with A. B. Emden another work of lasting importance: a new edition of 'The Universities of Europe in the Middle Ages' (1895) by Hastings Rashdall, in which he described the 'intense intellectual life of the schools' as 'a process of incessant wisdom and folly' throwing up 'ideas and ways of thought and speech' still profoundly influencing the modern world ('Universities of Europe', 1.xxxvii). By these books and his catalogue 'The Medieval Books of Merton College' (1931) he opened up for British historians the whole subject of scholastic history, but he left it to others to acquire the expertise to pursue it in depth. 
In the 1930s some of Powicke's energy was taken up in promoting co-operative historical scholarship through the Royal Historical Society, whose president he became in 1933 on a reforming programme in that rarest of events for such a body, a contested election. The society's series of guides and handbooks, notably 'The Handbook of British Chronology' (1939), which he himself edited, are the result of his initiative. Of importance for church history was his project for a new edition of the 'Concilia' (1737) of David Wilkins, which he announced in his Raleigh lecture of 1931 and which began to appear in 1964, the year after his death. He was also continuing to produce the type of essays written for a wider public at which he excelled: an early example was 'Christian Life in the Middle Ages' (1926), the book which he thought had caused Stanley Baldwin to offer him the regius chair. His interest in evoking the personalities and purposes of individuals -- Pope Boniface VIII, for instance, or Gerald of Wales -- is evident in this book, as also in his edition of Walter Daniel's life of Abbot Ailred of Rievaulx (1922 and 1950), which glows with his liking for the man and love of the place. In his article 'The murder of Henry Clement [in 1235] and the pirates of Lundy island', published in 'History' (vol. 25, 1941), he confessed: 'sometimes, as I work at a series of patent and close rolls, I have a queer sensation; the dead entries begin to be alive. It is rather like the experience of sitting down in one's chair and finding that one has sat on the cat. These are real people. ('Ways of Medieval Life', 67)' The rewards and dangers of this imaginative sympathy with figures of the past, even to talk of them as friends, and of the intuitive recreation of their ideas and motivation are exemplified in the two massive books which appeared at the end of Powicke's career and on which his reputation largely rests: 'King Henry III and the Lord Edward' (1947), and 'The Thirteenth Century' in the 'Oxford History of England' (1953). The first is an episodic, 'Proustian' narrative of the century from Henry's accession to the early years of Edward's reign, hauntingly written, and most successful in its evocation of the culture of the western European governing class as manifested in the politics of the kingdom of England. The principal explanation of political change given here is generational change among the aristocracy. But Powicke's aspiration to make the book 'a study in social history, not in the sense in which the term is generally used, but in the sense of social life, relations, and forces in political action' ('King Henry III', v), ran up against the difficulty of finding an unprejudiced vocabulary for insights into the attitudes of a remote age. He could have no impression of the motivation of the mass of the population, and there seems to be a touch of nostalgia for a lost England in the values he attributed, in the gloom of the Second World War, to medieval aristocrats. He was convinced that the thirteenth century was a harmonious and 'happier time' when 'England coped with herself' ('England and Europe in the thirteenth century', 'Ways of Medieval Life', 117) despite the extremism of Simon de Montfort and his 'commissars', and he was too impressed by the concept of the 'community of the realm' which he found in the records. Many have found inexplicable his belief, evinced in both his last books, in Edward's generosity and respect for right, even in his dealings with the Welsh and Scots. In 1965 K. B. McFarlane demolished Powicke's 'feeble attempt to extenuate' Edward's treatment of earldoms for his own and his family's material advantage, and showed how little community there was even in the group around the king ('Had Edward I a 'policy' towards the earls?', 'History', 50, 1965, 149-50). 

'The Thirteenth Century', which carries the narrative down to Edward I's death in 1307, has some of the previous book's weaknesses. The extensive work of economic historians on what was a largely peasant society still makes little impact. Indeed, Powicke argued in the 'Economic History Review' (vol. 14, 1946) that the emphasis of economic history 'on the particular interests of persons and groups tends to incoherence'; the strength of English parliamentary government, 'the most stable form of government in the world' so far, lay 'in its capacity to deal with our economic life as part of the community' ('The economic motive in politics', 'Modern Historians and the Study of History', 247). 'The Thirteenth Century' is different from 'King Henry III and the Lord Edward', however, in weaving into the narrative discussions of the work being done in legal and administrative history, with which he was fully conversant. The result is a difficult book, but one that comes nearest to the ambition Powicke had expressed in his presidential address to the Royal Historical Society in 1936 to write the history of the English state as 'more than a complex of institutions': rather as 'the relations between men with a capacity to be influenced in their normal daily life by abstractions' and able 'to discuss, plead and act together in councils, law courts, armies and business' ('Reflections on the medieval state', 'TRHS', 4th ser., 19, 1936, 5). Despite the criticism, the two late books have together established the enduring image of thirteenth-century England, and also support a claim that Powicke added a new dimension to medieval historiography by his combination of wide scholarship with imaginative insight into the springs of action. 
In personal appearance Powicke was noticeably small and deceptively fragile; his voice was soft and fluty; he read well, especially such favourite authors as Dickens, and he had a relish for the ridiculous which went with a somewhat macabre and elfish sense of humour. He liked walking and was deeply attached to the Lake District, where for many years he and his family spent most of the summer at their cottage in Eskdale. On 8 September 1909 he married Susan Irvine Martin Lindsay (died 1965), daughter of the Revd Thomas M. Lindsay, principal of the United Free College of Glasgow, and the sister of his friend A. D. Lindsay. For many years the Powickes' house at 97 Holywell, Oxford, was a place of resort for large numbers of pupils and visiting historians. They had one son, who to Powicke's lasting grief was killed in a road accident in 1936. Of his two daughters one, Janet, married the historian Richard Pares. 
Powicke was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1927 and knighted in 1946. He was an honorary fellow of his three Oxford colleges, Merton (1932), Balliol (1939), and Oriel (1947), an honorary doctor of many universities, and a corresponding member of foreign academies in France, Germany, and America. He died in the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, on 19 May 1963, after a brief illness. 


@@@@@


doc= 35597


Pownall, Sir Henry Royds (1887-1961), army officer, was born in London on 19 November 1887, the second son of Charles Assheton Whately Pownall of St John's Park, Blackheath, London, and his wife, Dora Bourne Royds. C. A. W. Pownall was consulting engineer to the railway bureau of Japan, and between the ages of three and eight Henry lived in Japan. He was educated at Rugby School, entered the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, in 1904, and was commissioned into the Royal Field Artillery in 1906. From 1914 to 1919 he served continuously in France and Belgium, acting as brigade major, Royal Artillery, 17th division, in 1917-18. He was mentioned in dispatches, and was awarded the MC and DSO (1918). On 10 December 1918 Pownall married Lucy Louttit (died 1950), daughter of William Henderson of Aberdeen and the widow of Captain John Gray, 36th Sikhs, Indian army, killed at Kut al-Amara in 1916; they had one son. 
Pownall was brigade major, school of artillery (1924-5) and on the directing staff (general staff officer, grade 2) of the Staff College, Camberley (1926-9): an excellent horseman, he gained the prestigious appointment of whip to the Staff College drag. In 1931 he won a bar to his DSO in action on the north-west frontier of India. From 1933 to 1936 he served on the secretariat of the committee of imperial defence (CID) under Sir Maurice Hankey, who would have been prepared to recommend Pownall as his successor had he not preferred to return to service with troops. From mid-1936 he was commandant of the school of artillery, Larkhill, Salisbury Plain, with the rank of brigadier. 
In the 1930s Pownall consistently argued -- against the policy of 'limited liability' advocated by Captain Basil Liddell Hart and others and favoured by Chamberlain, most other politicians, and many officers -- that a continental commitment of the army was probably unavoidable; and he played an important part in eventually getting it accepted as government policy. He wrote in his diary in May 1934 on Chamberlain, 'his ideas on strategy would disgrace a board school' (Bond, 'British Military Policy', 200). In January 1938 he wrote of the 'most dangerous heresy... of 'limited liability' in a war... It will be 100% -- and even then we may well lose it' (ibid., 218). He also bitterly criticized Liddell Hart, and impugned his motives. He disliked his criticism of orthodox officers, and believed that his proposed strategy was wrong and that his role of 'eminence grise', outside adviser to Leslie Hore Belisha (secretary of state for war, 1937-40), was improper and irresponsible, and that his influence increased the general staff's difficulties in preparing for a continental commitment. Pownall also disliked Liddell Hart's 'confused writing and his usual false deductions from History' ('Chief of Staff', 151). Later, during the war, Pownall and other senior officers opposed his proposed appointment as adviser to David Margesson when secretary of state for war (1940-42). 
Pownall's three years at the CID had established his reputation as an exceptionally able staff officer. In the five years before the war he was promoted five times, and his appointment as director of military operations and intelligence at the War Office in January 1938 was a jump of over a hundred places in seniority. Long convinced that war with Germany was inevitable -- in 1933 he had guessed that war might come in 1940 -- he strove first to secure a definite continental commitment for the army. In January 1938 he wrote in his diary, ''My' view is that support of France is home defence -- if France crumbles we fall' (Bond, 'British Military Policy', 286). Nevertheless he distrusted French politicians and the French army. In the few months remaining (April-August 1939), he worked all-out to prepare the British expeditionary force (BEF) to go to France. 
At the War Office Pownall enjoyed excellent relations with Lord Gort VC (chief of the Imperial General Staff, 1937-9) whom he much admired, and Gort selected him as his chief of staff (CGS) when appointed to command the BEF on the outbreak of war; although this entailed -- as in 1914 -- that the two men who knew most about military organization and planning were suddenly removed from the War Office. Pownall, Gort, and other officers detested Hore-Belisha, believing him conceited, ignorant, self-seeking, and untrustworthy. Pownall in May 1939 in his diary contrasted Gort and Hore-Belisha: 'a great gentleman and an obscure, shallow-brained, charlatan, political Jewboy' ('Chief of Staff', 203). He wrote that Hore-Belisha intended 'to bitch up the higher organization of the Army in order to make the position of CIGS impossible' (ibid., 206). 
After the 1939 'pill box affair' -- during which Gort and other senior officers expressed resentment at what they considered unjustified criticism and interference by Hore-Belisha on the BEF's construction of concrete 'pill box' defences in France -- Pownall played a considerable part behind the scenes in securing Chamberlain's dismissal of Hore-Belisha (4 January 1940). He wrote in his diary, 'it's no good being Old School Tie with H-B, you have to fight him with his own weapons' ('Chief of Staff', 264). During the 1940 retreat to Dunkirk, Pownall set an admirable example of calmness and foresight, working closely with Gort in the final phase to extricate the BEF from encirclement. He was mentioned in dispatches and appointed KBE (1940). 
Unlike Gort, Pownall retained Churchill's confidence, and he was given a succession of important commands in potential trouble-spots. After a few months as the first inspector-general of the Local Defence Volunteers (later the Home Guard) he was commander-in-chief of British forces in Northern Ireland (1940-41) when German invasion was still a real possibility. When the threat had waned he returned to the War Office in May 1941 as vice-chief of the Imperial General Staff. In November 1941 the replacement of Sir John Dill by Sir Alan Brooke as chief of the Imperial General Staff led to a reshuffle of senior officers at the War Office and Pownall was appointed commander-in-chief, Far East. However, Japan entered the war against Britain and the United States before he could effectively take up his command, and in January 1942 he became chief of staff to Wavell in the short-lived south-west Pacific command. He was promoted lieutenant-general in 1942 and in April took over the Ceylon command, a post he held for exactly a year. Once again the enemy robbed him of the opportunity to demonstrate his capacity as a commander, and when the Japanese advance had clearly been arrested he was appointed commander-in-chief, Persia-Iraq, succeeding Sir Henry Maitland Wilson, but he wanted to escape from what he regarded as a backwater into the Mediterranean theatre. 
In the summer of 1943 Mountbatten had been appointed to the new south-east Asia command, and Brooke -- with Churchill's approval -- selected Pownall as a highly experienced staff officer, 'a wise old head', to supply a steadying influence as chief of staff: Pownall saw his role as, in his favourite phrase, 'to keep, Mountbatten on the rails' ('Chief of Staff', xiv). This proved an excellent choice so far as personal relations with Mountbatten and the creation of the large and complex SEAC inter-allied staff headquarters were concerned; but in strategic terms Pownall's term of office was largely characterized by frustrating changes of plan due to the theatre's low priority in the allies' grand strategy. In November 1944 Pownall's health broke down, and he retired from the army early in 1945, receiving a KCB (1945). From 1942 to 1952 he was colonel commandant, Royal Artillery. 
Pownall was a first-class staff officer, orthodox, not an original thinker, and between the wars lukewarm on mechanization. He was aptly described by his friend and successor as deputy secretary to the CID, Lord Ismay, as 'one of the best brains of my vintage in the Army, courageous, competent and cool as cucumber' (Ismay, 124). Lieutenant-General Sir Wilfrid Lindsell, who served with 'Henry', as he was universally known, as quartermaster-general of the BEF in 1939-40, wrote of him: 'He certainly possessed all the qualities for success in any branch of Staff work or in Command. He had the essential basis of sturdy commonsense, a well-balanced knowledge of his profession, no fear of taking responsibility and plenty of initiative and energy... of a serious turn of mind and always imperturbable in a crisis... Quick and precise in manner, he was an energetic worker, bringing to the solution of all his problems a clear well-ordered mind. To all who served under him he was a quiet, courteous and sympathetic chief. He had a remarkable memory and was a masterly writer of minutes and reports. ('Royal Artillery Regimental News', Aug 1961, 297-8)' Wavell also found him an ideal senior staff officer. 
Pownall was appointed chief commissioner of the St John Ambulance Brigade in 1947, and became vice-chancellor of the order of St John in 1950 and chancellor in 1951. He was chairman of Friary Meux Ltd and a member of the committee of Lloyds Bank. For six years he assisted Churchill as military consultant on the 'History of the Second World War'. His chief relaxations were skiing, fly-fishing, and golf. He was an accomplished linguist and a delightful conversationalist with a dry sense of humour. Pownall died in London on 9 June 1961. 
Brian Bond', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35598


Powys, John Cowper (1872-1963), novelist and writer, was born on 8 October 1872 at the vicarage, Shirley, Derbyshire, the eldest of eleven children of the Revd Charles Francis Powys (1843-1923) and his wife, Mary Cowper (1849-1914), daughter of William Cowper Johnson, rector of Yaxham, Norfolk, through whom Powys inherited the blood of the poets John Donne and William Cowper. Through both parents he came from several generations of country parsons. The Powys family, connected in England with the barony of Lilford, was of ancient Welsh origin. In 1879 John's father took a curacy at Dorchester, Dorset, in order to be near his mother in Weymouth; in 1885 he became vicar of Montacute, Somerset. Thus the west country was the major conditioning environment of John and his brothers Theodore Francis Powys (1875-1953) and Llewelyn Powys (1884-1939), all aware in their writings of the impact of landscape on personality. John was educated at Westbury House preparatory school, Sherborne, and Sherborne School (1883-91). He read history at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, from 1891 to 1894, 'years of an unbalanced and chaotic idealism' (Powys, 'Autobiography'), and was awarded a second-class degree. While walking in Cambridgeshire, Powys experienced 'a beyond sensation', which was 'to do with some secret underlying world of rich magic and strange romance. In fact I actually regarded it as a prophetic idea of the sort of stories that I myself might come to write'. In 1896 he married Margaret Alice Lyon (1874-1947), sister of a Cambridge friend, T. H. Lyon; they had one son, Littleton Alfred (1902-1954), who entered the Anglican and afterwards the Roman Catholic priesthood. 
From lecturing in girls' schools near Brighton, Powys moved to Oxford University extension lecturing from 1898 and to the American Society for the Extension of University Teaching from 1905. From 1909 to 1934 he spent the large part of each year in the USA, normally returning each summer to his family. As an enthralling, theatrical lecturer, Powys could draw American audiences of 2000 people. Recognition in the USA of his fame and critical intelligence is indicated by his being called, for example, as expert defence witness at court cases on the publication of Theodore Dreiser's 'The 'Genius'' (1915) and James Joyce's 'Ulysses' (1922), and his being filmed with Bertrand Russell in 'Debate: is Modern Marriage a Failure?' (1929). 
Powys began his literary career with a small collection of lyric poems, 'Odes and other Poems' (1896), and continued to publish small volumes (in 1899, 1916, 1917, and 1922). His first novel was 'Wood and Stone' (1915), followed by 'Rodmoor' (1916). These coincided with his first works of non-fiction: three books of literary criticism including 'Visions and Revisions' (1915) and 'Suspended Judgments' (1916), and one of self-analysis, 'Confessions of Two Brothers' (with Llewelyn Powys) (1916). Thereafter he published steadily throughout his lifetime, growing in power. 
In America in 1921, a meeting with Phyllis Playter (1894-1982), one of several powerful, intellectual American women friends, led to a lifelong companionship in which she served as Powys's secretary, influential literary critic, and muse. Critical opinion, supported by evidence in his diaries, is that Phyllis Playter's advice helped to raise the quality of Powys's novels, starting with the first of the 'great' ones, 'Wolf Solent' (1929), written from 1925 to 1928. This novel may in part reflect the contrasting natures of Margaret Alice Lyon and Phyllis Playter in its principal women characters. Retiring from 4 Patchin Place, New York, his base of seven years, in 1930 Powys moved with Phyllis Playter to Phudd Bottom, upper New York state, where, with 'the life-blood of his home', he wrote the massive works for which he is generally most admired, 'A Glastonbury Romance' (1932), 'Autobiography' (1934), and 'Weymouth Sands' (1934). Phyllis Playter accompanied Powys on his return to Britain in 1934, moving with him to Wales for his final years. 
Powys did not win the Nobel prize with 'A Glastonbury Romance', as he anticipated. Instead he was financially crippled by an out-of-court payment of the novel's royalties and more to a Glastonbury dignitary who thought himself portrayed in the novel. 'Weymouth Sands' was published in England not under the title of place, but of its main protagonist, 'Jobber Skald'. A year in Dorchester produced 'Maiden Castle' (1937). When Powys retreated to north Wales, he identified himself with the Welsh in 'Obstinate Cymric' (1947), and wrote the Wales-based novels 'Owen Glendower' (1940) and 'Porius' (1951), his 'masterpiece' set in one week in AD 499. His latest fiction was also removed from contemporary life, including 'Atlantis' (1954), 'Homer and the Aether' (1959), and a space fantasy, 'All or Nothing' (1973). 
In tandem with his fourteen full-scale novels and other fiction, Powys produced fourteen 'philosophical' works to guide the 'common man' through the stresses of modern urban life, such as 'The Art of Happiness' (1923), 'The Meaning of Culture' (1929), 'In Defence of Sensuality' (1930), 'A Philosophy of Solitude' (1933), 'The Art of Growing Old' (1944), and 'In Spite Of' (1953). Literary criticism continued, including 'The Pleasures of Literature' (1938), 'Dostoievsky' (1947), and 'Rabelais' (1948). The latter two subjects give some clue to the mixed ingredients of Powys's outstanding works -- some six novels and his astonishing 'Autobiography'. 'Autobiography' is a self-portrait without reticence, without excuse, virtually without women (Frances Gregg, with whom he had a passionate friendship from 1912 to her death in 1945, appears fleetingly when dressed in boy's costume), and with more than his 'touch of caricature'. Here, at sixty, he declared his ambition in fiction to break down fossilized attitudes, putting his readers at pleasant unease by writing a 'mystic-humorous, Pantagruelian, Shandean, Quixotic Romance'. It is a fact that Powys's novels can be and are read for their dynamic representation of the landscapes he knew well ('Glastonbury herself' he declared the 'hero' of that 'story'), for occasional animation of the inanimate, and for their series of spectacular scenes mingling the trivial, the unexpected, the comic, and the sublime, crowded with increasingly large arrays of intriguing and eccentric characters in tortuous relationships. This is their strength but also only their surface: he had a great gift for investing even the inanimate with complex personality. In his lifetime Powys received appreciative reviews, such as Conrad Aiken's praise of 'Wolf Solent' as 'leisurely, copious, humorous', and the 'Times Literary Supplement' critic's contrast of it with 'Ulysses' as arousing 'disgust' but leaving us 'with a realisation of the beauty not the ugliness of the world' (1929). Yet, as Angus Wilson put it in 1963, Powys's enthusiastic critics failed him in their expression of 'amazement rather than comprehension'. 
John Cowper Powys was strikingly handsome in appearance as in personality. The painting by Raymond Jonson (1917) and numerous photographs for dust-jackets, including the National Portrait Gallery's choice, may better represent the novelist than the portrait by his sister Gertrude (1944; NMG Wales), the drawing by Augustus John, and the bust by Jonah Jones of the 1950s. 
Official recognition was slight and late: Powys received the plaque of the Hamburg Free Academy of Arts in 1958 and was made DLitt by the University of Wales in 1962. He received a stream of visitors, eminent writers and ordinary readers, to his houses in Corwen (1935-54), and Blaenau Ffestiniog. He died on 17 June 1963 at the Memorial Hospital, Blaenau Ffestiniog. His ashes were scattered on the sea off Chesil Beach, Abbotsbury, Dorset. 
Since Powys's death he has been progressively perceived as ahead of or out of his time: that is, as an inter-war novelist with Proust, Woolf, and Joyce; as an anti-novelist in a line from Homer, Rabelais, Spenser, and Sterne; as an ultra-Wordsworthian, 'green' novelist who is pervasively aware of the vital interaction of nature and man, inanimate and animate worlds, as a magic realist, and, finally, as a poet-novelist who not only presents individual man's fictive imagination as his liberation but is a teasing creator who gives his reader the novel as a fictive game. He is seen as the 'terrifyingly formidable genius' he claimed to be. 


@@@@@


doc= 35599


Poynder, John Poynder Dickson-, Baron Islington (1866-1936), politician and colonial administrator, was born at Ryde, Isle of Wight, on 31 October 1866, the only son of the four children of Rear-Admiral John Bourmaster Dickson (1815-1876), and his first wife, Sarah Matilda (who died in childbirth with John), third daughter of Thomas Poynder of Hilmarton Manor, Calne, Wiltshire. On his father's side John Dickson came of a family which had distinguished itself in the fighting services, the most notable member being his great-uncle Major-General Sir Alexander Dickson. He succeeded to his uncle's baronetcy in 1884. His mother's family had made its mark in commerce and had attained considerable wealth in the East India trade. From his uncle, Thomas Poynder, of Hilmarton, Wiltshire, whom he succeeded in 1887, he inherited a large fortune, and in 1888 he assumed by royal licence the additional surname Poynder. He was educated at Harrow School and then entered Christ Church, Oxford, in 1885, but did not take a degree. He settled down at Hartham Park, near Chippenham, Wiltshire, where the Poynder lands were extensive. It was said to be characteristic of him that when he came of age he remitted a year's rent to all his tenant farmers. On 30 September 1892 he was elected as the Conservative member for the Chippenham division. He retained this seat until his resignation in 1910. On 30 September 1896 he married Ann Beauclerk (died 1958), third daughter of Robert Henry Duncan Dundas, of Glenesk, Midlothian, and granddaughter of Robert Cornelis Napier, first Baron Napier of Magdala. They had one daughter, Joan Alice Katherine Grigg, organizer of maternity services in Africa. 
After leaving Oxford, Dickson-Poynder had been commissioned in the 3rd Royal Scots regiment and afterwards joined the Wiltshire yeomanry, serving from 1900 to 1901 as aide-de-camp to P. S. Methuen, third Lord Methuen, in the South African War. For his services during the campaign, which involved a good deal of dispatch riding in enemy country, he was appointed DSO. He was elected for the third time at Chippenham while at the front in 1900. 
Having chosen politics, rather than the military or business, as a career, Dickson-Poynder had selected to enter parliament as a Conservative in an area where his family influence was strong. But he 'had rather a cross-bench mind which prevented him from fitting comfortably into either the Conservative or the Liberal Party' ('The Times', 8 Dec 1936, 11). In 1905 he crossed the floor of the house on the tariff reform issue and joined the Liberal Party. But he showed his independence again by opposing the land taxation clauses of the Liberal 1907 budget. He was a moderate (Conservative) member of the London county council from 1898 to 1904, representing St George's, Hanover Square. There he showed a deep concern for social issues. He was chairman of the housing committee and was also a member of the committee on the feeding of schoolchildren. The report of that committee formed the basis for parliamentary legislation in 1906. He was also a member in 1903-4 of the royal commission on London traffic. 
Having not achieved government office in the House of Commons, Dickson-Poynder in 1910 accepted the offer of appointment as governor-general of New Zealand, and, on 27 April 1910, was created Baron Islington of Islington. In 1911 he was sworn of the privy council and appointed KCMG. But in 1912 he resigned his governorship in order to become chairman of the royal commission on the public services in India. He was appointed GCMG in 1913 and in 1914-15 was under-secretary of state for the colonies. From 1915 to 1918 he was under-secretary of state for India. 
In 1915 Islington was promoting himself as a possible new viceroy for India, with the support of the secretary of state, Austen Chamberlain. But the prime minister, Asquith, wrote to Venetia Stanley: 'What folly! They wd never do' ('Letters to Venetia Stanley', 406). This perhaps reflected agitation over what was described as Islington's tendency to be 'changeable in some things -- he could be a vigorous champion to-day and a vehement opponent tomorrow' ('The Times', 12 Dec 1936, 19) as well as concerns about his wife. Asquith was not the only one to have this opinion. Hearing the news that the Islingtons were being considered, the Australian governor-general, Munro-Ferguson, commented that: 'It is hard to imagine anything worse' ('Letters to Venetia Stanley', 407). 
In 1920 Islington became chairman of the National Savings Committee, touring the country on its behalf until his resignation in 1926, when he was appointed GBE. He had acquired a position of some authority in the House of Lords. He obtained the house's approval in June 1922, against the opposition of the ex-prime minister, Lord Balfour, for a motion against acceptance of the British mandate for Palestine 'until such modifications had been effected as would comply with British pledges to the Arabs'. As 'The Times' noted, Islington was notable for his 'devotion to the cause of Palestine Arabs' ('The Times', 12 Dec 1936, 19). 
Islington also served for twenty-one years (1891-1912) as chairman of the board of management of the Royal Northern Hospital in Islington. He died at his home, 18 Hyde Park Gardens, London, on 6 December 1936, and was buried at Hilmarton church, Calne, Wiltshire, on 10 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 35600


Poynter, Sir Edward John, first baronet (1836-1919), painter and arts administrator, was born on 20 March 1836 in Paris, the second child and only son of Ambrose Poynter (1796-1886), an architect, and his first wife, Emma Forster (1800-1848), daughter of the Revd. E. Forster; Edward's elder sister, Clara ['see 'Bell, Clara], became a noted translator. He came from an artistic family and many commentators subsequently emphasized the inherited nature of his ability. His father's interests extended beyond architecture to include watercolour painting and illustration. His mother was the granddaughter of the neo-classical sculptor Thomas Banks (1735-1805), and both she and her mother were talented amateur artists. 
Poynter's childhood was marked by poor health and interrupted study at Westminster School (1847-9), Brighton College (1849-50), and Ipswich grammar school (1851-2). In 1852 he began his artistic training under the watercolourist Thomas Shotter Boys, a friend of his father; he also attended Leigh's academy. During the following year, he spent the winter in Rome where he met the painter Frederic Leighton. Inspired by the example of Leighton's large-scale academic painting, Poynter returned to London to continue his training at Leigh's and at the studio of W. C. T. Dobson. In 1855 he entered the Royal Academy Schools but a visit to the Paris Universal Exhibition in the same year convinced him of the superiority of contemporary French painting. He returned to Paris in 1856, becoming a pupil in the atelier of Charles Gleyre (1806-1874) and enrolling in the Eole des Beaux-Arts. Poynter's three-year period in Paris with fellow students James McNeill Whistler, George Du Maurier, Thomas Lamont, and Thomas Armstrong was later celebrated in Du Maurier's best-selling novel 'Trilby' (1894). During this period Poynter received his first commissions for decorative work in the form of painted furniture and stained glass. He continued to design stained glass after his return to England in 1860, principally for James Powell & Sons of Whitefriars glassworks. His friend the architect William Burges also employed him on several decorative projects, of which the most important were the stained glass designs for the Maison Dieu, Dover (1860-1861), and the painted ceiling of Waltham Abbey, Essex (1860). Poynter also joined the ranks of the black and white illustrators of the 1860s, contributing drawings to several magazines, such as 'Once a Week' and 'London Society', and executing twelve plates for the Dalziel brothers' prestigious 'Bible Gallery' (eventually published in 1880). 
In 1861 Poynter exhibited his first work at the Royal Academy, and during the following years he made his name with pictures of Egyptian and classical subjects. A typical example is 'Faithful unto Death' (1865; Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool), illustrating a dramatic scene set in ancient Pompeii. He also produced paintings in watercolour, chiefly portraits and landscapes, which were regularly exhibited at the Dudley Gallery in London. In 1867 Poynter completed the large and elaborate biblical painting 'Israel in Egypt' (Guildhall Art Gallery, London), which enjoyed enormous popular success and established his reputation. He followed this with 'The Catapult' (1868; Laing Art Gallery, Newcastle upon Tyne), another impressive depiction of ancient history. Both works demonstrate characteristic features of Poynter's art, such as his technical proficiency, careful attention to archaeological detail, and commitment to the academic ideal of the nude. These works ensured his election in 1869 as ARA. 
Poynter's career as a decorative artist also flourished. Indeed, he emerges as a significant figure in the 'mosaic revival' of the 1860s. The majority of his decorative works were commissioned by the South Kensington Museum, London. These included designs for the mosaics of 'Phidias' and 'Apelles' (1864) in the south court (for the series known as the 'Kensington Valhalla'), the innovative tile decoration and metal grill for the grill room (or Dutch kitchen) (1866- 'c'.1874), and his proposed mosaic scheme for the apse of the lecture theatre (1867-71). In preparation for this latter work -- an ambitious multifigured hemicycle -- Poynter travelled to Italy in 1868 to study Venetian mosaics. Unfortunately, the only part of the scheme eventually to be completed was the ornamental soffit (1877). Two further decorative projects from this period were Poynter's design for part of the frieze of the Royal Albert Hall (1869) and the cartoon for the 'St George' mosaic in the houses of parliament (1869). 
The same decade witnessed Poynter's marriage, on 9 August 1866, to Agnes ['see 'Poynter, Agnes, 'under' Macdonald sisters], daughter of the Revd G. B. Macdonald. Remembered as 'a lady of great beauty and musical talent' ('DNB', 440), Agnes's charm was to prove a considerable social asset for her husband, whose tall and distinguished appearance was offset by a deeply reserved and forbidding manner. Agnes Poynter achieved a certain status in her own right as one of the Macdonald sisters, a title which alluded to the sisters' later fame as wives or mothers of eminent Victorians. Agnes's sisters included Louisa Baldwin (mother of Stanley Baldwin), Alice Kipling (mother of Rudyard Kipling), and Georgiana Burne-Jones (wife of Edward Burne-Jones). Edward and Agnes Poynter's eldest child, Ambrose, was born in 1867; he was followed by a second son, Hugh, in 1882. 
In 1871 Poynter was appointed the first Slade professor at University College, London. During his five-year tenure he was responsible for introducing the principles of French art education into the English system. His Slade lectures upheld the continued relevance of the academic tradition, while also addressing practical issues, such as the importance of life drawing. These lectures were well received and later published under the title 'Ten Lectures on Art' (1879). Poynter's promotion of his friend the French artist Alphonse Legros (1837-1911) as his successor at the Slade ensured the continuation of his teaching philosophy. Poynter retired from the Slade professorship in 1875, following his appointment to the influential position of director and principal of the National Art Training School at South Kensington. In his new role administering the government art system, he again took on an agenda of reform. This included a greater emphasis on fine art training within the schools and was also reflected in his appointment of new teachers such as the French sculptor Jules Dalou (1838-1902) as head of the modelling class. While at South Kensington, Poynter was responsible for the publication of a series of drawing books and several art history text books. 
Many of the ideas which Poynter expounded in his role as an educator were evident in his major works of the 1870s. These included the fresco in St Stephen's Church, south Dulwich (1872-3), depicting the trial and martyrdom of the saint. Recognized as a rare example of the 'buon fresco' technique in Britain, this work's heroic figures and expressive gestures embody the principles of history painting, the most prestigious of the genres. Poynter's most important commission of the decade was the execution of four large oil paintings to decorate the billiards room at the earl of Wharncliffe's seat, Wortley Hall, near Sheffield. Between 1872 and 1879 Poynter exhibited these paintings -- 'Perseus and Andromeda' (1872), 'The Fight between More of More Hall and the Dragon of Wantley' (1873), 'Atalanta's Race' (1876), and 'Nausicaa and her Maidens Playing at Ball' (1879) -- at the Royal Academy. The last of these pictures reflects the influence of the aesthetic movement in its frieze-like composition and flowing draperies. Nevertheless, Poynter's strong emphasis on narrative and dramatic action distinguished his classical paintings from those of his contemporaries, such as Leighton and Moore. Many considered these paintings to be Poynter's greatest success as an exponent of 'high art'; certainly they contributed to his election as RA in 1876. During the early 1880s Poynter completed the Wharncliffe commission by designing an elaborate ornamental scheme for the billiards room interior. 
Poynter's next important work was 'A Visit to Aesculapius' (1880; Tate collection), a large classical painting celebrating the female nude which was acquired by the Chantrey bequest. Between 1878 and 1884 he collaborated with Frederic Leighton on a proposal to decorate the dome of St Paul's Cathedral in mosaic. Both artists designed large cartoons illustrating an apocalyptic theme, but when viewed 'in situ' these efforts were judged unsuitable and the scheme was abandoned. This project was followed by Poynter's most ambitious painting, 'The Visit of the Queen of Sheba to King Solomon' (1890; Art Gallery of New South Wales, Sydney). A vast canvas, which included over fifty figures, this painting is reminiscent of his earlier reconstructions of antiquity, although far more grandiose in terms of technical skill and the wealth of archaeological detail. After taking over six years to complete, the work sold for $3000 -- the highest payment Poynter ever received for one of his paintings. While working on the canvas, Poynter's interest in the ancient world was reinforced by his acceptance in 1889 of the position of honorary secretary to the Society for the Preservation of the Monuments of Ancient Egypt. 
The majority of Poynter's later works tended to be small-scale classical paintings such as 'On the Terrace' (1889; Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool), and 'When the World was Young' (1891; priv. coll.), which were frequently likened to the anecdotal, Graeco-Roman pictures of Lawrence Alma-Tadema. This predilection for classical genre was matched by an increased interest in portraiture (including some highly original portrait medallions in bronze) and landscape painting. Poynter became a regular exhibitor at the Grosvenor and New galleries and at the Society of Painters in Water Colours, sending examples in a range of media, including designs and studies. These latter works enhanced his reputation as a fine and versatile draughtsman. His interest in decorative design also continued. In 1892-3 he collaborated with Alma-Tadema on a scheme of neo-Pompeian decoration for a series of rooms in the Athenaeum; the following year he created some reverses for the proposed new coinage. 
The 1890s saw Poynter become more actively involved in public office. In 1894 he was the last practising artist to be appointed director of the National Gallery, London. In spite of legislative changes which had curtailed the director's discretionary powers, Poynter still made a valuable contribution to the collection. His most notable acquisitions included Pisanello's 'The Vision of St Eustace', Antonello's 'St Jerome in his Study', Mantegna's 'Agony in the Garden', Titian's 'Portrait of a Man', and Rembrandt's portraits of Jacob Trip and his wife. Moreover, his unusual breadth of taste resulted in the gallery purchasing works by Lorenzo Monaco, Durer (ascribed), Zurbaran, Jan Steen, Goya, and Alfred Stevens. Before his retirement in 1904, Poynter edited the first complete illustrated catalogue of the collection (1899) and was responsible for the display and opening of the Tate Gallery in 1897. 
In recognition of his experience and talents as an artist, educator, and administrator, Poynter was elected president of the Royal Academy in December 1896, following the death of Millais; in the same year he was knighted, becoming a baronet in 1902. During his presidency the academy was increasingly challenged by more progressive elements in the arts community. This is reflected, for example, by the appointment in 1904 of a select committee to inquire into the academy's administration of the Chantrey Fund. Poynter remained in office for twenty-two years, until ill health and failing eyesight led to his reluctant resignation in 1918. In the same year, his fine collection of old master drawings was sold at Sothebys on 24-5 April 1918. Poynter died on 26 July 1919 at his house and studio, at 70 Addison Road, Kensington, and was buried in St Paul's Cathedral, London, on 30 July. His studio sale was held at Christies on 19 January 1920. 
Poynter was unfortunate in outliving most of his generation, for he became a target of the modernists in their rejection of Victorian art. His reputation as a teacher and academic draughtsman, however, did survive into the twentieth century: William Gaunt described him as 'one of the best draughtsmen of his age' (Gaunt, 16). It was not until the revival of interest in Victorian art during the 1970s that Poynter's role as a leading figure of the English classical revival was again recognized. Recent scholarship has continued to focus on aspects of Poynter's classicism, such as his assimilation of contemporary developments in archaeology or his advocacy of the nude. This emphasis on Poynter as a 'Victorian Olympian' has tended to obscure his equally important activities as a decorative artist and public official. It should not be forgotten that during his lengthy career -- which extended over sixty years -- Poynter achieved distinction not only as a painter in oil and watercolour, but also as an academic draughtsman, a decorative designer in stained glass, mosaic, fresco, and ceramic tiles, a modeller of medals and coinage, an etcher, a graphic illustrator, a portrait painter, and a theatre designer. He also added the roles of educator, administrator, and museum official to his many achievements. He deserves recognition as one of the great Victorian polymaths. Poynter's works are held in most major British collections, including the Tate collection, the Victoria and Albert Museum, the Walker Art Gallery in Liverpool, Manchester City Galleries, and the British Library. He is also represented in many Commonwealth art collections. 


@@@@@


doc= 35601


Poynting, John Henry (1852-1914), physicist, the youngest son of Thomas Elford Poynting, Unitarian minister at Monton, near Manchester, and his wife, Elizabeth Long, of Bath, was born at Slack Lane, Monton, on 9 September 1852. He received his early education at the school kept by his father, and then went in 1867 to Owens College, Manchester. He took the BSc degree of London University in 1872. In the same year he gained an entrance scholarship at Trinity College, Cambridge, and entered in October. In 1876 he graduated third wrangler in the mathematical tripos and returned to Owens College as demonstrator in the physical laboratory under Balfour Stewart. 
Elected a fellow of Trinity College in 1878, under James Clerk Maxwell in the Cavendish Laboratory, Poynting began experiments on the mean density of the earth, which occupied much of his time for the next ten years. In the next two years he also published work on the use of balances, the sonometer, the saccharimeter, and on the change of state from solid to liquid. Those articles advanced the understanding of both the physics and mathematics of those areas. He remained at Cambridge until 1880, when he was elected to the chair of physics in the new Mason College, later the University of Birmingham, a post he held until his death. There he developed his interests in improving scientific instruments, and later supervised the construction of new physical laboratories. 
Poynting married on 9 June 1880, Maria Adney ('b'. 1857/8), daughter of John Cropper, a Unitarian minister, of Stand, near Manchester. They had one son and two daughters. In 1887 Poynting received the ScD of Cambridge, continued to act as an examiner for that university, and won their Adams prize in 1893 and the Hopkins prize in 1903. In 1888 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. He was president of section A of the British Association in 1899, of the Physical Society in 1905, and in 1907 was a founder of the National Physical Laboratory. In 1905 he received a royal medal from the Royal Society 'for his researches in physical science, especially in connexion with the constant of gravitation and the theories of electro-dynamics and radiation'. He was a vice-president of the Royal Society in 1910-11. 
Poynting's most important contributions to physics were two papers communicated to the Royal Society: 'On the transfer of energy in the electromagnetic field' ('PTRS', 1884) and 'On the connexion between electric currents and the electric and magnetic induction in the surrounding field' ('PTRS', 1885). These papers revolutionized ideas about the motion of energy in the electric field. For example, it was previously supposed that when a charged Leyden jar was discharged by connecting the inside and outside by a wire, the energy travelled along the wire. Poynting's explanation was that the energy spread out from the glass between the coatings of the jar and then converged sideways into the wire, where it was converted into heat. He showed that there was a general law for the transfer of energy, according to which it moves at any point perpendicularly to the planes containing the direction of the electric and magnetic forces, and the amount crossing unit area per second is equal to the product of these forces multiplied by the sine of the angle between them and divided by 4greekLetterpi. The line which represents in direction and magnitude the flow of energy at any point is now known as the Poynting vector and is of fundamental importance in electromagnetic questions. 
Poynting did work which was important at the time on the pressure of radiation. This helped to confirm earlier work by Maxwell, but was later more usually explained in terms of the quantum theory of radiation. Poynting established the existence of the tangential force produced when light is reflected from a surface at which there is some absorption, and the existence of a torque when light passes through a prism. He succeeded in demonstrating the recoil from light of a surface giving out radiation. These experiments, in which he was associated with Guy Barlow, are a good example of Poynting's practical skill. He had exceptional mechanical ability and an excellent knowledge of the capabilities of instruments. 
Throughout his life Poynting was engaged on researches connected with gravitation. As well as his early experimental work on determining the density of the earth, he investigated whether the gravitational attraction between two crystals depended on the orientation of their axes, and whether the attraction was affected by temperature. He also made important contributions to the theory of the change of state in matter ('Philosophical Magazine', 1881) and to osmotic pressure ('Philosophical Magazine', 1896). He took great interest in the philosophical basis of physics and chose this as the subject of his presidential address to section A of the British Association in 1899. There he argued for physicists to move away from a mechanical cause-effect view of scientific laws, and that the aim should be to reduce the number of laws. He used as examples the notions of corpuscle and wave as applied to light. 
Poynting's 'Collected Scientific Papers' was published by Cambridge University Press in 1920. In addition he wrote 'On the Mean Density of the Earth' (Adams prize essay, 1893), 'The Pressure of Light' (1910), 'The Earth' (1913), and, in conjunction with J. J. Thomson, a series of textbooks on physics. Poynting was very successful as a teacher, and his sound judgement and conspicuous fairness and courtesy were of great service to the University of Birmingham. He became dean of the science faculty when Mason College was made the University of Birmingham, and held the office for twelve years. 
Poynting suffered from diabetes for twenty years. To improve matters he lived for some time at a small farm in Alvechurch in Worcestershire where he pursued his interests in farming and natural history. He was for some time chairman of the Birmingham Horticultural Society. He died of diabetes at his home, 10 Ampton Road, Edgbaston, Birmingham, on 30 March 1914. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35602


Prain, Sir David (1857-1944), botanist, was born on 11 July 1857 at Fettercairn, Kincardineshire, the elder child of David Prain, a native of Inchture near Dundee, and his wife, Mary, daughter of George Thomson, farmer and miller, of the Vale of Alford, Aberdeenshire. For at least two hundred years Prain's ancestry on both sides had been country people. His father, who had a saddlery business, was also clerk to the parish council and to the school board in Fettercairn. Prain was educated until the age of fifteen at the Fettercairn parish school, then for one year at the Aberdeen grammar school in order to be accepted as a clerk in the Royal Bank of Scotland. However, in 1873 he went to the University of Aberdeen where he obtained an MA (1878), with honours in natural science, botany being his strongest subject. A bursary had made it possible for him to enter the university and in vacations he added to his means by teaching. He had intended to become a schoolmaster but after two years of teaching at Chatham House School, Ramsgate, he returned to the university to study medicine. He qualified MB and CM at Aberdeen in 1883 with the highest honours; he also qualified LRCS (Edinburgh) the same year. 
Prain was persuaded by his mentor at Aberdeen, Professor J. W. H. Traill, to seek admission to the Indian Medical Service in the expectation of opportunities to transfer to botanical research. Accepted in October 1884, he left the following spring for India where for the next two and a half years he served in military hospitals except for a few months in 1885 when he temporarily filled the post of curator of the herbarium at the Royal Botanic Garden, Calcutta. In January 1887 he was recalled to the same position in the garden under Sir George King, the then superintendent. Since he showed an active interest in economic botany, the government of Bengal requested Prain to submit a report on Indian hemp. This was followed by other official investigations on wheat, mustards, pulses, and indigo. In 1887 he married Margaret Caird (died 1942), daughter of the Revd William Thomson, of Belhevie, Aberdeen. They had a son, Theodore, who was killed in the First World War. 
When King retired in 1898 Prain succeeded him as director of the botanic garden (as the post had by then been renamed) and of the botanical survey of India. Prain had already replaced King as professor of botany at the medical college of Calcutta in 1895. In his role as government quinologist, he reorganized the management of the cinchona factory in Sikkim, making it once more commercially viable. As botanist on Sir Francis Younghusband's Sikkim-Tibet boundary commission in 1903, Prain had the opportunity to collect plants on the Tibetan plateau. His travels through the Indian subcontinent, Burma, Ceylon, and the Andaman and Nicobar islands extended his knowledge of the Indian flora which he reviewed in articles in 'Annals of the Royal Botanic Garden, Calcutta' and 'Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal'. 'Bengal Plants' (1903), published at his own expense, described nearly 3000 species. In 1905 he was elected FRS and retired from Indian service with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. In June 1906 he was appointed CIE. 
In December 1905 Prain succeeded Sir William Thiselton-Dyer as director of the Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew. The staff there were still suffering from Thiselton-Dyer's autocratic administration and someone with Prain's tolerance and diplomacy was needed to restore harmony. His willingness to delegate responsibility was especially appreciated; he was happy to leave decisions regarding the layout of the gardens to the curator and his assistant director, Arthur Hill. During Prain's term of office a medicinal garden was formed in the grounds of Cambridge Cottage, a large tank for aquatic plants was installed, and the Japanese gateway, made for the Japan-British exhibition in 1910, was acquired. Also in 1910 Cambridge Cottage was converted into a museum of British forestry and timbers. Much of Prain's time at Kew was devoted to editorial duties: he revived the 'Kew Bulletin' which had been languishing for several years; he abandoned the practice of the 'Index Kewensis' in making taxonomic judgements regarding synonymy; he edited 'Curtis's Botanical Magazine' and Hooker's 'Icones plantarum'; he collaborated with I. H. Burkill in 'An Account of the Genus Dioscorea in the East' (1936); and he contributed to the 'Flora Capensis' and 'Flora of Tropical Africa'. 
Prain, who retired in 1922, served as the first chairman of the advisory council of the Imperial Institute on plant and animal products from 1926. During all his time at Kew and to the end of his life he was especially interested in the John Innes Horticultural Institution, being chairman of its council from 1909. He did not much less for the Imperial College of Tropical Agriculture, Trinidad. He was president (1916-19) of the Linnean Society, from which he received the Linnean medal (1935); vice-president from 1919 of the Royal Horticultural Society which awarded him the Victoria medal of honour (1912) and a Veitch memorial medal (1933); treasurer of the Royal Society (1919-29); a trustee of the British Museum (1924-36); president of the Imperial Botanical Conference in 1924; and a member of the council of the British Association (1907-14), its vice-president (1931), and president of the botany section in 1909. His many honours included appointment as CMG in January 1912 and knighthood in June of the same year; he was a knight of the royal Swedish order of the Pole Star (1908) and a commander of the Belgian order of Leopold II (1919). The honorary degree of LLD was conferred upon him by the universities of Aberdeen (1900) and St Andrews (1911); he received the Albert medal of the Royal Society of Arts (1925), and was an honorary member of many foreign learned societies. 
Prain's modest demeanour, his courtesy, and many kindly acts won him the support of his staff at Kew, where he brought stability, and consolidated the achievements of his predecessors. He died at his home, Well Farm, Godstone Road, Whyteleafe, Surrey, on 16 March 1944 and was buried at Putney Vale cemetery five days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 35603


Pratt, Hodgson (1824-1907), peace campaigner and co-operative movement activist, born at Bath on 10 January 1824, was the eldest of five sons of Samuel Peace Pratt and his wife, Susanna Martha Hodgson (died 1875). After education at East India College, Haileybury, where he won a prize for an English essay in his first term, he matriculated at London University in 1844. In 1847 he joined the East India Company's service at Calcutta. In 1848 he became assistant magistrate and collector at Murshidabad, and the following year he married Sarah Caroline Wetherall, daughter of an Irish squire. In 1851 he was superintendent of the land revenue survey of Monghyr, in 1853 he was joint magistrate and deputy collector there, and in 1854 he became under-secretary to the government of Bengal and inspector of public instruction there. 
Following Sir Charles Wood's establishment of national education for India, Pratt became inspector of public instruction for the lower provinces. He was concerned to stimulate the educational and social development of the province of Bengal, and urged on the Bengalis closer relations with British life and thought. In 1851 he helped to found the Vernacular Literature Society, which published Bengali translations of standard English literature, including Macaulay's 'Life of Clive', 'Robinson Crusoe', Lamb's 'Tales from Shakespeare', and selections from the 'Percy Anecdotes'. Pratt acted as the society's secretary until 1856. He also started a school of industrial art in Calcutta. In 1857 Pratt was at home on leave and at the close of that year he contributed to 'The Economist' articles and letters dealing with Indian questions, social, political, educational, and religious, which were published collectively in a pamphlet. He founded, with Mary Carpenter, the National Indian Association, supporting nationalist demands for self-government, and remained closely involved with it until 1905. The spread of the Indian mutiny recalled Pratt hurriedly to India, which he left finally in 1861; he resigned from the Indian Civil Service in 1863. 
On settling in Britain, Pratt immediately threw himself into the industrial co-operative movement, in association with Edward Vansittart Neale and George Jacob Holyoake. He was a member of the first central board of the modern co-operative movement and, with Thomas Hughes, was a guarantor of the London Co-operative Agency, established to supply wholesale to southern co-operative societies. In 1874 he helped to establish a London branch of the Co-operative Wholesale Society and throughout the 1870s and 1880s he worked to found new stores and societies in metropolitan and suburban London. Pratt was elected chairman of the council of the Guild of Co-operators (1878), established to disseminate co-operative knowledge, and later succeeded Benjamin Jones as its secretary. Pratt originated the idea of the International Co-partnership Alliance, supported the Labour Co-partnership Association, founded the Co-operative Permanent Building Society in 1884, and advocated the formation of a co-operative college to provide craft, technical, and academic education. 
In 1864 Pratt met Henry Solly and became a member of the council of the Working Men's Club and Institute Union (founded by Solly in June 1862). In its interest he travelled up and down the country, encouraging struggling branches and forming new ones. He was president from 1885 to 1902. With Solly he also started trade classes for workmen in St Martin's Lane, London, in 1874. In 1867 he was a vice-president with Auberon Herbert, W. E. Forster, George Joachim Goschen, and others of the Paris excursion committee, through whose efforts over 3000 British workmen visited the Paris Exhibition of that year. 
At the same time Pratt, who had a perfect command of French, was an ardent champion of international arbitration. On the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War of 1870 he pleaded for a peaceful settlement of the dispute. Two years later he joined in an appeal to M. Thiers, the French premier, for the release of Elisee Reclus, the geographer, who had supported the commune and been taken prisoner. In 1880 he joined William Phillips and others in founding the International Arbitration and Peace Association, and became first chairman of the executive committee. Four years later (1 July 1884) he founded, and for some time edited, the association's 'Journal' (later entitled 'Concord'). On behalf of the association he visited nearly all the countries of Europe and helped in the formation of many kindred continental societies -- in Belgium, Italy, Germany, Austria, and Hungary. He took part in many international peace congresses at Paris and elsewhere from 1889 onwards. For the association Pratt produced translations of works by Elie Ducommun and Descamps, published respectively as 'The Programme of the Peace Movement' (1896) and (summarized in English) 'The Organisation of International Arbitration' (1897). 
Notwithstanding his disinterested and retiring disposition, Pratt's persuasive advocacy of international arbitration and industrial co-operation was appreciated by governments and peoples at home and abroad and he was recommended for the Nobel peace prize in December 1906. He was a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society, vice-president of the National Association for the Promotion of State Colonisation (1886) the Sunday Society, and the Workmen's Peace Association, and an executive member of the Travelling Tax Abolition Committee. 
In 1892 Pratt married his second wife, Monica, daughter of the Revd James Mangan DD LLD. He spent the last years of his life at Le Pecq, Seine et Oise, France, and died at his home, 12 avenue du Pavillon, Sully-Le-Pecq, on 26 February 1907. His wife and their daughter survived him. He was buried in Highgate cemetery. The Hodgson Pratt memorial fund was established in 1910, awarding annual scholarships to the co-operative college and prizes for essays on peace; an annual Hodgson Pratt memorial lecture was also founded. 


@@@@@


doc= 35604


Pratt, Joseph Bishop (1854-1910), engraver, was born on 1 January 1854 at 4 College Terrace, Camden New Town, London, the son of Anthony Pratt, a mezzotint engraver, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Bishop. From 1868 he was apprenticed for five years to the noted mezzotint engraver John Lucas, of whom he made a portrait drawing (priv. coll.). Pratt's first published plate was 'Maternal Felicity', after Samuel Carter, issued in December 1873, proofs of which cost 4 guineas. It was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1874, when his address was given as 24 Kentish Town Road, London. On 26 August 1878 Pratt married Caroline Almader James, with whom he had six children. His eldest son, Stanley Claude Pratt (1882-1914), trained under his father, and also became an engraver. 
Pratt was a prolific and successful engraver who declared more than a hundred plates to the Print Sellers' Association. He worked in mezzotint, line, and mixed-method engraving. He was also significant for his work in colour, and also for engaging with new technology through his hand photogravures. His prints were signed in roughly equal proportion either 'Joseph B. Pratt' or 'Bishop Pratt'. He was known particularly for his engravings of animal and landscape pictures by Peter Graham, Sir Edwin Landseer, Frank Paton, Briton Riviere, and Rosa Bonheur, all issued by the leading print publishers of the day. From the mid-1890s he devoted himself increasingly to mezzotint, and executed a series of successful prints in this medium after the portraits of Reynolds, Gainsborough, Romney, Lawrence, Raeburn, and Hoppner, artists who were then enjoying renewed critical interest. Pratt generally chose unengraved subjects, and in his employment of mezzotint sought to evoke the prints of that period. Such plates often sold for the relatively high price of 10 guineas for an artist's proof. 
Throughout his career Pratt's skill was widely admired, and exhibitions of his work were held by Agnews at Manchester and Liverpool in 1902, and by Vicars in Bond Street in 1904. A large collection of his prints is held by the British Museum. From 1878 until the mid-1890s he lived in Dartmouth Park Avenue, first at Lonsdale House and from 1891 at Northover. From 1897 his address was Carlton House, Harpenden, Hertfordshire, but in 1907 he moved to High Firs, Brenchley, Kent. He died on 23 December 1910 at 25 Dorset Square, London, following an operation, leaving an estate valued at almost $22,000. He was survived by his widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 35605


Preece, Sir William Henry (1834-1913), electrical engineer and administrator, was born on 15 February 1834 at Bryn Helen near Caernarfon, Wales, the eldest son of Richard Matthias Preece (1797-1854), stockbroker and politician, and his wife, Jane (1799-1870), daughter of John Hughes of Caernarfon. In 1845 the family moved to London, where William entered King's College School and, in 1850, King's College. His father had intended to secure William a commission in the army, but financial reverses made this impossible, and Preece left King's College in 1852. The Preeces had by then become friendly with Latimer Clark, who was to marry William's sister Margaret in 1854. Clark was an assistant to his brother Edwin, chief engineer of the Electric Telegraph Company, and together they secured Preece a job on their engineering staff in 1853. 
Preece later liked to say he had learned about electricity 'at the feet of Faraday', but his contact with Michael Faraday was limited to a stint in 1853 helping with some telegraphic experiments, and he in fact acquired his knowledge of electricity on the job. After three years in London, Preece was appointed superintendent of the Electric Telegraph Company's south-western district at Southampton, in 1856. He also supervised the telegraphs of the London and South Western Railway and, from 1858 to 1862, the cables of the Channel Island Telegraph Company. 
While at Southampton, Preece met (Ann) Agnes Mary Pocock (1843-1874), the daughter of a local solicitor. They married on 28 January 1864, and had four sons and three daughters before her death in childbirth in 1874. Grief-stricken, Preece left Southampton and soon settled with his children at Gothic Lodge, Wimbledon Common, Surrey. He had by then begun his long service with the Post Office telegraph system, having been named engineer for the southern district when the government bought out the private telegraph companies in 1870. He became electrician to the Post Office system in 1877 and spent the next two decades directing the expansion and improvement of the British telegraph network. He was promoted to engineer-in-chief in 1892, and on retirement in 1899 was made a KCB. He continued as a government consultant until 1904, and was also active, along with his sons Llewellyn and Arthur, in the engineering firm of Preece and Cardew. 
Preece introduced several valuable technical advances, particularly in railway signalling, but his most important work was as an administrator, writer, and public speaker. He published a widely used handbook on telegraphy (1876, with James Sivewright), two books on the telephone (1889, 1893), and over a hundred papers and lectures. He was president of the Society of Telegraph Engineers in 1880, and again (after it had become the Institution of Electrical Engineers) in 1893, and was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1881. 
Of average height, stocky, and with a round face usually adorned with small wire-rimmed spectacles, Preece was a lively and impressive lecturer, and excelled at making complex subjects seem simple and understandable. Although he took great interest in new technologies, he was often complacent about the superiority of existing methods, particularly those used by the Post Office. Thus, although he had been the first in Britain to demonstrate a working telephone, he told a parliamentary inquiry in 1879 that he foresaw little demand for the device in Britain, saying the telegraph and a 'superabundance of messengers, errand boys and things of that kind' already met the need. Like other Post Office officials, Preece resisted anything that might undercut the existing telegraph system, an attitude that did much to delay the spread of the telephone in Britain. 
In 1887 Preece began a long and bitter feud with the physicist and electrical engineer, Oliver Heaviside. Heaviside had found theoretically that the clarity of telegraph and telephone signals could be greatly improved by loading transmission lines with extra inductance. Reasoning from inadequate experiments, Preece had already declared inductance to be prejudicial to clear signalling; he not only dismissed Heaviside's theory as empty mathematics, but took steps to block its publication. Enraged, Heaviside thereafter missed no opportunity to denounce Preece's mendacity and scientific ignorance. American telephone engineers later made inductive loading a great practical success, but Preece always refused to give Heaviside any credit for the innovation. 
Preece had pioneered an early method of wireless telegraphy, using induced currents, and in 1896 he gave an enthusiastic reception to Guglielmo Marconi's new system using Hertzian waves. Although his public praise and provision of Post Office experimental facilities did much to establish Marconi as the early leader in wireless telegraphy, Preece did not secure government control of Marconi's patents, a failure that later drew criticism. 
Preece spent his last years at Penrhos, Waenfawr, his summer home near Caernarfon. He was awarded an honorary DSc degree by the University of Wales in 1911. After a long period of failing health, he died at Penrhos on 6 November 1913 and was buried on the 11th in Llanbeblig churchyard, Caernarfon. 


@@@@@


doc= 35606


Prendergast, Sir Harry North Dalrymple (1834-1913), army officer, second son of Thomas Prendergast (1807/8-1886) of the Madras civil service, and his wife, Lucy Caroline Dalrymple, was born in India on 15 October 1834. On their mother's death in 1839, Harry and his brother Hew were sent to Brighton to live with their grandfather, Major-General Sir Jeffrey Prendergast, Madras army. Educated at Cheam School and at Brighton College, Harry followed Hew to Addiscombe College and Chatham. He obtained a commission in the Madras engineers in 1854. 
Prendergast took part in the Anglo-Persian War (1857), and in the Indian mutiny served with the Malwa and Central Indian field forces. During the battle of Mandasor (21 November 1857) he saved the life of Lieutenant Dew, and was severely wounded. For this and for heroism at Bhima and Betwa he received the Victoria Cross. Aide-de-camp to Sir Hugh Henry Rose, Prendergast saw constant action until, perilously wounded a second time, he was invalided home in April 1858. Thereafter, his left arm was virtually useless, not that that stopped him volunteering (unsuccessfully) for the Austrian army in 1859 to fight the Italians or for the Second Opium War in 1860: 'I can play cricket so I can fight', he protested. In 1867 he was, however, appointed field engineer to the Abyssinian expedition, saw action at Magdala, and, mentioned by the commander-in-chief as having rendered singularly valuable assistance, was promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel. Prendergast had married at Bangalore on 11 October 1864 Emilie Rachel Simpson. They had five children; their daughter Ella married Sir Harry Aubrey de Vere Maclean. 
In 1878 Prendergast led the Indian sappers sent to Malta and Cyprus at the time of the congress of Berlin. Then followed a series of posts and commands: military secretary, Madras (1878-80), the Western Districts (1880-81), the Ceded Districts (1881-2), quartermaster-general, Madras (1882-3), the British Burma division (1883-4), and the Hyderabad subsidiary force (1884-5). Emphasis on musketry, mapmaking, and manoeuvres showed Prendergast a modern major-general and explain his eyebrow-raising selection in October 1885 to lead the Burma field force; no Madras officer had been entrusted with field command since 1857. Equally unusual were his instructions from the viceroy, Lord Dufferin, to take the capital and dethrone King Thibaw 'rather by the display than the use of force'. Prendergast had to overcome modern blockhouses guarding the Irrawaddy and reach Mandalay before the Burmese could block the river. Fierce fighting at Minhla (17 November) showed that, outmatched in everything but courage, Burma intended to fight. But the Third Anglo-Burmese War, the most audacious example of forward policy in India, was launched so rapidly that Prendergast seized every vantage point first. Unconditional surrender was offered on 27 November, Mandalay occupied on the 29th and the royal family deported that night. 
Prendergast was showered with congratulations and created KCB, but annexation (1 January 1886) provoked extensive insurgence. With a 9000-man force, Prendergast was suddenly expected to conquer a kingdom the size of France, with no cavalry, no mules, and no reinforcements. War correspondents gleefully attacked military inadequacies and ruined several reputations, Prendergast's included. Although promoted lieutenant-general (1886) and general (1887), he remained unemployed from April 1886. Through the kindnesses of friends, he filled in as acting resident in Travancore, Mysore, Baroda, and Baluchistan. Relegated to the supernumerary list, however, he quit India in 1892, aged only fifty-seven. 
While Prendergast supported campaigns for imperial conscription and cadet corps in schools, bitterness proved preferable to boredom. Many saw his GCB (1902) as the army making amends; 1908 saw him appointed colonel commandant, Royal Engineers. But he would never be commander-in-chief in India, as some had once hoped. This self-effacing soldier died of pneumonia, at his residence, 2 Heron Court, Richmond, Surrey, on 24 July 1913 and was buried four days later at Richmond cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 35607


Prestage, Edgar (1869-1951), historian and Portuguese scholar, was born in Manchester on 20 July 1869, the only surviving child of John Edward Prestage (1828/9-1915), solicitor, and his wife, Elizabeth Rose (1843/4-1917), both of High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire. Towards the end of his life he attributed the awakening of an interest in Portugal to the reading of stories of adventure, particularly Vasco da Gama's voyage to India. While still at school at Radley College, he began to study Portuguese, using a shilling grammar. He was converted to Roman Catholicism with his mother in 1886, and in 1891 he first visited Portugal, where the kindness of his reception, at a time when Lord Salisbury's ultimatum had caused a wave of anti-British feeling, gave him a permanent bond with the Portuguese. Religion, he said, proved a closer tie than nationality. His lecture 'Portugal: a pioneer of Christianity' (1933) was perhaps the fruit of this early approach. 
From Balliol College, Oxford, Prestage graduated with a second class in modern history in 1891, and from 1896 to 1907 practised as a solicitor in his father's firm, Allen, Prestage, and Whitfield, at Manchester. His first published work (1893) was a translation from the French of the celebrated 'Letters of a Portuguese Nun' ('Marianne Alcoforado'), now generally considered the work of a professional writer rather than the lovesick nun of Beja to whom Prestage himself, in common with tradition from the seventeenth century, had originally attributed the work. Prestage became convinced that the book was a literary fabrication and refused to allow further editions of his translation after the third. He also translated for the Hakluyt Society the fifteenth-century chronicler of the discoveries, Azurara, in collaboration with C. R. Beazley (2 vols., 1896-9). Between 1891 and 1906 he often visited Lisbon, mainly for historical research, and made friends with a number of prominent Portuguese scholars and writers, including most of those forming part of the celebrated coterie 'Os Vencidos da Vida' ('the Vanquished in Life'). He had already, in the 1890s, been elected to the Portuguese Royal Academy of Sciences. He was introduced in Lisbon to the salon of Dona Maria Amalia Vaz de Carvalho, herself a distinguished writer and widow of the Brazilian (Parnassian) poet Goncalves Crespo. In 1907 Prestage married their only daughter, Maria Cristina. His mother, who had a strong influence over him, opposed his intention of settling in Portugal, but his wife, who is said not to have been accepted in English society owing to her non-European blood, was unhappy in Southport, Lancashire, and they soon returned to Lisbon. There they occupied the flat over Dona Maria Amalia's in the Travessa Santa Catarina until, in the wake of his wife's suicide in 1918, Prestage returned to England. 
During the period of his permanent residence in Lisbon, between 1907 and 1919, Prestage saw little of the English colony, identifying himself with his adopted country. He worked continuously at his researches in the Portuguese state and private libraries. A traditionalist by temperament, he was much attached to the monarchy, and never reconciled himself to the first Portuguese republic. He later supported the dictator Salazar, while remaining friendly with the exiled king Manuel II, whose three volumes on early Portuguese printed books he helped to revise. Prestage published many articles in Portuguese historical reviews, completed his long biography, in Portuguese, of the great seventeenth-century writer Don Francisco Manuel de Melo (1914), and published some of the Lisbon parish registers. From 1917 to 1918 he was press officer at the British legation in Lisbon. 
In 1923 Prestage was appointed as the first Camoes professor of Portuguese at King's College, London. There was almost no undergraduate teaching in the nascent department of Portuguese for many years, and the chief work of the professorship consisted in giving public lectures at which the Portuguese or Brazilian ambassadors presided, and in conducting the research to publish books and pamphlets. In 1924 Prestage married Victoria, daughter of Charles Davison Cobb, who was half-Spanish and had family connections with Porto. They settled down at her Queen Anne house in London, 16 Holland Street, Kensington, visiting Lisbon frequently in the spring of each year. 
At this time Prestage's main publications were connected with the period of the Portuguese restoration of 1640. He printed much of the relevant diplomatic correspondence, including (in collaboration) that of Joao F. Barreto, 'Relacao da Embaixada a Franca em 1641' (1918), and F. de Sousa Coutinho, 'Correspondencia diplomatica' (1920, 1926, vol. 3 unpublished). His account of the 'Diplomatic Relations of Portugal with France, England and Holland from 1640 to 1668' was published at Watford in 1925 and in Coimbra in 1928. It is a valuable survey of the whole subject, skilfully reduced to readable proportions, but limiting itself mainly to the narrative of events. In 1929 he published an account of Afonso de Albuquerque, which was followed by a general survey of the Portuguese discoveries, 'The Portuguese Pioneers' (1933), which was translated into various languages. He delivered the Norman MacColl lectures at Cambridge in 1933, and his short although rather incomplete account of the Anglo-Portuguese alliance was presented as a lecture to the Royal Historical Society and included in the society's 'Transactions' for 1934. 
After this Prestage wrote no major work, for in his later years he was more concerned with his lifelong commitment to Catholicism than with his further research, although he contributed chapters to several publications, and compiled a bibliography on Portugal and the War of the Spanish Succession. He remained professor until 1936. He was elected FBA in 1940, was a grand officer of the order of Santiago, a corresponding member of the Lisbon Academy of Sciences, the Portuguese Academy of History, and the Lisbon Geographical Society. He died at his London home, 16 Holland Street, Kensington, on 10 March 1951. 
Prestage was a devoted and meticulous scholar, who, like many of those who pioneered the study of foreign countries in Britain in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, displayed remarkable sympathy and identification with an adopted people and language. With Aubrey Fitzgerald Bell, he was the chief early pioneer of Portuguese and Lusophone studies, but the dryness of his writing style, and the limited range of the subjects to which he applied himself, meant that his impact on making things Portuguese known in Britain was limited. 


@@@@@


doc= 35608


Orton, Charles William Previte- (1877-1947), historian, was born at Arnesby in Leicestershire on 16 January 1877. He was the younger son of the vicar there, the Revd William Previte-Orton (1837-1912), and his wife, Eliza Swaffield Orton. The latter, whose maiden surname of Orton was adopted by her husband in 1870 when they married, was of Sicilian descent; but the future historian showed few traces of his Italian ancestry in either appearance or temperament. Shy and diffident by nature, he was forced to terminate his school career at Franklin's Preparatory School, Leicester, at the age of fourteen after chronic sight problems led to the removal of his left eye; he was afterwards taught at home. Only in 1905, when he was twenty-eight, did Previte-Orton's health recover sufficiently to enable him to enter his father's old college of St John's, Cambridge. His academic career there was one of unbroken success. After obtaining a first class in both parts of the historical tripos (1907, 1908) and being awarded the Gladstone and members' prizes in the same years, he was elected a fellow of St John's in 1911. He was devoted to the welfare of his college for the rest of his life. In 1913 Previte-Orton married his first cousin, Ellery Swaffield, daughter of the Revd John Swaffield Orton. Throughout their long married life the couple lived in a large house, 55 Bateman Street, Cambridge; and for over thirty years it was there that Previte (as he was universally known) was most often to be found, vigorously engaged in a ceaseless round of writing, teaching, and -- above all -- editing the work of other medieval historians. 
Although little read now, Previte-Orton's first book, 'The Early History of the House of Savoy' (1912), immediately established his reputation as a leading English exponent of the exact scholarship and exhaustive attention to sources exemplified by the influential German historical scholarship of the period. Though not a deeply imaginative historian himself, he displayed an exceptional range of detailed knowledge. Somewhat surprisingly, perhaps, his essays on Marsiglio of Padua and his critical edition of the latter's 'Defensor pacis' (1928) have proved to be the most enduringly important of his works. Inevitably the more popular and general historical enterprises to which Previte devoted so much of his formidable industry and editorial skills now seem considerably more ephemeral. In sometimes slightly uneasy partnership with his Cambridge colleague Zachary Brooke, he was responsible for supervising the later stages of the most ambitious and demanding English collaborative venture yet attempted in the field of medieval European history: only in 1937 were the eight volumes of 'The Cambridge Medieval History' finally brought to a more or less satisfactory close -- to Previte's own intense relief. However, Previte-Orton's own historical influence was greatest among the many readers of his three general textbooks. Only after the 1950s did his 'Outlines of Medieval History' (1916), his Methuens textbook 'A History of Europe, 1198-1378' (1937), and his posthumously published 'Shorter Cambridge Medieval History' (2 vols., 1952) gradually cease to hold their place among the most widely read of all popular introductions to medieval European history. 
Previte-Orton's wide erudition and extraordinary editorial energies naturally received recognition outside Cambridge. In 1925 he was invited to become joint editor, and from January 1927 to January 1938 sole editor, of the 'English Historical Review'. After receiving the degree of LittD from his own university in 1928, he was elected FBA in 1929. When a chair of medieval history was at last founded in Cambridge in 1937, he was a natural choice as the first professor. Most unfortunately, a haemorrhage in his remaining eye during the Christmas vacation of 1937-8 caused him temporary blindness; he was obliged to resign the editorship of the 'English Historical Review' and to relinquish many of his other responsibilities. However, he continued to work strenuously to the very end. Even after his retirement from his chair in September 1942, he agreed to undertake a certain amount of supervision for St John's. It was while teaching a student at his home on 11 March 1947 that he died suddenly of a heart attack. In the opinion of those who knew him personally, as a scholar Previte was lucid and accurate but passionless rather than original. As an editor, however, he was critical, shrewd, painstaking, and generous: few scholars made so sustained a contribution to the reputation of medieval studies at Cambridge during the first half of the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 35609


Price, (Frederick George) Hilton (1842-1909), antiquary and banker, born in London on 20 August 1842, was the son of Frederick William Price (died 1888), for many years partner and eventually chief acting partner in the banking firm of Child & Co. Educated at Crawford College, Maidenhead, in 1860 he entered Child's Bank, where he succeeded his father as chief acting partner. Much of his early leisure was devoted to the history of Child's Bank, and in 1875 he published 'Temple Bar, or, Some Account of ye Marygold, No. 1 Fleet Street' (2nd edn, 1902), where Child's Bank had been established in the seventeenth century. In 1877 he brought out a useful 'Handbook of London Bankers' (enlarged edn, 1890-91). He was a member of the council of the Bankers' Institute and of the Central Bankers' Association. 
Price's life was mainly devoted to archaeology. Always keenly interested in the prehistoric as well as historic annals of London, he formed a fine collection of antiquities of the stone and bronze ages and the Roman period. It also included Samian ware vessels imported during the first and second centuries from the south of France, English pottery ranging from the Norman times to the nineteenth century, tiles, pewter vessels and plates, medieval inkhorns, coins, tokens (many from the burial pits on the site of Christ's Hospital), and other artefacts. His collection was secured to form in 1911 the nucleus of the London Museum at Kensington Palace. 
Interested in excavations in Britain and abroad, Price took a leading part in the excavation of the Roman villa at Brading in the Isle of Wight, the remains of which were by his exertions temporarily opened to the public, and on which, in conjunction with J. E. Price, he read a paper before the Royal Institute of British Architects on 13 December 1880. He was treasurer for the research fund for the excavations at Silchester or Calleva Attrebatum, on the subject of which he read a paper at the Society of Antiquaries on 11 February 1886. At the same time he was actively engaged in studying and collecting Egyptian antiquities. In 1886 he described part of his collection in the 'Proceedings of the Society of Biblical Archaeology' (of which he was elected member in 1884, vice-president in 1901). A large selection from his collection was exhibited at the Burlington Fine Arts Club in 1895, and two years later he published an elaborate catalogue of his Egyptian antiquities, which was followed in 1908 by a supplement. In 1905 he was elected president of the Egypt Exploration Fund, which he had joined in 1885. 
Price was an enthusiastic member of the Society of Antiquaries of London, of which he became a fellow on 19 January 1882. He was elected director on 23 April 1894, and retained the post until his death. A keen numismatist, he joined the Royal Numismatic Society in 1897; he was also elected fellow of the Geological Society in 1872. He was a voluminous contributor to the journals of most of the societies and institutions to which he belonged. A valuable series of illustrated papers on 'Signs of old London' appeared between 1903 and 1908 in consecutive issues of the 'London Topographical Record' (2-5). 
Price married on 5 November 1867 Christina, daughter of William Bailey of Oaken, Staffordshire, with whom he had one son and one daughter. They lived at 17 Collingham Gardens, South Kensington. He died at Hotel Gallia, Cannes, France, on 14 March 1909, after an operation, and was buried at Finchley in the next grave to his father. His wife survived him. He bequeathed $100 to the Society of Antiquaries for the research fund. His books, coins, old spoons, and miscellaneous objects of art and virtu fetched at auction (1909-11) the sum of $2606 10's'. 6died His Egyptian collection realized $12,040 8's'. 6died at Sothebys on 12-21 July 1911. The same firm sold his coins on 17-19 May 1909 and 7-8 April 1910, 575 lots realizing $2309 9's'. 


@@@@@


doc= 35610


Price, Thomas (1852-1909), politician in Australia, born at Harwd, near Wrexham, Denbighshire, on 19 January 1852, was the eldest of the seven children of John Price, a stonemason, and his wife, Jane Morris. In 1853 the family moved to Liverpool, where he was educated at the St George's Church of England penny school, Everton, before being apprenticed at the age of nine to a stonecutter. His father's drinking led Price to temperance and Wesleyanism. After continuing his education at a mechanics institute, he became a teacher and lay preacher at the Boundary Street Sunday school and was active in politics. At St David's Welsh Church of England, Liverpool, on 14 April 1881 he married Anne Elizabeth, the daughter of Edward Lloyd, a timber merchant, of Liverpool. They had four sons and three daughters. 
Stonecutting had damaged his lungs, so in 1883 Price and his wife emigrated to Australia and settled in Adelaide at a time when there was much difficulty in getting employment. He lived in suburban Unley, where he resided until his death, and was temporarily employed as clerk of works at the government locomotive shops at Islington. He worked as a stonecutter on many important Adelaide buildings, including the new parliament house, in which he later sat as premier. He was a member and later South Australian secretary and president of the Operative Masons' and Bricklayers' Society of Australia. From 1893 to 1902 he sat in the house of assembly of the colony for the United Labor Party as member for Sturt and from 1902 as member for Torrens. During this time he supported the radical Kingston ministry. In 1899 he became leader of the United Labor Party. In July 1905, after success at the polls, he formed a coalition with the Liberals and became premier, taking the portfolios of public works and education. He held the office of premier until his death. 
Price was a kind man with a strong sense of humour and rugged eloquence. He was one of the few parliamentary speakers who are known to have changed votes and decided the fate of a measure by power of speech. During his premiership he was responsible for the completion of the outer harbour at Adelaide, and for acts creating wages boards, municipalizing the tramway system (which had previously been in the hands of seven companies), reducing the franchise for the upper house, transferring after his death the northern territory to the commonwealth, and tightening control on drinking, gambling, and prostitution. His administration was successful in its own right and paved the way for later Labor administrations. In continuing poor health, he died of phthisis and diabetes at the height of his popularity at Mount Lofty, Adelaide, where he was staying with friends, on 31 May 1909, and was buried on 2 June in Mitcham cemetery at Adelaide. 
Price's widow went on to become a JP, perhaps the first in British territories, and was also a Labor Party vice-president. Their eldest son, John Lloyd Price (1882-1941), was also a politician, a member of the Labor Party until 1931 and the United Australia Party thereafter. 


