@@@@@


doc= 35611


Prichard, Harold Arthur (1871-1947), philosopher, was born in Kilburn, London, on 30 October 1871, the eldest child of Walter Stennett Prichard, solicitor in Bedford Row, and his wife, Lucy Withers. He was educated at Clifton College, and at New College, Oxford, of which he was a mathematical scholar. He was placed in the first class in mathematical moderations (1891) and in 'literae humaniores' (1894) and was university mathematical exhibitioner in 1892. In 1894 he was articled to a firm of solicitors in the City of London, but he remained there only a few months. He was a fellow of Hertford College from 1895 to 1898, and of Trinity College from 1898 to 1924. In 1899 he married Mabel Henrietta Ross ['see below'], with whom he had two sons and one daughter. 
After many years of devoted service to Trinity Prichard retired by reason of temporary ill health. In 1928 he was elected White's professor of moral philosophy, which carried with it a fellowship of Corpus Christi College; he retired on reaching the age limit in 1937 and was made an honorary fellow of the college. He was elected FBA in 1932, and received the honorary degree of LLD from Aberdeen University in 1934. 
Prichard wrote very little for publication, but much in order to clear his own mind, to elicit the opinions of his friends, and to help them in their own philosophical problems. The only book he published was 'Kant's Theory of Knowledge' (1909). He had accepted from John Cook Wilson, for whom he had the greatest admiration, the realistic view which had begun, in Oxford as elsewhere, to prevail over the Kantian and Hegelian views hitherto in the ascendant. He combined with a great respect for Kant the conviction that at bottom Kant's view is an unsuccessful attempt to mediate between realism and idealism. Prichard's book contains, therefore, both a clear and detailed analysis of Kant's view and a vigorous argument against it. Knowledge, he maintained, is an activity entirely 'sui generis' and incapable of being interpreted in terms of anything else. Having expressed this view in his book, he did not return to the theory of knowledge in later writings except in his lectures, published in the posthumous volume 'Knowledge and Perception' (1950), on the theories of Descartes, Locke, Berkeley, and Hume. With regard to perception, he expressed in his book on Kant the view that the appearing of bodies to minds is, like knowledge, an unanalysable fact, both when it corresponds to reality and when it does not. But his mind remained open on the subject; he dealt with it in four papers published in the posthumous volume, and in the last of them, 'The sense-datum fallacy' (1938), he expressed the view that the unanalysable fact is best stated as 'some-one-seeing-a-colour', 'some-one-hearing-a-sound', and so on, the colour or sound having no separate existence. 
In 1912 Prichard published in 'Mind' a paper which has had a significant and enduring influence on ethical thought: 'Does moral philosophy rest on a mistake?'. Just as in his book on Kant he had argued in general that there can be no theory of knowledge which supplies an answer to the question 'Is what we have hitherto thought to be knowledge really knowledge?', so he argued here that there is no theory which will prove that what we have thought to be obligations really are so; to attain this certainty we have simply to think harder about the facts. To this he added the thesis that while the rightness of an act depends on the nature of the situation in which we are and on the change the act will originate, the goodness of an act depends on its motive. To this view he supplied an important addendum in a British Academy lecture, 'Duty and ignorance of fact' (1932), by arguing that since being obliged is an attribute of a person, what makes an action right or wrong for the individual is not the objective situation but the agent's opinion about the situation, and, further, that what he is obliged to do is not to produce a certain change, but to set himself to produce it. Prichard was much pressed to state his view at full length, and he made considerable progress with the negative part of the task, the refutation of the most important existing theories; the result is to be found in the long paper called 'Moral obligation' included in the posthumous book of the same name (1949), which includes also several shorter papers dealing with important ethical problems. 
Prichard was a great teacher, and he had great influence among his fellow teachers at Oxford and elsewhere. 'A post-prichardian, reading his views for the first time in full, may well be amazed how many of the commonplaces of contemporary Oxford philosophy have their origin in his work', wrote R. M. Hare, reviewing two works by him in 1950 ('Oxford Magazine', 558). Prichard combined unhesitating conviction of what he considered the fundamentals in philosophy with great readiness to examine over and over again detailed problems both about perception and about obligation. Severe on what he regarded as obvious error in others, he was at least equally critical of himself, modest about his own work in philosophy, and never satisfied with what he had done. In controversy he was formidable, in social intercourse friendly and interested in the interests of his friends. In his work as a tutor, as a professor, and in the Second World War as an air-raid warden, he was conscientious almost to a fault. Physically he was short and slight, but vigorous; as an undergraduate he played lawn tennis for Oxford against Cambridge, and he remained until near the end devoted to golf. He died at his home, 6 Linton Road, Oxford, after a short illness, on 29 December 1947. 
He was survived by his wife, 
Mabel Prichard was best known for her voluntary welfare work in the city of Oxford. In the early twentieth century she was among a group of dons' wives who pioneered infant welfare work. In 1922 she was elected a university representative on Oxford city council, becoming an alderman in 1932, and she was a city magistrate. She had a particular interest in mental health, and an occupational centre at Littlemore Hospital was named after her. As well as serving on the Oxford Council of Social Service, she was chairman of the Citizens' Advice Bureau and of Skene House, the latter concerned with the moral welfare of young women. For her public services she was appointed OBE; in 1964 she became the first woman to be made an honorary freeman of Oxford. She died in St Luke's Nursing Home, Linton Road, Oxford, on 14 March 1965. 


@@@@@


doc= 35612


Primrose, Archibald Philip, fifth earl of Rosebery and first earl of Midlothian (1847-1929), prime minister and author, was born at 20 Charles Street, Berkeley Square, London, on 7 May 1847, the third child and first son of Archibald Primrose, Lord Dalmeny (1809-1851), and Catherine Lucy Wilhemina Stanhope (1819-1901), daughter of Philip Henry Stanhope, fourth Earl Stanhope ['see under 'Stanhope, Philip Henry]. 
Primrose became Lord Dalmeny on the death of his father in January 1851; his mother married Harry Vane, fourth duke of Cleveland, in August 1854. In 1855 Dalmeny was sent to his first school, Bayford House, near Hertford; five years later he entered Eton College. There he became a protege of William Johnson (later William Cory), whose letters to the duchess of Cleveland on her son's progress provide a vivid account of Dalmeny's Etonian idyll. Johnson's letters to Dalmeny's mother show an initial enthusiasm for his pupil's intellect yielding to frustration at his laziness: he 'could not give him a good character for industry' (Rhodes James, 32). He feared that the 'fashionable triflers, gamblers, loungers, and cricketers' at Christ Church, which the thirteen-year-old Dalmeny had precociously selected as his Oxford college in 1861, would encourage his idleness. Dalmeny none the less matriculated at Christ Church in January 1866, surrounding himself with Etonians. In the event his examination performance was impressive, but he was noted more for his involvement in horse-racing -- his extravagantly unsuccessful bets and his purchase of a racehorse, Ladas, in 1868. The college authorities held racehorse ownership to be incompatible with undergraduate status and requested him to dispose of his acquisition. Misguidedly calling their bluff, he was sent down, without a degree, at Easter 1869. 
Dalmeny had already succeeded to the earldom of Rosebery on the death of his grandfather Archibald John Primrose, fourth earl of Rosebery, in March 1868. With the title came 21,000 acres of land in Midlothian and Linlithgow, the medieval Barnbougle Castle, and the Gothic-revival Dalmeny House, built by his grandfather in 1819 (Rosebery later purchased The Durdans, near Epsom, in 1872, and spent much of his life at the Rothschild house at Mentmore, near Aylesbury, after his marriage to Hannah de Rothschild in 1878). A total income probably above $30,000 p.a. gave Rosebery enormous wealth; the peerage assigned him to the House of Lords. This elevated him effortlessly to a political stage which had always attracted him, but it confined him to a 'gilded dungeon', in his words, which would become increasingly constricting. Though courted as a possible parliamentary candidate by the Darlington Conservatives in 1867, Rosebery had inherited his father's Liberalism, and he found himself in the first generation of Liberal peers for whom a position in the Lords was a political drawback, even before the mass defection of Liberal peers over Irish home rule in 1886. After a quarter of a century in the Lords, Rosebery claimed that he could remember once voting in the majority, though not, he thought, on a vital question. In 1890 he considered 'unfrocking' himself as a peer and running for a parliamentary seat in order to test at law the barriers assumed to stop peers standing for the Commons. For most of his political career he advocated the reform of the Lords to produce a more balanced and more plausible second chamber. The recurrent crises triggered by the Lords' anomalous position gave Rosebery a platform: his first reform proposal, the motion for a select committee to examine the house's composition, coincided with the Lords' resistance to franchise extension in the summer of 1884; his last, the motions in 1910 to reduce the representation of the hereditary peerage and introduce 'ex officio' and nominated peers, were mooted during the constitutional battle over the 1909 budget, but such crises, while illustrating the case for Lords reform, provided the worst moments to propose it. Twenty-five years of sporadic devotion to this cause yielded nothing, and Rosebery spent his entire career in what he once described as the political equivalent of the Tower of London. 
In common with most of the peerage in this period, Rosebery mixed eclectically with the leaders of both parties. Disraeli fascinated him, and in later life, disenchanted with the Liberal Party, Rosebery expressed his regret at not having followed him, but if he was attracted to toryism at all in his youth it was to the evanescent Young England idealism of Disraeli, or the quixotic tory democracy of Lord Randolph Churchill, an Eton contemporary whose biographical sketch Rosebery published in 1906. His earliest political expressions -- his concern that the French Revolution had resulted from the estrangement of classes, his interest in working-class political organizations, his exposure of the condition of children in the Glasgow brickfields, and his presidency of the Edinburgh United Industrial School from 1871 -- reflect something of this paternalist spirit, as does his call in 1871 for 'a union of classes without which power is a phantom and freedom a farce' (Lord Rosebery, 'The Union of England and Scotland: an Inaugural Address to the Edinburgh Philosophical Institution', 1871). The emergent toryism of resistance and the protection of property -- the toryism of Salisbury and Balfour -- appeared to him ungenerous and short-sighted, at least until his embittered twilight years. Burke he thought 'completely, though naturally and accountably, in the wrong' (ibid., 1.189). Rosebery came from a whig background, was said by his sister to have 'taken a very strong Radical turn' by 1867, and affirmed his commitment to Liberalism in 1869 even in declining Granville's invitation to second the address on behalf of the Gladstone government in the Lords. His acceptance of a further invitation in 1871 made public his allegiance and brought his maiden speech in the Lords. 
Subsequent interventions in Lords debates were, though, infrequent and largely inconsequential in the 1870s. Rosebery preferred to develop his public career by means of platform speeches, mostly in Scotland, where he gained an enthusiastic public following. His growing political stature north of the border was confirmed by his leading role in the overhaul of Scottish Liberalism in the mid-1870s. Alongside the then Liberal leader, Hartington, he attended the birth of the two federal associations created in 1877, becoming president of the Edinburgh-based East and North of Scotland Liberal Association (ENSLA). The aim of the leadership in sponsoring these bodies was to improve the organizational efficiency of the Scottish party without creating vehicles for the critics of party policy. Rosebery was suited to this delicate task: a whig aristocrat who could sway a public meeting, he had voiced radical views on social reform and foreign policy (he had supported Gladstone's campaign against Ottoman atrocities in Bulgaria in 1876) but was at best agnostic on -- and apparently uninterested in -- church disestablishment, the most divisive issue in Scottish Liberal politics. Chairing the inaugural meeting of the ENSLA he stressed that the new body should not become 'a sickly and despotic society [demanding] an exact profession of faith from every member that enters it'. He defined Liberalism whiggishly as 'the principle in politics that neither class nor creed nor privilege shall hinder the progress of our national development' and cited corn law repeal, Catholic emancipation, and the 'Reform Act' as the party's defining moments ('The Scotsman', 7 Nov 1877). The Scottish radical press remained unconvinced by such archaisms, and doubted that the 'blank shield' of policy could be maintained for long ('Scottish Reformer and Weekly Review', 10 Nov 1877), but the Scottish caucuses remained more tolerant of whiggery than their English equivalents. Rosebery went on to become the first president of the newly united Scottish Liberal Association in 1881, and the Scottish leadership succeeded in containing radicalism until the damaging battles over disestablishment in 1885. 
Rosebery's reputation as Scottish Liberalism's leading crowd-puller was confirmed by his speeches in support of Gladstone's Midlothian campaign of 1879-80, when Dalmeny became the base for Gladstone's operations and Rosebery, in effect, his manager. The campaign's success underlined Rosebery's claim to office in the subsequent Liberal government which Gladstone formed. It was less clear, though, what sort of preferment Rosebery was entitled to expect. He had been a peer for more than a decade and had become a regional magnate within the party, but Gladstone did not consider these attributes to exempt a man still in his early thirties from the normal apprenticeship of junior office. The next five years saw a succession of efforts to tempt Rosebery into offices which he clearly considered inadequate. In 1880 he declined an under-secretaryship at the India Office for characteristically fastidious reasons: publicly because the appointment would be seen as a political reward for his work and money in the election campaign, privately from annoyance that he had not been offered a cabinet post. Such self-denial would become a familiar feature of his later career, but he did agree to become under-secretary at the Home Office in August 1881, attracted by a brief to handle Scottish business. His reasons for resigning from this office in June 1883 combined the principled and the petty: his belief that London habitually neglected Scottish business and his fear that this neglect would spawn a Scottish home-rule movement; his overreaction to criticism of the Home Office in the Commons; his difficult relationship with the home secretary, Sir William Harcourt; and the fact that he was bored with the work. It is a sign of the general belief that Rosebery was the 'man of the future' that neither the difficulty in inducing him to accept office nor the speed with which he had left it prevented his being offered the projected post of minister for Scotland under the 'Local Government Board (Scotland) Bill' of 1883. Again he refused on the two grounds, uncomfortably conjoined, that he had lobbied for the ministry himself and that the post was not in the cabinet, and stilled all argument by departing in September 1883 on an Australian tour. The eventual offer of a cabinet post as commissioner of works in November 1884 brought another display of reluctance, attributable either to Rosebery's disapproval of the government's Egyptian policy or to the unglamorous nature of the post. Gladstone, still sceptical about Rosebery's administrative capacity and reluctant to allow any cabinet newcomer to dictate his terms, stood firm, ensuring a stalemate which lasted until February 1885, when the death of Gordon at Khartoum allowed Rosebery to swallow his misgivings at a moment of national crisis. The pill was sugared by his concurrent appointment as lord privy seal, which he held until June 1885. 
Rosebery thus assumed a position of limited importance only four months before the second Gladstone ministry fell, but his inexperience did not prevent his being seen as the natural successor to the failing Granville at the Foreign Office when the Liberals returned to power in January 1886. His first period of office lasted until June 1886. His appointment as foreign secretary allowed him to demonstrate an executive talent which validated the hopes long vested in him. Entrusted with policy making for the first time, he acclimatized himself rapidly to the mores of a department more aristocratic in tone than most of Whitehall and better insulated from party politics. As foreign secretary the former critic of Beaconsfieldism became an advocate of bipartisanship in foreign policy. Over time he would elevate the doctrine of continuity to the level of principle -- 'the second rate foreign policy which is continuous', he asserted in 1905, 'is better than the first rate foreign policy which is not' (Matthew, 196) -- but he had not entered office in 1886 with a clear determination to perpetuate second-rate tory diplomacy. Rosebery was anxious that the complex problem of protecting Britain's interests should not be complicated further by deference to a separate radical ethical standard in foreign policy. This determination was reinforced by the inclinations of a predominantly tory set of officials and ambassadors, but the continuity evident in Rosebery's treatment of the problem which dominated his brief first tenure of the Foreign Office, the Bulgarian crisis, was facilitated by Salisbury's earlier revision of British Near Eastern policy when the crisis erupted in September 1885. 
Salisbury's decision to support moves for the union of Bulgaria and Eastern Roumelia, thereby endorsing another blow to the authority of the Porte, reflected his growing realization that the enfeebled Ottoman empire no longer provided the best guarantee of British interests in the region. It meant that 'raison d'etat' no longer required Britain to turn a blind eye to Ottoman misbehaviour, and consequently allowed Rosebery to cope with the ramifications of the Bulgarian revolt undistracted by radical pressure. He was also undistracted by Gladstone, now preoccupied by Irish home rule, though in fact the new Foreign Office orthodoxy, favouring the yoking of Bulgaria and Eastern Roumelia under Prince Alexander, was consistent with Gladstone's earlier advocacy of a united Bulgaria and with traditional Liberal support for nationalist movements. It may be that an inherited Liberal belief in the robustness of free peoples induced Rosebery to leave the new Bulgaria with fewer safeguards against Russian designs than Salisbury would have allowed: Russian agreement to Turkish military guarantees to Bulgaria was bought at the cost of preventing the eventual agreement from naming Alexander personally as governor-general of Eastern Roumelia (leaving open the possibility that he could be supplanted by a Russian puppet) and limiting his initial appointment to five years. With these concessions, though, Rosebery was able to engineer a great power agreement in Europe's most volatile region which proved acceptable to domestic opinion, and to do so within weeks of his appointment. Gladstone could not 'remember an instance of such an achievement carried through in the 'first quarter' of a Foreign Secretaryship' (Gladstone to Rosebery, 28 April 1886, Gladstone, 'Diaries', 11.541). Two subsequent measures arising from the crisis, the co-ordination of a naval blockade of Greece to deter her from exploiting the situation and a stern dispatch to Russia to dissuade her from abrogating the free port status (under the 1878 Berlin treaty) of Batum on the Black Sea, demonstrated that Liberal diplomacy would not be distorted by the party's previous pan-Hellenism or its Russophilia. Rosebery was aware that his success in defusing the crisis owed much to the fact that the issue had not been the subject of partisan debate within the cabinet or within the country at large. His subsequent anxiety to take foreign policy out of party politics, which later prompted idiosyncratic musings that the foreign secretary and the service ministers should be made fixed-term appointments to shield them from electoral disfavour, was rooted in the events of 1886. So, by extension, was his eventual disenchantment with party politics. 
Crucially, Rosebery remained loyal to his party and its leader during the crisis over Irish home rule. To the Conservative Lord Birkenhead, surveying Rosebery's career in the 1920s, it was clear that Rosebery, bemused by Gladstone's magnetism, had imprisoned himself in the wrong party in 1886. If wealth and membership of the peerage are taken as predictors, Rosebery might indeed have been expected to join the whig secession over home rule. A whig by background and upbringing, his intellectual make-up was that of educated whiggery -- a concern for the nation's literature, history, and constitutional traditions; a lack of interest in abstract philosophy, in mathematics, or in economics. He had inherited the whig faith in a measured progress towards democracy at a pace which did not threaten property or the social order, but he did not -- in the 1880s at least -- share whig anxieties about the direction of Liberalism. The weakness of toryism north of the border served generally to limit the number of defections from the Scottish Liberal peerage, and Rosebery was more of a Gladstonian than most of his colleagues. He displayed something of the populism that most whigs abhorred in Gladstone, and he was skilled in the platform oratory which most of them shunned. His speeches were characterized by an elegance of phrase and a refinement of construction that guarded him from appearing demagogic, but also by a scepticism towards irresponsible privilege that had been sharpened by criticism of the House of Lords and advocacy of Scottish land reform. In 1880 Dilke and Chamberlain had seen him as a potential recruit for radicalism. Rosebery never was a radical; the hope that he might be one derived rather from the fact that his whiggism was more elevated and idealistic than that which most of the 1886 defectors carried into alliance with the tories. His anxiety in 1888 that 'if in the future there should again be encroachments of the Crown, the aristocracy would all be found on the side of the Crown; so unlike their forefathers' ('Diary, 1885-1906', 26 Feb 1888, 77) shows a Macaulayan concern for constitutional liberty that was at best dormant in most whig minds by the 1880s. Similarly, Rosebery's views on empire were drawn from an earlier whig tradition. His Australian visit of 1883-4 had imparted an enthusiasm for empire that he never shed, but it was at heart an enthusiasm for self-government in the white settler colonies, formed at a time when other whigs were citing the unicameral colonial parliaments to demonstrate the dangers of unfettered democracy. Rosebery argued for the voluntary confederation of largely self-governing colonial democracies -- he became the first president of the Imperial Federation League in 1884 -- at a time when much whig and Conservative thought was moving towards imperial centralization. This determined his response to the home rule question in 1886. He shared whig distaste for concessions to militant nationalism, and resented the fact that Irish violence appeared to bring rewards while London continued to neglect the law-abiding Scots. He might have resigned from the government over Gladstone's dealings with Parnell in 1882 had he occupied a more exalted position. He none the less shared Gladstone's view that Irish grievances could be assuaged by statesmanlike devolution. Home rule was probably not his preferred option: in one of his earliest public speeches he had stressed the benefits brought to Scotland by the 1707 union -- 'like nothing so much as a poor man marrying an heiress' ('The Union between England and Scotland, Address to Edinburgh Philosophical Institution', 1871) -- and while fighting the Scottish corner in the 1880-85 government he had considered administrative devolution preferable to a Scottish parliament. He had inclined towards Chamberlain's scheme for enhanced local government in Ireland, but when Gladstone's home rule proposals killed the Chamberlain scheme Rosebery accepted that a Dublin parliament offered the only alternative to coercion, which, again faithful to the whig tradition, he rejected entirely. His later disenchantment with home rule developed 'pari passu' with his disenchantment with the Liberal Party; in 1886 there is no sign that he contemplated joining the whig revolt. 
In the wake of the Liberal split Rosebery convinced himself that the whole cathartic episode had given the party a clarity of purpose previously lacking. The years after 1886, however, saw Rosebery, like most Liberal leaders, reassessing the future of a party clearly substantially damaged. For the first time he began seriously to question Gladstone's judgement, and in 1889 he attempted unsuccessfully to induce him to establish a small front-bench committee to reassess the 1886 'Home Rule Bill'. By the summer of 1887 he had concluded that a major party realignment was almost inevitable -- a view which he would hold for the next twenty years. Whatever the future of the policy, the departure of so many of the party's ruling cadre left Rosebery -- still young but with a successful foreign secretaryship behind him -- by some way the most plausible contender for high office among the next generation of Liberals. Having spent much of 1880-85 anxious not to lose ground in the scramble for preferment, Rosebery now had public prominence thrust upon him as a duty to his party. 
The process began early in 1889 when Rosebery was urged by Harcourt and others to accept the chairmanship of the newly formed London county council. Despite the usual professions of incapacity, he was attracted by the challenge. His belief in local self-government as a means by which social politics could be pursued without state socialism had grown during the 1880s in parallel with his faith in imperial devolution. Initially anxious to stand for a division like Whitechapel 'in order to show community of feeling between the lower classes and the aristocracy' ('Diary, 1885-1906', 6 Jan 1889), he was persuaded to run in the City of London, where a peer might be more acceptable. Deference duly carried him to the top of the poll, despite the weakness of Liberalism in the City, and to the chairmanship of the first council, despite a muted radical protest. The principal ground for opposition to Rosebery was his refusal to commit himself to support the taxation of land values -- a prudent course in the City but one which many radicals found suspicious in a landed aristocrat. In reality the council lacked legal power to impose land taxes or any other innovations in local taxation, and while the question retained much totemic significance, it did not come before the council in any concrete form during Rosebery's chairmanship. Whatever his views on the issue, which are unclear at this point, it is unlikely that he would have sought to use the largely formal powers of the chair to restrain the council's (radical) Progressive majority. As chairman Rosebery was punctiliously impartial in his regulation of debates, and was not normally called upon to vote. Formal pronouncements such as the chairman's review of the first year's work were couched in magisterial terms, endorsing the LCC's programme of urban improvement and treating it, despite the council's increasingly partisan atmosphere, as the fruit of shared objectives. In fact his formal impartiality overlaid a broad sympathy with the council's social objectives which was clear from his public speeches at the time, with the result that the Progressive majority on the council felt more comfortable with his chairmanship than with that of his Liberal Unionist successor, Sir John Lubbock. 
Rosebery, too, remained more comfortable with London's municipal 'new Liberals' than with the traditional radicals who dominated provincial Liberalism. Though he spoke at one time or another in support of most of the items in the Newcastle programme (the radical shopping list adopted at the National Liberal Federation's Newcastle conference in 1891) and would make the implementation of the programme his first commitment to the party as prime minister in 1894, he believed that programmatic politics encouraged axe grinding and the proliferation of minority causes. In particular Rosebery had little affinity for the representatives of political nonconformity, whose stock had risen in the party with the departure of the Anglican whigs. He did not share their evangelical temper or their sectarian outlook. His own religious attitude was eclectic: brought up in an Episcopalian household, he defined himself as an Anglican, but would attend kirk services on occasion when in Scotland and go to mass when abroad in a Catholic country. He married a Jewish woman. Ever fearful that the Christian ideal would be obscured by 'the dust of warring faiths', he contemplated optimistically the reunion of the Scottish church (Lord Rosebery, 'Dr Chalmers: an Address', 1915, 20). His son-in-law and biographer, Lord Crewe, believed that the kirk made 'particular appeal to one side of his character'; John Buchan claimed in an obituary that 'while to the world he seemed like some polished eighteenth-century grandee, at heart he was the Calvinist of seventeenth-century Scotland' (Crewe-Milnes, 1.65; 'Glasgow Herald', 22 May 1929). 
Buchan's simile was intended to depict Rosebery's cast of mind rather than to label him doctrinally. If Rosebery was a Scottish Calvinist he was an unusual one, who collected pornography and ran a racing stable. The former was a private hobby, the latter necessarily a public one, which aroused nonconformist disapproval in proportion to Rosebery's success. This was considerable: Rosebery twice won the Derby as prime minister, in 1894 and 1895 (with Ladas II and Sir Visto), and again in 1905 (with Cicero). His involvement in the turf was a committed and professional one -- between 1875 and 1928 he won every major English race except the Ascot Gold Cup -- but the sport still carried overtones of aristocratic debauchery. Rosebery's association with it was a sign that he lacked the moral earnestness that liberal nonconformity sought in its leaders, distinguishing him pointedly from Gladstone when he succeeded him as prime minister. 
What Buchan had in mind was rather Rosebery's pervasive melancholia, his 'haunting sense of transience' and of the futility of human action, perhaps even the preoccupation with death that impelled him to inspect the corpses of deceased friends before burial. He was prone to depression throughout his life, but particularly during his lugubrious old age, when Crewe and Buchan knew him best. His was, indeed, a life scarred by many personal tragedies -- the loss of his father when Rosebery was three and the deaths of his younger brother, Everard, in the Sudan in 1885, of his nephew in 1895, of his second son, Neil ('b'. 1882), killed in action in 1917, and above all of his wife in 1890. 
Rosebery had been introduced to Hannah de Rothschild (1851-1890), only child of Baron and Baroness Mayer de Rothschild, by Disraeli in 1868. The couple married on 20 March 1878, despite the reservations of his antisemitic mother and those of Britain's Jewish community, reluctant to see the most prominent Jewish heiress marry out of the faith. 'I do not know the young lady personally', commented Rosebery's stepfather, the duke of Cleveland, caustically after the engagement, 'but I am told that the family is well-to-do in the City' (F. E. Smith, 'Men of the hour: Lord Rosebery', 'Sunday Times', n.d., Rosebery MSS); marriage into the Rothschilds augmented Rosebery's personal fortune. Hannah, tory-leaning but little interested in politics, accepted the role of statesman's wife without demur, though she disliked the official functions that were Rosebery's lot as foreign secretary. She provided Rosebery with the adulation that always reassured him and submitted uncomplainingly to his recurrent public teasing. Her death from typhoid fever in November 1890, at the age of thirty-nine, devastated him. Out of office at the time, he withdrew completely from public life for about eighteen months. He continued to use black-edged writing paper for his correspondence for four or five years after her death. During his protracted bereavement his innate melancholia deepened, and the misanthropy that was a part of his nature developed into a profound craving for solitude. This coloured his attitude towards public life and public office in a critical period when others looked to him to renovate post-Gladstonian Liberalism. Refusal of honours and appointments was habitual for him throughout his life, but before 1890 his refusals either reflected a contempt for the office on offer or were founded in an elaborate sense of etiquette which his colleagues found wearisome if they understood it at all; after Hannah's death, when he found the highest positions in the land being pressed upon him, Rosebery was genuinely reluctant to return to public life. In these years he was a better judge of his own incapacity than those who started from the premise that only he could restore the credibility of Liberalism. Bereavement exacerbated his insomnia, 'the curse of his life' that had afflicted him since his twenties, impairing his judgement and his patience. During the protracted effort to tempt him back to the Foreign Office when the Liberals regained power in 1892, John Morley found him 'haggard-looking and distressed', insisting that his political ambitions had been buried with his wife ('Diary, 1885-1906', 6 Aug 1892). 
Morley considered Rosebery's reluctance to serve 'a downright act of desertion of Mr G and his colleagues'. Hamilton believed that a Gladstone government without Rosebery would immediately fall to pieces, but that his joining the government would reassure the commercial classes and steady the markets. Harcourt maintained that 'without him we should have been simply ridiculous... with him we are only impossible' ('Diary, 1885-1906', 6, 11, 15, 17 Aug 1892). Rosebery's prominence and the reputation derived from his previous Foreign Office term and his chairmanship of the London county council meant that his absence from a Liberal cabinet already low in ministerial experience would indeed have been conspicuous, making it morally difficult for him to abstain. Denied the private life he sought, Rosebery may have found the Foreign Office a substitute, accepting the office in August 1892. It remained an insular and independent department -- 'we did not send too much information from the FO to the other side of the street', Ronald Munro Ferguson recalled (Ferguson to Crewe, 22 Oct 1929, Crewe MS 10195) -- staffed by solicitous permanent officials who had briefed him privately since 1886 in anticipation of his return. Rosebery's sense that he had been bullied into office reinforced his own determination to claim complete freedom of action, unaffected by the scruples of cabinet colleagues or radical back-benchers. The doctrine of continuity, developed pragmatically during his first Foreign Office term, now became more a dogma, invoked to justify overriding Liberal qualms about empire, than a guide to policy. In his handling of the inherited crisis over Uganda, Rosebery in fact adopted a stance more imperialistic than that of his Conservative predecessor. 
The crisis was rooted in the bankruptcy of the Imperial British East Africa Company, the chartered company through which the outgoing Salisbury government had sought to exercise a vicarious British control over the upper Nile. This region was taken to be crucial to the security of Egypt, itself vital to the freedom of the Suez Canal and the short route to British India. Rosebery was doubtless as ready as most imperial enthusiasts in the 1890s to accept the alarmist argument that a foreign power on the upper Nile might dam the river or otherwise imperil Egypt, but Salisbury had not seen this possibility as justification for bailing out a speculative venture, let alone asserting a permanent British claim to a region which was, in itself, of little value. In fact Rosebery was virtually the only member of the Gladstone cabinet to advocate retention with any fervour, but his actions throughout the episode were founded on the premise that withdrawal was not an option. The compromise solution of placing Uganda under the control of the friendly sultan of Zanzibar appealed to him as a means of retaining British influence which did not require the trappings of formal rule, especially as this solution appeared to satisfy Harcourt, the chief opponent of retention, and Gladstone himself. The appointment of Gerald Portal, progenitor of the Zanzibar option, as special commissioner to report on the Uganda question, was apparently intended to lead to this solution. That Portal, generally taken to be a fervent retentionist, should be so impressed by the unpromising nature of the territory itself as to return reports which weakened the case for continued British influence was not anticipated. Faced with this outcome, Rosebery suppressed Portal's findings, aided by his unexpected death in January 1894, and in February presented the cabinet with a demand for a protectorate. Uganda was eventually annexed in April 1894, a month after Rosebery's accession to the premiership. 
Rosebery's stance over Uganda was, in fact, an incongruous gesture towards expansionism on the part of one who was at heart a consolidationist rather than an expansionist. It sprang in part from his desire to make a point to his colleagues, affirming that he would be his own man at the Foreign Office and would not allow foreign policy to become the plaything of a fractious cabinet, as he believed it to have been during Granville's final foreign secretaryship in 1880-85. This carried the risk of antagonizing colleagues, and the risk became a certainty when Portal failed to endorse the anticipated compromise, leaving the cabinet with a stark choice between retention and withdrawal. Whether or not cabinet divisions disturbed Rosebery, they carried an ulterior benefit. Rosebery's policy towards the wider world was conducted with an eye to the European implications. In 1892 he was concerned to distance himself from the Francophilia of Gladstone and much of the Liberal cabinet. He shared Salisbury's view that French hostility towards Britain was inescapable, implying a need to cultivate Germany and her partners in the triple alliance, Austria-Hungary and Italy. At the same time Rosebery, like every nineteenth-century foreign secretary, was 'anxious to obtain the full advantage of the insular position with which Providence has endowed us' (Martel, 121), and determined that Britain should not become so dependent upon Germany as to be effectively drawn into the European alliance system, with attendant continental obligations. By taking a robust line on Uganda, Rosebery hoped to show Germany that British policy was not set by its largely Francophile cabinet, but at the same time that Britain could defend her position in Egypt without German aid. Similar arguments applied to Egypt itself, where Rosebery resisted Gladstone's attempts to end the quarrel with France which had simmered since the unilateral British occupation of 1882, arguing that concessions to France in that strategically sensitive area would only increase British dependence upon Germany. 
Rosebery believed that Britain's foreign policy had necessarily become a colonial policy since the 1860s. He was very conscious of the extended and ultimately indefensible nature of Britain's empire and aware that any substantial military commitment in defence of one part of the empire might leave other parts open to attack. He considered the Crimean War to have been a mistake because it advertised the limits to British military power; during the Panjdeh crisis in 1885 he had warned that 'if we have one hand tied down in Central Asia and another in Central Africa we may be practically danced upon in every other part of the world' (Martel, 232). While refusing to acknowledge French claims to Siam during the crisis there in 1893, as possession of Siam would bring France to the borders of British Burma, Rosebery was careful that his rebuttal should not be so bellicose as to allow the Siamese to take British military support for granted. Rosebery's carefully weighted blend of tact and firmness secured a French withdrawal without necessitating a military commitment. 
Crewe believed that no statesman of his generation was so reluctant to risk war. In a jingoistic age Rosebery was a cautious diplomat. His loose talk during the Uganda crisis of 'pegging out claims' for the future by acquiring barren territory was out of character; Rosebery considered imperial adventurism to be provocative and dangerous. Britain was a satisfied power, whose main concern should be to maintain her possessions within existing limits. Diplomacy was the means to that end, but Rosebery shunned the obvious diplomatic strategy, to be followed by his successors in the 1900s, of protecting the empire by reaching agreements with the powers most likely to threaten it. He saw formal alliances as a threat to Britain's freedom of action, carrying the danger of drawing Britain into conflicts irrelevant to her own interests. In many ways his diplomacy was Bismarckian in its suppleness, its attention to detail, and its lack of ideological preconceptions, but Rosebery never enjoyed the freedom of diplomatic invention central to the Bismarck system. To some extent he constrained himself with his reluctance to make any arrangements which depended upon 'Gallic good faith'; his unvarying assumption of French enmity made negotiations with France over areas of potential tension -- notably the upper Nile -- more difficult and threatened to conflict with his objective of avoiding war. The provocative declaration of Edward Grey, under-secretary at the Foreign Office, in March 1895 that any French move into the Nile valley would be seen as an 'unfriendly act' was consistent with Rosebery's attitude; Rosebery might have inspired it and would endorse it three years later when the Fashoda crisis threatened to drag Britain and France into war. At that point, indeed, Rosebery, no longer in office, suggested privately that 'a war with France now would simplify difficulties in the future' (R. Brett, journal, 28 Oct 1898, Stansky, 260). The real obstacle to an unfettered foreign policy was, however, the polarization of the powers that had taken place since Bismarck's departure. Since 1890 the growth of Franco-Russian co-operation had divided Europe into two clear camps. France and Russia were the two powers which most directly threatened Britain's overseas possessions; the limited extra-European interests of the triple alliance powers posed little direct threat to the British empire. Rosebery's Francophobia and his aversion to dealing with the empire's potential enemies underlined his inclination towards the triple alliance; denied a completely free hand, his intellectual dexterity was devoted to maintaining friendly relations with the alliance without becoming a tool of German policy. 
Rosebery's policy of, in effect, seeking the protection offered by the alliance system without making the commitments which it required of the other powers was an attempt to preserve the tradition of 'splendid isolation' in the altered circumstances of the 1890s. It was not cost-free. Britain's status as a naval power obliged her to offer something more than moral support to the triple alliance in view of Franco-Russian strength in the Mediterranean. Without a stronger British naval presence in the Mediterranean to bolster the alliance Italy might be tempted to deal with France, and Austria-Hungary with Russia. Where Gladstone had seen the chance to scale down Britain's Mediterranean Fleet as one of the benefits of an accommodation with France (it would later be an effect of the 1904 entente), Rosebery's policy entailed naval expansion, and was the principal reason for the $4 million programme which Spencer, first lord of the Admiralty, presented to an alarmed Liberal cabinet in 1894. The consequences were to be considerable: the navy programme entailed Gladstone's resignation as prime minister; Harcourt's redistributionary 1894 budget, which alarmed Rosebery; and in due course the imitative German naval build-up of 1897, which, by turning Germany into a maritime rival, would eventually undermine the Rosebery system. 
Its essential fragility had been exposed before then, however. Rosebery's foreign policy was indeed a colonial policy, but it was always unclear how valuable was the understanding with the triple alliance in extra-European matters. Rosebery assumed that the existence of the alliance would act as a deterrent inhibiting France and Russia from extra-European adventurism. To some extent it may have done so, but it was equally true that the alliance members would not jeopardize European peace to defend British colonial interests while Britain remained no more than an associate member of the alliance. Britain remained obliged to make her own arrangements to protect her territory. Her greatest security lay in the fact that the Russians, at least, did not consider the Franco-Russian understanding relevant outside Europe. This became clear when Russia failed to endorse French objections to Rosebery's Anglo-Congolese agreement of 1894, by which territory on the upper Nile was leased to King Leopold of the Belgians in order to forestall any French advance into the area; it was rather unanticipated German objections to the implications of the arrangement for the future of German East Africa which necessitated its abandonment. Rosebery had, in fact, few inhibitions about antagonizing France; Russia was more problematic because a Russo-German rapprochement -- increasing the likelihood of Russian interference in India -- was feasible, where a Franco-German rapprochement was not. The question of Britain's attitude towards Russia became critical with the sudden emergence of Japan as a military power following her intervention to suppress the Tonghak rebellion in Korea in the summer of 1894. Rosebery had become prime minister three months before the crisis emerged, strengthening his ability to determine foreign policy, but his replacement as foreign secretary, Kimberley, was not simply a mouthpiece for the new premier. Kimberley in fact saw Japan as a 'natural ally' against Russia. Rosebery, who had worked to improve relations with St Petersburg since 1892, in the hope of limiting the Russian threat to India and dissuading Russia from supporting French expansion, could not agree, but nor could he offer the tsar much practical help in his efforts to coerce Japan to moderate its demands in Korea. Fearful that military escalation might lead to a European war in China, Rosebery ruled out British intervention where no British interest was at stake. Russia was left to ask what benefits could be derived from Britain's friendship. Seven years after Rosebery left office, the 1902 Anglo-Japanese alliance would begin the process by which his successors reversed his policy of relying upon reactive diplomacy to defuse threats to Britain's extended empire, and looked instead to agreements with potential imperial predators. Rosebery feared the consequences of this reversal: he warned that the 1902 alliance 'may be the first Treaty of the kind for many years past, but having been made it cannot be the last' (Rhodes James, 449), and advised Edward Grey in 1905 that the previous year's entente with France would lead to war. Events may have vindicated him, but the fact remained that his own sinuous diplomacy had been unsuited to the polarized power relations developing after 1890. 
Gladstone's retirement in March 1894 left Rosebery the leading contender for the succession, and he resisted this preferment less strenuously than usual. His only plausible rival, Harcourt, had the advantages of seniority and greater ministerial experience, but the drawback of being personally unacceptable to almost the entire cabinet. Harcourt's efforts in February to dictate the terms on which he could work, as Liberal leader in the Commons, with a prime minister in the Lords -- freedom to act and speak on all issues, the right to be consulted on foreign policy and patronage questions -- indicated his recognition of the inevitable even before Gladstone stepped down. They also presaged troubles to come. The position of a Liberal peer-premier was inevitably less comfortable than that of a Conservative one, and Rosebery's personal relations with Harcourt were far less secure than Salisbury's had been with his leader in the Commons, his nephew Arthur Balfour. The situation did require the terms of Harcourt's role to be spelled out, but given Harcourt's opposition to the principle of a peer as prime minister his demands implied that Rosebery held his position on sufferance. Rosebery, characteristically ready to feel slighted, claimed that the terms would make him 'a dummy prime minister' (Rhodes James, 313). Fractious relations with Harcourt blighted Rosebery's premiership, partly because of Harcourt's ungenerous behaviour, but partly because his performance as prime minister was open to real criticism. Rosebery had once likened the office to 'a 'dunghill', on which the other ministers threw everything that was disagreeable' ('Diary, 1885-1906', 17 April 1887); he regretted losing the real power he had enjoyed at the Foreign Office. He complained repeatedly of his 'inherited programme and... inherited Cabinet' but did little to change either (ibid., 21 May 1894). 
The succession question had been decided on the basis of the personal merits of the main candidates and their acceptability to their cabinet colleagues. It had not been necessary for Rosebery to promulgate anything resembling a manifesto and he entered office without giving any clear indication of his policy intentions. He had contributed little to the Liberal debates on future policy after the home rule debacle; in the seclusion of the Foreign Office after 1892 he had done little to shape the domestic programme of the Gladstone cabinet. He kissed hands on 5 March 1894. On the previous day he was urged by G. E. Buckle, editor of 'The Times', to modify his party's domestic policy as he had modified its foreign policy. The task of educating his party appealed to him. He had already, in September 1893, voiced ostentatiously tepid support for Irish home rule when Gladstone's second bill was obliterated in the upper house, and his first speech in the Lords as prime minister reinforced that impression by maladroitly implying that home rule required the approval of a majority of MPs from England, as 'the predominant member of the Three Kingdoms' (Rhodes James, 338). He was now convinced of the depth of the damage done to the party in 1886. Three speeches in the City of London, in Birmingham, and in Manchester in April and May 1894 were interpreted as appeals to rank-and-file Liberal Unionists to return to the fold. 
It was none the less unclear what Rosebery could offer to those Liberal Unionists who were worried less by home rule than by the Liberals' drift towards social radicalism. He was not anxious to reverse social policies either passed or pledged, such as hours limitation for government employees or the eight-hour day for miners, and was anyway powerless to do so. His impotence was emphasized by his failure significantly to modify the redistributionary budget proposed by Harcourt in 1894. In a pattern that would be repeated in 1909, a budgetary crisis largely due to increased naval expenditure became the occasion for a radical fiscal experiment, conducted with an eye to electoral benefit. Harcourt proposed to meet the largest ever peacetime army and navy estimates by raising duties on beer and spirits, increasing the basic rate of income tax while raising allowances for the poorest taxpayers, and above all overhauling the death duties. Higher death duties hit the wealthy, while the increased tax allowances were designed to benefit higher-paid workmen, clerks, struggling professionals, small shopkeepers, and agriculturalists. Rosebery, who continued to hope that Gladstone's retirement might encourage some Liberal Unionists to rejoin the party, believed that the budget would alienate the Liberals' few remaining wealthy supporters. He expressed his fears in a private memorandum to Harcourt in April 1894, receiving a dismissive and combative reply, after which the prime minister and the chancellor of the exchequer hardly spoke to each other for six months. He achieved only a limited modification of the scale of death duty graduation. 
At the heart of the broader battle between Rosebery and Harcourt was the question of whether the Liberal Party should extend its electoral base by moving to the centre or to the left. This was a major strategic dilemma, not easily resolved, but Rosebery was unwise to pick a fight over the 1894 budget. Its redistributionary benefits were limited to the income-tax-paying classes; the beneficiaries were an electorally significant group whose disenchantment with unionism in 1892 was believed to have helped the Liberals regain office. The losers by the budget were wealthy but numerically insignificant; Harcourt was probably right to suggest that the few among them who contributed to Liberal Party funds could be appeased with honours. The surplus produced by the tax changes went not towards the free breakfast table, old age pensions, or any other social objective, as some Liberal back-benchers had urged, but to defray the increased naval estimates, largely a product of Rosebery's foreign policy. Rosebery himself offered no alternative means of funding naval expansion. None the less, his failure to defeat the cabinet's senior prize-fighter reinforced the sense of inadequacy which had clouded his accession to the premiership, and drove him into a seclusion which lasted for most of his first summer as prime minister. 
This seclusion ended with Rosebery's re-emergence in October to revive his pet subject of House of Lords reform, proposing in a speech at Bradford to introduce a Commons resolution asserting the legislative supremacy of the lower house. Some kind of gesture against the Lords was necessary to reassure the Liberals' Irish nationalist allies after the peers had contemptuously disposed of home rule in 1893 and the 'Evicted Tenants (Ireland) Bill' in 1894, but Rosebery had not discussed his proposal with the cabinet, most of whom preferred in principle to abolish rather than reform the Lords, and saw limitation of the Lords' veto as a more practical way of clipping their wings. In November this option was adopted in place of Rosebery's resolution, but no measure of Lords reform appeared in the 1895 queen's speech. 
The failure of this initiative marked the end of Rosebery's serious efforts to shape the domestic policy of his own government. Without a dominant legislative aim, the government fell back upon the agenda of radical objectives such as Welsh church disestablishment, liquor licensing reform, and the abolition of plural voting. The simultaneous launch of measures of this sort -- contentious and intricate and therefore vulnerable in parliament -- by a government with a slender and dwindling majority indicated that most were being aired to encourage their supporters, with little prospect of success: the unionist Goschen depicted the 1895 agenda as a programme of 'first nights'. Only the Welsh church measure made any substantial progress, but it had not passed the Commons when the government was defeated on a snap vote criticizing the War Office for shortages in army cordite in June 1895. Resignation, though constitutionally unnecessary, was grasped by ministers anxious to escape the 'nightmare' that government had become. 
Rosebery himself was a distant figure for most of the 1895 session, victim of a comprehensive nervous and physical breakdown. Its outward symptoms -- a severe influenza attack in February, followed by general debilitation and what his physician, Sir William Broadbent, described as a 'long-continued derangement of the digestive organs' (Crewe-Milnes, 2.501) -- were probably induced by the recurrence of chronic insomnia over the preceding months, which Rosebery eventually contained by resort to the patent tranquillizer Sulfonell. Insomnia was doubtless prompted by the strain of presiding over a warring cabinet and a failing government, but also, almost certainly, by fear of emerging scandal. 
On re-entering the Foreign Office in 1892 Rosebery had appointed Francis Douglas, Lord Drumlanrig, heir to the marquess of Queensberry, as his assistant private secretary, drawing himself thereby into the affairs of an eccentric and feud-ridden family. When Rosebery persuaded Gladstone to appoint Drumlanrig as lord-in-waiting to the queen, entailing his elevation to the English peerage, Queensberry, himself a former Scottish elective peer, objected not merely to the honour but also to Rosebery's 'evil influence' on his son. Queensberry pursued Rosebery on his rest-cure at Homburg in August 1893, seeking to dog-whip the foreign secretary, but was thwarted in this purpose by the local police, apparently in response to a request from the prince of Wales. Farce turned to tragedy in October 1894 when Drumlanrig shot himself on a shooting party in Somerset. The inquest recorded a verdict of accidental death; society rumour alleged suicide, prompted by fear of blackmail over homosexual relations with Rosebery. 
Rosebery would doubtless have absorbed the easy toleration of male love prevalent at Eton, as at other major public schools, but in that he was hardly alone among the British governing class of the period; the nature of his relations with his tutor William Johnson, later dismissed on suspicion of homosexuality, cannot be determined. That Rosebery retained in adulthood an emotional attachment to young men is suggested by the highly charged tone of a note in one of his jottings books on the anniversary of the death of Frederick Vyner, 'a pale, tall, beautiful English boy' murdered by Greek brigands in 1870: 'I locked the door and looked on it with dry sobs. Why had he gone? His life was beautiful and pleasant. He lived in an atmosphere of love... I can believe in no future state where we can be divided. I hardly think that death divides us now. (jotting books, 12 April 1871, Rosebery MS 10188, fols. 25-6)' Accusations of homosexual promiscuity appear all to relate to the years after Hannah's death: his 'considerable fancy' for Drumlanrig, his affection for the homosexual British consul in southern Italy, Eustace Neville-Rolfe, his reclusive holidays in the midst of the colony of homosexual English expatriates around Naples, and his purchase (with Neville-Rolfe) of the Villa Delahante at Posilippo in 1897. References to Rosebery in the diaries of the homosexual proselytizer George Ives and, however spuriously, in those of the fantasist Sir Edmund Backhouse suggest that Rosebery's homosexuality was taken for granted in homosexual circles. Queensberry took little convincing. His son's death made Queensberry much more dangerous to Rosebery than he had been in 1893. In the first place, convinced that Rosebery's high office made him immune to punishment -- Ives later claimed that 'Hyde Park Police had orders never to arrest Lord R. on the principle that too big a fish often breaks the line' (Ives's journal, 21 May 1929, Ransom HRC) -- and that 'the Snob Queers' would cover up the circumstances of Drumlanrig's death, he became still freer with charges which, even if false, Rosebery could not easily refute. Second, Queensberry became all the more determined to detach his youngest son, Lord Alfred Douglas, from his relationship with the playwright Oscar Wilde. Wilde was no more than an acquaintance of Rosebery, but the danger of collateral damage from any exposure of the Douglas family's sexual adventures was considerable. Exposure became more likely when Wilde responded to Queensberry's attacks with an ill-advised criminal libel suit. Rosebery's name was mentioned in the grand jury hearing preceding the main trial and leaked into the French press. The collapse of Wilde's libel action was followed by the prosecution of Wilde himself on the strength of the evidence of homosexuality adduced by Queensberry in his own defence. When the jury failed to agree upon a verdict the solicitor-general, Sir Frank Lockwood, insisted upon a retrial for fear that any leniency towards Wilde would fuel rumours about Rosebery. Only when Wilde was convicted and imprisoned in May 1895 was Rosebery relieved of the daily fear that sexual allegations against him would surface in court, protected by privilege and guaranteed publicity. 
The tension that built up steadily from the day of Drumlanrig's death virtually paralysed Rosebery during his last few months as prime minister. His memory of those months remained vivid eight years later: 'I cannot forget 1895. To lie night after night, staring wide awake, hopeless of sleep, tormented in nerves, and to realise all that was going on, at which I was present, so to speak, like a disembodied spirit, to watch one's own corpse as it were, day after day, is an experience which no sane man with a conscience would repeat. (Crewe-Milnes, 2.586-7)' This breakdown, following his failure to alter the 1894 budget, the collapse of his initiative for Lords reform, and the unravelling of his foreign policy completed an ineffective premiership. Always afraid of failure, Rosebery reassured himself by acerbic denunciations of disloyal colleagues, particularly Harcourt, and of his own party. He became the sharpest critic of the 'faddist' programme of 1895 and welcomed the electoral catastrophe that arrived a month after his government's resignation. Gladstone's political re-emergence in September 1896 to advocate European action against the Turks following massacres in Armenia provided the occasion for Rosebery's resignation as Liberal leader in October. A week later he expressed to Hamilton his impatience with the role of 'Mr G's political executor': 'the real fact was that he had been too tied to Gladstonian chains ever since he had taken a prominent part in politics' ('Diary, 1885-1906', 16 Oct 1896). Thus disavowing his party's household god, he began a nine-year effort to rescue Liberalism from the Liberal Party. 
Another period of solitude ended with Rosebery's re-emergence in February 1898 with an effective intervention in support of the Progressive Party in the London county council elections. Over the next five years he developed a role better suited to his abilities and in some ways reminiscent of his successful period on the council -- that of patron to a group of younger Liberals aiming to modernize their party. He cultivated the group of 'Liberal Imperialists', prominently H. H. Asquith, Sir Edward Grey, R. B. Haldane, Ronald Munro Ferguson, and Sidney Buxton -- more cerebral, more metropolitan, and less sectarian than most of the party's rank and file, and untouched by 'little Englander' hostility to the spirit of empire. How far this group shared Rosebery's conviction that a party realignment was inevitable remains unclear, but they did display an independence of thought which Rosebery found refreshing. Their differences with the party mainstream were emphasized by the outbreak of the South African War in October 1899. Though Rosebery and his acolytes had misgivings about the provocative British diplomacy which hastened the conflict, they supported the war once it was under way and relished the embarrassment of the Liberal Party, with its substantial anti-war minority. Public reaction to early British reverses made fashionable the belief that Britain's liberal institutions were unfit for an age of competing empires. The vogue for 'national efficiency' which moved the nation in the wake of reverses in the South African War promised to rehabilitate Rosebery, a long-term iconoclast towards the House of Lords and now a vocal critic of party dogma and discipline. In 1900-01 he gained a renewed prominence, campaigning for Britain's political rejuvenation in a series of platform speeches, notably in his address as rector of Glasgow University, when he warned 'It is beginning to be hinted at that we are a nation of amateurs' ('The Times', 17 Nov 1900). 
Rosebery's broad objectives were clear enough: to 'restore efficiency to our parliament, our administration and our people', to attain 'a condition of national fitness equal to the demands of our empire', and to mobilize that 'great volume of opinion not very expressive... which does not greatly sympathise with the extreme men of either party' (Lord Rosebery, 'National Policy', 1902, 16; Lord Rosebery, 'Liberal Principles and Prospects', 1902, 31). How his objectives were to be achieved was less clear. At times his distaste for conventional politics inclined him towards some of the anti-democratic proposals which gave the national efficiency movement its illiberal aspect: in 1901 he advocated a cabinet of businessmen and was, indeed, said to 'have the 'business man' fad on his brain' (Northbrook to Curzon, 12 Dec 1901, G. R. Searle, 'The Quest for National Efficiency', 1971, 88). At other times, notably in his much-trailed Chesterfield speech of December 1901, he appeared rather to be urging the Liberal Party to mend its ways -- to drop Irish home rule, to love the empire, and to redraw policy on a 'clean slate'. He continued to hanker after the return of the Liberal Unionists to the party. He was, moreover, tempted by press speculation that he might lead a coalition government, formed of the best men of both parties, though he could not ignore the scars left by his premiership. His characteristic response to this dilemma was to wait to be called, but it soon became clear even to the sympathetic Hamilton that there was 'no great flocking of persons to the Rosebery standard' ('Diary, 1885-1906', 3 March 1902). His Gaullist stance annoyed his supporters -- Grey warned him that there was no such thing as a political conscript, and although the Liberal League, formed by the Liberal Imperialist group in February 1902, served in part as a Rosebery vehicle, it emerged as a ginger group on the right of the Liberal Party rather than the independent political organization that Rosebery had wished to create. Rosebery's eclipse began with the revival of partisanship over the 1902 'Education Bill'. Initially sympathetic to the bill as an 'efficiency' measure of modernization, he was persuaded not to separate himself from Liberal criticism of it. His platform speeches concentrated upon the threat to the best urban school boards, while his speech in the House of Lords reiterated nonconformist objections to subsidizing Anglican education. 
The launch of Joseph Chamberlain's campaign for tariff reform in May 1903 -- advocating a departure from Britain's free-trade tradition in order to confer tariff preference upon imperial goods -- did subtler but deeper damage to Rosebery's claim to embody a modern, streamlined, and undogmatic politics. An awareness that his own enthusiasm for empire was shared by the mass of the British people had given Rosebery the confidence that his whiggish views were not unpopular. Liberal embarrassment over empire during the South African War had justified his claim that a party in hock to its activists had grown out of touch with the wider public. After 1903, though, Britain's imperial visionaries aligned themselves with a protectionist policy which Rosebery could not support. He was, like most whigs, a free-trader by habit. Uninterested in economics, he was impervious to protectionist arguments founded upon Britain's relative economic decline. He had attacked the protectionist groundswell for some years before Chamberlain's policy emerged, arguing that a British imperial customs union would weaken the empire internally by encouraging disputes over duty levels, that it would antagonize the rest of the world, and that food duties would turn the working classes against empire. After an initial hesitation he reiterated these arguments in 1903, intensified by his personal dislike of Chamberlain. In his defence of free trade he found himself at one with his party for the first time for a decade. Indeed he believed that 'for the first time since 1886 the deliberate intellect and the highest intellect of the country... is beginning to turn slowly but surely in the direction of Liberalism' ('A Supreme Contest: a Speech', n.d. [1904?], 8), raising the possibility that Liberalism could recapture the centre ground lost by Gladstone, as he had hoped in 1894. In the event the Liberals probably did win the argument over free trade, but the number of tory defectors was small, and the effect of the debate was rather to polarize British politics around the free-trade issue. Rosebery was only one of many Liberal defenders of free trade, and neither the most original nor the most distinctive. 
Rosebery's redundancy was demonstrated by the events of 1905. The 'Relugas compact' of September -- the arrangement by which Asquith, Grey, and Haldane agreed to serve in a future Liberal government if Campbell-Bannerman could be removed to the Lords -- made no reference to Rosebery and was not communicated to him. Nor was Asquith's agreement with Campbell-Bannerman on a step-by-step approach to home rule. Accustomed throughout his career to turning down offers of office, Rosebery did not take kindly to being ignored, and saw Relugas as a betrayal. Unaware of Asquith's steps towards a compromise over home rule, he called at Stourbridge in October for a clear statement of the party's Irish policy. When Campbell-Bannerman unfurled the step-by-step policy in November Rosebery responded with unexpected asperity at Bodmin, rejecting home rule for impairing the Liberals' hard-won unity and declining 'emphatically and explicitly' to serve in a government pledged to home rule. He was no longer likely to be asked. Campbell-Bannerman thought him 'off his head'; even Hamilton thought Rosebery had 'put his foot in it' at Bodmin. 
The last years of his political life saw Rosebery become a purely negative critic of the Liberal governments of Campbell-Bannerman and Asquith. His crusade 'for freedom as against bureaucracy, for freedom as against democratic tyranny, for freedom as against class legislation, and... for freedom as against Socialism' ('The Times', 16 Feb 1910) was a lonely one, conducted from the cross-benches in the Lords. He did join the die-hard unionist peers in attacking Lloyd George's redistributive budget in 1909, but stopped short of voting against the measure for fear of bringing retribution upon the Lords. The crisis provoked by the Lords' rejection of the budget encouraged him to reintroduce his resolutions for Lords reform, but they were lost with the dissolution of parliament in December 1910. After assaulting the 'ill-judged, revolutionary and partisan' terms of the 1911 'Parliament Bill' (Rhodes James, 469), which proposed to curb the Lords' veto, he voted with the government in what proved to be his last appearance in the House of Lords. This was effectively the end of his public life, though he made several public appearances to support the war effort after 1914 and sponsored a 'bantam battalion' in 1915. Though Lloyd George offered him 'a high post not involving departmental labour' to augment his 1916 coalition, Rosebery declined to serve (Crewe-Milnes, 2.51). 
The last year of the war was clouded by two personal tragedies -- his son Neil's death in Palestine in November 1917 and Rosebery's own stroke a few days before the armistice. He regained his mental powers, but his movement, hearing, and sight remained impaired for the rest of his life. His sister, Constance, described his last years as a 'life of weariness, of total inactivity, & at the last of almost blindness'; John Buchan remembered him in his last month of life, 'crushed by bodily weakness' and 'sunk in sad and silent meditations' (Rhodes James, 485). Rosebery died at The Durdans, Epsom, Surrey, on 21 May 1929, to the accompaniment -- as he had requested -- of a gramophone recording of the Eton boating song. He was buried in the small church at Dalmeny. Rosebery was survived by three of his four children: Lady Sybil Myra Caroline Primrose, later Lady Sybil Grant (1879-1955) ['see under 'Grant, Charles John Cecil]; Lady Margaret Primrose, later the marchioness of Crewe (1881-1967); and (Albert Edward) Harry Mayer Archibald Primrose (1882-1974), who became the sixth earl. 
Rosebery wrote a number of literary and historical essays, many of which were edited by John Buchan and published in his 'Miscellanies' (2 vols., 1921). He published two essay-length lives -- 'Sir Robert Peel' (1899) and 'Oliver Cromwell' (1899) -- and four books. The first was a study of William Pitt the younger -- a distant relative on his mother's side whose standard life was by Rosebery's grandfather Lord Stanhope; it was commissioned by John Morley for Macmillan's 'Twelve English Statesmen' series and published in 1891. Three other biographical studies -- 'Napoleon: the Last Phase' (1900), 'Lord Randolph Churchill' (1906), and 'Chatham: his Early Life and Connections' (1910) -- punctuated his semi-retirement. Each displays its author's wit and verbal fluency, though each has its 'longueurs', suggesting that Rosebery was ideally a miniaturist in prose. Frederic Harrison recalled that Macaulay was the model for Rosebery's character studies, which may account for their sometimes dated tone. Technically Rosebery's work certainly compares uncomfortably with the best professional history of the time. He did, though, enjoy the advantage conferred by his status of access to aristocratic houses and to collections of private papers not then generally available, an advantage conspicuous in the Chatham study and in his edition of 'The Windham Papers' (1913). Reviewers enjoyed spotting parallels between Rosebery's subjects' careers and his own. His choice of subject for the two larger works was certainly revealing. 'Chatham' and 'Napoleon' both avoid their subjects' periods of high office and provide deeper character studies than 'Pitt'. Chatham emerges as a 'haughty, impossible, anomalous character... difficult to calculate and comprehend', who 'retires, distempered if not mad, into a cell' after his premiership ('Chatham: his Early Life and Connections', 1910, viii, 25). The anonymous 'Times Literary Supplement' reviewer noted unkindly that Rosebery's Chatham owed his ascent to little more than his eloquence. Napoleon, like Cromwell, represented a type always appealing to Rosebery -- 'the man of destiny, whose spirit attracts and unites and inspires' -- but it is the defeated, exiled Napoleon that Rosebery portrays, a lost leader in premature retirement enduring 'the monotony of a suppressed life' ('Napoleon: the Last Phase', 1900, 162). Even Churchill, personally unlike Rosebery, was depicted as victim of a party machine, 'now so developed that no individual, however gifted, can fight against it' ('Lord Randolph Churchill', 1906, 119-20). In general the professional reception of Rosebery's books was reserved, but lay reviewers were enthusiastic, and the books sold well. 'Pitt', which disappointed Morley, went through twenty-seven printings between 1891 and 1962. 
Few politicians have been the subject of such high hopes on the strength of so little political experience, and though Rosebery's career clearly was an unsuccessful one if success is measured by accomplishment -- he was identified with no major legislative achievement except, indirectly, the creation of the Scottish Office, and his foreign policy was unravelled within a few years of his resignation -- the impression of failure is enhanced by the unusually demanding expectations vested in him. The assumption of future greatness -- 'there is perhaps no man of his age in either House whose political future is so assured', Gladstone wrote in 1883 to James Donaldson (Gladstone, 'Diaries', 10.458) -- hung over him from the start of his career. Even when he was prime minister his junior acolytes in the Liberal Imperialist circle discussed 'how to make Rosebery 'great', which is really rather funny when you come to think about it' (E. Grey to Lady Grey, 21 March 1894, Stansky, 174). 
Most who lived to be disappointed in Rosebery put his failings down to an inscrutable personality -- 'was there ever such a complex person?', Crewe asked, in compiling the official biography (Crewe to the marquess of Huntly, 25 July 1929, Crewe MS 10195). Early in his career his closest political friend had feared that his 'over-sensitive, thin-skinned nature will sadly stand in the way of a really successful political future' (Hamilton to Ponsonby, 5 June 1883, 'Diary, 1880-1885', 1.xxvii). It certainly did not help him. During the second Gladstone government his conviction that first Granville then Gladstone himself had taken against him threatened to become self-fulfilling. His fear that any delay in his attaining offices for which he had been tipped in the press would be taken as a sign that he had been tried and found wanting led him to put himself forward in a manner which won him few friends. Gladstone 'thought it marvellous how so clever a man as Rosebery could be so silly' (ibid., 22 Nov 1882). His everyday actions were guided by a dated etiquette which some found charming, others frustrating. This was most evidently true of his ritual refusal, amid professions of inadequacy, of virtually every preferment offered him. The list of appointments initially declined by Rosebery is formidable: minister at the board of rating (1872), lord lieutenant of Linlithgow (1873), under-secretary at the India Office (1880), member of the Order of the Thistle (1881), trustee of the British Museum (1883), projected minister for Scotland (1883), lord lieutenant of Midlothian (1884), commissioner of works (1884), foreign secretary (1892), Liberal leader in the House of Lords (1892), chairman of the London county council for the second time (1892), high commissioner of the Church of Scotland (1915), unspecified high office in the Lloyd George war coalition (1916). There was generally a reason for refusal, but the fact that he eventually accepted all the more substantial offers except the last led colleagues to see the initial refusal as a tiresome and precious affectation -- 'pretty Fanny's way' in Harcourt's uncharitable phrase. That this 'way' was rooted in a genuine fear of inadequacy and of failure appears incontestable; a telling passage in 'Pitt' describes how men wearied by office none the less dreaded the process of leaving it -- 'the triumph of enemies and the discomfiture of friends' -- as men weary of life still feared death ('Pitt', 1891, 286). 
Personal insecurity probably does explain the paradox that one clearly possessing immense personal magnetism and an easy ability to attract admirers could appear tetchy and defensive to those unready to defer to him. A. H. D. Acland found Rosebery 'intolerable as head of the Cabinet, shy, huffy and giving himself the airs of a little German king' (Rhodes James, 357), while his insensitive chairmanship of the Lords select committee on the reform of the upper house in 1907 helped thwart one of his lifelong projects. With hindsight the chairmanship of the London county council, in which he was a success, can be seen as a position ideal for him -- raised somewhat above the party battle yet not merely ornamental, allowing him to act as a public advocate for a body in which his work was generally admired. It was a position with no equivalent in national politics. 
There are identifiable moments in Rosebery's political career at which his personal shortcomings proved damaging -- most obviously in the prolongation of his quarrel with Harcourt during and after his premiership. But the Victorian political world was crowded with complex and difficult individuals, many of whom enjoyed successful careers. That Rosebery did not, owed something to his personality but more to the problems facing a Liberal peer in a rapidly evolving democracy. Rosebery believed that by the extension of the urban franchise in 1867 'English public life received a shock from which it has scarcely recovered' (Rosebery, 'Sir Robert Peel, review of C. S. Parker's 'Peel'', 'Anglo-Saxon Review', 1899, 92). Like most of his contemporaries in the British political elite, he sought to comprehend democracy and to guide it. He admired Gladstone for a political style which was popular without being demagogic, and discovered in himself a skill in platform oratory virtually unique among Liberal peers. Yet the high point of Weberian charismatic leadership in Britain had been reached in the era of Gladstone and Disraeli; rhetorical skills remained valuable after 1880, but political leadership required also a mastery of the more modern democratic arts of party management and a sensitivity to the demands of the electorate. As a peer Rosebery was disadvantaged in these respects. He never had to 'nurse' a constituency, for instance: his only real experience of electoral work derived from his involvement with Gladstone's Midlothian campaign in 1879-80. This campaign was, of course, a pivotal episode in the democratization of late Victorian politics, but Rosebery's principal contribution to it -- the expenditure of $50,000 to buy up property in the constituency in the hope of generating faggot votes -- was a tactic from an earlier electoral age. Growing electorates and legal restrictions upon election expenditure gave greater prominence to the volunteer activist, who demanded in return, particularly in the Liberal Party, the opportunity to promote his own policy concerns. Political activity became, in the 1880s, less dependent upon the stump oratory at which Rosebery excelled and more dependent upon electoral organization. 
Rosebery had little understanding of the mechanics of modern party organization and was irritated by his colleagues' readiness to defer to the party's rank and file. He believed that party politics worked to obscure the popular will and that 'the great difficulty of the age as regards politics is the impossibility of ascertaining the real feeling of the country' (Rosebery to Haldane, 1 April 1896, Hamer, 252). Never losing his ability to sway an audience -- even the rancorous Bodmin speech of 1905 was punctuated by 'wild applause' -- he became convinced that he understood 'demos' better than Liberal 'faddists'. He was perhaps right, but his awareness of the weakness of his party's programme sometimes blinded him to the limitations of his own. Though lionized as a 'modern' politician by the Webbs and others on the strength of his detachment from party dogmas, his outlook was in fact rather dated by the 1900s. His Macaulayan ideals of enlightened aristocratic government, constitutional reform, and free-trade imperialism had bound him to the Gladstonian Liberal Party whatever his reservations about the Gladstonian style of politics, but he had little contact with the thinkers who refashioned Liberalism in the 1890s and 1900s, and was largely unreceptive to their doctrines of social and fiscal reform. He could support the social measures of the LCC as the fruits of local self-government, but proved resolutely hostile to the statist social reforms of the 1905-14 Liberal governments. As a peer -- and a very wealthy one -- Rosebery was also vulnerable to the revival of the fiscal debate. In 1894 he had been insensitive to the electoral dangers of loading the naval programme onto the existing fiscal system and the electoral advantages of a redistributive budget. After 1903 he was slow to appreciate that fiscal controversy would intensify partisanship, destroying his hope that in his detachment from party he could speak for a silent majority. He himself remained too much of a Gladstonian to stomach either the protectionist remedies of the Unionist tariff reformers or the wealth taxes enacted by the Liberals, but his agnosticism condemned him to political isolation. 'Those who are neither Tariff Reformers nor Socialists nor Home Rulers have no refuge to look to,' he complained in 1907 (Rosebery to Ernest Pretyman, 7 June 1907, Rosebery MS 10202, fol. 171). In the event he found refuge only in his long-promised retirement from politics. 


@@@@@


doc= 35613


Primrose, Sir Henry William (1846-1923), civil servant, was born in Edinburgh on 22 August 1846, the second of the six sons of the Hon. Bouverie Francis Primrose and his wife, Frederica Sophia, daughter of Thomas Anson, first Viscount Anson, and sister of Thomas William Anson, first earl of Lichfield. Primrose, whose father was the second son of Archibald John Primrose, fourth earl of Rosebery, was the cousin of Archibald Philip Primrose, fifth earl of Rosebery, the prime minister. Henry Primrose was educated at Trinity College, Glenalmond, and Balliol College, Oxford. He obtained second classes in classical moderations (1867) and in the final honour school of law and modern history (1869). From Oxford he passed into the home civil service, entering the Treasury in 1869. 
Primrose was one of W. E. Gladstone's secretaries from April to June 1880, but then went to India as secretary to Lord Ripon, the viceroy. In 1884 he returned to Gladstone's service, serving until the fall of the ministry in 1885. In Gladstone's government of 1886 he was head of the Downing Street secretariat. He was the least admiring of Gladstone's secretaries, and was a useful conduit of information to his cousin, Rosebery (then foreign secretary). In 1887 Primrose was appointed secretary to the office of works. In 1888 he married Helen Mary (died 1919), eldest daughter of Gilbert McMicking of Miltonise, Wigtownshire, and formerly the wife of James Montgomery Walker; they had one son. In 1895 Primrose was appointed chairman of the board of customs, and in 1899 of the Board of Inland Revenue, which post he held until he retired from the civil service in 1907, aged sixty-one. As a financier Primrose was a strict Gladstonian at a time when Treasury attitudes were fast changing. His evidence to the select committee on income tax in 1906 vigorously defended Victorian precepts. 
After retirement Primrose continued active in public life. He chaired the Pacific Cable company from 1907 until 1914. In 1911 he chaired a special committee on the financial clauses of the 'Irish Home Rule Bill', a subject with which he had had experience since 1886. He boldly proposed that an Irish government should have full control over its revenue, with the imperial government providing some additional funds to meet the deficit. His plan was thought to offer excessive financial autonomy and was not included in the 'Home Rule Bill' of 1912, the financial clauses of which were drawn up by Herbert Samuel. In 1912 he was a member of the MacDonnell royal commission on the civil service and in 1913 of the Loreburn royal commission on railways. In 1914 Primrose became chairman of the Welsh church commission consequent on Welsh disestablishment. In the First World War he was chairman of the sugar commission and in 1918 he was a member of the Bradbury committee on staff retrenchment in government offices. Primrose was thus a distinguished and valuable public servant, especially known for the clarity of his minutes and reports. He was created KCB in 1899 and was sworn of the privy council in 1912, an unusual honour for a civil servant. Primrose was, like his cousin Lord Rosebery, a chronic insomniac, and suffered from depression as a result. On the morning of 17 June 1923 he was found to have shot himself in Kensington Gardens (he lived nearby at 44 Ennismore Gardens); he was taken to St George's Hospital, where he died almost immediately. 


@@@@@


doc= 35614


Pringle, William Mather Rutherford (1874-1928), politician, was born at Gordon, Berwickshire, on 22 January 1874, the third and youngest son of George Pringle, farm steward, of Gordon, and his wife, Elizabeth Mather. He was educated at Garnethill School, Glasgow, and at Glasgow University, where he graduated with honours in classics and history. In 1904 he was called to the bar by the Middle Temple. On 4 June 1906 he married Lilias Patrick ('b'. 1877/8), who survived him, daughter of Joseph Somerville, timber salesman, of Glasgow. They had four sons and one daughter. 
At the 1906 general election Pringle unsuccessfully contested the Camlachie division of Glasgow as the Liberal candidate. He entered parliament as the member for North-West Lanarkshire at the general election of January 1910, and quickly gained a reputation for his skill in the use of parliamentary procedure and tactics, which he later used to great effect. On 3 August 1914 he made an important speech in the House of Commons in support of the decision to go to war with Germany over the violation of Belgian neutrality: 'We who hold to the Liberal tradition, and still honour Mr Gladstone's ideas, are bound in a conflict of this kind to range ourselves on the side of international morality against the forces of blood and iron' ('Hansard 5C', 66, 1880). But he subsequently objected to what he regarded as the oppressive methods used to carry out the war, opposing conscription and other aspects of the 'Military Service Acts'. 
After the Liberal split which saw Lloyd George become leader of a new coalition government in late 1916, Pringle became one of the most determined and vocal critics of the new prime minister, whom he personally 'detested' (Wilson, 332). He and James Myles Hogge became known as the 'terrible twins' who kept up the attack on the Lloyd George government in defence, as they saw it, of true Liberal beliefs and individual liberty. Pringle strongly condemned Lloyd George's manipulation of his 'Kept Press' (Owen, 467). 
Pringle lost his seat in the 1918 'coupon' election, when he came third behind a coalition Conservative and a Labour candidate at Glasgow Springburn, and he was again third in a by-election at Manchester Rusholme in October 1919. After coming second in a by-election at Yorkshire Penistone in March 1921, he was returned for that seat in the 1922 general election and held it in the following year. He had developed -- after earlier being a critic -- a fierce loyalty to Asquith, and he maintained this throughout his second period in the house, alongside his peculiar ability to annoy and distract ministers through his use of parliamentary tactics. 'The Times' noted that it 'was said that Labour Ministers dreaded nothing more than the guerrilla warfare of Mr Pringle on the Liberal benches' ('The Times', 2 April 1928, 19). Asquith wrote of parliament in 1924 that 'This would be the dullest place in Europe but for Pringle... he is far the most resourceful Parliamentarian in the House' (Asquith, 211). 
In 1924 Pringle was invited to join the Liberal 'shadow cabinet' under Asquith, but in the general election of October 1924 lost his seat. Following the election, an 'angry meeting' (Owen, 684) of around one hundred defeated Liberal candidates was held, with Pringle in the chair. Much of the blame for their defeat they attributed to Lloyd George's failure to direct sufficiently the resources of his 'Lloyd George Fund' towards the general benefit of the party in the election. At this meeting the Liberal and Radical Candidates' Association was formed and Pringle, as its first chairman, sought to have this body gain a formal say in the choice of the parliamentary leadership. 
Pringle also played a significant role in the formation of the Liberal Council in 1927 and was largely responsible for its monthly publication, 'Burdens on Industry'. He attempted to return to parliament, and at the time of his death he was the prospective candidate for Paisley, which had previously been held by Asquith. His loyalty, in his later years, to Asquith was unquestioned, and his ability to keep ministers of whatever party on their toes, sometimes almost as a lone voice, was widely respected. Although not in office he played an influential role in the parliaments of his period. He died of heart failure at his home, Hampton, 10 Sutherland Grove, Southfields, Surrey, on 1 April 1928, and was buried on 5 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 35615


Prinsep, Valentine Cameron (1838-1904), artist and writer, was born on St Valentine's day (14 February), 1838, at Calcutta, the second of the four children of Henry Thoby Prinsep (1792-1878), Indian civil servant and author, and his wife, Sara Monckton (1816-1887), one of seven 'singularly handsome' daughters of James Pattle. Prinsep's parents retired to London in 1843, living first at 9 Chesterfield Street, and then from 1851 at Little Holland House on the Holland estate in Kensington, where they were joined the following year by the artist George Frederic Watts. Prinsep was educated at Haileybury College, with the expectation of joining the Indian Civil Service. However, even before leaving school in 1856 he had decided to become an artist. He was influenced by the salon his mother had established at Little Holland House around Watts. The guests, almost all of whom became Prinsep's friends, included Tennyson, Thackeray, Browning, Holman Hunt, Millais, Leighton, D. G. Rossetti, and Burne-Jones; Sara Prinsep's sister, Julia Margaret Cameron, took photographs of the group. 
With financial support from his father and tuition from Watts, Prinsep embarked on a career which brought him recognition by his peers as a dedicated artist, though never of the first rank: 'well known in Art and highly esteemed in Society... a thorough artist in his aspirations, a fine painter, and a right good honest man' ('VF', 23). His engaging personality made him welcome in the country houses of the aristocracy and newly rich industrialists, in London clubs and theatres; his large build and shock of hair earned him the nickname Buzz. In 1857 he came under the influence of Pre-Raphaelitism when invited by Rossetti to help decorate the Union debating hall in Oxford with scenes from Sir Thomas Malory's 'Morte d'Arthur'. He chose the story of 'Sir Pelleas and the Lady Etarde'. In 1859 he took a studio in Charlotte Street, London, close to Burne-Jones, travelled in Italy with him, and exhibited, for the first time, 'The Queen was in the Parlour Eating Bread and Honey' at the Hogarth Club (Manchester City Art Galleries). The first of his paintings to be exhibited at the Royal Academy, 'How Bianco Capello Sought to Poison her Brother-in-Law the Cardinal de Medici' (1862), was still influenced by the movement and shortly before his death he wrote, for the 'Magazine of Art' (1904), an entertaining account of his early experiences with Rossetti. 
Prinsep studied at Gleyre's atelier in Paris from 1859 to 1860. Shortly after returning to London he became friends with George Du Maurier, who had also attended the atelier and used Prinsep as a model for Taffy in his novel 'Trilby' (1894). Du Maurier introduced Prinsep to the artists of the St John's Wood clique, who became the next major influence on his work. 'Home from the Gleaning' (exh. RA, 1875) and 'The Linen Gatherers' (exh. RA, 1876) are strongly influenced by two members of this eclectic group, Frederick Walker and George Heming Mason. Prinsep's closest friend was Frederic Leighton, whom he first met at Little Holland House about 1856. In 1860 both joined the 38th Middlesex (Artists') rifle volunteer corps, from which Prinsep retired as major in 1885; four years later they acquired neighbouring plots of land in Holland Park Road on which to build studio-houses. Prinsep's costs were paid by his father; Philip Webb, who had recently completed the Red House for William Morris, was his architect. Though considerably altered, the house survives (14 Holland Park Road). 
Through his father's Indian connections Prinsep was commissioned by Lord Lytton, viceroy of India, to paint the Delhi imperial assemblage to celebrate Queen Victoria's accession to the title empress of India in 1877 (Royal Collection). The 27 foot-long painting received a mixed reception when it was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1880. 'Vanity Fair' referred to it as 'that Eastern monstrosity'. However, the commission resulted in Prinsep's election as an associate of the Royal Academy in 1878 and in a number of fine paintings based on his Indian travels: 'A Nautch Girl' (exh. RA, 1878) and 'The Roum-i-Sultana' (exh. RA, 1879) were bought by the prince of Wales (Royal Collection). Prinsep wrote a lively account of the visit, 'Imperial India: an Artist's Journals' (1879). He also tried his hand at writing plays while completing the durbar painting. He was a friend of the actor John Hare, painting his portrait in 1879. The same year Hare produced and acted in Prinsep's two plays: 'Cousin Dick', at the Court Theatre, and 'Monsieur le duc', at the St James's. Later Prinsep wrote two novels: 'Virginie: a Tale of one Hundred Years Ago' (1890) and 'The Story of Abibal the Tsourian' (1893). 
On 28 July 1884 Prinsep married Florence ('b'. 1859), daughter of Frederick Richard Leyland (1831-1892), a Liverpool shipping millionaire and patron of Rossetti, Burne-Jones, and Whistler. Florence's annual income was reputed to be $10,000, and Prinsep was now a wealthy man (Leighton had given him financial support after his father's death). Prinsep joined the boards of shipping and investment companies, he extended his London house, bought property by the sea at Pevensey, and acquired an apartment on the Grand Canal in Venice. 
Prinsep continued to paint, exhibiting at the Royal Academy every year until his death. He was elected a royal academician in 1894 and was appointed professor of painting in 1901 (his lectures were privately published in 1901 and 1902). Of his later works, 'At the Golden Gate' (exh. RA, 1882; Manchester City Art Galleries) and 'Ayesha' (exh. RA, 1887; Tate Collection) are orientalist in style: his diploma work, 'La revolution' (exh. RA, 1896), is a historical piece, set during the French Revolution. He also painted his wife and their three sons, Thoby, Anthony, and Nicholas, as well as commissioned portraits. A number of his works are in the South London Art Gallery. Prinsep died on 11 November 1904 at Welbeck House, Welbeck Street, London, after a prostate operation and was buried in the Brompton cemetery. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35616


Prior, Melton (1845-1910), artist reporter, was born on 12 September 1845 in London, the son of William Henry Prior (1812-1882), draughtsman and landscape painter, and his wife, Amelia. Educated at St Clement Danes Grammar School, London, where he attended art classes, and at Bleriot College, Boulogne, France, he helped his father, and so developed his artistic ability. From 1868 he was one of the 'special artists', employed by the illustrated press, who preceded press photographers. They were sent to sketch newsworthy events; their sketches were worked on by the illustrated paper's studio artists and then engraved on wood or sometimes, from the 1880s, reproduced as photomechanical facsimiles. Prior worked throughout his career for the world's leading weekly illustrated paper, the 'Illustrated London News', which gained an extensive circulation and large profits for its proprietor, Sir William Ingram. 
For five years Prior sketched events in Britain, then in 1873 Ingram sent him as a special war artist on Wolseley's Asante campaign. War artists were an elite: their work was well paid, adventurous, and dangerous. Prior's success in the Second Anglo-Asante War brought him fame and established his career. For the following thirty years he worked primarily as a special war artist, on numerous wars including the 1874 Carlist War, Russo-Turkish War, 1878 Cape Frontier War, Anglo-Zulu War, Anglo-Transvaal War, 1882 Egyptian campaign, eastern Sudan campaigns, Gordon relief expedition, and pacification of Burma (1886-7). From 1889 to 1892 he was in South America, sketching revolutions in Brazil, Argentina, and Venezuela. In 1895, invited by Barney Barnato, he went to Johannesburg and drew mine scenes. He then drew the Jameson raid and its aftermath, and the Matabele (Ndebele) uprising (1896). He went through the brief Graeco-Turkish War (1896), the Afridi campaign (1897) on the north-west frontier of India, and the Cretan rising (1898). In the South African War he witnessed the battle of Elandslaagte, was besieged with White's force in Ladysmith (November 1899 to February 1900), reported Roberts's advance to Pretoria, and returned to England in July 1900, 'the 'doyen' of war artists' ('ILN', 21 July 1900). In 1903 he was on the Somaliland campaign. In 1904 he went to draw the Russo-Japanese War, but the Japanese prevented reporters going to the front, which Prior bitterly resented: he wrote they were 'smiling, deceitful liars' (Prior, 335). Frustrated and disappointed, he returned to England. 
Prior's war reporting had been interspersed with peaceful assignments overseas, including the visit to Athens by the prince of Wales in 1875 and the 1903 Delhi durbar. He went twice round the world, and travelled much in America. He claimed he had experienced twenty-six wars and had between 1873 and 1904 spent only one full year, 1883, at home. He did some work for 'The Sketch', also owned by Ingram. He occasionally fought in battle, was repeatedly under fire, and had, he claimed, numerous narrow escapes from death by shooting, spearing, drowning, or disease. Short (5 feet 61/2 inches), bald, and with a high-pitched voice and very shrill laugh, he was nicknamed 'the screeching billiard ball' (Furniss, 128). A member of the Savage Club, he was energetic, genial, convivial, 'a Rabelaisian humorist [with] a certain roughness of metaphor in his own speech' ('The Times'). 
A competent but not great artist, Prior worked very quickly, usually in pencil or ink. His sketches were lively, pleasing, and often dramatic, with skilful use of chiaroscuro, and the published engravings were often inferior to the sketches. An imperialist, Prior identified with the British forces, especially their officers, and British settlers, and his portrayal of their enemies was unflattering. Well paid and with generous expenses -- Ingram called him the 'Illustrated Luxury' (Prior, 209) -- Prior travelled well provided with whisky and Moyer's tinned Irish stew. He repeatedly drew himself in action. Boosted by the 'Illustrated London News', he enjoyed his celebrity. He belonged to the adventurous, self-advertising school of war correspondents of whom Archibald Forbes was a leading figure. He was awarded foreign decorations and, like his colleagues, resented the War Office's refusal to award campaign medals to war correspondents. However, he wore the campaign ribbons to which he believed himself entitled. 
Prior married in 1873 Mary, daughter of John Greeves, a surgeon. Except for accompanying him to Turkey in 1877, she stayed at home while he travelled, and reportedly his long absences contributed to the breakdown of the marriage. She was killed in 1907 in a tramway accident at Lewisham, London, where they lived. In 1908 Prior married Georgina Catherine, daughter of George MacIntosh Douglas; she survived him. He had no children from either marriage. In his last years Prior's health deteriorated, and he wrote his memoirs which -- edited, expurgated, and cut by about half by his 'ILN' colleague S. L. Bensusan -- were published after his death. Following heart weakness, asthma, and in February 1910 a serious attack of pleurisy, he died at his home, 12A Carlyle Mansions, Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, on 2 November 1910, and was buried at Hither Green cemetery, London. A memorial tablet was placed in St Paul's Cathedral crypt. 
Through his work in the 'Illustrated London News', Prior helped shape the Victorian public's perceptions of the empire and of war. His pictures remain useful historical sources and have been much reproduced, particularly in works of military history. 


@@@@@


doc= 35617


Pritchard, Sir Charles Bradley (1837-1903), administrator in India, born at Clapham on 5 May 1837, was the eldest son of Charles Pritchard (1808-1893), headmaster and astronomer, and his first wife, Emily, daughter of J. Newton. After early education by his father he entered Rugby School in 1849, and was transferred to Sherborne School in 1852. He obtained a nomination to the Indian army, and went to Addiscombe College in 1854, but secured a writership in the Indian Civil Service and completed his education at Haileybury College. In 1862 he married Emily Dorothea, daughter of Hamerton John Williams; they had two sons and two daughters. 
On his arrival at Bombay in January 1858 Pritchard first served as assistant magistrate and collector at Belgaum, and was active in suppressing banditry in the district. In 1865 he was put in charge of Thana, and carried on a successful campaign to extend the control of the forest department over the forests of the district. Nominated to the province of Khandesh in 1867, he was active in trying to check the exploitation of the Bhils by moneylenders, and in organizing relief measures during the famine of 1868. The trenchant manner in which he dealt with fraud in the public departments led to his appointment as first collector of salt revenue in the Bombay presidency. In this capacity he reformed the administration, suppressed smuggling, and established a large salt factory at Kharaghoda. Considerable opposition was excited by the system of private licences, which he introduced with a view to ensuring that the salt was properly weighed, but owing to his perseverance the controversial tax on salt became gradually easier to collect. The stability of the Bombay salt revenue was henceforth assured, and when in 1876 a commission was appointed to reform the abuses of the Madras salt revenue, Pritchard was nominated its president. 
In 1875 Pritchard put forward a plan to reform the system of excise ('abkari') on Indian-made liquor and toddy (the fermented sap of palm trees) in the Bombay presidency. At the time the manufacture and sale of these drinks was highly localized, which made it hard for the government to collect the excise. Pritchard's plan was to centralize the manufacture of liquor in central distilleries, to discourage toddy-drinking by placing a steep tax on toddy trees, and to require all liquor shopkeepers to be licensed and to buy their supplies from the central distilleries. These proposals were accepted by the government of Bombay and formed the basis for 'Act V' of 1878. Pritchard was appointed first 'abkari' commissioner in the same year so that he could personally supervise the implementation of the act. Raising as it did the price of liquor and toddy, the new system proved very unpopular, and there was widespread protest as well as evasion of the law. Although a few concessions had to be made, Pritchard refused to compromise on the fundamental principles. Between 1874 and 1888, excise revenue rose in consequence by 145 per cent. 
Pritchard, who had been made CSI in 1886, held the post of commissioner of Sind from 1887 to 1889, and there he did much to develop harbour works and railway communications. He revived the idea of the Jamrao canal, which was completed in 1901, and he set on foot the scheme for the construction of a line linking up Karachi with the railway system of Rajputana which was carried out by his successor, Sir Arthur Trevor. 
In November 1890 Pritchard was promoted to be revenue member of the government of Bombay, and in 1891 was created KCIE. In the following year he took his seat on the central legislative council as member for the public works department. During his tenure of office he frequently found himself at variance with Lord Elgin, the viceroy, and with the majority of his colleagues on questions of high policy. He disapproved of the 'forward' policy, and he joined Sir Antony MacDonnell and Sir James Westland in protesting against the high expenditure and casualties involved in military expeditions to Waziristan, Swat, Chitral, and Tirah. In 1896 his health showed signs of failure, and he resigned his seat on the council. He returned to England and settled in London. He died at his home, 2 Charles Street, Berkeley Square, London, on 23 November 1903, and was buried at Norwood. A memorial tablet to him was placed in the crypt of St Paul's Cathedral, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 35618


Pritchett, Robert Taylor (1828-1907), gun maker and landscape painter, was born, probably in London, on 24 February 1828, the son of Richard Ellis Pritchett ('c'.1782-1866), and his wife, Ann Dumbleton. His father was head of the firm of Enfield gun makers, which supplied arms to the East India Company and to the Board of Ordnance. Educated at King's College School, London, he entered his father's firm, taking charge -- at an early age -- of the royal small arms factory at Enfield. He was made free of the Gunmakers' Company by patrimony and took livery in 1849, and he was gun maker at 86 St James's St, London, from 1856 to 1862. By 1852 Pritchett was working with William Ellis Metford; they invented the Pritchett rifle bullet with 'a hollow and unplugged base which did much to counteract the eccentricity of the Enfield Rifle' ('The Times', 20 June 1907). The invention brought Pritchett fame, the nickname the Father of the Enfield Rifle, and an award of $1000 from the government on its adoption by the small-arms committee. He married Louisa Kezia McRae (died 1899) on 22 September 1857; they had a son and a daughter. His wife and both children predeceased him. 
With the abolition of the East India Company in 1858, Pritchett's firm lost its principal customer and he made a new career for himself as an artist. However, he continued to lecture on gunlocks and rifles, remaining a lifelong liveryman of the Gunmakers' Company; he was also an original member of the Victoria Rifles. As an artist he retained, as his device, an ancient harquebusier and his gun -- an allusion to his early trade -- and he drew the illustrations for Sir Sibbald Scott's 'The British Army' (1868). Pritchett helped to establish the London Working Men's College, and in 1851, 1852, 1869, and 1871 he exhibited at the Royal Academy. In the 1860s, probably through his friendship with John Tenniel, Pritchett joined the staff of 'Punch', made some twenty-six drawings for publication, and became a close friend of Charles Keene, John Leech, and Myles Birket Foster. He travelled in Britain and abroad and exhibited views of the continent. In 1868, while in the Netherlands, he met the painter Jozef Israels and dined at the palace of Het Loo with the Belgian king Leopold II. In the same year and in 1870 he exhibited views of Scheveningen at the Royal Academy and in 1871 he published 'Brush Notes in Holland'; other publications included 'Smokiana: Historical and Ethnographical, etc', published in facsimile by photochromolithography in 1890. In 1874-5 he visited Norway and subsequently published 'Gamle Norge' (1878), and he illustrated twenty-four articles on Norway in the 'Art Journal' in 1877-8. 
In March 1868 Queen Victoria bought two of Pritchett's watercolours of Scotland, perhaps through the duchess of Atholl. This signalled the beginning of sustained royal patronage of the artist. A sketch of Skye was shown at Agnew's in 1868 and two exhibitions of Pritchett's views of the Netherlands were held there in 1869; more were shown in later years. Princess Louise visited an exhibition in 1869 and, in 1870, she and Lord Lorne visited the artist's house, the New Lodge, at Esher, Surrey. In June 1868 Pritchett had requested permission to sketch at Claremont near by, and in 1870 he showed his work to Queen Victoria, who acquired sketches of Esher. The prince of Wales bought two views of Denmark; in November 1871 he saw Pritchett's drawings of Paris during the Franco-Prussian War, published as 'Paris 1871: under the Reign of the Commune'. 
A keen and expert yachtsman, by 1899 Pritchett had been made marine painter to the Royal Thames yacht club. Between 1880 and 1882 he went round the world with Joseph Lambert and his wife on their yacht and illustrated their book 'The Voyage of the 'Wanderer'' (1883). In 1883 and 1885 he travelled as artist on the journeys of Sir Thomas and Lady Brassey on the 'Sunbeam'. His illustrations appear in Lady Brassey's 'In the Trades, the Tropics and the Roaring Forties' (1885) and 'The Last Voyage of the 'Sunbeam'' (1889). Pritchett lectured about his travels and exhibited his work in London between 1884 and 1890. His illustrations appear in the 1890 edition of Charles Darwin's 'Voyage of the 'Beagle'' and in the 'Badminton Volumes' on 'Yachting' (1894) and 'Sea Fishing' (1895). He also published 'Pen and Pencil Sketches: Shipping and Craft All Round the World' (1899). 
From 1872 Queen Victoria commissioned from Pritchett over eighty watercolours of ceremonies relating to her golden and diamond jubilees and scenes of family events; these are now in the Royal Collection. She was delighted to have found an artist able to record on a small scale, and at small expense, the many events of her later years. Pritchett was also prepared to accept criticism and, at her request, to make corrections to his watercolours. He attended many ceremonies, anxious to be commissioned to paint the scenes for his royal patron. On 7 September 1898 he suggested publishing a book containing thirty sketches made for the queen, for 'without the Queen's favour the Sketches are things of the past, with it they will be Kings of the Future' (Windsor Castle, Royal Archives, PP Vic 1209), but the scheme was never carried out. Queen Victoria's death in 1901 was a great blow to Pritchett, 'depriving him as it did of a 'quasi' right of 'entree' on grand occasions' and 'closing one of the principal sources of his slender income' ('Catalogue', 7). 
Pritchett died, after months of illness, on 16 June 1907 at Burghfield, Berkshire, the village where he lived. He was buried in the churchyard at Burghfield. The sale of his memorabilia, books, and watercolours, held by Haslam & Son at Reading on 30-31 October 1907, contained many of his own versions of watercolours painted for the queen; some were purchased by Edward VII. Pritchett's works fetched low prices; his obituarist in 'The Times' (20 June 1907) rightly described him as 'a man of strangely varied talent who had in some measure outlived his fame'. 


@@@@@


doc= 35619


Probert, Lewis (1837-1908), Congregational minister and college head, third son of Evan Probert, a miner, and his wife, Mary, was born at Llanelli, Brecknockshire, on 22 September 1837. He was baptized on 15 October 1837. He became a Congregational church member during a revival in 1860, and began to preach in 1862. After a short preparatory course at the Revd Henry Oliver's school at Pontypridd, Probert entered Brecon Independent college in 1863. In July 1867 he was ordained to the Congregational ministry at Bodringallt, in the Rhondda valley, where he was active in establishing new churches among a rapidly growing colliery population, particularly in the villages of Ystrad, Cwm-parc, Tonypandy, and Pentre. In October 1874 he moved to Porthmadog, Caernarvonshire, where he spent twelve years again leading the effort to expand and build Congregational chapels. 
In 1886 Probert returned to Pentre. Here he added to his renown as a preacher an increasing reputation as an essentially conservative theologian. Accordingly, upon the death of Evan Herber Evans in 1896, Probert was chosen to succeed him as principal of the Congregational college at Bangor, a post which he held until his death. At the time, Congregational students at Bangor were being prepared in co-operation with the Baptist denomination, and Probert's skill and diplomacy in maintaining the unity of the college was renowned. In 1891 he received the degree of DD from Ohio University, and was chairman of the Welsh Congregational Union for 1901. Among his most notable publications were 'Y weinidogaeth ymneillduol yng Nghymru' (The nonconformist ministry in Wales) (1882) and a commentary on the 'Romans', 'Esboniad ar y Rhufeiniaid' (1890). 'Nerth y goruchaf' (1906), a treatise on the work of the spirit, sheds important light on the nature of religious revivals in Wales. 
Probert was twice married: first, on 14 September 1870, to Annie (1844/5-1874), daughter of Edward Watkins, a miner from Blaenau, Monmouthshire, and second, on 20 May 1886, to Martha('b'. 1845/6), only daughter of Benjamin Probert, a boot manufacturer from Builth. Probert died suddenly on 29 December 1908 at Henfryn, Bangor, Caernarvonshire, and was buried at Llanelli. 


@@@@@


doc= 35620


Procter, Francis (1812-1905), Church of England clergyman and liturgical scholar, born at Hackney on 21 June 1812, was the only son of Francis Procter, a warehouseman in Gracechurch Street, Manchester, and his wife, Mary. He was of delicate health, and spent the early years of his life at Newland vicarage, Gloucestershire, under the care of an uncle, Payler Procter, who was vicar there. In 1825 he was sent to Shrewsbury School under Samuel Butler, and thence passed in 1831 to St Catharine's College, Cambridge, where another uncle, Dr Joseph Procter, was master. In 1835 he graduated BA as thirtieth wrangler and eleventh in the second class of the classical tripos. In the following year he was ordained deacon in the diocese of Lincoln, and in 1838 priest in the diocese of Ely. He served curacies at Streatley, Bedfordshire, from 1836 to 1840, and at Romsey from 1840 to 1842, when he gave up for a time parochial work in order to become fellow and assistant tutor of his college. In 1847 he left the university for the vicarage of Witton, Norfolk. There the rest of his long life was spent. In 1848 he married Margaret, daughter of Thomas Meryon of Rye, Sussex; they had five sons and three daughters. Procter died at Witton on 24 August 1905 and was buried in its churchyard. 
Procter was author of 'A History of the Book of Common Prayer, with a Rationale of its Offices', first published in 1855. In many subsequent editions Procter kept the work abreast of the liturgical studies of the day. Further revised with Procter's concurrence in 1901 by W. H. Frere, it remained of value for many years. Later he edited the Sarum breviary, for which he transcribed the text of the great breviary printed at Paris in 1531. The first volume, with Christopher Wordsworth as joint editor (and with the assistance of Henry Bradshaw and others), was published in 1875, the second in 1882, and the third in 1886. Procter's liturgical work was careful and scholarly; his text book followed the lines of sound exposition laid down by Charles Wheatley (1686-1742) and his followers, and his edition of the Sarum breviary was the most notable achievement of an era which was first developing the systematic study of medieval service books. 


@@@@@


doc= 35621


Proctor, Robert George Collier (1868-1903), bibliographer, was born at Budleigh Salterton, Devon, on 13 May 1868, the only child of Robert Proctor (1821-1880) and his wife, Anne Tate. His father was a good classical scholar, while his grandfather Robert Proctor (1798-1875) published in 1825 a description of a journey in South America, and married Mary, sister of John Payne Collier, who was thus the bibliographer's great-uncle. A sister of Proctor's father, Mariquita, was first wife of George Edmund Street, the architect. 
Proctor, who early developed a precocious love of study, went from a preparatory school at Reading to Marlborough College at the age of ten. But his father died on 5 March 1880, and soon afterwards Proctor was taken away from Marlborough, it is said partly owing to eye trouble. The family had settled at Bath as early as January 1878, and in January 1881 the boy entered Bath College. In 1886 he won an open classical scholarship at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, and he matriculated at the university in October. His mother lived at Oxford during his academic course. He won a first class in classical moderations in Hilary term 1888, and graduated BA in 1890. While an undergraduate, Proctor engaged in antiquarian research; a visit to Greece stimulated his archaeological interests. As a schoolboy he had collected books, and at Oxford he spent much time in his college library. A love of bibliographical study developed, and he prepared a catalogue of the Corpus incunabula and printed books up to 1600. 
Proctor remained at Oxford after taking his degree in order to continue his study of early printed books. Between 23 February 1891 and September 1893 he catalogued some 3000 incunabula in the Bodleian Library, continuing the work begun by E. Gordon Duff, and he did similar work at New College and at Brasenose. On 16 October 1893 he is first found in the house lists of the British Museum, having competed successfully (after a first failure) for entry into the library. He remained as assistant in the printed books department until his death. He lived at Wimbledon from the autumn of 1893 to the summer of 1897, when he and his mother moved to a new house at Oxshott. At the British Museum he soon became a leading expert on early typography. He rearranged the incunabula at the museum and revised their entries in the catalogue, in which he was also responsible for the heading 'Liturgies'. He soon set himself to describe every fount of type used in Europe up to 1520, and first read through the whole of the British Museum catalogue. His reputation was finally established by his 'Index of early printed books from the invention of printing to the year MD', issued in four parts in 1898, the result of four years' labour. He then worked on a similar index for the period 1501-20, but of four projected sections only the German one was completed in his lifetime (1903). 
Proctor's earliest contribution to bibliographical research was an article on Jan van Doesborgh, the sixteenth-century printer of Antwerp, which appeared in 'The Library' in 1892 and was expanded into a monograph for the Bibliographical Society in 1894. Proctor soon read other papers before that society, for which he also prepared 'A classified index to the Serapeum' (1897) and 'The printing of Greek in the fifteenth century' (1900). He likewise printed for private circulation three pamphlets on early printing, published in 1895 and 1897. 
Proctor subsequently experimented in Greek printing, adapting a beautiful type from the sixteenth-century Spanish fount used in the 'New Testament' of the Complutensian polyglot 'Bible'. With his new type Proctor had printed at the Chiswick Press an edition of Aeschylus' 'Oresteia', which Frederic Kenyon completed for publication in 1904. Homer's 'Odyssey' was subsequently printed in the same type in 1909. 
Interest in the work of William Morris's Kelmscott Press led to an acquaintance with Morris, with whose socialist opinions Proctor was in sympathy. On F. S. Ellis's death in 1901 Proctor became one of the trustees under Morris's will. Morris's influence developed in Proctor an enthusiasm for Icelandic literature. His first rendering of an Icelandic saga, 'A Tale of the Weapon Firthers', was printed privately in 1902 as a wedding gift for his friend Francis Jenkinson of Cambridge University Library. He later published a version of the 'Laxdaela saga' (1903). 
From boyhood Proctor, who never married, often went on long walking tours, usually with his mother, in Great Britain and on the continent and in Scandinavia. On 29 August 1903 he left London for a solitary walking tour in the Austrian Tyrol. He reached the Taschach hut in the Pitzthal on 5 September and left to cross a glacier pass without a guide. Nothing more was heard of him; he doubtless perished in a crevasse. Some have thought that suicide was a possible explanation, caused by a knowledge of his oncoming blindness. At the end of the month, when his disappearance was realized in Britain, the weather had broken and no search was possible. 
A memorial fund was formed for the purpose of issuing his scattered 'Bibliographical Essays': the collection appeared in 1905, with a memoir by A. W. Pollard. The memorial fund also provided for the compilation and publication of the three remaining parts of Proctor's 'Index of Early Printed Books from 1501 to 1520', of which Frank Isaac published the section on Italy, Switzerland, and eastern Europe as late as 1938. 
For the major collections of the world today 'Proctor order' is still followed. This means that the books are arranged and described in order of country of origin, then of town, then of printer, in chronological order. Proctor order is used in the incunabula catalogues of the British Library (beginning in 1908 and still incomplete), Cambridge University Library (J. C. T. Oates, 1954), and Harvard University (James E. Walsh, beginning in 1991). Smaller collections find it more appropriate to arrange their incunabula in alphabetical order according to authors and anonymous headings. 


@@@@@


doc= 35622


Propert, John Lumsden (1834-1902), physician and art critic, was born on 9 April 1834, the son of John Propert (1792-1867), surgeon, and his wife, Juliana Ross. His father founded in 1855 the Royal Medical Benevolent College, Epsom, and served as its treasurer. Propert was educated at Marlborough College (August 1843 - December 1847), and at King's College Hospital. He obtained the diploma of the Royal College of Surgeons of England and the licence of the Society of Apothecaries in 1855, and in 1857 he graduated MB with honours in medicine at the University of London. He then joined his father in general practice in New Cavendish Street, London, and became highly successful. On 21 April 1864 he married Mary Jessica ('bap'. 1835), daughter of William and Caroline Hughes of Worcester, with whom he had three sons and three daughters. 
Propert was widely known in artistic circles as a good etcher. He favoured landscapes, particularly river or marine views, and exhibited his work frequently at the Royal Academy from 1870 to 1882. Later in life he also took up landscape painting in oils. He was a connoisseur, as well as a practitioner, of art in the broadest sense, and his home, 112 Gloucester Place, Portman Square, London, was filled with beautiful specimens of Wedgwood, bronzes, and jewelled work. His deepest fascination was reserved for portrait miniatures and he accrued one of the most significant private collections of miniatures in existence in the late nineteenth century. A contemporary, G. C. Williamson, doubted that there had ever been: 'a private collection so numerous in examples of the finest work of each of the great masters' (Williamson, 'Portrait Miniatures', 2.141) and it was certainly an exceptional, balanced collection containing many signed examples of work by miniaturists of the first order. Today miniatures with a Propert provenance grace collections such as the Victoria and Albert Museum, London (Nicholas Hilliard, 'Mrs Holland'), the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge (Samuel Cooper, 'Robert Lilburne'), and the Huntington Library and Art Collections, San Marino (Andrew Plimer, 'The Three Graces'). A privately printed catalogue was issued prior to the collection's dispersal, following an exhibition at the Fine Art Society, London, in May 1897. 
It was, however, as a scholar rather than a collector that Propert made his greatest contribution to the subject. His 'History of Miniature Art with Notes on Collectors and Collections' (1887) presented the public with the first scholarly and comprehensive treatment of the history of portrait miniatures, setting their development in England in the early sixteenth century in the context of early illuminated manuscripts. He also compiled in 1889 the catalogue of the 'Exhibition of Portrait Miniatures' at the Burlington Fine Arts Club. Propert died from pneumonia at his home, 112 Gloucester Place, London, on 7 March 1902 and was buried at Brookwood cemetery. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35623


Prothero, Sir George Walter (1848-1922), historian, was born on 14 October 1848 at Charlton, Wiltshire, the eldest of the four sons of the Revd George Prothero, vicar of Clifton upon Teme, Worcestershire, later rector of Whippingham, Isle of Wight, chaplain-in-ordinary to Queen Victoria, and canon of Westminster, and his wife, Emma, daughter of the Revd William Money Kyrle of Homme House, Herefordshire, and Whetham House, Wiltshire. His brother Rowland Edmund Prothero was president of the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries from 1916 to 1919. 
Prothero was educated on the foundation at Eton College and became head of the school. In 1868 he went to King's College, Cambridge, as a scholar; he was awarded the Bell scholarship in 1869, and in 1872 was sixth in the classical tripos. He was elected a fellow of King's in 1872; he also captained his college boat (1870-71). After a short time as assistant master at Eton, he studied at Bonn University, from 1873 to 1874, under von Sybel; there he became familiar with the work of the great German historians of the time. It was at Bonn that Prothero began to develop a strong commitment to what C. H. Firth called 'the historical teaching of history' -- the view that the distinct, objective, methodological techniques developed by historians had a unique educational value and should therefore be taught as an intrinsic component of every university history course. When Prothero returned to Cambridge in 1875 he persuaded John Seeley, regius professor of history, to allow him to lecture on the newly created history tripos. Seeley agreed on condition that Prothero did so, not on the German history he so admired but on the middle ages, for which the board of historical studies was finding it difficult to find a reliable teacher. Prothero complied, and his 'Life and Times of Simon de Montfort' (1877) was written as a text to support his lectures. After a year of trying he then succeeded in persuading the King's College educational council to support the new tripos by establishing a college lectureship in history, to which he himself was elected in 1876. His wife, whom he married in 1882, was Mary Frances, daughter of Samuel Butcher, bishop of Meath, and sister of Samuel Henry Butcher and of John George Butcher, later Lord Danesfort. There were no children of the marriage. 
In May 1884 Prothero was one of five college lecturers to be appointed to the first university lectureships in history, and a year later he was one of a small group who campaigned successfully for the addition to the history tripos of a special subject, which, based on the detailed study of historical source material, was intended to teach students historical techniques. Prothero's chief and most enduring work of scholarship is a compilation, 'Select Statutes and other Documents Illustrative of the Reigns of Elizabeth and James I' (1894), which was intended for teachers and students of history; it went into four highly influential editions. 
In 1894 Prothero was appointed to the newly created chair of modern history at Edinburgh University. In 1899 he accepted the editorship of the 'Quarterly Review', resigned by his brother Rowland, which he held until his death. The 'Quarterly' was a digest of articles on politics, literature, art, archaeology, philosophy, and religion, but rarely published historical material. Indeed of the eighteen articles written by Prothero himself during his editorship none was on history. No longer a specialist teacher or writer of history, he now took on a new role as a high-profile spokesman for British historical scholarship. He was elected president of the Royal Historical Society (1901-5), fellow of the British Academy (1903), Rede lecturer at Cambridge (1903), Lowell lecturer at Boston University and Schouler lecturer at Johns Hopkins University, USA (1910), Chichele lecturer at Oxford (1915, lectures delivered 1920). He was co-editor of the 'Cambridge Modern History' (1901-12) and general editor of the 'Cambridge Historical Series'. He used his standing in the social and intellectual life of the London of his time to promote ideas of community and co-operation in British historical scholarship, and to help to define a growing sense among historians that they were part of a profession with a clearly defined set of skills and duties, and a career structure. Prothero acted as historical adviser to the Foreign Office between 1917 and 1919, where, working with the intelligence division of the Admiralty, the geographical section of the general staff of the War Office, the war trade intelligence department, and a specially created historical section of the Foreign Office, he edited the handbooks containing the relevant historical, geographical, and economic data supplied to British delegates at the Peace Conference at Versailles in 1919. These 162 handbooks were published in 25 volumes, by HMSO, in 1920. Prothero himself was invited to attend the peace conference in November 1918 but a severe attack of influenza delayed his arrival until February 1919. As a result he was not asked to serve on any of the committees and was rarely consulted. The two historical memoranda he did produce went unread, prompting him to reflect that he felt he was 'the fifth wheel in the coach'. In 1920 Prothero was created KBE for his services to the peace effort. He died at his home, 24 Bedford Square, London, on 10 July 1922. 


@@@@@


doc= 35624


Prothero, Rowland Edmund, first Baron Ernle (1851-1937), author, land agent, and politician, was the third son of Canon George Prothero and Emma, daughter of the Revd William Money Kyrle of Homme House, Herefordshire; he was born at Clifton upon Teme, Worcestershire, on 6 September 1851. His father was the rector of Whippingham in the Isle of Wight, and the proximity of the church to Osborne, Queen Victoria's summer residence, brought the Prothero family into close contact with the royal family and their many distinguished guests. Educated first at home by his mother, who gave him a grounding in English, Latin, French, and German, the young Prothero also learned arithmetic and writing from the village schoolmaster. At the age of ten he was sent to Temple Grove at East Sheen, London, a well-known private school; but a prolonged illness kept him at home until he was well enough to go to Marlborough in 1864. From there he entered Balliol College, Oxford, to read law and history, took a first class in modern history in 1875, and shortly afterwards was elected a fellow of All Souls. 
After a year spent at Darmstadt improving his German, Prothero trained as a barrister and practised briefly on the Oxford circuit until, in 1881, the weakening of his eyesight obliged him to give up a career in the law. In an effort to improve his eyes he took up an outdoor life, walking the length and breadth of France. His time there, spent following the paths of Jeanne d'Arc, Agnes Sorel, and Rabelais, and staying in primitive village inns, gave him a lasting love for that country, and led eventually to a collection of his essays on French poetry and related topics in 'The Pleasant Land of France', published in 1908. 
His choice of career still limited by his improved but frail eyesight, Prothero was a proctor at Oxford in 1883-4, and then, at the age of thirty-three, embarked on gaining a livelihood by his pen, a profession which gave him some latitude in the hours he chose to devote daily to reading and writing. He was, nevertheless, remarkably prolific, publishing as many as fifty-four unsigned articles in seven years, mainly in the 'Quarterly Review' and the 'Edinburgh Review'. He developed an attractively simple, pellucid style, writing on a variety of biographical, historical, topographical, political, and literary subjects, as well as producing obituaries of leading figures of the day, and contributing signed articles to 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine' and other periodicals. Having some knowledge of farming (some farmland was attached to the rectory at Whippingham), he wrote in 1887-8 for 'The Guardian' on the effect of the great depression in agriculture on the glebe lands of the clergy, and on the anti-tithe agitation in Wales. A long-standing interest in the history of agriculture led in 1888 to a book on 'The Pioneers and Progress of English Farming', which was subsequently developed into his well-known 'English Farming Past and Present', a work hailed as a 'classic' on its appearance in 1912, and which went through five editions in the author's lifetime. 
Prothero's literary career advanced as he became assistant editor of 'The Nineteenth Century', and in 1893 editor of the 'Quarterly Review'. His position had become financially secure and in August 1891 he married Mary Beatrice, third daughter of John Bailward of Horsington Manor, Somerset, and the sister of an old undergraduate friend at Balliol. They were married by Canon Prothero in the Henry VII chapel of Westminster Abbey, and settled down to live at 3 Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, a house which remained Prothero's London home for the rest of his life. His wife, a gifted artist in water-colours and a lover of horses and dogs, gave him a son, and they enjoyed a brief seven and a half years of 'perfect happiness' until her untimely death in 1899. 
Meanwhile, a steady flow of major works ran from Prothero's pen -- a life of A. P. Stanley in 1893, and in 1896 his edition of the previously unpublished 'Letters of Edward Gibbon, 1753-94', followed in 1898-1901 by the six volumes of the 'Letters and Journals of Lord Byron'. Queen Victoria commissioned from him for private circulation a 'Life of Prince Henry of Battenberg' (1897). A familiar figure at literary gatherings of the period, Prothero rubbed shoulders with such celebrities as Gladstone, Tennyson, Browning, Huxley, and Oscar Wilde. Through visits home to Whippingham his acquaintances also included Crown Prince Frederick of Germany and his wife, and Princess Alice, the second daughter of Queen Victoria who had married Prince Louis of Hesse (with whom he frequently dined while at Darmstadt), as well as many other distinguished members of the European aristocracy. 
Suddenly, in 1898, Prothero decided to give up his now established literary career and turn to estate management, accepting the handsome offer of the duke of Bedford to become his chief agent. Prothero was then aged forty-seven and, as he remarked, if he were to make a new career this was the time. He was succeeded as editor of the 'Quarterly Review' by his eldest brother, George Walter Prothero. 
Prothero's change of course was not quite so abrupt or so unlikely as some contemporaries supposed, for he had already some experience in managing estates for an uncle and for All Souls. His move to Bedfordshire was marred by a great personal loss -- the death of his wife -- but three years later, in April 1902, he married Barbara Jane, the only daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Charles Hamley, who after her father's early death had spent much of her life with her uncle, General Sir Edward Hamley, MP for Stockport. She was an early supporter of the cause of women's suffrage, and also a talented miniature painter, and a writer of short stories, which were published in 'Blackwood's Magazine'. She died in 1930, predeceasing her husband by seven years. 
While serving as chief agent for the duke of Bedford, Prothero still managed to put aside two or three hours a day for reading and writing, and continued to publish books and articles. In 1903 began the third phase of his life, a career in public life. He became chairman of the higher education committee of Bedfordshire county council, and in 1907 stood unsuccessfully as Unionist candidate for the parliamentary seat of Biggleswade. The introduction of the 1911 'National Insurance Act' encouraged him to put forward a scheme for associating village benefit clubs into large groups, and for long he was president of the newly formed National Federation of Rural Approved Societies, an organization always close to his heart and for which he was widely remembered by farm workers. In 1914 he was chosen to stand unopposed as member of parliament for the University of Oxford, though at the age of sixty-three he found life in the House of Commons somewhat strange and lonely. However, he served on two highly important inquiries, the Milner and Selborne committees on agriculture, whose proposals he was to put into effect when asked by Lloyd George in December 1916 to become president of the board of agriculture. 
As president Prothero undertook a demanding role at a time of crisis, when as a result of the German submarine warfare the nation's food supplies were under severe threat and it was becoming evident that the expansion of agricultural production at home was vital for sustaining the war effort. In promoting his 'plough campaign' to expand production of grains and potatoes on suitable grasslands, Prothero found it difficult at first to convince farmers and the public of the need for urgent and drastic measures. His plans for higher production had to meet the problems of shortages of farm equipment, inadequate supplies of fertilizers, and, not least, a critical lack of labour as many skilled farm workers had joined the armed forces. In addition to obtaining the services of British troops, German prisoners of war, and public schoolboys to help get in the crops, he also established a women's branch of the board of agriculture to recruit village women and to organize the Women's Land Army, as well as to foster the infant Women's Institute movement. The success of the plough campaign in adding nearly 3 million acres to the arable acreage, together with the passing of the 1917 'Corn Production Act' (designed to win over farmers to the policy of expanding corn production after many years of converting to more profitable grass) played a key part in sustaining the country through the final stages of the First World War. The 'Corn Production Act' also promised to put British agriculture on a new post-war course of government-supported high production, thereby ending the long depression which had affected grain farming before the war. The failure of government to follow Prothero's policies after his resignation in 1919 was a prime cause of the agricultural problems that arose in the 1920s. 
Prothero's retirement from government was probably hastened by the news near the end of the war of the death of his only son in Mesopotamia. He had been created Baron Ernle in 1919, and lived on in retirement, still battling with weakening eyesight, for a further eighteen years. Two more books appeared in the 1920s, 'The Land and its People' (1925) and 'The Light Reading of our Ancestors' (1927), the latter reflecting an early interest in the history of the novel, which he had long postponed fulfilling. His delightful volume of reminiscences, 'Whippingham to Westminster', was left almost complete at his death and appeared in 1938. He was the recipient of many honours, not the least to him the presidency of the MCC in 1924-5, a testimony to his lifelong support of cricket. As a great wartime administrator of agriculture Ernle's reputation remains undiminished, and many of the measures which he introduced for the control and expansion of farming to meet the food crisis of the First World War were reinstituted in the Second. Of his many books, 'English Farming Past and Present' best survived the test of time, reaching a sixth edition in 1961, and continuing to serve as a major source for the history of agriculture. 
Physically Ernle was an impressively tall, thin, and erect figure, very active in his habits and one inclined to walk rather than take a cab. In his earlier years he was an enthusiastic cricketer, playing at Oxford and later for I Zingari and the Harlequins. He was also a lifelong collector of portrait busts and figures in china and brass. He was always assiduous at attending to his responsibilities and was widely admired for his good judgement and great integrity, as well as for his unfailing wit and charm. He died on 1 July 1937, in his eighty-seventh year, at his country home, Ginge Manor, near Wantage, Berkshire, close to the garden he always loved. 


@@@@@


doc= 35625


Prout, Ebenezer (1835-1909), music theorist and journal editor, was born on 1 March 1835 at Oundle, Northamptonshire, the son of the Revd Ebenezer Prout, a Congregational minister, from a Devon family, and nephew of the water-colour painter Samuel Prout. He was taught music by his father, and was educated at Denmark Hill grammar school, London (1848-51). He was a lay student at New College, St John's Wood, for a year, and in 1852 he became an usher at Priory House School, Clapton. He graduated BA from London University in 1854. After teaching at Joseph Payne's School, Leatherhead, Surrey, from 1856 to 1859, he decided to enter the music profession, despite strong opposition from his father. Although Prout received some piano lessons from Charles Kensington Salaman, he was almost entirely self-taught. He began by teaching singing at a girls' school in Hackney, and from 1860 to 1884 he was a professor of piano at the Crystal Palace School of Art. He was organist at Union Chapel, Islington, from 1861 to 1873. In 1862 he won the first prize in a competition for a new string quartet, instituted by the Society of British Musicians, and in 1865 their prize for a piano quartet. 
In 1871 Prout was appointed the first editor of the 'Monthly Musical Record'. He at once introduced a new element into music criticism, which he made the prominent feature of his journal. He wrote detailed analyses of the less known works of Schubert, of Schumann's symphonies, and of some of the later works of Wagner, all of which were practically unknown in England, and led the way for the introduction of Wagner's operas. In 1875 he was forced to resign the editorship, and after a period as music critic of 'The Academy' he wrote for 'The Athenaeum' from 1879 to 1889. 
Prout continued to compose, and in 1871 produced an organ concerto in E minor which was performed by John Stainer at a Crystal Palace concert. This was followed by a duet sonata in A major for piano and harmonium, which became very popular. He wrote several cantatas, including 'Hereward' (1878), 'Alfred' (1882), 'Queen Aimee' (for female voices, 1885), and 'Damon and Phintias' (for male voices, 1889), as well as three symphonies, overtures, chamber music, and sonatas. He also published many arrangements of classical pieces for the organ. 
In 1877 Prout contributed a valuable text on instrumentation to Novello's series of music primers. He began a series of treatises in 1889 with 'Harmony, its Theory and Practice', which reached a twenty-fourth edition. 'Counterpoint, Strict and Free' (1890; 9th edn, 1910), 'Fugue' (1891), and 'The Orchestra' (1897) were among many of his works which became standard textbooks. 
From 1876 to 1890 Prout was conductor of the Borough of Hackney Choral Association. At the establishment of the National Training School for Music in 1876 he became professor of harmony, a post he held until 1882, and from 1879 until his death he taught at the Royal Academy of Music, where his pupils included Henry Wood and Edward German. He also became professor at the Guildhall School of Music in 1884. The reputation of his textbooks secured him in 1894 the professorship of music at Trinity College, Dublin, a non-resident post, in succession to Sir Robert Prescott Stewart, and he was awarded the honorary degree of MusD in 1895. 
Prout was a leading Handel scholar, and he wrote additional accompaniments for a performance of 'Samson' at the Leeds festival in 1880. In 1891 he carried on a long controversy in print over Franz's edition of 'Messiah', and in 1902 brought out his own edition of the work, still often used by choirs, eliminating textual errors and adding accompaniments. In his later years he concentrated mainly on Bach. Large selections of airs from Handel's operas and Bach's cantatas, translated and edited by him, appeared between 1905 and 1909. He invented words for all the fugue subjects of Bach's '48' to help students to see where the fugue subject ends, and these mottoes were widely circulated. 
Prout married Julia West, the daughter of a nonconformist minister. They had one son, Louis Beethoven Prout, and three daughters. He lived at 246 Richmond Road, Hackney, always spending the summer vacation at Vik, Norway. He died suddenly at home, on 5 December 1909, and was buried at Abney Park cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 35626


Pryde, James Ferrier (1866-1941), artist and designer, was born at 23 London Street, Edinburgh, on 30 March 1866, the only son of six children of David Pryde (1834-1907), headmaster of Edinburgh Ladies' College (1870-91), and his wife, Barbara ('b'. 'c'.1833/4), daughter of William Lauder and niece of the painters Robert Scott and James Eckford Lauder. 
In 1872 the family moved to a Georgian townhouse at 10 Fettes Row in Edinburgh's New Town. Pryde was educated at George Watson's Boys' College and he developed a lifelong interest in the theatre through his parents, who were close friends of the actors Sir Henry Irving and John Lawrence Toole. He was a student of the Royal Scottish Academy life school from 1885 to 1888, and first exhibited at the Royal Scottish Academy in 1884. Pryde's early work consisted mostly of portraits, and he received encouragement from the Glasgow school painters James Guthrie and Edward Arthur Walton. He then studied in Paris for three months at the Academie Julian, under W.-A. Bouguereau. He returned to Edinburgh in 1889, but moved to London in 1890. 
Pryde's memories of Edinburgh profoundly influenced his art: the family house with its tall windows, high ceilings, and stone staircase; the slum tenements of the Old Town, with their narrow closes and archways, and washing draped from windows; and the ornate four-poster bed at Holyrood Palace, said to have belonged to Mary, queen of Scots. Pryde was first noticed in London as a pastellist when he exhibited 'Little Girl in Black (Miss Mutton)' (1890; priv. coll.) at the Grosvenor Gallery. The sitter was the daughter of his landlady at Bushey, Hertfordshire, where he shared lodgings with his sister Mabel. She was studying at Hubert von Herkomer's school, and another student was William Nicholson (1872-1949). In 1893 Nicholson married Mabel Pryde, and the couple moved to an old inn, the Eight Bells, at Denham, Buckinghamshire. During these years James Pryde became a close friend of Nicholson, and he moved in with them. 
British poster design underwent significant changes in the 1890s. The old-fashioned bills with dense wording gave way to posters with a greater pictorial input, showing the influence of Toulouse-Lautrec and Japanese prints. In 1894 Pryde and Nicholson prepared several designs for an exhibition at the Westminster aquarium. Using paper cut-outs on rolls of brown paper their designs relied on striking, uncluttered silhouettes. They employed flat colours, strong outlines, and the spare use of lettering to create apparently easy yet memorable designs. They named themselves the Beggarstaff Brothers, and their posters include 'Kassama Corn Flour' (1894; Kunstgewerbemuseum, Cologne) and 'Rowntree's Elect Cocoa' (1896; V&A). Other designs were never put into production -- for example, 'Becket' (1894; Ellen Terry Memorial Museum, Tenterden) and 'Don Quixote' (1895; V&A), both designed for Henry Irving. The partnership lasted until 1899. Although it was never a financial success it had a profound influence on graphic art world-wide for many decades. 
After the breakup of the Beggarstaff partnership Pryde supplemented his earnings with occasional stage appearances. His acting abilities were limited, and his roles were mostly confined to walk-on parts. In 1899 he married Marian Symons ('c'.1877-1945), a talented singer and pianist. In 1903 they had a daughter, Betty, who was a talented dancer but died of consumption in 1932. Marriage provided an early stimulus to Pryde's work as a painter but was short-lived, and Pryde and his wife separated in 1914. 
In the early 1900s Pryde continued to produce graphic work, but he also painted studies of grotesque characters. Culminating in 'The Celebrated Criminals' ('c'.1902; BM) and 'Sir Henry Irving as Dubosc in The Lyons Mail' (1906; Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art, Edinburgh), these have a larger-than-life, theatrical quality and are painted with a vigour reminiscent of Henri Daumier. About this time Pryde began painting imaginative landscapes and architectural subjects. Often melancholic, they show a knowledge of the work of Velazquez as well as memories of the architecture of Edinburgh, for example 'The Slum' (1910; Musee National d'Art Moderne, Paris). The purchase of his 'Guildhall with Figures' (1905) by J. S. Sargent was a landmark in Pryde's career, and henceforth he exhibited regularly at the International Society, of which he eventually became vice-president, and at the Goupil Gallery. The first painting of his series called 'The human comedy', 'The Doctor' ('c'.1909; Tate collection), introduces the motif of the four-poster bed. This grows in stature, culminating in the painting 'The Death of the Great Bed', which remained unfinished at Pryde's death ('c'.1929-41; Royal Pavilion Art Gallery and Museums, Brighton). Here the bed has become a stage set, back-lit, before which the human drama of life takes place. In 1911 Pryde visited Venice and shortly afterwards began 'La casa rosa' (1911-12; priv. coll.), another dramatic architectural subject relying on the contrasts between strong, flat colours and deep, dark shadows. Again, the building is not specific but is a memory of both Venice and Edinburgh. From 1912 onwards Pryde found a generous patron in Viscountess Cowdray, for whose library at Dunecht House, Aberdeenshire, he was commissioned to paint a large series of decorative canvases. This provided useful income, for Pryde's spendthrift habits resulted in serious cash-flow problems. 
One important commission towards the end of Pryde's career was to design the sets for a production of 'Othello' at the Savoy Theatre in 1930. Despite his lifelong love of the theatre and the influence of the stage on his paintings, this was his only foray into theatre design. The set was based around a flight of steps behind which ran a massively scaled colonnade. Other scenes used painted sets and a huge four-poster bed as a prop. The scenery proved unwieldy, and his desire for dramatic lighting resulted in the cast being plunged into darkness. At the time his designs were not well received, although their visual effects look forward to such artists as Giorgio de Chirico and Graham Sutherland. Pryde received recognition towards the end of his life. He had a one-man show at the Leicester Galleries in 1933, and in 1937 he received a civil-list pension in recognition of his services to art. In 1939 his health declined and he was admitted to St Mary Abbots Hospital, Kensington. He died there on 24 February 1941, and was cremated at Golders Green. 
James Pryde was tall and handsome. He was a witty and engaging companion but could also be lazy, extravagant, and unproductive for long periods. He often taxed the patience of his friends. Pryde's output was small but he influenced his contemporaries such as William Nicholson and William Orpen. Although his paintings are well represented in public collections, there have been few exhibitions. The Arts Council of Great Britain organized a memorial exhibition in 1949. Thereafter his work has had little re-evaluation, apart from his role as one of the Beggarstaff Brothers, until an exhibition mounted by the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art in 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 35627


Prynne, George Rundle (1818-1903), Church of England clergyman and writer, was born at West Looe, Cornwall, on 23 August 1818, the younger son among the eight children of John Allen Prynn (whose form of the surname was abandoned later by his son) and his wife, Susanna, daughter of John and Mary Rundle of Looe, Cornwall. John Prynn, who claimed descent from William Prynne (1600-1669), the puritan, was a native of Newlyn, Cornwall. 
After education at a school run by his sister at Looe and at the private Devonport Classical and Mathematical School, Prynne matriculated at St John's College, Cambridge, in October 1836, but migrated to St Catharine's College. He graduated BA on 18 January 1840 (MA in 1861, and MA 'ad eundem' at Oxford on 30 May 1861). Ordained deacon on 19 September 1841 and priest on 25 September 1842, he was licensed as curate first to the parish of Tywardreath, Cornwall, and on 18 December 1843 to St Andrew's, Clifton, Bristol. There he first came in contact with E. B. Pusey, who was the greatest influence on his adoption of Tractarian ideas and practices, especially the hearing of confessions, which he began at this time. However, Prynne declined Pusey's suggestion to join St Saviour's, Leeds, on account of an implied obligation of celibacy, as he was already contemplating marriage. On the nomination of the prime minister, Sir Robert Peel, Prynne became vicar of the parish of Par, Cornwall, newly formed from that of Tywardreath, from October 1846 to August 1847, when he took by exchange the living of St Levan and St Sennen in the same county. From 16 August 1848 until his death he was incumbent of the newly constituted parish of St Peter, formerly Eldad Chapel, which contained many of the poorest districts in Plymouth. On 17 April 1849 he married Emily (died 1901), daughter of Admiral Sir Thomas Fellowes; they had four sons and six daughters. 
At Plymouth, a town then predominantly nonconformist and evangelical in sympathy, Prynne's strenuous advocacy of Tractarianism involved him in heated controversy. The conflict was largely fostered by John Hatchard, vicar of Plymouth. In 1850 Prynne brought a charge of criminal libel against Isaac Latimer, the editor, publisher, and proprietor of the 'Plymouth and Devonport Weekly Journal', for an article, prompted by religious differences, that seemed to reflect on his moral character (24 January 1850). The trial took place at Exeter, before Sir John Taylor Coleridge, on 6 and 7 August 1850. The defendant alleged that the English Church Union was responsible for the prosecution and was supplying the necessary funds: the jury found Latimer not guilty and the heavy costs of the case almost ruined Prynne. 
In 1852 Prynne was once again at the centre of controversy, this time as a result of his support of Priscilla Lydia Sellon (1821-1878) and her Devonport community of Sisters of Mercy. Despite the heroic endeavours of Prynne, Sellon, and the sisters during a cholera epidemic in 1849, this support, together with Prynne's advocacy of auricular confession and penance, especially his hearing the confessions of young girls from the sisters' orphanage, provoked a pamphlet war with the Revd James Spurrell and the Revd Michael Hobart Seymour. On 22 September 1852 an inquiry by Henry Phillpotts, bishop of Exeter, into allegations against Prynne's doctrine and practice found in Prynne's favour, but a riot took place when Phillpotts held a confirmation at Prynne's church the next month. In 1860 Prynne 'conditionally' baptized Joseph Leycester Lyne, known as Father Ignatius, and employed him as an unpaid curate. Prynne joined the Society of the Holy Cross in 1860 and the English Church Union in 1862, becoming vice-president of the latter body in 1901. 
Meanwhile opposition diminished, and Prynne's local reputation improved as his pastoral work expanded. He built schools, established guilds, and conducted missions. His church was rebuilt and consecrated in 1882 without disturbance. (The architectural design was carried out by his second son, George, while his third son, Edward, executed the Prynne memorial mural after their father's death.) Although Prynne always remained a staunch Tractarian, he was chosen with prebendary M. F. Sadler proctor in convocation for the clergy of the Exeter diocese from 1885 to 1892, and he was on friendly terms with his diocesans, Frederick Temple and E. H. Bickersteth. Contrary to the views of many of his party, Prynne submitted to the first Lambeth opinion of 1899, which condemned the liturgical use of incense, until the death of Bishop Bickersteth in 1901. 
Prynne acquired a considerable reputation as a compiler and author of hymns. His first published hymnal was produced as early as 1854, and contained 177 hymns; the 1866 edition grew to include 433, of which nearly 200 were eventually included in 'Hymns Ancient and Modern', a collection he subsequently helped to revise in 1875. His own collected hymns were published in 'The Soldier's Dying Visions, and other Poems and Hymns' (1881), the best-known being 'Jesu, meek and gentle', written in 1856. In addition Prynne's writings about the eucharist were also significant, especially 'The Eucharistic Manual', designed for the non-academic reader: the ten editions through which it passed from 1865 to 1895 attest to its popularity in late Victorian high-church circles. Prynne also wrote 'Truth and Reality of the Eucharistic Sacrifice' (1894) and 'Devotional Instructions on the Eucharistic Office' (1903), as well as a number of sermons and controversial pamphlets. 
After a short illness, Prynne died at his vicarage, 28 Wyndham Square, Plymouth, on 25 March 1903, and was buried at Plympton St Mary, near Plymouth, on 30 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 35628


Puddicombe, Anne Adalisa (1836-1908), novelist, was born on 6 October 1836 in Bridge Street, Newcastle Emlyn, Carmarthenshire, the eldest child of the two sons and two daughters of Benjamin Evans (1809-1884), solicitor of that town, and his wife, Letitia Grace Morgan ('b'. 1814, died after 1871), daughter of Thomas Morgan, surgeon, also of Newcastle Emlyn. Both parents came from families noteworthy in the cultural history of Wales: Benjamin Evans was the grandson of the Revd David Davis (1745-1827) of Castellhywel, Cardiganshire, a leading figure in the Unitarian movement and translator into Welsh of Gray's 'Elegy', and Letitia Evans was the granddaughter of the religious reformer Daniel Rowland (1711?-1790). Anne Adalisa herself (known as Ada to her family) went to school in Carmarthen (1846-9) before being sent to Cheltenham to be educated with the family of the Revd Henry Solly, Unitarian minister, pioneer of the movement for working men's institutes and friend of literary figures such as Charles Dickens, George Eliot, Mrs Henry Wood, and Bulwer-Lytton. In 1851 the Sollys moved to Southfields, near Wimbledon; Ada, who had now been joined by her sister, Lettie, went with them and the two girls stayed at Southfields until 1856, when they returned to Newcastle Emlyn. 
Once home, Ada led the conventional life of a young lady of the period, but she maintained her intellectual interests, learning French and Italian and studying botany. She also edited a short-lived magazine called 'Home Sunshine' with a group of friends (in particular the Leslie family of Adpar, Cardiganshire, through whom she was to meet her future husband). She remained at Newcastle Emlyn for the next sixteen years until, on 10 April 1872, she married Beynon Puddicombe (1839-1906) at Penbryn church, Cardiganshire. Puddicombe was foreign correspondent at Smith Payne's Bank, London, and the couple settled at Elgin Villas, Addiscombe, near Croydon, where they stayed for the next eight years, a period during which Ada suffered from serious, but unspecified, ill health. This improved when the Puddicombes moved to Winchmore Hill, Middlesex. Despite her poor health, Ada learned to play the violin during these years, becoming a capable musician. 
There is also evidence to suggest that Ada's earliest attempts at novel writing also date from this period in the 1880s, though her official career as Allen Raine, novelist, did not begin until 1894, when she was fifty-eight. In that year she shared a prize given at the national eisteddfod for a story descriptive of Welsh life; 'Ynysoer' was then serialized in the 'North Wales Observer' and finally published posthumously in book form as 'Where Billows Roll' (1909). 'A Welsh Singer', her first full-length novel, was published in 1897. Originally entitled 'Mifanwy', it had been rejected by six publishers before Hutchinson & Co. accepted it, but it became an immediate best-seller on publication. 'A Welsh Singer' was followed by ten more novels, of which 'Torn Sails' (1898), 'Garthowen' (1900), 'A Welsh Witch' (1902), and 'Queen of the Rushes' (1906) are the most accomplished; she also published a collection of short stories, 'All in a Month' (1908), and an 'Allen Raine Birthday Book' appeared in 1907. The novels sold worldwide and in April 1908 'The Bookman' ranked her as one of the four best-selling novelists of the day, along with Marie Corelli, Hall Caine, and Silas Hocking. Her books eventually went out of print at the beginning of the Second World War, though three appeared in Welsh translations in the 1960s and a fourth, 'Garthowen', was published in 1983. However, the late twentieth-century growth of women's studies led to a new interest in her work and 'Queen of the Rushes', perhaps her most completely achieved work, set in west Wales during the religious revival of 1904, was republished by Honno, the Welsh women's press, in 1998, with a new critical introduction. 
Although based in London, the Puddicombes had kept their links with west Wales, building a house, Bronmor, at Tre-saith, Cardiganshire, in 1897. In 1900 Beynon Puddicombe retired from the bank, due to mental illness, and the couple moved permanently to Tre-saith. Beynon Puddicombe died on 29 May 1906 and Ada herself died of cancer at Bronmor on 21 June 1908; they were both buried in nearby Penbryn churchyard. They had no children. 
The pseudonym Allen Raine appeared to Ada in a dream, and it is unlikely that she deliberately chose a masculine pen-name. Whether this affected the earliest critical response to her novels is not clear, but in his obituaries in 1908 (when she was known to be a woman) Ernest Rhys was typical in categorizing her novels as unsophisticated potboilers with cardboard characters. As he said, 'She wrote love-stories, in short' ('Manchester Guardian', 27 June 1908). Ironically, in view of the way in which she is so often contrasted with Caradoc Evans, her work too was stigmatized as a caricature of Welsh life. Rhys commented that 'Welsh readers who wish to see Wales pictured as it really is were not satisfied to accept her as a genuine Welsh novelist' ('Manchester Guardian', 24 June 1908), while H. Elvet Lewis asserted that 'the dialect she has used in her stories... distressed those who know Wales from within and love its everyday speech' ('British Weekly', 25 June 1908). However, the appearance of a volume on Allen Raine in the 'Writers of Wales' series led to the beginnings of a critical reappraisal which rejects her easy categorization as a popular novelist of romance, with little realism or depth of analysis. 


@@@@@


doc= 35629


Pugh, Sir Arthur (1870-1955), trade unionist, was born on 19 January 1870 at Ross, Herefordshire, the fifth child of William Thomas Valentine Pugh, a civil engineer, and his wife, Amelia Rose Adlington. His circumstances and prospects clearly suffered from the death of both his parents in his infancy. Arthur received his education at the local elementary school, and at thirteen was apprenticed to a farmer-butcher. In 1894 he moved to south Wales, close to his father's birthplace of Neath, obtaining a series of short-term jobs as a subordinate hand in the steel industry. He probably remained in Wales until his marriage, on 7 April 1901, to Elisabeth (1879/80-1939), daughter of David Morris of Port Talbot. Shortly afterwards, evidently in search of promotion to the senior grade of smelter, he moved to the Frodingham iron works in Lincolnshire. He had already been active in the British Steel Smelters' Association, and now became a branch secretary. As administrator and negotiator he was manifestly successful, and in 1906 the smelters' executive appointed him as assistant secretary. 
The smelters' union had, from its origins in Glasgow in 1885, developed into a national organization with ambitions to dominate the labour force of the industry. Pugh readily acceded to the conciliatory strategy of its full-time president, John Hodge, designed to secure recognition of the union by the employers, the equalization of working conditions among the different tiers of labour, and thereby the eventual displacement of smaller, rival unions. Pugh's main sphere of responsibility was the conduct of the smelters' finances, and under him its central office became, in the view of the Webbs, the most efficient in the union movement. Pugh's elevation had coincided with Hodge's election as a Labour MP. In December 1916 the latter became a minister in the war-time coalition government, and Pugh again received promotion, to central office secretary. As the 'de facto' chief of the premier steel union he took the lead in the negotiations to create a single organization for all steel workers. He may well have devised the ingenious scheme which, in 1917, gave birth to the Iron and Steel Trades Confederation and to the British Iron, Steel and Kindred Trades Association -- which was intended ultimately to absorb all the existing unions. 
In 1920 Pugh was elected to the parliamentary committee of the TUC, and he remained on the general council, its successor, until 1936, retiring as secretary of the Iron and Steel Trades Confederation a year later. His widening sphere of activity reflected the expanding role of the union movement in government. He was Labour representative on several public inquiries into industrial disputes, and on others considering the application of 'safeguarding' duties. He joined the British delegates on the economic consultative committee of the League of Nations, and in 1939, in retirement, served on the Central Appeal Tribunal under the 'Military Service Acts'. On behalf of the TUC he oversaw the educational facilities provided for union members, and for many years helped to administer the 'Daily Herald'. It was these various services which earned him a knighthood in 1935. The role he played in the general strike of 1926 was, by contrast, relatively unimpressive. Though acting 'ex officio' as the chief public spokesman of the general council he was almost certainly a reluctant participant in this conflict. 'I have never heard him say that he was in favour of it', remarked Hodge in the aftermath, 'but I have never heard him say that he was against it' (J. Hodge, 'Workman's Cottage to Windsor Castle', 1931, 363). He made little contribution to the organization of the strike, though he was more heavily involved in the discussions with Viscount Samuel which brought it to an end. He was similarly supportive, over the next two or three years, of the TUC's attempts to launch negotiations with national employers' organizations. 
Although Pugh gained public prominence mainly as the chairman of the TUC during the general strike, he achieved far more in the quieter arena of the iron and steel industry. He was praised by his obituarists as a 'born conciliator' and a 'brilliant negotiator'. He was certainly not a born orator, and the committee room appeared his natural milieu. 'One great difficulty', complained his president, 'was to get Mr Pugh to go out into the country' ('Workman's Cottage', 359). To another observer he had the qualities of a chartered accountant, his competence in financial matters being of like value to his union and to the general council. He was described as 'a man of temperate habits, medium height, and wiry build, of fresh complexion, with greying hair and moustache, and a high bald forehead' ('DNB'). He was steadfastly loyal to the union movement and looked for the same virtue in his members. He belonged to that genre of labour leader for whom central co-ordination of policy, internal discipline, and strict adherence to collective agreements were articles of faith. He was not attracted to a political career, and though never questioning his union's association with the Labour Party, gave precedence to the former's interests, notably in championing industrial protection against the party's free-trade line. His history of the metal unions, 'Men of Steel', was published in 1951, and was characteristically painstaking, restrained, and self-effacing. It marked his continued interest in union affairs after his retirement. He died at the General Hospital, Bedford, on 2 August 1955, leaving a son and three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 35630


Pullen, Henry William (1836-1903), Church of England clergyman and writer, was born at Little Gidding, Huntingdonshire, on 29 February 1836, the elder son of the four children of William Pullen, rector of Little Gidding, and his wife, Amelia, daughter of Henry Wright. Pullen was educated at Marlborough College from 1845 to 1848, in which year his family moved to Babbacombe, Devon, owing to his father's poor health. In the same year his father published a volume of young Pullen's verses and rhymes, called 'Affection's Offering'. 
Pullen went to Clare College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1859 and MA in 1862. In 1859 he was ordained deacon on appointment to an assistant mastership at St Andrew's College, Bradfield, and became priest in 1860. Deeply interested in music, he was elected vicar-choral of York Minster in 1862 and was transferred in 1863 to a similar post at Salisbury Cathedral. Pullen did his chief literary work while at Salisbury. He published several pamphlets (1869-72) on reform of cathedral organization and clerical unbelief, which were often viewed as pugnacious. 
Near the end of 1870 Pullen published a pamphlet on the Franco-Prussian War entitled 'The Fight at Dame Europa's School'. Here he presented the European situation as a simple parable, in which John, the head of the school (and representing England), refuses to separate Louis (France) and William (Germany), though he sees that Louis is beaten and that the prolongation of the fight is mere cruelty. John is reproached by Dame Europa for cowardice: he is told that he has grown 'a sloven and a screw', and is threatened with loss of his position. 
The pamphlet was enormously successful. The first edition of 500 copies was printed at Salisbury on 21 October 1870. By 1 February 1871 29,000 copies had been issued. The Salisbury resources then became overstrained, and the publisher, Spottiswoode of London, printed 50,000 copies (1-9 February). By 18 April 192,000 had appeared, and the final thousand were printed in April 1874. The pamphlet was translated into French, German, Italian, Danish, Dutch, Frisian, Swedish, Portuguese, and Jersey French. A dramatized version by George T. Ferneyhough was acted on 17 March 1871 by amateurs at Derby in aid of a fund for French sufferers. 'The Fight', which brought Pullen $3000, evoked a host of replies, especially ones justifying Britain's non-involvement in the conflict. Pullen's further pamphleteering critical of the 1868-74 Gladstone government was less successful. 
In 1875 Pullen retired from Salisbury. During that year and 1876 he served in Sir George Nares's Arctic expedition as chaplain on the ship 'Alert' and received on his return the Arctic medal. For the next twelve years he travelled widely on the continent, making Perugia his headquarters. The publisher John Murray, to whom he had sent useful notes of travel, appointed him editor of his popular travel guides. Fluent in five or six languages, Pullen successively revised nearly the whole of the series, beginning with north Germany. His writing continued throughout his life, focusing on political and religious pamphleteering. 
Pullen resettled in England in 1898, and held successively the curacy of Rockbeare, Devon (1898-9), and several locum tenencies. In May 1903 he became rector of Thorpe Mandeville, Northamptonshire, but died, unmarried, in a nursing home at 70 Newhall Street, Birmingham, seven months later, on 15 December 1903. He was buried at Birdingbury, Warwickshire, and a brass tablet to his memory was put up on the chancel wall of the parish church at Thorpe Mandeville. 


@@@@@


doc= 35631


Pumphrey, Richard Julius (1906-1967), zoologist, was born at 30 Wynnstay Gardens, Kensington, London, on 3 September 1906, the only child of Julius Pumphrey, a manufacturer of umbrellas, and his wife, Alice Lilian, the daughter of Edward Towgood of Hawkes Bay, New Zealand. His father came from a well-known Quaker family in Worcestershire; his mother had moved to Kent as a child. Pumphrey was educated at Arnold House School, London, and at Marlborough College (1920-25). There H. L. O. Fletcher imbued him with an abiding interest in the English language, and the biologist A. G. Lowndes encouraged him to explore the Wiltshire countryside. Pumphrey won an entrance scholarship to Trinity Hall, Cambridge, where he took part one of the natural sciences tripos in 1927, gaining second-class honours. He went on to finish with first-class honours in part two in 1929 (in zoology and comparative anatomy) and was awarded the Frank Smart prize as the best zoologist of the year. 
Pumphrey now began research in experimental cytology at Cambridge, working on the physical chemistry of the surface membranes of trout eggs. In 1931 he was appointed Amy Mary Preston Read scholar, and the following year he was awarded his PhD. In 1934 he was a Rockefeller fellow at the Eldridge Reeves Johnson Foundation at the University of Pennsylvania, where he gained experience in electrophysiology that set a pattern for his future work. He held a Beit fellowship in the University of Cambridge from 1936 to 1939. At Cambridge Pumphrey met Sylvia Margaret Mills, a research student in the department of zoology, and daughter of the chemist W. H. Mills (1873-1959); they were married at Chesterton, near Cambridge, in 1933. A daughter, Alison Margaret, and two sons, Nicholas and Richard, were born. 
In October 1939 Pumphrey joined the Admiralty Surface Weapons Research Establishment at Ports Down, transferring in 1941 to the Admiralty Signal Establishment at Witley. There he became an important contributor to electronics and radar development, gaining admiration for both his hard work and ingenuity as an experimenter. He developed the accurate radar ranging apparatus, for which he was granted $400 from the Admiralty Awards Council. In 1945 he returned to Cambridge, where he collaborated with Professor T. Gold on the biophysics of hearing, both in man and the higher vertebrates, and at the fourth symposium of the Society for Experimental Biology in 1949 (the year he was awarded the degree of ScD by the University of Cambridge) he presented one of the most definitive publications on the subject of hearing. Between 1947 and 1949 he was assistant director of research in zoology. 
In 1949 Pumphrey was appointed Derby professor of zoology at the University of Liverpool, where he became recognized as a shrewd, wise defender of his department who acquired the best possible facilities for his staff and students. During his tenure he served terms as both dean and chairman of the faculty of science and was also active on national bodies (serving on the councils of both the Marine Biological Association and the Society for Experimental Biology). He was also recognized as a gifted lecturer who could explain a complicated subject with clarity; he was a master of the stimulating phrase and sentence. 
Despite his teaching and administrative loads Pumphrey continued his own research into the sense organs and central nervous systems of animals. He greatly clarified knowledge of the intermediate zone between touch and hearing, and produced a theory of frequency modulation in the hearing and vision of birds and insects which explained the ability of grasshoppers and crickets to recognize the sounds of their own species. Much of this research was conducted on equipment which Pumphrey had constructed himself. (He later collaborated with A. F. Rawdon-Smith in the design of more advanced equipment which became widely used in electrophysiology.) Pumphrey extended his bird and insect studies much further by investigating human hearing and demonstrating the high sensitivity of resonant elements in the ear. His continuing study of vision resulted in an important article published in the Festschrift for Sir James Gay. 
Pumphrey had been interested in languages since his Marlborough days and his inaugural lecture at Liverpool on 'The origin of language' was published by the university press. His work was published in Norwegian, and through his love of Snowdon he also came to appreciate the Welsh language. In his university days he had been a formidable athlete, rowing in the Trinity Hall first boat and playing in the University of Cambridge hockey first eleven, and he never lost his love of country pursuits such as fishing and rock climbing. Pumphrey died following a short illness, at Clatterbridge Hospital, Bebington, on the Wirral, on 25 August 1967. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35632


Purcell, Albert Arthur (1872-1935), trade unionist and socialist, was born on 3 November 1872 at 29 Britannia Street, Hoxton, London, the son of Albert Duncan Purcell and his wife, Charlotte ('nee' Alleway), who were both Irish. Purcell spent much of his childhood in Keighley, where he received an elementary education and began his first job, as a half-timer in a woollen mill, at the age of nine. In 1890, back in Hoxton, Purcell was apprenticed to his father's and brothers' trade as a French polisher. In 1895 he married Sarah Elizabeth, daughter of George Thomas Fidler, an engine driver of Edmonton; they had three daughters. An active member of the London French Polishers' Union, Purcell was elected first treasurer and then, in 1898, general secretary of the Amalgamated Society of French Polishers, into which the London union had merged. In 1900 he moved with his union's central office to Manchester and made his home in Salford. With the merger of his union into the newly formed National Amalgamated Furnishing Trades Association in 1910, Purcell became its Manchester organizer. He was by this time a familiar figure at meetings of Manchester and Salford Trades Council, serving the first of several stints as president and vice-president from 1905 to 1907. 
In 1895 Purcell had begun lecturing for the temperance movement, only to recoil from its leaders' narrow-mindedness some two years later. Instead he was drawn by the Eight Hours Movement into the avowedly Marxist Social Democratic Federation (SDF), forerunner of the British Socialist Party (BSP). While he shared the SDF's disdain for the compromising attachments of Labour pragmatists, Purcell's was an ecumenical socialism and in Salford he held both SDF and Independent Labour Party (ILP) memberships. With their support he won a seat on the borough council in 1906, held, with a year's interruption, until 1912. In the parliamentary election of January 1910, he fought West Salford as an independent socialist, backed by Victor Grayson, the countess of Warwick, and a self-consciously exclusive Socialist Representation Committee. Some Labour MPs responded by supporting his Liberal opponent and Purcell came bottom of the poll. This debacle may help to explain the greater attractiveness to him of notions of direct action based on the workplace. In November 1910 he chaired the Manchester conference on industrial unionism initiated by Tom Mann, and helped to establish Mann's Industrial Syndicalist Education League. Purcell told the conference that he looked upon industrial unionism as a movement which was far more important than the political labour movement, and observed that 'This force [is] what [is] required to emancipate the workers, if they [are] to be emancipated at all' ('Industrial Syndicalist'). It is a measure of the period's complexities that he had, that same month, sought and regained election as a Salford borough councillor. 
During the war years Purcell remained identified with the BSP left and in 1920, representing South Salford BSP, he moved the formation of the British Communist Party at its founding congress. Like many early converts, he left the party soon afterwards but without distancing himself from his left-wing past. He sat in parliament for Coventry (1923-4) and then the Forest of Dean (1925-9), but according to his colleague George Hicks he felt penned up in its clubby precincts. Instead, his true metier was as one of the 'Communistic trade union leaders' noted by Beatrice Webb, assured and assertive in the early 1920s but inevitably somewhat deflated by the failure of the general strike. In 1919 he was elected to the TUC parliamentary committee and remained on its successor body, the TUC general council, until 1927. His was a robust militancy and heartfelt internationalism, exemplified by the journal he founded in 1925, 'Trade Union Unity'. In particular he was identified with the cause of Soviet Russia. A stalwart of the Hands Off Russia movement and its successor, the Anglo-Russian parliamentary committee, he had been enthused by visits to the new workers' state in 1920 and 1924. He was, with Mikhail Tomsky, the main force behind the Anglo-Russian committee of the British and Soviet trade union centres, conceived at the euphoric Scarborough TUC of 1925 and buried amid mutual recriminations two years later. As president of the International Federation of Trade Unions (IFTU) from 1924, he found that his pro-Soviet attitudes were not always palatable to the continental unions and in 1927 they failed to re-elect him to the IFTU's executive. 
At the 1929 general election, Purcell returned to Manchester to contest Moss Side but lost by some 2000 votes. He remained in the city and that September was elected secretary of Manchester and Salford Trades Council. He devoted his final years of undiminished vigour to its activities, organizing a notable People's Congress in May 1931 and helping set up a local tenants' association. Purcell died suddenly at his Manchester home, 24 Kendall Road, Crumpsall, on 24 December 1935. He was survived by his wife, for whom a trades council appeal raised just over $1200. 
Powerful and stockily built, Purcell was as combative in debate as he had at one time proved in east London boxing rings. S. G. Hobson, with whom he had set up the short-lived Furnishing Guild in 1922, remembered him to have been 'as ready with his fists as with his tongue'. Joe Toole, a Salford Labour MP, recalled him on his arrival in Salford as 'a man of fine physique, a first-class speaker, and possessed of a good knowledge of working-class life, [who] threw himself into our propaganda work and rallied thousands to our standard'. 


@@@@@


doc= 35633


Purse, Benjamin Ormond (1874-1950), social worker and expert on blind welfare, was born on 29 August 1874 at Salford, Lancashire, the son of Edward Purse, general labourer, and his wife, Matilda, 'nee' Clavering. His sight became defective in early life, but it was not until he was thirteen, when it had become extremely poor, that he was sent to school at Henshaw's Institution for the Blind, Manchester. 
Purse was trained as a piano-tuner, took the certificate, and struggled for more than two years to build up a tuning practice. However, his inclinations were towards a career of professional or public service, and to prepare himself he devoured every book he could lay hands on. His first step in this direction was taken when he became the first paid secretary (at 8's'. a week) of the National League of the Blind, a small body which voiced the unsatisfactory conditions prevalent among blind people. He used a legacy of $60 left to him in 1898 to launch a journal, the 'Blind Advocate', as the organ of the league, and in 1901 he devoted himself full-time to the organization at a weekly salary of $1 3's'. 0died In 1902 the league was affiliated to the Trades Union Congress. 
The next few years were crowded with activity for Purse -- writing, lecturing, expending all his efforts for blind people. In 1905 he was a delegate at an international conference of blind welfare workers; between 1904 and 1910 he visited forty-eight municipal authorities and secured travel concessions from thirty-seven of them; in 1907 he was the only witness to give evidence concerning the blind before the royal commission on the poor laws, and he took an active part in the movement which led in 1914 to the compulsory notification of ophthalmia neonatorum, a foremost measure in sight-saving. He was responsible for preparing the preliminary matter, and subsequently helped to frame the recommendations which resulted in the setting up in 1917 of the government's advisory committee for the welfare of the blind, of which he was a member until 1942. 
In 1916 Purse was persuaded by Sir Arthur Pearson to join the staff of the National Institute for the Blind, as director of the aftercare department, which helped to train, and to find employment for, blind persons. Although by so doing he signified his approval of voluntary organizations, he by no means relinquished his efforts to secure a degree of state aid for blind people, and no blind person contributed more than he to the movement which led to the passing of the 'Blind Persons' Act' in 1920. 
From 1920 until 1943 Purse superintended the administration of relief, training, and general employment at the National Institute for the Blind. In 1921 he played a prominent part in forming what later became the National Association of Blind Workers, and he edited its official journal, the 'Tribune', until 1942. In that year he was elected a vice-president of his old school, Henshaw's Institution, an honour no blind person had ever received before; and in 1944 his work for blind people was recognized by his appointment as OBE. 
Ben Purse's massive intelligence, amazing statistical memory, power of debate, and grim courage left their mark for all time on the British blind community. He published a number of works, which mainly concerned his campaign to improve the position of blind people in work. His publications include 'The Blind in Industry' (1925), 'The British Blind' (1928), and a book of verse, 'Moods and Melodies' (1931). 
Purse had married in 1899 Mary Elizabeth, daughter of John Alcock, a collier, of Oldham. She and their two children had predeceased him. Purse himself died at Wembdon, Bridgwater, on 31 March 1950. 


@@@@@


doc= 35634


Purser, Louis Claude (1854-1932), classical scholar, was born at Dungarvan, co. Waterford, on 28 September 1854, the youngest son of Benjamin Purser, grain merchant, of Dungarvan, and his wife, Anne, daughter of John Mallet, iron, brass, and copper founder, of Dublin (but originally from Devon), and sister of the engineer Robert Mallet. He was educated first at Midleton College, co. Cork, then at Portora Royal School, Enniskillen, before entering Trinity College, Dublin, in 1871. There he was influenced by that brilliant group of fellows, J. P. Mahaffy, Arthur Palmer, and R. Y. Tyrrell, who were then winning high repute for Dublin classical scholarship. Oscar Wilde was among his university contemporaries. A reverse in the family fortunes drove him into teaching before he graduated as senior moderator in classics in 1875, and between then and his election as a fellow in 1881 habits of industry and self-denial became second nature to him. By this time he had been attracted to the main interest of his life. In 1882 he collaborated with Tyrrell in the second volume of 'The Correspondence of Cicero' (1886) and during the preparation of the subsequent volumes (1890, 1894, 1897, 1899) his contribution became predominant. In 1898 he was appointed professor of Latin at Trinity College but his modesty led him to resign in 1904 despite protests from his colleagues, and he thenceforth confined himself to administrative duties in the college. He was appointed vice-provost in 1924, but with the ill health of the provost, J. H. Bernard, Purser found himself burdened with quasi-public duties and, daunted perhaps by the pressures of the post, was driven once again by his anxious nature to resign after three years. In 1927 he also resigned his fellowship, but he lived long enough to complete the revision of 'The Correspondence of Cicero' for its second edition. A private man, Purser clung to his rather cheerless rooms in the college and made his study his hearthstone. He died, unmarried, at Elpis Hospital, Lower Mount Street, Dublin, on 20 March 1932. 
Purser's scholarship was marked by a literary gift and historical grasp as well as by minute and exhaustive criticism of text and language, and he will be remembered by 'The Correspondence of Cicero'. His output is impossible to quantify precisely, for besides a critical text of Cicero's letters in the Oxford Classical Texts series ('Ad familiares', 1901, and 'Ad Atticum', 1903), an edition of Apuleius's 'Story of Cupid and Psyche' (1910), work on Sidonius Apollinaris and Prudentius in later years, and contributions to 'Hermathena' and the 'Proceedings' of the Royal Irish Academy, much of his work was inextricably involved with that of other scholars, whose books he completed and revised when they were stricken by illness. His completion of the edition of Ovid's 'Heroides' by his colleague Arthur Palmer was praised with uncharacteristic warmth by A. E. Housman. Purser was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1923, and received honorary degrees from the universities of Glasgow (1914), Oxford (1923), and Durham (1931). He refused the presidency of the Royal Irish Academy, of which he was secretary from 1902 to 1914 and vice-president in 1916, 1922, and 1927-8. 


@@@@@


doc= 35635


Purvis, Arthur Blaikie (1890-1941), industrialist and buyer of war supplies, was born in London on 31 March 1890, the son of William Blaikie Purvis, a commercial clerk, of Perth, Scotland, and his wife, Annie Maria Baker. He was educated at Tottenham grammar school and won a scholarship, but owing to the death of his father began work at thirteen. In 1905 he joined the firm of Lynch Brothers in London, and in 1910 went to Glasgow to the Nobel Explosives Company Ltd, where his ability was quickly recognized by Harry Duncan McGowan. He represented the firm in South America and South Africa and, despite his youth, by 1914 was in charge of the New York office. On the outbreak of war he made one of the largest war purchases, $25 million of acetone, which was in acute shortage in the United Kingdom; he remained responsible for the purchase in America of materials for explosives throughout the war. In 1918 he married Margaret, daughter of Cyrus Emory Jones, of Jamestown, New York; they had one son. 
The strain of Purvis's wartime duties resulted in a prolonged breakdown in health. He went to the Adirondacks where, by sheer will-power, he made a recovery so complete that in 1925 he was able to go to Canada as president of Canadian Explosives Ltd, which he reorganized into Canadian Industries Ltd. He was eager to encourage chemical research in its application to Canada's natural resources and urged manufacturers to take risks in the adoption of scientific ideas. By 1939 he had become one of the foremost figures in Canadian industry and director of eleven important Canadian concerns. During these years he also devoted much time to community work, especially in Montreal where he was a governor of McGill University; as the remarkably successful chairman of the national employment commission (1936-8), he also contributed services of a national character. 
'A man of the highest integrity with no enemies and, indeed, no critics', as the governor-general of Canada, Lord Tweedsmuir, described him, Purvis became director-general of British purchasing in the United States in November 1939, and in the following January chairman of the Anglo-French purchasing board 'with a high degree of effective authority', which on the British side did not, however, at first extend beyond making contracts for the Ministry of Supply. Purvis soon found his work hampered by the 'uncontrolled' purchases of other missions, which, as he pointed out, 'destroyed his background' with American industry and the United States government. Not until mid-1940 did he succeed in extending his own direct responsibility for purchase to machine tools and iron and steel, or in receiving, as of right, complete and detailed information from all other purchasing bodies. 
From the outset, however, all doors in Washington were thrown open to Purvis. He conceived his task as far wider than the mere purchase of American supplies. He entered at once with President Roosevelt and Henry Morgenthau, secretary of the United States treasury, into the economic planning of the war and the denial of supplies, especially of strategic metals, to the enemy. 'From the first', said Morgenthau, 'Purvis impressed me tremendously.' It was essential, he counselled Purvis, to have a complete statement of all allied requirements lest they be swept aside when a still neutral United States turned to war expansion on its own account. Purvis, in his persuasive turn, pressed this lesson upon a British government not yet imaginatively ready, as Purvis was himself, to 'talk big', or, to Purvis, big enough. 
It was Purvis who took immediate action in Washington during the fall of France, initially by negotiating the swift transfer of American arms to replace in part those lost by the British at Dunkirk. In one week he signed both the $37.5 million contract for this transaction and, on 17 June 1940, a document committing the British government to the payment of $600 million for the French contracts in America. 'Never', said Lord Woolton in the House of Lords a month later, 'have wider powers to commit this country been delegated to any mission.' 
In the next six months Purvis played the leading part in carrying through the decision to empty the British war chest by both financing massive British war contracts in the United States and, by a series of capital investments, laying the foundations of the American munitions industry. In July 1940 he was joined in Washington by M. Jean Monnet, who, like himself, recognized the vital importance of the British striking a proper balance between their own competing claims. Without explicit authority Purvis set about the necessary co-ordination at a time when there were a number of separate British missions in the United States, some 'ad hoc' and some representing different departments in Whitehall; of these the air commission was especially independent. Until December 1940 Purvis achieved such co-ordination as was attained by his personal efforts and persuasion and the especial confidence of Morgenthau. After visiting the United Kingdom in the closing weeks of that year for discussions on the strategy of British supply in the United States, on his return Purvis was given explicit status by his appointment as chairman of the British supply council in North America and thus, on the civilian side, director of the entire British war organization there. 
If his authority was now assured, to Purvis the basic issue remained unchanged: 'it was a cardinal feature of the Purvis-Monnet programme to get the Americans to raise their sights all round'. The president resumed with Purvis the discussions which had already borne fruit in the idea of the 'Lend-Lease Bill' and were now shaping the range and scope of the act. Purvis now went into action with 'a well-tried weapon from Monnet's armoury', the balance sheet technique. Largely on his own initiative, in January 1941 he boldly translated into dollars British requirements which he had gathered from departments in Whitehall, and produced his estimate of British production and of the resultant deficiency which American production could alone make good. The president took his estimate of $15 billion, Purvis reported, in his stride. It was held in official circles at the time that Purvis's balance sheet powerfully influenced the first appropriation under the 'Lend-Lease Act'. British policy in Washington at this period 'formulated in large measure by Monnet's planning mind and propagated by the persistence and persuasiveness of Purvis' was making demands on American industry greatly in advance of contemporary American opinion. Purvis himself was by now the most powerful British influence in the United States. To Morgenthau he was not only 'the ablest British representative in Washington but one of the rarest persons I have ever known'. He was nominated to the privy council in December 1940 but did not live to be sworn. 
At the time of his death Purvis was planning to secure from President Roosevelt the greatest directive yet issued, to place all American production on a full war basis. He was killed when the aircraft in which he was returning from Britain to Washington crashed on taking off from Prestwick on 14 August 1941. 'Purvis was a grievous loss', wrote Winston Churchill ('Second World War', 3, 1950), 'as he held so many British, American, and Canadian threads in his hands, and had hitherto been the directing mind in their harmonious combination.' The Anglo-American consolidated statement that month represented the climax of Purvis's work and the effective beginning of that Victory programme which thereafter took the central place in the wartime economic planning of the Western allies. Purvis saw -- was perhaps the first to see -- the size of the problem. 
H. D. Hall', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35636


Pye, Sir David Randall (1886-1960), mechanical engineer and academic administrator, was born on 29 April 1886 in Hampstead, London, the sixth of the seven children of William Arthur Pye, wine merchant, and his wife, Margaret Thompson, daughter of James Burns Kidston, writer to the signet, of Glasgow. Edith Mary Pye was his sister. A scholar of Tonbridge School and Trinity College, Cambridge, he was placed in the first class of the mechanical sciences tripos in 1908; he also won his half blue for rifle shooting. In 1909 C. F. Jenkin, who had just been appointed the first professor of engineering science at Oxford, invited Pye to join him there. He was elected a fellow of New College in 1911. 
During the First World War, Pye taught at Winchester College (1915-16), then worked as an experimental officer in the Royal Flying Corps on design and testing, and learned to fly as a pilot. In 1919 he returned to Cambridge as a lecturer, and became a fellow of Trinity. There he met Henry Tizard and Harry Ricardo, his association with whom led to important pioneer work on the internal combustion engine. In 1926 Pye married Virginia Frances, daughter of Charles Moore Kennedy, barrister. The couple had two sons and a daughter. She became a well-known writer of books for children under the name of Virginia Pye and was a younger sister of the writer Margaret Kennedy. Pye's outstanding exposition, 'The Internal Combustion Engine' (2 vols., 1931-4) was published in the 'Oxford Engineering Science' series, of which he became an editor. In 1925 he was appointed deputy director of scientific research at the Air Ministry under H. E. Wimperis. He succeeded him as director in 1937 and in the same year was appointed CB and elected FRS. During the early war years he became closely associated with the development of the new jet propulsion aircraft engine which he did much to encourage. 
In 1943 Pye accepted the provostship of University College, London. He entered upon his new duties with enthusiasm and determination to make a real contribution to the college and to post-war education. Before serious illness caused his resignation in 1951, he had seen the college through an extremely difficult period of rebuilding, following war damage, and of reorganization: probably the greatest achievement of his career. He was knighted in 1952 and in the same year became president of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, to which he gave a memorable presidential address on the higher education of engineers, stressing the importance of the artistic or design aspects of engineering. 
Pye was fastidious and had the charm of a man of taste and intelligence who preferred to convince others by persuasion rather than by asserting the superiority of his own ideas. Believing in the highest standards, he was never arrogant or certain that he was right. Partly perhaps because he appeared to have no ambitions to leadership he was trusted and followed by his many colleagues in all his working life. 
An enthusiastic climber, Pye led the first ascent of the severe Crack of Doom in Skye; in 1922 he was elected to the Alpine Club of which he became vice-president in 1956. He was a friend of G. L. Mallory (whose notice he contributed to the 'Dictionary of National Biography') and in writing of his loss on Everest, with his companion A. C. Irvine, Pye perhaps best revealed his own character and sensitivity: 'Those two black specks, scarcely visible among the vast eccentricities of nature, but moving up slowly, intelligently, into regions of unknown striving, remain for us a symbol of the invincibility of the human spirit' ('Memoirs FRS', 204). Pye died at his home, Cuttmill Cottage, Shackleford, Godalming, Surrey, on 20 February 1960. 


@@@@@


doc= 35637


Quarrier, William (1829-1903), philanthropist, was born in Greenock on 16 September 1829, the only son and second of three children of William Quarrier, a ship's carpenter, and his wife, Annie Booklass. When William was three years old his father died of cholera and was buried in Quebec. Shortly afterwards the family moved to Glasgow where his mother provided for her children by doing fine sewing and laundry work. At the age of six years Quarrier started work in a pin factory, where, for ten hours a day, working a hand-machine, he put heads on ladies' hat pins. He was paid 1's'. a week. His mother realized that this was a job with very little future, and at the age of eight years he began an apprenticeship as a boot and shoemaker, becoming a qualified journeyman by the age of twelve. In his first Orphan Homes annual report Quarrier recorded the thoughts he had at the end of the first week of his apprenticeship, recalling how, bareheaded and barefoot, cold and hungry, he had stood in the high street of Glasgow, wondering at the lack of compassion shown by passers-by. 
Eventually Quarrier found employment with a Mrs Hunter, who owned a shoe shop in Argyle Street, Glasgow. She was a member of Blackfriars Baptist Church, which she encouraged Quarrier to attend. He soon became very active in church life and was soon appointed church officer. At the age of twenty-three he established his own shoemaking business, and on 2 December 1856 married Isabella, the daughter of Mrs Hunter. By 1864 Quarrier and his wife had a family of four (three girls and one boy) and his business was prospering. He was, in fact, one of the first multiple shoe-shop owners in Glasgow, with shops in Argyle Street, Anderston, and Cowcaddens. During this period his younger sister, who had been widowed, died, leaving three children. The Quarriers took them in and cared for them as part of their family. 
Quarrier had not forgotten the hardships of his early life, and when, travelling home one night, he met a young boy crying over the theft of his matchbox stock by an older boy, he determined to do something to alleviate the plight of street children like him. After discussions with friends, he decided to establish a Shoeblack Brigade, a self-help group. The boys wore a simple uniform consisting of a cap, navy blue jacket trimmed with red, a red badge on the arm, and dark trousers. Each was provided with a box of brushes, blacking, and all that was required for the job. The aim was that they would be united in their work and would respect each other. Each boy kept 8died out of every shilling, and 4died was paid into a common fund from which all the shoeblacks' needs were to be met. In addition, they were required to attend a night class which Quarrier set up and they were expected to attend a Sunday school. Soon Quarrier turned his attention to another section of Glasgow's underprivileged young, the children hawking newspapers in the streets. They, too, were turned into a brigade with school lessons during the morning. Within a year of the formation of the Shoeblack Brigade, the third of the groups came into being. This was the Parcel Brigade. Wearing a canvas tunic, black belt, and a special badge, they carried parcels for citizens at a rate of 2died per half mile, 3died a mile. The parcels carried had their delivery guaranteed by the brigade. Quarrier was one of the prime movers in getting the town council to take responsibility for the young vendors. They, however, were slow to move and for some years the brigades worked in the face of continuing difficulties. Eventually, with changes in education, social conditions, and the organization of labour, the brigades were dissolved. Quarrier's initial vision had led to a major philanthropic endeavour in Scotland's largest city, which had met with considerable success. After the dissolution of the brigades, he turned his attention to another project. While working with the brigades, he had met Annie MacPherson, a Quaker working in the East End of London who was involved in Canadian immigration work. She convinced Quarrier that this might be a way forward. In September 1871 he wrote a letter which appeared in the 'Glasgow Herald' and 'North British Daily Mail' pleading the cause of the destitute children of Glasgow. Thomas Corbett, on reading this letter, forwarded $2000 to allow William Quarrier to open the first of his homes for orphaned children at 10 Renfrew Lane in 1871. Within six months he had thirty-five children ready to emigrate to Canada. The home at Renfrew Lane soon proved too small and the girls were transferred to a rented house in Renfield Street. During this time a night refuge and mission hall were established in Dovehill. In 1872, with the need for expansion, the boys moved to Cessnock House -- a mansion in the suburbs of Govan. Later the girls moved to Newstead and Elmpark homes which were in the same neighbourhood as Cessnock House. The premises at Dovehill were bought by the Glasgow school board but the need for a night refuge remained. In 1875 a new building was erected in James Morrison Street to provide accommodation and a mission hall. This building became known as the City Orphan Home, and eventually provided accommodation for working boys and girls and served as a receiving home for children who were subsequently transferred to Quarrier's Village at Bridge of Weir. 
In Quarrier's first annual report, which he entitled 'A Narrative of Facts Relative to the Work Done for Christ', Quarrier developed his concept of cottage homes, which represented a new departure in the care of dependent children. In this document he discussed the establishment of an orphanage near Glasgow, open to children from any part of Scotland, which would consist of adjacent cottages, each able to accommodate twenty or thirty children. A 'father' and 'mother' would head each household, and a playground would be attached to each cottage. A central school and workshop would be established, and the fathers of the households would each be able to teach a different trade, while the mothers would cook for the households, with assistance if necessary. Each boy would learn the trade to which he was best suited, and all the children would meet together at school and church, and, on special occasions, in the common playground. Quarrier hoped, by these new arrangements, to keep up 'the family and home feeling' among the children; he criticized the traditional institutions for orphans, where the 'strict uniformity' necessary for the management of large numbers of children destroyed any domestic attachment. 
The village at Bridge of Weir was the realization of Quarrier's ideal. In 1876 he purchased 40 acres of farmland at this site, which was 16 miles west of Glasgow, and in September 1878 the first buildings of what was to become known as Orphan Homes of Scotland were officially opened. The houses were built chiefly through the gifts of individual friends. Quarrier's Village grew, with more than fifty houses, a school, church, and dairy, poultry farms and workshops. From 1872, when the first thirty-five children went to Canada through Annie MacPherson's immigration scheme, until 1932, Quarrier and his successors continued to send boys and girls to Canada. 
In 1887 Quarrier established his own distribution home at Brockville, Ontario. As he did for the children who remained in Scotland, Quarrier fought for and defended the members of his large family. In 1897 he fell out with the Canadian authorities over proposed legislation which would 'mark' all children entering the country through schemes such as his. Each distribution home was to be licensed and a dossier kept on each child, classified until they were eighteen years of age. Quarrier felt that since the regulations were to apply only to children such as those he brought to Canada, it amounted to unjust treatment. As he was in Canada at the time, he discussed the legislation with the Canadian premier and members of the Ontario legislature, who had nothing but praise for his work and for the children he sent. But he did not receive a satisfactory answer to his queries concerning the act, which was passed in 1897; Quarrier immediately stopped his scheme. Immigration was later restarted in the year following Quarrier's death by his son-in-law, who had satisfied himself that all was in order. 
In 1896 another of Quarrier's initiatives, a consumption sanatorium, was opened, and in 1906, three years after his death, his daughter opened a centre for epileptics, which was Quarrier's third area of concern. He died on 16 October 1903 at Quarrier's Homes at Bridge of Weir and was buried in Quarrier's Village. His wife, Isabella, died on 22 June 1904. The administration of the homes was continued by members of the family, together with elected trustees. In 1948 the consumption sanatorium was brought under the management of the local health board. At the end of the twentieth century Quarrier's homes were administered by a council of management and a team of senior managers, who were jointly responsible for the continuing and diverse work of this organization, which remained as a living memorial to the energy and achievement of nineteenth-century Scottish philanthropy. 


@@@@@


doc= 35638


Quick, Sir John (1852-1932), lawyer and politician in Australia, was born at Trevega, Towednack, near St Ives, Cornwall, on 22 April 1852, the only child of John Quick, a farmer, and his wife, Mary, the daughter of James Quick, of Trevega. The family arrived in Victoria in October 1854 to search for gold, but the father died at Bendigo shortly after their arrival, leaving his wife and child badly off. Quick attended various schools until he was ten, and then, to help support his mother, worked successively in a foundry, a goldmine (above ground), and a printing press. Eventually, when he was seventeen, he became a reporter on the Bendigo 'Independent' and, later, on the 'Bendigo Advertiser'. 
Quick decided to study law, and in 1874 entered the University of Melbourne. He graduated LLB in April 1877, and was admitted to the Victorian bar in June 1878. While studying law he had worked as a reporter with 'The Age'; he now became leader of its parliamentary staff, and so entered political circles. He became a strong supporter of the 'liberal' party of Graham Berry, advocating protection and land reform. Encouraged by Berry, he stood for the Victorian parliament in July 1880, and was returned as one of the members for Sandhurst (Bendigo). He began practice as a barrister at Bendigo, and in April 1882 was admitted to the degree of LLD by the University of Melbourne. On 24 December 1883 he married Catherine (died 1938), the daughter of Joseph Harris from Liskeard, Cornwall, a mine manager and former mayor of nearby Eaglehawk; they had no children of their own, but brought up a niece of Catherine Quick as their daughter. Quick built up a good legal practice in Bendigo, becoming senior partner of Quick, Hyett and Rymer there, while also, as an independent member, playing an active part in Victorian politics until he lost his seat in 1889. 
Quick was keenly interested in Australian federation. The federal movement received popular impetus after July 1893, when a conference was held at Corowa of delegates from many voluntary organizations including the Australian Natives' Association, which Quick represented, despite not being Australian born. At Corowa Quick was chiefly responsible for the formulation and adoption of the idea that each colony should pass an act for the election of representatives to a federal convention; the draft constitution would then be submitted to a popular referendum. Quick drafted a model bill for submission to the six colonial parliaments, and for the next few years was tireless in getting these ideas adopted. He also proposed at an unofficial 'People's Federal Convention', held at Bathurst in November 1896, that the senate in the federal constitution be elected democratically by the people, not by state legislatures. In 1897 he was one of the ten Victorian delegates elected to the constitutional convention, and his work for federation was recognized by his being knighted on 1 January 1901. 
In 1901 Quick was returned unopposed to the commonwealth parliament for Bendigo, and held the seat until 1913. From December 1904 to July 1907 he was chairman of a royal commission on commonwealth tariffs, whose rather inconclusive reports were ignored when in 1908 the government decided to impose higher duties, with preferential rates to Great Britain. Quick helped to bring about the Deakin-Cook (anti-Labor) 'fusion' government of 1909-10, in which he gained ministerial office as postmaster-general. On his defeat in 1913 he retired from politics, and he devoted himself to his legal practice and business interests until June 1922, when he became deputy president of the commonwealth arbitration court. Here, until his retirement in 1930, his even-handed judgments won him wide respect. 
Throughout his life Quick retained his interest in literature, from his presidency of the Shakespeare and Pickwick societies in Bendigo to his membership of the Author's Society in Melbourne, where he was also patron of the Australian Literary Society and began to compile a bibliography of Australian literature (completed and published in 1940). His other chief publications were 'The History of Land Tenure in the Colony of Victoria' (1883), 'The Annotated Constitution of the Australian Commonwealth' (with Sir Robert Garran, 1901), 'The Judicial Power of the Commonwealth' (with Sir Littleton Groom, 1904), and 'Legislative Powers of the Commonwealth and the States of Australia' (1919). They show his unmatched grasp of constitutional matters and his desire that the public of the new commonwealth be well informed on such matters. 
Quick died on 17 June 1932 at his home in the Melbourne suburb of Camberwell, survived by his wife. He was buried on 20 June in Back Creek cemetery, Bendigo. His colleague Garran likened himself to the 'junior partner of a steam-roller', but undoubtedly Quick's painstaking, meticulous, and determined work enabled the federal movement to achieve success earlier than it would otherwise have done. 


@@@@@


doc= 35639


Quick, Oliver Chase (1885-1944), theologian, was born on 21 June 1885 at Sedbergh vicarage, Yorkshire, the only son of Robert Hebert Quick (1831-1891), educationist, and Bertha, daughter of General Chase Parr of the Indian army. He was Anderson scholar and head of school at Harrow School, winning a scholarship to Corpus Christi College, Oxford, in 1904. He gained a first class in classical moderations, but, partly because of intellectual differences with his tutor, F. C. S. Schiller, was placed in the third class in Greats in 1908. Turning to theology, he won the Ellerton prize in 1911 for an essay on mysticism. After a year at Bishop's Hostel, Farnham, he was ordained deacon in 1911 and priest in 1913, serving curacies in Beckenham and Wolverhampton. He became a friend of H. R. L. (Dick) Sheppard and member of the so-called Clique associated with Oxford House, Bethnal Green. After two years as vice-principal of Leeds Clergy School from 1913, he served as Sheppard's curate at St Martin-in-the-Fields until his appointment as domestic chaplain to Randall Davidson, archbishop of Canterbury, in 1915. He published his 'Essays in Orthodoxy', much influenced by Charles Gore, in 1916. In 1917 he married Davidson's secretary, Frances Winifred, daughter of Hugh William Pearson, of Malton, Yorkshire. They had two sons and two daughters. 
After a year as army chaplain, where Quick was associated with his former principal, B. K. Cunningham, at the chaplains' school at St Omer, he became vicar of Kenley, Surrey, in 1918. A series of residentiary canonries followed, beginning with Newcastle in 1920 and Carlisle in 1923, which gave him the opportunity to lecture widely. He published several volumes of lectures and addresses, including his 1922 Paddock lectures, 'Liberalism, Modernism and Tradition', delivered at the General Theological Seminary, New York. His powers of synthesis made him an obvious choice for membership of the archbishops' commission on doctrine set up in 1922. He made a considerable contribution, forming a close friendship with the chairman, William Temple. 
In 1927 Quick published 'The Christian Sacraments' which became an important part of the debate over Anglican orders. He was a keen ecumenist, taking part in the Missionary Conference in Jerusalem in 1928, and the Faith and Order conferences in Lausanne in 1927 and Edinburgh in 1937, where he contributed an influential paper. In 1930 he became a canon of St Paul's, an institution he found backward-looking, but where he wrote his apologetic works, 'The Ground of Faith and the Chaos of Thought' (1931) and 'The Gospel of Divine Action' (1933), which sought to 'soften the lines at present dividing our 'schools of thought'' ('The Gospel of Divine Action', viii). In 1934 Hensley Henson, the bishop of Durham, offered him the professorship at Durham which carried a canonry, where he wrote 'Doctrines of the Creeds' (1938), 'one of the outstanding books on Christian doctrine of our generation' (Robinson, 62). 
In 1939 he was appointed regius professor of divinity and canon of Christ Church, Oxford, where, although hampered by illness and producing no substantial writings, he made an impact through his lectures on the atonement (published posthumously as 'The Gospel of the New World', 1944), which attempted to reconcile competing theories. He was awarded honorary DDs from St Andrews in 1928, Oxford in 1939, and Durham in 1941, and became chaplain to the king in 1933. In August 1943 he collapsed in the cathedral and was forced into retirement in December of that year. He died at his home at Larch Hill, Longborough, Gloucestershire, on 21 January 1944 and was buried four days later in Lonborough churchyard; he was survived by his wife. 
Quick, who possessed a personal humility and a sense of humour 'both lively and dry, like good champagne' (Mozley, 'Quick as a theologian', 8), was primarily a philosophical theologian with a theological temper both 'catholic and evangelical, and at the same time inherently Anglican' (Mozley, 'Tendencies', 87). Although he was criticized for lacking an acute historical sense and for being 'tone-deaf' to religious experience (Robinson, 62), his 'liberal orthodoxy' (Ramsey, 107), which listened to all opinions, was influential on the post-war generation of Anglican theologians. 


@@@@@


doc= 35640


Couch, Sir Arthur Thomas Quiller- (1863-1944), writer and anthologist, was born on 21 November 1863 at Poul Street, Bodmin, Cornwall, the eldest of the five children of Thomas Quiller Couch (1826-1884), physician, and his wife, Mary (died 1901), daughter of Elias Ford, yeoman, and his wife, Theophilas, of Abbots Kerswell, near Newton Abbot, Devon. The Quillers and Couchs had lived for generations in Polperro, Cornwall, earning their living largely from the sea. Q's grandfather Jonathan Couch (1789-1870) was a doctor and noted naturalist. 
Educated at Newton Abbot College, Devon, and Clifton College, Bristol, Quiller-Couch won a classics scholarship to Trinity College, Oxford, in 1882. While there he wrote for the 'Oxford Magazine' and began using the pseudonym Q. After he obtained a second class in 'literae humaniores' (1886), Trinity awarded him a one-year lectureship in classics. In 1887 Q published his first novel, 'Dead Man's Rock' -- an adventure story in the manner of Robert Louis Stevenson -- and moved to London. At this time he was supporting his family, his father having died in 1884; audaciously, Q asked Louisa Amelia (died 1948), second daughter of John Hicks of Fowey, Cornwall, to be his wife. They were married on 22 August 1889 and had a son, Bevil, and a daughter, Foy Felicia. 
In London Q combined work for Cassell, which published many of his novels, with freelance writing. When Cassell started a Liberal weekly, 'The Speaker', Q was appointed assistant editor, and provided a short story each week. Overwork led to ill health and in 1892 Q was happy to take his doctor's advice and move to the seaside. At Fowey, from a house called The Haven, he indulged his love of rowing and yachting for fifty years. 
During the twenty years between leaving London and returning to university life in 1912 Q published nearly forty novels, short-story collections, and anthologies. His second book on Cornish themes, 'The Delectable Duchy: Stories, Studies, and Sketches' (1893), was so popular that the title became a synonym for Cornwall. His facility with the style of R. L. Stevenson caused Stevenson's estate to ask Q to finish the draft of 'St. Ives', which he did with great skill (1898). He initiated the 'Oxford Books' series with 'The Oxford Book of English Verse, 1250-1900' (1900, revised and extended to 1918 in 1939). This volume soon became the standard anthology of English verse and sold nearly a million volumes during Q's lifetime. In 1903 he antagonized mainstream Methodists with 'Hetty Wesley', a sympathetic portrayal of Hetty's unhappy relationship with her famous family. 
Q combined public service with his prodigious writing, working tirelessly for improvement in Cornish education, and holding numerous local offices. He spent over thirty years on Cornwall's education committee, which was established to create a countywide system of grammar schools provided for in the 'Education Act' of 1902. His reward for his public service was a knighthood in 1910 and his appointment as the second King Edward VII professor of English literature at Cambridge University in 1912. In that year he was also elected a fellow of Jesus College, where he spent each term. There was scepticism about his selection inside and outside the university, but Q confounded the critics with his inaugural lecture, finely crafted, rich in learning, and grounded in the classics. For over a decade his lectures were filled to capacity and his published collections of lectures were immensely popular. In 'On the Art of Writing' (1916), his 'On jargon' was a timeless and telling warning of the stultifying influence that jargon has on clear and concise writing. The preface to 'On the Art of Reading' (1920) is equally apposite, with its 'The real battle for English lies in our Elementary Schools, and in the training of our Elementary Teachers'. Throughout his lectures Q championed his belief that literature was an art that must be practised. During the First World War he and his allies H. M. Chadwick, professor of Anglo-Saxon, and Hugh Fraser Stewart, fellow of St John's and later Trinity, campaigned for an independent English faculty. In 1917 they were successful, when an English tripos, separate from the medieval and modern languages tripos, was authorized by the university senate. The study of Anglo-Saxon, philology, and medieval literature became optional and literary criticism and comparative literature could be offered instead. In 1928, at Q's urging, the English tripos was divided into two parts and a paper on the English moralists was added. 
After his son's death in occupied Germany in 1919 Q submerged his grief in work, and the next decade was filled with academic studies and collections of lectures, including most notably the introductions to Shakespeare's fourteen comedies for the 'New Shakespeare' series (Cambridge, 1921-31). In 1931 Q withdrew from the project and left the series to his co-editor, John Dover Wilson. 
Q's output declined precipitously in the 1930s, but recognition for his life's work included honorary degrees from the universities of Bristol (1912), Aberdeen (1927), and Edinburgh (1930), and an honorary fellowship at Trinity College, Oxford (1926). He was made freeman of Bodmin, Fowey, and Truro, and became mayor of Fowey in 1937-8. His friend and first biographer, Frederick Brittain, wrote of Q that he was celebrated for 'his hospitality, his conversation, his humour, his kindness of heart, and the care he took in choosing and wearing picturesque clothing' ('DNB'). 
Q's successor in the professorship and an early English school graduate, Basil Willey, described his predecessor as: 'intensely and even sentimentally patriotic; unobtrusively but sincerely Christian; a passionate believer in liberal education, liberal politics, and the idea of the gentleman. All that he thought and said presupposed the unbroken continuity of the old Christian-Humanist tradition, the old class structure of society, the old sense of decorum, propriety and ceremony in human relations in literature. (Willey, 'Cambridge and other Memories', 20)' These traits, and an inability to treat adequately the darker human emotions, have dated Q's serious works for a world grown cynical and less secure in its verities. In other areas, however, Q's legacy remains: the creation of the grammar school system in Cornwall; the English faculty at Cambridge; the unsurpassed window on Cornwall and the Cornish in his fiction; and the enduring power of the lectures. Books by Helene Hanff have twice renewed interest in Q's works: '84 Charing Cross Road' (1970; later made into a play and a film) and 'Q's Legacy' (1986). 
In late March 1944 Q fell while avoiding a vehicle in Fowey, and on 12 May, at his house in Fowey, he succumbed to cancer of the mouth, brought on by a lifetime of smoking. He was buried in Fowey on 15 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 35641


Quilter, Harry (1851-1907), art critic, was born at Knight Hill Road, Lower Norwood, Surrey, on 24 January 1851 to William Quilter (1808-1888) and his wife, Elizabeth Harriot Cuthbert (died 1874). William Quilter was first president of the Institute of Accountants and a collector of British watercolours, and his eldest son, Sir William Quilter, first baronet (1841-1911), was also a collector, as well as a politician. Harry was privately educated and entered Cambridge University in 1870. He graduated BA in 1874 and MA in 1877. Abandoning his original intention, which was to pursue a career in business, Quilter opted to travel abroad instead, informally studying art in Italy. 
After returning to England, Quilter began preparing for the bar as a student of the Inner Temple, which he had entered in 1872. Meanwhile he continued to study art, enrolling at the Slade School of Fine Art. In 1876 he began writing art criticism for 'The Spectator', and he continued until 1887. He was called to the bar in 1878, but an attack of smallpox and a restless temperament made it difficult for him to concentrate his energies. He subsequently abandoned his career in law and devoted his time to art and journalism. From 1879 to 1887 he lectured on art and literature around England. In 1880-01 he worked for a short time as art critic for 'The Times', taking over from Tom Taylor. Between 1884 and 1893 he exhibited at the Institute of Painters in Oil Colours and in 1885 he studied landscape painting at Van Hove's studio in Bruges. Despite his efforts he never succeeded as an artist, but rather became known for his art criticism. In 1886 he applied for the Slade professorship at Cambridge, but failed. Tired of being edited, he started his own periodical in 1888, entitled 'The Universal Review', which only lasted a year. On 16 June 1890 he married Mary Constance ('b'. 1869/70), daughter of a gentleman, Charles Hall; they had six children. 
Quilter was a prolific writer and contributed to numerous newspapers and periodicals, including the 'Contemporary Review', the 'Cornhill Magazine', the 'Fortnightly Review', 'Fraser's Magazine', 'MacMillan's Magazine', the 'National Review', the 'New Review', and the 'Nineteenth Century'. In addition to art he wrote about theatre, literature, and women's rights (as an opponent). He was renowned for his outspokenness, which often resulted in controversy. He was a conservative art critic whose views reflected those of the 'philistine'. He opposed avant-garde movements, such as aestheticism and impressionism. Ideologically opposed, he was an enemy of James McNeill Whistler, siding in the press with John Ruskin during the famous Ruskin versus Whistler trial of 1878. In 1879 he infuriated Whistler by purchasing the artist's former home, the White House, in Chelsea, and replacing the painter's interior design with his own conservative style. Whistler sought vengeance on 'Arry (Whistler's nickname for Quilter) after he castigated the artist's Venetian etchings in 'The Times'. Quilter's criticism, along with Whistler's rebuttal, appeared in the artist's book, 'The Gentle Art of Making Enemies', in 1890. He found himself at the centre of yet another dispute between the philistine and the avant-garde regarding Edgar Degas's 'L'absinthe' (1875-6), which was displayed at the Grafton Gallery, London, in 1893. The controversy began when the art critic D. S. MacColl maintained in 'The Spectator' that the painting set a standard for art. Quilter, writing for the 'Westminster Gazette', joined a band of philistine art critics who retaliated against MacColl's assertion. 
Quilter also wrote several books, including 'Sententiae artis' (1886), 'Preferences in Art, Life, and Literature' (1892), and 'Opinions on Men, Women and Things' (1909). The climax of his career as an artist was his one-man show held in January 1894 at the Dudley Gallery. Between 1894 and 1896 he managed two boarding-schools using a system he formulated and wrote about in the 'Nineteenth Century' in 1895. He continued to write up until his death on 10 July 1907 at 42 Queen's Gate Gardens, London, and was buried at Norwood; his wife survived him. Most of his collections were sold at Christies in April 1906. 


@@@@@


doc= 35642


Quilter, Roger Cuthbert (1877-1953), composer, was born on 1 November 1877 at 4 Brunswick Square, Hove, Sussex, the fifth of the seven surviving children and the third son of Sir William Cuthbert Quilter (1841-1911) and his wife, Mary Ann Bevington (1842-1927). His family was extremely wealthy: his father, the first baronet, was a shrewd businessman, and his mother was strong-minded, energetic, and devoted to her family. He grew up in an atmosphere appreciative of the arts, but one which, following Victorian social mores, saw music as a diversion, not an occupation. 
Quilter was happy at Pinewood, his preparatory school in Farnborough, Hampshire, where his musical abilities were nurtured; in contrast, his period at Eton College was one of utter misery. A family friend suggested he continue his musical studies abroad, still a common route at that time, and he began at the Hoch'sche Konservatorium in Frankfurt am Main in 1896. He stayed in Frankfurt for four and a half years, initially studying the piano with Ernst Engesser but later taking composition lessons with Ivan Knorr, who had a remarkable ability to develop individuality in his students. Knorr's pupils also included Balfour Gardiner, Norman O'Neill, Cyril Scott, and Percy Grainger, and the five were together known as the Frankfurt group: though not collectively influential, they nevertheless made significant contributions to the contemporary musical scene. Back in England in 1901, Quilter eventually settled in London, first at 27 Welbeck Street, and then from 1912 at 7 Montagu Street, Portland Square. Two short-term addresses preceded the move in 1938 to his final home, 23 Acacia Road, St John's Wood, and over several decades he held open house to many artists, musicians, and writers. He was well read and well travelled, with an eye for beautiful things, but he was not ostentatious, preferring to use his substantial private means to give young musicians discreet financial support -- support which also enabled Jewish friends to flee Vienna in the 1930s: his mother, of Quaker stock, had bequeathed him a warm, humanitarian outlook. 
Quilter first achieved public acclaim when Denham Price sang his 'Four Songs of the Sea' at the Crystal Palace in March 1901. His songs were performed frequently by the major singers of the day: John Coates, Harry Plunket Greene, Ada Crossley, Dame Nellie Melba, and, most especially, the tenor Gervase Elwes, whose great lyrical refinement, integrity, and artistry matched his own. He freely acknowledged Elwes as 'the greatest inspiration to me always' (Quilter to Lady Winefride Elwes, 16 Jan 1921, Lincolnshire County Archives), claiming that he owed 'more to G Elwes than anyone, for the popularity of my songs' (Quilter Papers, priv. coll.). Quilter became a founder member and benefactor of the memorial fund (later the Musicians' Benevolent Fund) set up in Elwes's memory after his tragic death in 1921 at Boston, Massachusetts, and he dedicated many of his songs to him, including the song cycle 'To Julia', which they premiered together in 1905. In 1923 Quilter met the young baritone Mark Raphael, who took up Elwes's mantle, though never to the same degree; however, the performances in their 1934 recording of seventeen of Quilter's songs are definitive, and he was evidently a fine, sensitive pianist and accompanist. 
Quilter loved the theatre: he wrote music for it from 1909 onwards, and his delightful incidental music to the children's play 'Where the Rainbow Ends', produced by Charles Hawtrey at the Savoy Theatre, London, in December 1911, proved immensely popular. He collaborated with Rodney Bennett on 'The Blue Boar', a light opera broadcast by the BBC in 1933; extensively revised, it was renamed 'Julia' and performed at Covent Garden in 1936, but, though it received moderately favourable reviews, it was not performed in that version again. However, it produced a glorious waltz song, 'Love calls through the summer night', which stands comparison with the music of Edward German or Eric Coates. His orchestral piece 'A Children's Overture' (1919), a sparkling and felicitously woven medley of nursery rhymes inspired by Walter Crane's illustrated children's book 'The Baby's Opera', was already well known by the time the BBC transmitted it in its first broadcast concert in 1922. 
Quilter's tastes in music ranged from Bach to Stravinsky and ragtime, but his sensibilities did not lie with mainstream musical developments, and he was content -- notwithstanding his German training -- with his own inimitably English sound, untouched by the folk-song revival movement. His songs were broadcast frequently for many years, but despite his fame he remained shy, with a slight stammer. He was more at ease with fellow artists than with those of his own class, unless they too were artistic, and he was relaxed in the non-threatening company of children (though they sometimes found his great height a little daunting): his children's parties at the end of each 'Rainbow' season were famous. 
Quilter's friends were many and very dear to him. He dedicated his choral work 'Non nobis, domine', first performed at the pageant of parliament in 1934, to his friend Walter Creighton, who produced it; he also dedicated the first set of Shakespeare songs (1905) and three other Shakespeare songs to him. Other close friends, from before the First World War, were Major Benton Fletcher and the American millionaire philanthropist Robert Allerton, and although he never had a lifelong partner, relationships with them have been presumed. Creighton's cousin Wilfrid Gabriel de Glehn painted the oil portrait of Quilter now held by the National Portrait Gallery. 
Quilter was never well (he was exempted from service during the First World War on medical grounds) and was a chronic depressive. An operation in 1945 coupled with the shattering news of the execution by a German officer of his favourite nephew, Arnold Vivian, during the Second World War triggered a mental breakdown and he was twice admitted to St Andrew's, Northampton, a private mental hospital. It was alleged after his death that he had been blackmailed for his homosexuality, and while the allegations have never been substantiated they are certainly plausible -- a sad coda to his life. 
Quilter knew where his strengths lay and never attempted music on a grand scale. He wrote orchestral works, partsongs, some fine piano pieces, and theatre music, much of it in light vein, but he is best-known for his songs -- exquisite gems, showing a love of lyricism and language -- which mirrored his personal elegance. They are bathed in Edwardian wistfulness, but rise well above the banality of the drawing-room ballad and make a significant contribution to the art-song repertory. Quilter crafted every phrase, every note, and the graceful beauty of the finished product belies the effort that went into its making. Shakespeare and Robert Herrick were his favourite poets among an eclectic selection: three of his most famous songs were settings of Tennyson ('Now sleeps the crimson petal'), Shelley ('Love's Philosophy') and Edmund Waller ('Go, lovely rose'). 
In November 1952 the BBC celebrated Quilter's seventy-fifth birthday with a concert conducted by the chorus-master of the BBC, Leslie Woodgate, Quilter's personal secretary during the 1920s. For the last few weeks of his life he was completely bedridden; he died at his home in St John's Wood on 21 September 1953 of heart failure and pneumonia, and was buried on 25 September in the family vault at St Mary's Church, Bawdsey, Suffolk. A memorial service at St Sepulchre's Church, Holborn Viaduct, was attended by family, musicians, and ordinary members of the public who loved the music of this gentle and gentlemanly composer. 


@@@@@


doc= 35643


Quilter, Sir William Cuthbert, first baronet (1841-1911), art collector and politician, was born at South Audley Place, London, on 29 January 1841, the eldest son of William Quilter (1808-1888), the first president of the Institute of Accountants and a prominent art collector, and his wife, Elizabeth Harriot Cuthbert (died 1874), and brother of Harry Quilter (1851-1907), an art critic. Following his private education, Quilter spent five years (1858-63) working for his father's accountancy business. He married Mary Ann, daughter of John Wheeley Bevington of Brighton, on 7 May 1867. Together they had five sons and two daughters. After working for his father, Quilter started his own business, eventually founded as the firm Quilter, Balfour & Co. in 1885. He was one of the founding directors of the National Telephone Company (registered on 10 March 1881) and continued as a director and large shareholder for the remainder of his life. In 1883 Quilter purchased the Bawdsey estate near Felixstowe in Suffolk. He spent vast sums of money on the estate, which totalled 9000 acres, in the form of sea defences, a manor house, and an alpine garden. He was an agriculturist and was particularly adept at cattle breeding. Quilter, an enthusiastic yachtsman, owned a number of famous boats, including the 40 ton cutter 'Britannia', and was vice-commodore of the Royal Harwich Yacht Club from 1875 to 1909. He was also president of the Suffolk Horse Society. In December 1885 Quilter was elected as the Liberal Party member of parliament for Sudbury. He was re-elected as a Liberal Unionist in 1886 and continued as a representative of his constituency until he was defeated at the beginning of 1906. He rarely spoke in the House of Commons. Quilter was made a baronet on 13 September 1897. He was also a justice of the peace and a deputy lieutenant for Suffolk, as well as an alderman of the West Suffolk county council. 
Quilter shared his father's interest in art collecting, although he cultivated his own unique, albeit catholic, taste. His collection included works by modern English artists, such as the Pre-Raphaelite painters D. G. Rossetti, Millais, and Holman Hunt; Royal Academicians including Sir Frederic Leighton, Sir Edwin Landseer, and Sir Hubert von Herkomer; nineteenth-century French masters, for example Corot, Daubigny, and Millet; and old masters such as Frans Hals and Velazquez. His collection was well respected. The art critic F. G. Stephens praised Quilter's collection in a series of articles written for 'Cassell's Magazine of Art' in 1896-7, wherein he claimed it 'possesses a number of modern masterpieces the merits of which form a whole inferior to none in England' (Stephens, 121). In his reminiscences the artist William Rothenstein made note of the opportunity afforded him to view Quilter's collection. Quilter was generous in loaning his acquisitions to public exhibitions; he lent Sir Joshua Reynolds's 'Nymph' and 'Piping Boy' (Tate Collection) and Hals's 'Pieter Tjarck' to the Royal Academy's winter exhibition in 1891. The whole of his collection was displayed at Lawrie's Galleries, Bond Street, in 1902 in aid of King Edward's Hospital Fund for London. He presented Herkomer's portrait of Spencer Compton Cavendish, eighth duke of Devonshire, to the National Portrait Gallery in 1909. Quilter's assemblage of paintings at his London house, 28 South Street, Park Lane, was sold at Christies on 9 July 1909, realizing $87,780. He died suddenly at Bawdsey Manor on 18 November 1911 and was buried in the parish churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 35644


Quin, Windham Thomas Wyndham-, fourth earl of Dunraven and Mount Earl (1841-1926), politician and yachtsman, was born at Adare Manor, co. Limerick, on 12 February 1841. He was the only son of Edwin Richard Windham Wyndham-Quin, third earl (1812-1871), and his first wife, Augusta (died 1866), daughter of Thomas Goold, master in chancery in Ireland. During his boyhood his father, who had been under the influence of the Tractarian movement, joined the Roman Catholic church. Lady Dunraven, however, remained strongly protestant; the boy was sent to Rome for education, and forbidden to communicate with his mother. This produced an obstinate resistance. Lord Adare, as he then was, after some tuition in Paris, went to Christ Church, Oxford, in 1858. 
After three idle years at Oxford, Adare entered the army in 1862, as cornet in the first Life Guards, and with his troop saw the 'battle of Hyde Park' on 23 July 1866, when the crowd threw down the railings as a protest against the cabinet's prohibition of a meeting of the Reform League. He rode steeplechases, being a very light weight, and raced a little; but already the passion of his life was sailing, and his leaves were mostly spent on a yacht. In 1867, when the military expedition to Abyssinia was announced, Adare contrived to get the post of war correspondent for the 'Daily Telegraph', and was present at the capture of Magdala. He again acted for the 'Daily Telegraph' in the war of 1870 between France and Prussia, and witnessed the earlier battles from the Prussian crown prince's headquarters. He spent the winter of 1870-71 at Versailles, and was present when the king of Prussia was proclaimed German emperor. There, in 1919, he saw the signing of the peace between the allies and defeated Germany: he was the only person who was present on both occasions. 
Adare married on 29 April 1869 Florence Elizabeth (1841-1916), second daughter of Lord Charles Lennox Kerr; they had three daughters, two of whom predeceased him. In 1871 he succeeded to the peerage, taking his seat in the House of Lords as second Baron Kenry, a United Kingdom title granted to his father in 1866; he inherited estates in county Limerick, but his wealth was mostly derived from his lands in south Wales. He went to America (which he had visited with his wife in 1869) for big game shooting. He was introduced by General Sheridan to Buffalo Bill (William Cody) and Texas Jack, and with these famous scouts he shot buffalo and wapiti about the Platte River during the Indian wars. He purchased a ranch in Colorado, which was later neglected and a troublesome incubus to its owner. In 1874 he again went to the United States, accompanied Dr George Henry Kingsley, and explored the Yellowstone region. His observations were published as 'The Great Divide' (1876). From this time on for sixteen years he yearly crossed to North America for sport, especially in Canada and Newfoundland. 
Unlike his predecessors, who had lived chiefly at Dunraven Castle, Glamorgan, Dunraven made his home at Adare, co. Limerick. In 1880 he wrote to the American press in defence of Irish landlords, and published the first of his many pamphlets on Irish public affairs, 'The Irish Question'. In politics, Dunraven became closely associated with Lord Randolph Churchill. He was president of the Fair Trade League (whose views he represented in the royal commission on the depression of trade in 1885) and in April 1883 published in the 'Nineteenth Century' a tory-democratic manifesto with Churchill's support. This document called for the reorganization of the Conservative Party along Chamberlainite lines, denounced radicalism as essentially 'communistic', and advocated protectionism and imperialism. In 1885-6 and again in 1886-7 he was under-secretary for the colonies in Lord Salisbury's administration but resigned, ostensibly because he thought the government unfair to Newfoundland in the controversy with France over the fishery question, but really in support of Lord Randolph Churchill. In 1889 he was offered but declined the governorship of Cape Colony. 
Turning his attention to social subjects, Dunraven moved in the House of Lords for the appointment of a committee on sweated labour, carried his motion, and was appointed chairman (1888-90). He considered that much later legislation sprang from its recommendations. In 1895 he was elected a London county councillor for Wandsworth, and took a particular interest in the provision of working-class housing. A different task was the chairmanship in 1896 of the commission on Irish horse breeding. His stud at Adare was famous and successful. He raced a good deal, but his interest lay chiefly in breeding: Desmond was the most famous of his sires. 
In the years before 1900, however, Dunraven was chiefly known to the public as a yachtsman and faced criticism for neglecting his political duty for this sport. He competed for the America's Cup in 1893 and 1895 with two specially built yachts, 'Valkyrie II' and 'Valkyrie III' -- both times unsuccessfully. In the second contest against the American 'Defender' he withdrew from the third race, being dissatisfied with the keeping of the course. His subsequent protest in a pamphlet created much acrimony, and he was struck off the membership of the New York yacht club. Dunraven took out his certificate as master and extra master, and in 1900 published 'Self-Instruction in the Practice and Theory of Navigation', primarily for the use of yachtsmen. This training enabled him in the First World War to take command of the steam yacht 'Grianaig' (bought and run at his own expense) for service as a hospital ship. 
Dunraven's interest in Ireland revived in the early 1900s. In 1902 George Wyndham, as chief secretary, was contending with a renewed outburst of land agitation, when the idea of a conference between representatives of landlords and tenants was suggested in a public letter by Captain John Shawe-Taylor, a young Galway squire. Wyndham recognized the political usefulness of the idea and gave it official endorsement. It was also accepted by the nationalist leaders, but repudiated by the Irish Landlords' Convention. However, a group of landlords, of whom Dunraven was chief, set up an organization which polled the lieutenants and deputy lieutenants of Ireland on the question and secured 103 votes for conference against 33 opposing. After further proceedings, the landlords' convention having renewed its refusal, a poll of individual landlords nominated four representatives, Lord Mayo, Colonel Sir Hutcheson Poe, Colonel Nugent Everard, and Lord Dunraven. When the conference of eight assembled, Dunraven was named chairman on the motion of John Redmond. After long and difficult negotiation a unanimous report recommended a general policy of land purchase, and specified terms. This became the basis of the 'Wyndham Land Act' (1903), which settled the policy that Irish landlords should, without exception, be bought out and the occupier become the owner. The actual terms agreed at the conference were less important to Dunraven than the opportunity it provided for presenting the bill as a 'final solution' to the land question, reached by conciliatory means. 
This achievement was the great success of Dunraven's life, and naturally led him to attempt more. However, his hopes received a setback when William O'Brien, the foremost nationalist advocate of 'conciliation', resigned from the party in November 1903. In 1904 the Land Conference was revived as the Irish Reform Association, which advocated the policy of 'devolution', a partial transfer of Irish administration and legislation to an Irish assembly. Dunraven hoped that such self-government within the UK would restore the landlords to their natural place as architects of Irish social regeneration. Sir Antony MacDonnell, the under-secretary, helped to draft the proposals which, when published in 1905, were denounced by extreme nationalists and unionists alike, with the result that the scheme broke down and Wyndham was forced into resigning the chief secretaryship. Dunraven did not abandon his hopes for conciliation, and when O'Brien returned to active political life and launched a new organization, the All-for-Ireland League, in 1909, he gave it public support. 
In the struggle over the 'Home Rule Bill' and the 'Parliament Act', Dunraven played a cross-bench part. His last opportunity to forward what he always believed in, a settlement of the Irish difficulty by conciliation between different sections of the Irish community, came with the Irish Convention in 1917, in which he advocated a solution on federal lines. But there, as elsewhere, he lacked one of the main qualifications of a political leader: he had neither the equipment nor the temperament of an orator. Dunraven was saddened by partition and by the violence of 1919-21, but he supported the Anglo-Irish treaty of 1921. In January 1922 he urged southern unionists to recognize the Irish provisional government and support its efforts to restore order. He was among the members nominated by President Cosgrave to serve on the first senate of the Irish Free State in June 1921. 
Physically, Dunraven was a small, sturdy man with a weathered face. Few of his contemporaries touched life at more points, and although he experimented in many directions, he dropped nothing that interested him, while his physical endurance permitted. A large experiment in tobacco-growing at Adare was checked by the accidental burning of his factory in 1916; but even so he continued to grow as much Turkish leaf as would supply the cigarette factory that he had established. He also constantly advocated the serious development of fish supply by hatcheries, both freshwater and marine, for the British Isles. Politically, his career was eccentric and unsuccessful. His early adherence to Lord Randolph Churchill ruled out any significant role in British politics after 1887. In Ireland the 'Dunravenites' were always a small minority of protestant landowners, dependent on the sympathetic ear of Dublin Castle for success. Their weakness was compounded particularly in 1904-5 by ineptitude in political tactics and their limited strategic vision. The failure to resolve the contradiction between unionism and devolution had disastrous political consequences for the advocates of 'constructive unionism'. In the course of his life Dunraven published a number of pamphlets defending his political opinions. His memoirs were published in 1922 as 'Past Times and Pastimes'. He died at his home, 22 Norfolk Street, Park Lane, London, on 14 June 1926, and was succeeded by his cousin Windham Henry Wyndham-Quin. 


@@@@@


doc= 35645


Rackham, Arthur (1867-1939), painter and illustrator, was born on 19 September 1867 at 2 St James's Terrace, Lambeth, London, the fourth of the twelve children of Alfred Thomas Rackham (1829-1912), a legal clerk, and his wife, Anne Stevenson (1833-1920), the daughter of a Nottingham draper. Bernard Rackham (1876-1964) was his younger brother. His father became chief clerk at the Admiralty registry in 1875 and Admiralty marshal at the High Court in 1896. Rackham grew up with his many siblings at 210 South Lambeth Road in a busy part of south London, directly opposite the evocative remains of the large garden set out in the seventeenth century by John Tradescant the elder and younger. He was encouraged to paint as a child, and his first paintbox became the 'modest silent convenient companion' from which he was rarely parted (A. Rackham, 'In praise of watercolour', 'Old Water-Colour Society's Club', 1933-4, 51-2). He attended the City of London School (1879-83), where he won prizes for drawing, and made many visits to the British Museum and the Natural History Museum, where he painted from the exhibits. His health, however, was indifferent, and at the age of sixteen he left school on medical advice to take a return sea voyage to Australia. This journey, extending from January to July 1884, and the six weeks he spent painting landscapes and plants in and around Sydney, renewed his health and became his informal apprenticeship to art. 
On his return Rackham enrolled in evening classes at Lambeth School of Art, where he studied under the landscape painter William Llewellyn. His fellow students included Charles Shannon, Charles Ricketts, and Thomas Sturge Moore, and, with others, they encouraged his talents as a painter and a black and white illustrator. Their example urged him to submit illustrations to magazines, but to earn a secure living Rackham became a junior clerk in the Westminster fire office in 1885, a post he held until 1892. He resigned to join the staff of the 'Pall Mall Budget' as a news and features illustrator, and the following year he moved to the 'Westminster Budget' and the 'Westminster Gazette'. By now he was living in Buckingham Chambers, Strand, and was widening his practice by illustrating books for publishers. His name and reliability for delivery and content became known to publishers and public alike, and he was increasingly in demand. Rackham's first notable successes, which coincided with the beginnings of the fashion for lavishly produced gift books, were illustrations to 'The Ingoldsby Legends' (1898), 'Gulliver's Travels' (1900), and 'Grimm's Fairy Tales' (1900). These were followed by 'The Greek Heroes' (1903), 'Rip Van Winkle' (1905), 'Peter Pan in Kensington Gardens' (1906), and 'Alice in Wonderland' (1907). 
In the earlier books Rackham's style tended to take on the appearance of woodcuts, with the main features being drawn in thick pen and brush. From 1905 to 1910, as printing techniques improved, his line became sharper and likewise his detail more intense. In 'Rip Van Winkle' and 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' (1908) he developed his gift for drawing witches, gnomes, fairies, and anthropomorphized trees and brought them to a pitch of vivid characterization, sometimes with an unsettling frisson of horror. Trees with human limbs and faces became one of his trademarks, and may have been throwbacks to childhood memories of the Tradescants' garden. Despite the fantasy of his subjects, however, Rackham always maintained a strict sense of reality by giving his figures human traits and foibles and naturalistic, even recognizable, settings -- illustrations in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' are variously set in Wimbledon Park, Ruislip churchyard, and Walberswick, Suffolk. 
Rackham embarked on his new edition of 'Alice in Wonderland', with illustrations to rival John Tenniel's, when the book came out of copyright in 1907. Rackham's advantage over Tenniel was that now he could introduce colour; also his pen line would not be reproduced by wood-engraving. This gave him some new freedoms for invention, but his amendments to the ingrained image of Alice were not only technical. Rackham's Alice was very much a fleshly Edwardian child who would question the 'status quo' of Wonderland. Her courtesy carried an undercurrent of insistent argument. A contemporary critic observed 'a tender, flickering light of imagination in [Alice's] eyes' ('Daily Telegraph', 27 Nov 1907). 
Rackham travelled extensively in Europe, particularly to Germany, the Alps, and Italy, and he painted in watercolour on these journeys. As a direct result European landscape and architectural subjects peppered his illustrations, and he developed a particular fondness for German literature and language. This came to the fore in his two illustrated volumes of Wagner's 'Ring' cycle, 'The Rhinegold and the Valkyrie' (1910) and 'Siegfried' (1911). 
Unlike his contemporary Edmund Dulac, Rackham was not a bold colourist. He tended to restrict his palette to soft blues, greens, and reds, in local highlights or in several layers of transparent watercolour wash, over a yellowy-buff tone which gives to the whole a quality of vellum, or age. This was a practical as well as an artistic decision, as colour handled in this way could be faithfully reproduced by the three-colour separation printing process which was a new feature of pre-First World War book production. 
On 16 July 1903 Rackham married the painter Edyth Harriet Gertrude Gabrielle Starkie (1867-1941) in St Saviour's, Hampstead. She had been born and brought up in Ireland, where her father, William Robert Starkie JP, was an Anglo-Irish resident magistrate in co. Galway. At the age of sixteen she had been taken by her mother, Frances Starkie, on a tour of Europe which included a period in Paris (1884), where she studied painting at the Academie Julian. On William Starkie's death Edyth and her mother settled in London, and moved in 1897 to 3 Wynchcombe Studios, Hampstead, next door to Rackham. Edyth and Arthur met over the garden wall. At the height of Arthur's success (1905-20) the Rackhams lived in a house designed in 1881 by Charles Voysey, 16 Chalcot Gardens, Hampstead. Each had a studio there in which to pursue their individual artistic enterprises. Although the pattern of her career was undermined by ill health and motherhood -- the Rackhams' only surviving child, Barbara, was born in 1908 -- Edyth Rackham, who worked under her maiden name, became a considerable portrait painter in her own right. 
The steady flow of commissions that Rackham received settled, from 1905 to 1913, into a pattern in which late-autumn publication of the year's book coincided with an exhibition at the Leicester Galleries, London, of its original illustrations for sale. Rackham was by now in great demand socially and artistically, and delighted in entertaining and in his celebrity. His tastes, however, remained simple, and because of the frugality of his earlier professional years he found it hard to spend money on pleasure or to waste it on unnecessary expense. Recalling her father as she remembered him during her childhood, Barbara Rackham later wrote: 'He seemed to me always to look much the same, small and thin, with a deeply grooved but clear-cut face, and smooth pepper-and-salt hair at the sides of his bald head. If he grew slightly balder, more wrinkled and silvery during the years, it hardly altered his general appearance. (Hamilton, 'Rackham', 1990, 82)' Rackham was active and precise in all he did, and, having introduced his own self-portrait into his work because it was the most convenient and ever-ready face to draw, he continued during the period before the First World War to establish the image of himself that was to precede him for the rest of his life. His nephew the writer Walter Starkie confessed to thinking Rackham 'was' a goblin 'in his shabby blue suit and carpet slippers, hopping about the studio with a palette on one arm, waving a paintbrush in his hand' (W. Starkie, 'Scholars and Gypsies', 1963, 18). Eleanor Farjeon remembered: 'He watches you from behind Spectacles of Cunning, and there's a whimsical line on his face that can translate itself into the kindliest of smiles. He is light and spare and alert' ('Arthur Rackham -- the wizard at home', 'St Nicholas', March 1914, 385-9). 
Rackham's milieu was the London artistic and literary circles of the day. Among his friends were George Bernard Shaw, Charles Holroyd (the director of the National Gallery), and fellow artists Edmund Sullivan, Walter Bayes, and Lewis Baumer. Although characteristically apart from it, he also enjoyed the roistering element of the bohemian London art world. Walter Starkie remembers Augustus John remarking with 'a Homeric roar of laughter... 'Don't shock little Arthur too much, ladies and gentlemen: he is learning about life from you and he must not advance too quickly'' (W. Starkie, 'Scholars and Gypsies', 167). He did not develop a friendship with Edmund Dulac, but he did keep a file of cuttings of press reviews of his rival's work. 
The First World War effectively destroyed the illustrated gift-book market, and this brought Rackham a financial and professional reverse. He was, however, enough of a celebrity to be asked to create compilations such as 'Arthur Rackham's Book of Pictures' (1913) and 'The Allies' Fairy Book' (1916), and he contributed readily to war charity publications. Determined to continue his work despite the war, Rackham also produced editions of Dickens's 'A Christmas Carol' (1915) and Thomas Malory's 'Romance of King Arthur' (1917). 'In addition to his detachment', Walter Starkie recalled, 'he possessed an innate stoicism which made him endure austerity without complaining' (W. Starkie, 'Scholars and Gypsies', 166). 
In 1920 the Rackhams moved from London to Houghton House, Amberley, Sussex, where they lived until 1930. This gave Edyth the country air she needed for her failing health, while for the working week Rackham kept a London studio at Primrose Hill. The principal market for Rackham's work was now the United States. Fashions in England had shifted away from Rackham's fanciful subject matter, and this caused his income to shrink. In America, however, his illustrations remained in demand both for books and advertising. To maintain markets on both sides of the Atlantic, American and English publishers continued to co-operate on books such as 'The Sleeping Beauty' (1920), Milton's 'Comus' (1921), and Shakespeare's 'The Tempest' (1926), and Rackham also accepted contracts for illustrations to books published solely in America, such as A. F. Brown's 'The Lonesomest Doll' (1928). In 1927 he travelled to New York, Boston, and Philadelphia, returning with an important commission from the New York Public Library to illustrate a unique copy of 'A Midsummer Night's Dream', to be written out by the calligrapher Graily Hewitt (completed in 1930). 
In tune with the changing times, Rackham's style during the 1920s began to adopt hints of art deco, even of syncopation. This was a manner in which he was perhaps uneasy, but nevertheless his natural sense of design, of characterization, and his lyrical handling of line and wash did not leave him. Nor was there any perceptible change in the sympathetic approach he had always adopted to the reading of the texts he had chosen to illustrate. He had a keen ear for the moods his authors evoked and a natural understanding of the subtleties of human expression. This was the mature grounding which he drew upon throughout his career in his narrative evocations of evil, redemption, and fancy. In landscape watercolours and oil paintings, and in the handful of portraits he painted, Rackham emerges as a considerable artist whose gifts had been circumscribed by the needs of commercial book illustration. This reflection had struck Rackham himself, and, writing in the 1930s, he appears to have bitterly regretted having compromised and having followed what was, he believed, a 'lesser aim' (Hamilton, 'Rackham', 1990, 149). 
Among Rackham's last books -- made after the family moved in 1930 to Stilegate, the house they had built near Limpsfield, Surrey -- are E. A. Poe's 'Tales of Mystery and Imagination' (1935), 'Peer Gynt' (1936), and a third version of 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' (1939). His illustrations to Poe's 'Tales' have a sharp edge of true horror, a re-emergent strain from the earlier Grimm and Wagner subjects. The last few years of Rackham's life were interrupted by spells in hospital for both him and Edyth. During his last illness he worked on illustrations to Kenneth Grahame's 'The Wind in the Willows', a book for which he had a strong affection, and which he had longed for years to illustrate. The resulting pictures (the edition was published posthumously in 1940) are among his most affecting works, replete with wit, invention, and carefully controlled emotion. Rackham died at Stilegate on 6 September 1939 and was cremated in Croydon. There is a memorial in Amberley churchyard lettered by Bettina Furnee which was installed in 1992. 
Rackham brought a renewed sense of excitement to book illustration that coincided with the rapid developments in printing technology in the early twentieth century. Working with subtle colour and wiry line, he exploited the growing strengths of commercial printing to create imagery and characterizations that reinvigorated children's literature, electrified young readers, and dominated the art of book illustration at the start of a new century. A memorial exhibition of his work was held at the Leicester Galleries in December 1939, and a touring exhibition was shown in Sheffield, Bristol, and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, in 1979-80. Principal collections of original watercolours for Rackham's illustrations in the United Kingdom are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, the British Museum, the Tate collection, and museums and libraries in Cambridge, Leeds, and Sheffield. Original works and papers are in the National Art Library at the Victoria and Albert Museum; the Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center at the University of Texas, Austin; the Butler Library of the Columbia University, New York; the Free Library of Philadelphia; and the University of Louisville, Kentucky. 


@@@@@


doc= 35646


Rackham, Bernard (1876-1964), museum curator and expert on ceramics, was born in London on 26 July 1876, the third son of Alfred Thomas Rackham (1829-1912), later Admiralty marshal of the High Court of Justice, and his wife, Anne (1833-1920), daughter of William Stevenson, draper, of Leicester and Nottingham. His eldest brother was Arthur Rackham (1867-1939), the illustrator. Rackham was educated at the City of London School and went with an exhibition in 1895 to Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he took a first in the classical tripos in 1898. He then entered a competition for an assistant keepership at the South Kensington Museum (later the Victoria and Albert Museum) under a scheme whereby the government aimed to attract Oxford and Cambridge graduates to the museum service. Successful, he was posted to the department of ceramics, where he was destined to remain for forty years, during the last twenty-four of which he was its head. In 1909 he married Ruth (1880/81-1963), daughter of Francis Adams, of Clapham, a colonial merchant; they had one son and one daughter. 
To Rackham belongs the credit of putting ceramic studies in England on a firm footing, a service which in many fields was also of international significance. Before his time the study of English ceramics was based on facts, assumptions masquerading as facts, and vague traditions. Rackham, by his intellectual vigour and grasp of essentials, reduced this formless mass to order, eliminating baseless assumptions and calling in aid only verifiable and relevant information. The same strict method was applied in other fields. With this disciplined approach he combined a real enthusiasm for art in all its manifestations, ancient and modern, oriental and Western. For him the aesthetic quality of an object was its ultimate justification. 
Shortly after appointment to the museum, Rackham was detailed to register the vast mixed ceramic collection (some 5000 objects) acquired from the Museum of Practical Geology on its dissolution. This experience underlay his subsequent great and diverse knowledge of ceramics. 
Rackham's first publications lay in the field of English ceramics, partly because the main emphasis of the practical geology collection lay there, partly because he was charged with reworking the catalogue of the Lady Charlotte Schreiber collection of English pottery, porcelain, and enamels, the greatest of its kind. The three volumes appeared in 1924-30, only the first volume of the revision having been published previously, in 1915. In 1917 there appeared a complementary catalogue of the English porcelain in the Herbert Allen collection. These works established the basic categories of English porcelain. 
After the First World War it fell to Rackham to rearrange the enormous collections of his department. As a fitting complement to this work he undertook the translation from Danish of Emil Hannover's encyclopaedic 'Keramisk haandbog' (which appeared in three volumes in 1925 as 'Pottery and Porcelain'). The previous year he had returned to English studies in 'English Pottery', written with Herbert Read. This work represented the first modern classification of all branches of English pottery, and was succeeded by his catalogue (2 vols., 1935) of the vast Glaisher collection at the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, which has remained one of the most useful reference works on English pottery. 
In 1918 Rackham had turned to an entirely fresh theme in the 'Catalogue of the Le Blond Collection of Corean Pottery', and although he never explored oriental subjects in great depth, he was perennially interested and stimulated by them, and became a founder member of the Oriental Ceramic Society. By then he was devoting himself increasingly to the European middle ages and Renaissance, particularly tin-glazed earthenware and stained glass. About 1900 he had been invited to help catalogue the works of art inherited by Francis Wyndham Cook, and in 1903 he published his 'Catalogue of Italian Maiolica and other Pottery, 8 Cadogan Square'. This experience was the beginning of his special interest and mastery in this field. In 1926 he published a pioneer work on the tin-glazed pottery made in the Low Countries ('Early Netherlands Maiolica'). He contributed important articles on Italian maiolica to learned periodicals, and in 1933 brought out a 'Guide to Italian Maiolica' in the museum, a masterly work of compression and lucid exposition. The true fruit of his work in this field, however, was seen in his monumental 'Catalogue of Italian Maiolica' (1940) in the museum, a two-volume catalogue raisonne of the more than 1400 items in that great collection, and the essential tool in all maiolica studies. Rackham's vast erudition in this branch of ceramics was later distilled into the more popular 'Italian Maiolica' (1952). 
In 1936 a series of articles on stained glass culminated in a 'Guide to the Collections of Stained Glass' in the museum, one of the best short summaries of the whole subject in any language. The summit of his work in this field, however, was reached with his 'Ancient Glass of Canterbury Cathedral' (1949). This was more than ten years after his retirement, and he continued to publish on various ceramic themes -- 'A Key to Pottery and Glass' in 1940, 'Medieval English Pottery' in 1948, and 'Early Staffordshire Pottery' in 1951. He also published important articles on English and continental glassware, on Limoges enamels, and on continental porcelain. 
Rackham, who was a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, was appointed CB in 1937. He was honorary remembrancer of Guildford, and president of the English Ceramic Circle and of the Guildford Art Society. Apart from his scholarly work, Rackham was also a civil servant, charged with the administration of a department. These duties he conscientiously fulfilled, requiring of his subordinates the same high standards which he imposed upon himself. Personally, he was highly strung and eager, overflowing with enthusiasm, and endowed with a keen sense of humour. He was tall and lean, with a bright eye and a strikingly erect carriage even in old age. He died at the Hillbrow Nursing Home, Liss, Hampshire, on 13 February 1964. 
R. J. Charleston', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35647


Crocker, Henry Radcliffe- (1846-1909), dermatologist, was born Henry Radcliffe Crocker on 6 March 1846 at Western Road, Hove, Sussex, the son of Henry Radcliffe Crocker, a chemist and druggist, and his wife, Maria, formerly Walters. He was generally called by his middle name, Radcliffe, rather than his first name, Henry; in time this usage suggested the compound surname Radcliffe Crocker or Radcliffe-Crocker. He was educated at a private school in Brighton until, aged sixteen, he became an apprentice with a general practitioner, possibly Dr Ralph Goodall, in Silverdale, Staffordshire. Crocker's initial intention was presumably to follow his father as a pharmacist but, despite straitened circumstances, he studied hard and in 1870 gained entry to University College Hospital medical school in London. Part-time employment as a dispenser to a doctor in Sloane Street helped to support his brilliant undergraduate career. He was awarded the gold medals in materia medica and clinical medicine in 1872, which were followed two years later by the university scholarship and the gold medal in forensic medicine together with honours in medicine and obstetrics. He obtained his MRCS in 1873, LRCP and BS (London) in 1874, and his MD the following year. 
Crocker's first appointment was as resident obstetric physician and physician's assistant at University College Hospital. The delayed start to his medical career gave that institution a more mature and confident junior doctor than was normally found. These qualities were also recognized by his fellow practitioners and he was able to supplement his income by tutoring as he progressed through the posts of clinical assistant at the Brompton Hospital for Consumption and Diseases of the Chest and a further six months as resident medical officer at Charing Cross Hospital. His training continued in 1875 with his return to University College Hospital as resident medical officer and one year later he became the assistant medical officer in its dermatology department. There he came under the influence of William Tilbury Fox who inspired in Crocker the abiding interest in skin disease that developed into his career. 
Crocker continued to broaden his experience by taking appointments as assistant physician and pathologist to the East London Hospital for Sick Children at Shadwell in 1878 and six years later he became honorary physician there, an association he maintained until 1893. He became a member of the Royal College of Physicians in 1877 and a fellow ten years later. 
The tragic death in 1879 of William Tilbury Fox at the early age of forty-two gave Crocker the opportunity to succeed him as physician and dermatologist to University College Hospital. There were very few dermatologists in England and prejudice against the continental practice of specialization persisted among physicians. However, Crocker had acquired a wide base of medical knowledge and he steadily evolved a method of considering a skin disorder as part of the patient's overall condition which led him to direct therapy through both topical and systemic modalities. In so doing he retained his colleagues' respect and, as the necessity for specialization in the light of increasing medical knowledge was slowly accepted they credited Crocker and Tilbury Fox with 'bringing some semblance of order to the subject' (Gold, 23). Crocker was one of the first to appreciate the value of microscopic examination of a skin biopsy and undertook some of the earliest thorough epidemiological investigations of skin disease. His many scientific publications included the first descriptions of a number of important skin disorders including granuloma annulare and erythema elevatum diutinum, and he is credited with the identification of micrococci as the causative agents of impetigo. In England he pioneered the application of X-rays in the management of inflammatory skin disease and the use of Koch's treatment of lupus vulgaris with tuberculin. Concern for his patient, though, always tempered his thirst for innovation with a sober assessment of its value. 
On 3 April 1880, established in his substantive post, Crocker married Constance Mary, the daughter of Edward Francis Fussell, medical officer of health for east Sussex and physician at Sussex County Hospital. Crocker's developing reputation attracted increasing numbers of private patients and, from 1889, he consulted from rooms at 121 Harley Street. The couple had no children but, in 1898, their increased prosperity allowed the purchase of a country residence at Bourne End, Buckinghamshire. 
Crocker was a member of the court of examiners of the Society of Apothecaries from 1880 to 1896. An active interest in medical politics encouraged him to take office within the British Medical Association. He began as honorary secretary of the metropolitan counties branch (1889-91), he was appointed to council from 1890 to 1904, and high esteem for his business and organizing abilities resulted in his election as treasurer (1905-7). He was deeply involved in the redevelopment of the association's headquarters in the Strand and participated in the management of the 'British Medical Journal'. His regular contributions on dermatological and ethical matters to this journal and its rival, 'The Lancet', were well received by their readers and for many years he taught the fundamentals of medical ethics to each new intake of students at University College Hospital. 
For the last twenty years of his life Crocker was the doyen of British dermatologists; his professional stature has been compared with that of his contemporary Ernest Besnier in Paris. He was founder member of the Dermatological Society of London which functioned as the training ground for these new specialists. He was also an early participant in the Dermatological Society of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, later serving on its council and as its president in 1899. When, in 1905, these two societies were merged to form the Royal Society of Medicine, Radcliffe-Crocker was elected as the first president of its dermatological section. Nevertheless, he was able to maintain his position in mainstream medicine, as evidenced by the invitation in 1903 to deliver the prestigious Lettsomian lectures to the Medical Society of London and by his position on the council of the Royal College of Physicians from 1906 to 1908. 
Crocker's avid reading and retentive memory facilitated the production of his textbook 'Diseases of the Skin: their Description, Pathology, Diagnosis and Treatment', which was first published in 1888 and exemplified his lucid and comprehensive writing style. For many years it was the most highly regarded on the subject in English and it ran to several editions. It was followed between 1893 and 1896 by the monthly instalments of 'The Atlas of Diseases of the Skin'. Dermatological societies in America, France, Germany, and Italy recognized his pre-eminence in the speciality, elected him to their membership, and valued his attendance and contributions to their meetings. 
As a young man Crocker went about his work with an air of grave determination, but he was not aloof and remained generally good humoured and capable of sharing a joke. Above middle height he had a fine physique and participated in a number of sporting activities including cycling, sculling, and lawn tennis. He particularly enjoyed travel but in later life his health was undermined by recurrent attacks of erysipelas, of which the final and most severe precipitated his resignation from his posts at the British Medical Association and induced a desire to step down from his duties at University College Hospital. His colleagues persuaded him to reconsider and, in the summer of 1909, he embarked on a holiday to the Swiss alpine village of Engelberg, where he hoped to complete his recuperation. On 22 August he died suddenly from heart failure while sitting in his hotel. His burial took place at Engelberg. In 1912 Mrs Radcliffe-Crocker donated his extensive library of dermatological works in various languages to University College Hospital medical school together with $1500 for the foundation of a dermatological travelling scholarship. 


@@@@@


doc= 35648


Rae, William Fraser (1835-1905), author, was born in Edinburgh on 3 March 1835, the elder son of George Rae and his wife, Catherine Fraser, both of Edinburgh. After education at Moffat Academy and at Heidelberg, where he studied German, Rae entered Lincoln's Inn as a student on 2 November 1857, and on 30 April 1861 was called to the bar. But he soon abandoned law for journalism. 
On 29 August 1860 Rae married Sara Eliza, second daughter of James Fordati of the Isle of Man and London. About this time he edited the periodical 'The Reader', and joined the staff of the 'Daily News' as a special correspondent in Canada and the United States. He was in complete sympathy with the Liberal views of that paper. He published books on Canada and other subjects. 
Throat trouble led Rae to spend much time at Austrian health resorts, where he wrote articles about them for 'The Times', which were reprinted as 'Austrian Health Resorts, and the Bitter Waters of Hungary' (1888). In 'The Business of Travel' (1891) he described the methods of Thomas Cook & Son. 
Rae was particularly interested in eighteenth-century English political history. In 1874 he brought out 'Wilkes, Sheridan, and Fox, or, The Opposition under George III', which echoed the style of Macaulay. He studied the question of the identity of Junius, on which he wrote in 'The Athenaeum' (between 11 August 1888 and 6 May 1899, and occasionally later). He bolstered the argument that Junius was not Sir Philip Francis. He was never able to identify Junius, but eliminated many possible candidates from consideration. He also made a careful study of the career of Sheridan. With the aid of Lord Dufferin and others, he collected much unpublished material and sought to rehabilitate Sheridan's reputation. This resulted in 'Sheridan, a Biography' (2 vols., 1896). Rae succeeded in proving many rumours false, but failed in his purpose of whitewashing Sheridan. In 1902 he published from the original manuscripts 'Sheridan's Plays, now Printed as he Wrote them' and 'A Journey to Bath', a previously unpublished comedy by Sheridan's mother. He also wrote four three-volume novels (published between 1887 and 1891). 
Towards the end of his life Rae reviewed much for 'The Athenaeum', whose editor, Norman MacColl, was a close friend. He spent his time chiefly at the Reform Club, which he had joined in 1860, and where he was chairman of the library committee from 1873 until his death. He was an occasional contributor to the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. Chronic ill health and his declining popularity tended somewhat to sour his last years. Sara died at Franzensbad, where she and Rae were frequent autumn visitors, on 29 August 1902, leaving two daughters. Rae died on 22 January 1905 at his residence, 13 South Parade, Bath, and was buried at Bath. 


@@@@@


doc= 35649


Raggi, Mario (1821-1907), sculptor, was born in Carrara, Italy, and studied art at the Accademia delle Belle Arti, Carrara, first under Pietro Marchetti and later under Ferdinando Pelliccia. After winning all available prizes, at the age of seventeen he went to Rome, where he studied under Pietro Tenerani. In 1850 he moved to London, working at first under Raffaelle Monti, afterwards for many years under Matthew Noble, and finally setting up his own studio about 1875. His principal works were memorial busts and statues. He executed the national memorial to the earl of Beaconsfield in Parliament Square, a jubilee memorial of Queen Victoria for Hong Kong, with replicas for Kimberley, in southern Africa, and Toronto, Canada, and statues of Lord Swansea for Swansea, Dr Tait for Edinburgh, Dr Crowther for Hobart Town, Tasmania, Australia, Sir Arthur Kennedy for Hong Kong, and W. E. Gladstone for Manchester. 
Raggi first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1854, showing a work entitled 'Innocence', followed in 1878 by a marble bust of Admiral Henry Rous, which he executed for the Jockey Club, Newmarket, Suffolk. He afterwards exhibited intermittently until 1895, among other works busts of Cardinal Manning (1879), Cardinal Newman (1881), Lord John Manners, afterwards seventh duke of Rutland (1884), and the duchess of Rutland (1895). Raggi died at his home, The Mount, Boundstone, Farnham, Surrey, on 26 November 1907. 


@@@@@


doc= 35650


Raikes, Humphrey Rivaz (1891-1955), chemist and university administrator, was born on 14 July 1891 at Ide Hill, Kent, the third son of Canon Walter Allan Raikes, vicar of Goudhurst, and his wife, Catherine Amelia, daughter of William Cotton Oswell (1818-1893), an explorer and elephant hunter in southern Africa in the 1840s. Raikes, who remained an Anglican throughout his life, was educated first at St Clare's School, Walmer, then at Tonbridge School, Dulwich College, and Balliol College, Oxford, where he was a Williams exhibitioner in 1910 and Abbott scholar in 1911. A student of Harold Hartley, he attained a first class in the final honour school of chemistry in 1914. 
At the outbreak of the First World War Raikes served in France as a second lieutenant in the Buffs, and in April 1915 he was wounded in the shoulder. In November 1915 he transferred to the Royal Flying Corps, and in January 1918 became chief experimental officer at the experimental station at Orford Ness with the rank of major. In June 1918 he was awarded the Air Force Cross, and joined the Royal Air Force mission to the United States to help train American personnel. 
After the war Raikes returned to Oxford, and in June 1919 was elected to a tutorial fellowship at Exeter College. From 1920 to 1927 he again worked under Hartley, serving as demonstrator in physical chemistry at the Balliol and Trinity College laboratory, and from 1924 to 1927 he was sub-rector of Exeter College. He was a most stimulating teacher, his main interest being electrochemistry, and his colleagues in the growing school of physical chemistry owed much to his skilful administration of the Balliol and Trinity laboratory. On the formation of the Oxford University air squadron in 1925 Raikes was made chief instructor with the rank of wing commander. 
In January 1928 Raikes succeeded Sir William Thomson to become the third principal of the University of the Witwatersrand, South Africa, then entering its seventh year as a full university. His appointment as principal was fortuitous. The university's London committee, visiting Exeter College to interview a favoured candidate and not finding him, happened upon Raikes, who so impressed them that they promptly nominated him for the post. Nevertheless, at first Raikes struggled to establish his position within the university. He had been appointed against the wishes of senate, which favoured an internal candidate (the philosopher R. F. A. Hoernle), and often had difficulty in controlling senate meetings. Initially, the university council was not convinced that it had made the right appointment. A tall, gangling man, Raikes seemed shy, nervous, and lacking in drive. A narcoleptic, he also had the disconcerting habit of falling asleep during meetings. His position as principal was not confirmed until 1932, and it was not until 1948 that council appointed him to the largely ceremonial position of vice-chancellor. Although Raikes wished to identify himself with South Africa, he was long regarded by many as an alien transplant. This was compounded by his reticence and a natural reserve, which gave the impression of aloofness. In 1931 Raikes married Joan, daughter of Charles Mylne Mullaly of the Indian Civil Service; the marriage was soon annulled. In 1936 he returned to England to marry, on 8 December, Alice Joan (died 1977), daughter of William Arthur Hardy, an accountant of Norwich; she became headmistress of Roedean School in Johannesburg. They had no children. 
The Second World War enabled Raikes to come into his own, both within the university and in the wider community. He took the lead in involving the university in South Africa's war effort, including the formation of a university training corps, and in ensuring the provision by Wits, at the end of the war, of an accelerated programme for ex-volunteers. In August 1945 Raikes toured the South African forces in Italy and Egypt on a recruiting drive on behalf of all the country's universities; after the war twice as many ex-volunteers enrolled at Wits as in the other South African universities combined. 
It was during Raikes's tenure that Wits developed, together with the University of Cape Town, as an 'open' university in the South African context, by admitting black and white students to the same classes in defiance of the country's segregationist practices. In response to an external challenge, the university's council decided in 1934 to begin admitting black students, though this arrangement excluded them from clinical training in medicine and dentistry, leaving them with the option of going overseas for this; when the outbreak of war in 1939 rendered this impossible, Raikes played a central role in opening up the Wits medical school to the black students, on condition that their clinical training was confined to the non-European hospital. While Raikes strongly advocated the admission of all groups to Wits, he was reluctant to integrate the black students into formal social and sporting events -- the university's policy of 'academic non-segregation and social segregation' encapsulated his own approach. 
Following the accession of the National Party to power in 1948, Raikes found himself caught between a government committed to apartheid and a radicalized students' representative council pressing for an end to all forms of racial discrimination on campus. In March 1954 Raikes retired on the grounds of ill health, disheartened by the sheer complexity of the political pressures brought to bear on him after 1948 and frustrated by the financial constraints that had consistently obstructed his desire to develop Wits as a university of some international repute. 
Raikes's style of leadership was unassertive and collegial. He lived on campus in the principal's lodgings, and took a personal interest in almost everything that happened at the university. It was a matter of regret to him that by the end of his tenure it was no longer possible for him to know all senior students by name, the student body having grown from 1476 in 1928 to 4277 by 1954. 
Raikes was also active outside the university. He was president of the South African Chemical Institute in 1932-3; chairman of the board responsible for the aptitude testing of recruits to the South African Air Force during the Second World War; president of the Associated Scientific and Technical Societies of South Africa in 1947; and a long-serving member of the Johannesburg Hospital Board. Between 1948 and 1955 he was awarded five honorary doctorates, by the universities of Bristol, Cambridge, Toronto, Cape Town, and Wits. In 1960 the university's new chemistry building was named after him. Troubled by ill health since contracting dysentery on his way back from Egypt, Raikes died on 13 April 1955 in the Johannesburg General Hospital, following an operation; he was cremated on 14 April at Braamfontein crematorium. He was survived by his wife, and on her death the couple's estate went equally to the University of Witwatersrand and Balliol College, Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 35651


Railton, Herbert (1857-1910), illustrator, was born on 21 November 1857 at Brownlow House, Pleasington, near Blackburn, Lancashire, the fourth child in the Roman Catholic family of John Railton, an iron- and brass-founder and a JP. He was the eldest of his father's three children from his second marriage, to Eliza Ann Alexander, and was educated at Mechelen, Belgium, and at Ampleforth College in Yorkshire. He was then apprenticed to the Blackburn architect W. S. Varley, where he showed great promise as a draughtsman; in 1883 he had drawings published in a local guidebook. Realizing where his vocation lay, in 1885 he went to London, where he shared a studio with Louis Wain and John Jellicoe. Railton and Jellicoe jointly illustrated theatrical scenes for the 'Illustrated Sporting and Dramatic News', Jellicoe drawing the figures with Railton providing the scenery. This combination of talents found further outlet in reprints of the novels of Anne Manning, published between 1897 and 1899. 
Railton became increasingly prominent in the 'black and white school' which flourished as a result of the introduction of photomechanical processes of reproduction into the commercial periodicals market: indeed, the crucial replacement of wood-engraving by the line-block (which allowed the draughtsman to reproduce his own lines on the page) occurred in 1886 in the 'English Illustrated Magazine', a journal which employed Railton extensively. Railton's illustration reflected his initial training, the architectural exterior being his speciality. Castles, cathedrals, great houses, and high streets came in profusion from his pen, although he was versatile enough to enjoy success with Macmillan's jubilee edition of 'The Pickwick Papers' (1901). Railton also drew for 'Good Words', 'The Graphic', the 'Illustrated London News', 'The Portfolio', and the 'Magazine of Art'. At the height of his career he was earning considerable sums, although he was frequently short of money. Some of the series of articles which he illustrated later appeared as monographs: W. J. Loftie's 'Westminster Abbey' (1890), 'The Inns of Court' (1893), and 'Windsor' (1896) had first appeared in 'The Portfolio', and W. O. Tristram's 'Coaching Days and Coaching Ways', which he illustrated jointly with Hugh Thomson for the 'English Illustrated Magazine', was published in 1888 in book form by Macmillan with great success. 
In 1887 Railton was fortunate enough to meet the fledgeling publisher J. M. Dent and was engaged to illustrate the 'Temple Library' series. On 19 September 1891 he married the artist Frances (Fanny) Janetta Edney with whom he collaborated on Dent's elaborate gift books. Coloured lithographs in C. W. Stubbs's 'Cambridge and its Story' (1903), Cecil Headlam's 'Oxford and its Story' (1904), and W. O. Smeaton's 'Edinburgh and its Story' (1904) were tinted by Mrs Railton, whose own drawings for 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' (1901) reveal a delicacy of line. Herbert's lithographs, together with pen drawings from the texts, were reproduced in black and white in Dent's 'Mediaeval Towns' series, for which he illustrated Bruges, Chartres, and London. Other work for Dent included the 'Temple Edition' of the novels of Walter Scott (1897) and Boswell's 'Life of Johnson' (1901). For the publisher Isbister he illustrated ten titles in the 'English Cathedrals' series (1897-9). At this time he was also engaged on two de luxe editions for Freemantle, Gilbert White's 'Natural History of Selborne' (1900) and Leigh Hunt's 'The Old Court Suburb' (1902). Among other substantial projects were J. W. Brown's 'The Builders of Florence' (1907) and W. O. Tristram's 'Moated Houses' (1910), both published by Methuen. 
Joseph Pennell claimed that Railton was influenced by the styles of Martin Rico y Ortega (1833-1908) and Daniel Urrabieta y Vierge (1851-1904), Spanish masters of pen drawing, but he rapidly developed his own, distinctive broken-line technique which enthused many followers, few of whom reached his standard. Because his style did not vary, critics found him boring, but the combination of picturesque subject matter and delicate penwork greatly appealed to the general public. According to the critic and novelist Frank Swinnerton, Railton was fond of a drink and drew better in a 'state of expansiveness'. During his final illness he was without money and asked J. M. Dent to help his wife and child. He died from pneumonia on 10 March 1910 in St Mary's Hospital, Paddington, and was buried in Kensal Green Roman Catholic cemetery. He was survived by his wife and daughter. Examples of his work, including a self-portrait, are held in Blackburn Art Gallery. 


@@@@@


doc= 35652


Raines, Sir Julius Augustus Robert (1827-1909), army officer, was born at Rome on 9 March 1827, the only son of Colonel Joseph Robert Raines of Cork, of the 77th, 82nd, 95th, and 48th regiments, who had served in the Peninsular War, and his wife, Julia, daughter of Edward Jardine of Sevenoaks, Kent, banker. As a boy he lived with his mother's family at Sevenoaks, and attended the school there. He received his military education at the Ecole Militaire, Brunswick (where an uncle by marriage, Baron von Girsewald, was master of horse to the duke), and at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. He entered the army, as ensign in the 3rd foot (the Buffs), on 28 January 1842, and in the same year exchanged into the 95th regiment. He was promoted lieutenant on 5 April 1844, and captain on 13 April 1852. 
Raines served throughout the Crimean War (1854-5). For his services with the Turkish army in Silistria, before the invasion of the Crimea, he long after received the first-class gold medal of the Liakat. After the action at Bulganek he carried the queen's colour at the Alma. He was at Inkerman and Chernaya, and through the siege and fall of Sevastopol he served as an assistant engineer, being severely wounded in the trenches during the bombardment of 17 October 1854, and being present in the trenches at the attack on the Redan on 18 June 1855. He was mentioned in dispatches, and was awarded the Mejidiye (fifth class) and a brevet majority (24 April 1855). He became major on 1 May 1857. 
Raines commanded the 95th throughout the Indian mutiny campaign in 1857-9. He was present at the assault and capture of Rewah on 6 January 1858, when he received the commendation of the governor of Bombay and the commander-in-chief for 'gallantry displayed and ably conducting these operations'. He led the left wing of the 95th at the siege and capture of Awa on 24 January, and at the siege and capture of Kotah on 30 March was in command of the third assaulting column. After the battle of Kotah-ki-sarai he was mentioned in dispatches. He was especially active during the capture of Gwalior on 19 June, when he was wounded by a musket ball in the left arm, after taking by assault two 18-pounders and helping to turn the captured guns on the enemy. For bravery in minor engagements he was four times mentioned in dispatches. The 95th, while under his command in central India, marched 3000 miles. He was promoted lieutenant-colonel on 17 November 1857, and brevet colonel on 20 July 1858, and was made CB on 21 March 1859. He married on 15 November 1859 his cousin, Catherine Elizabeth, eldest daughter and coheir of John Nicholas Wrixon of Killetra, Mallow, co. Cork. They had no children, and she survived him. 
Raines next saw active service at Aden, where he commanded an expedition into the interior in 1865-6. The British troops captured and destroyed many villages and ports, including Assala, the Fadhlis' capital, and seven cannon. He was promoted major-general on 6 March 1868, lieutenant-general on 1 October 1877, and general (retired) on 1 July 1881, and was appointed colonel-in-chief of the Buffs (the East Kent regiment), in 1882. He was advanced to KCB on 3 June 1893 and GCB in 1906, and in the same year he received the grand cross of the Danish order of the Dannebrog. He published in 1900 'The 95th (the Derbyshire) Regiment in Central India'. He died on 11 April 1909 at his residence, 46 Sussex Gardens, Hyde Park, London, and was buried in the parish church, Sevenoaks. 


@@@@@


doc= 35653


Adam Rolland Rainy (1862-1911), MA, MB, and CM (Edinburgh), studied at Berlin and Vienna, and practised from 1887 to 1900 as a surgeon oculist in London. He travelled in Australia and New Zealand (1891), in the West Indies (1896), and in Spain and Algiers (1899 and 1903). Entering on political work he contested Kilmarnock burghs in 1900 as a radical, gained the seat in 1906, and held it until his sudden death at North Berwick on 26 August 1911. He married in 1887 Annabella, second daughter of Hugh Matheson of Ross-shire; she survived him with a son and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 35654


Rainy, Robert (1826-1906), United Free Church of Scotland minister, elder son of Harry Rainy MD (1792-1876), professor of forensic medicine in Glasgow University, and his wife, Barbara Gordon (died July 1854), was born at 49 Montrose Street, Glasgow, on 1 January 1826. On 10 October 1835 he entered Glasgow high school, where Alexander Maclaren was his schoolfellow. In October 1838 he proceeded to Glasgow University, where he graduated MA in April 1844. He had been taken by his father's friend Robert Buchanan (1802-1875) to the debates in the general assembly of 1841 leading to the Disruption; when the Disruption came in 1843 he felt a vocation to the ministry of the Free Church. However, his father intended him for the medical profession, and on his father's advice he gave a year (1843-4) to medical study. In 1844 he entered the Divinity Hall of the Free Church (New College, Edinburgh), studying under Thomas Chalmers, David Welsh, William Cunningham, 'rabbi' John Duncan, and Alexander Campbell Fraser. He was at this time a member of the famous Speculative Society of Edinburgh University. 
Rainy was licensed on 7 November 1849 by the Free Church presbytery of Glasgow, and for six months had charge of a mission at Inchinnan, near Renfrew. By Elizabeth, dowager duchess of Gordon, he was made chaplain at Huntly Lodge; declining other calls, he became minister of Huntly Free Church, ordained there by Strathbogie presbytery on 12 January 1851. His reputation was such that in 1854 he was called to Free High Church, Edinburgh, in succession to Robert Gordon. As he wished to remain in Huntly his presbytery declined (12 April 1854) to sustain the call, as did the synod; the general assembly (22 May 1854) transferred him to Edinburgh, henceforth his home. After moving to Edinburgh Rainy married one of his parishioners, Susan ('b'. 1835), daughter of Adam Rolland of Gask, on 2 December 1857. Their first son lived only briefly; they subsequently had three sons and three daughters. Susan Rainy was active in the Free Church and was convenor of the Women's Temporary Committee in 1903. She died on 30 September 1905. Rainy's pastorate lasted until 1862, when he was made professor of church history in New College, Edinburgh, delivering his inaugural lecture on 7 November 1862. In 1863 he received the degree of DD from Glasgow University. He became principal of the college in 1874, and retained this post until his death, resigning his chair in 1901. 
Rainy's position soon became that of the ecclesiastical statesman of his church, of whose assembly he was moderator in 1887, 1900, and 1905. His aim appears to have been to permit gradual 'modernization' of Free Church theology on questions such as biblical criticism, evolution, and the Westminster confession, while simultaneously pursuing disestablishment of the Church of Scotland. During the prosecution of William Robertson Smith (1876-1881), he sought a diplomatic solution, and was successful in preventing the condemnation of Smith's teaching; the price for this was a formal condemnation of Smith on Rainy's motion on 23 May 1881, and Smith's consequent loss of his chair. In 1890 Rainy's diplomatic skills played an important part in the avoidance of prosecution of Marcus Dods and Alexander Balmain Bruce. Rainy gave no clear intellectual lead in these controversies. It has been said of him 'that he had practised the art of concealing his thoughts for so long that he had lost the ability to express them frankly and briefly' (Drummond and Bulloch, 8). His publications were mostly collected lectures and sermons. He also published 'Presbyterianism as a Form of Church Life and Work' (1894) and 'The Ancient Catholic Church' (1902). He edited 'The Presbyterian' (1868-71) and contributed to collections of essays, including W. Wilson's 'Memorials of R. S. Candlish' (1880) and F. Hastings's 'The Atonement' (1883). Rainy pursued disestablishment with energy and resource, and succeeded in bringing pressure to bear on the Liberal Party leadership whose willingness to give the matter priority was vital. But Welsh rather than Scottish disestablishment took priority in the 1892-5 Liberal government. 
Rainy also pursued the objective of a union of the various free churches. In 1876, after prolonged negotiations, he achieved the union of the Reformed Presbyterian synod with the Free Church (the Original Succession synod having been incorporated with the Free Church in 1852). In 1881 he became convenor of his church's Highland committee. His lack of Gaelic disadvantaged him, but between 1882 and 1893 he raised $10,795 for endowment and more than $10,000 for church building, mainly in the Outer Hebrides. Despite this, 'Black Rainy' was not much trusted in Gaelic-speaking areas. The 'Declaratory Act' of 1892, largely passed as a result of his efforts, allowed for a more flexible interpretation of the Westminster confession and further encouraged the Free Church away from rigid Calvinism. Union with the United Presbyterian church was effected on 31 October 1900, with Rainy as the first moderator of the United Free Church. Discontented members of the old Free Church, mostly in Gaelic-speaking areas, won an action claiming for the dissentient minority the ownership of the pre-1900 Free Church property. Rainy co-ordinated the consequent negotiations and presentation of evidence to the royal commission chaired by Lord Elgin, which recommended that the Lords' verdict be reversed by statute; this was achieved by the 'Scottish Churches Bill' (1905). Rainy achieved a fairly satisfactory amendment of the bill in the Commons in favour of the United Free Church. In good health hitherto, Rainy was operated on for an internal disorder and went on a recuperative voyage to Australia in October 1906. He reached Melbourne on 8 December 1906 and died there of lymphadenoma on 22 December. He was buried in the Dean cemetery, Edinburgh, on 7 March 1907. 
Rainy's eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 35655


Rait, Sir Robert Sangster (1874-1936), historian and university principal, was born on 10 February 1874 at Narborough, Leicestershire, elder son and fourth child of David Rait and his wife, Elizabeth Sangster, who both came from Aberdeen. David Rait's service with the Inland Revenue took them back to Aberdeen, and Robert was educated at Old Meldrum parish school, Aberdeen grammar school, and King's College, Aberdeen, where he graduated MA in 1894. After acting as assistant to the professor of logic and attending classes in the Free Church Divinity Hall he won an exhibition in history at New College, Oxford, in 1896. H. A. L. Fisher was one of his teachers and among his friends was John Buchan, who nominated him for the post of secretary of the Oxford Union in 1898. 
Rait was awarded a first class in modern history in 1899 and in the same year won the Stanhope essay prize for 'The Scottish parliament', published in 1901 as 'The Scottish Parliament before the Union of the Crowns'. Elected to a fellowship at New College in 1900, he found life as a fellow, lecturer, and tutor congenial. For three years he was dean and for five years librarian. His students included Philip Kerr, later marquess of Lothian and ambassador to the USA. He published an edition of 'Acts of the Interregnum' (1911) and biographies (1903, 1911) of two Victorian field marshals: Viscount Gough, who had served in the Peninsular War, Ireland, China, and India where his tactics during the Sikh wars in the 1840s had been controversial; and Sir Frederick Haines, a veteran of Crimea. In 1908 Rait married Ruth Edith Mary, elder daughter of John Charles Edward Bridge of Aylesbury. They had two daughters. 
There had been extensive publication of Scottish historical sources, both officially and by private societies, during the nineteenth century, and with the foundation of the Sir William Fraser chair at Edinburgh in 1901 the subject became recognized by the universities. A decade later Glasgow University followed with its chair of Scottish history and literature, in which history dominated. Rait had a natural interest in the history of his native land -- his first book (1895) was a history of the two universities of Aberdeen and he edited sources on Mary, queen of Scots (1899) -- and he was appointed to the Glasgow post in 1913. 
From 1915 to 1918 Rait served in the war trade intelligence department in London and was appointed CBE. As professor, he did not confine his writing to specialist readers: besides a one-volume history of Scotland (1915) and a history of the Union Bank (1930), he made many anonymous contributions to the 'Glasgow Herald' and surveyed modern developments in the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' new volumes (13th edition). He contributed to the 'Scottish Review' under John Buchan's editorship in 1907 and to Nelson's 'The Teaching of History' series under Buchan as general editor from 1928 to 1930. With a junior colleague, George Pryde, he wrote 'Scotland' (1934), a collaboration which Pryde described as a command performance interrupting his editorial work for the Scottish History Society. Rait became president of the society in 1933 in succession to Buchan and took the opportunity to reproach English historians for their contemptuous attitude to Scottish history. 
Rait's most important book, 'The Parliaments of Scotland' (1924), returned to the subject of his Oxford Stanhope essay. Modifications in detail later emerged, for instance in regard to committees under the covenanters and the electoral system. At about the time of Rait's death the Scottish committee of the history of parliament began a study of burgh and shire commissioners which was eventually completed in 1992. It has been claimed that Rait, mesmerized by Stubbs's view of English history and taking an overly constitutional approach, exaggerated the subservience of parliament. Nevertheless the book has remained for remarkably long the standard work on the subject. 
In 1929 Rait was appointed principal of Glasgow University by the secretary of state for Scotland. Some observers were surprised that he decided to resign as historiographer royal for Scotland, an office which went back to the time of the Restoration and which he had held for ten years in succession to Professor Hume Brown. He did so with regret, taking the view that, although no specific duties were required, the post of historiographer royal should pass to someone who would have more time for any necessary research work than his new responsibilities would allow. 
Rait was principal and vice-chancellor of the University of Glasgow at a time of economic stringency. His main achievements were to introduce new arrangements for the faculty of divinity following the union of the Church of Scotland and the Free Church, to sell Queen Margaret College to the BBC, and to provide for a new chemistry building. Colleagues found him approachable, but to others he appeared increasingly distant. He was knighted in 1933, elected an honorary fellow of New College, Oxford, in the same year, and received honorary doctorates from the universities of Aberdeen (1921), Glasgow (1930), and Edinburgh and Lyons (1933). He was a justice of the peace and deputy lieutenant of Glasgow. From the time when the National Library of Scotland was founded by the transfer of the Advocates' Library in 1925 he had been a trustee, and he became chairman in 1932. In addition to his residence in Glasgow he owned a house at Blairmore on the Clyde coast. 
In September 1935 Rait became ill, and in May 1936 he announced that he would resign at the end of September; his condition deteriorated, however, and he died at the Principal's Lodging, Glasgow University, on 25 May 1936; his wife survived him. His reputation as principal inevitably became somewhat overshadowed by the outstanding tenure of his successor, Sir Hector Hetherington, but the expansion of Scottish historical studies after the Second World War owed much to Rait's academic leadership. 


@@@@@


doc= 35656


Raleigh, Sir Walter Alexander (1861-1922), literary scholar and historian, was born on 5 September 1861 at 4 Highbury Quadrant, London, the fifth child and only son of Alexander Raleigh (1817-1880), then Congregational minister of Hare Court Chapel, Canonbury, London, and his wife, Mary Darling, the only daughter of James Gifford, of Edinburgh. After a short time at the City of London School he was sent in 1876 to Edinburgh, where he lived with his uncle, the judge Adam Gifford, Lord Gifford (1820-1887), and became a pupil at the Edinburgh Academy. On his return to London in 1877 he attended University College School and proceeded to University College, London, graduating with a BA in 1881. In October 1881 he entered King's College, Cambridge, and obtained a second class in the historical tripos of 1885. In the Lent term of 1883 he interrupted his residency at King's to travel by sea to Italy in the interest of his health; since childhood he had been subject to a nervous tremor in both arms, which he never wholly overcame. Upon his return he had shot up to 6 feet 6 inches in height. For some time he edited the 'Cambridge Review', and in Michaelmas term 1884 he was president of the Cambridge Union. 
In the autumn of 1885 Raleigh went to India as the first professor of English literature at the Mohammedan Anglo-Oriental College in Aligarh, but he was invalided home in April 1887. His letters give a vivid picture of his Indian experience ('Letters', 1.28-107), which he always spoke of with enthusiasm. Forbidden by his doctors to return to India, he thought of becoming a journalist. During the winter of 1888-9 he lectured for the Oxford University extension delegacy, and in March 1889 he became personal assistant to Professor Adolphus William Ward at Victoria University, Manchester. In November of the same year he was appointed professor of modern literature at University College, Liverpool, in succession to A. C. Bradley, and began his work there in January 1890. On 8 July 1890 he married Lucie Gertrude Jackson ('b'. 1865/6), the only daughter of Mason Jackson, the art editor of the 'Illustrated London News'. They had four sons, and one daughter, Philippa, who later married the scholar and journalist Charles Whibley (1859-1930). 
At Liverpool Raleigh played a spirited part in college affairs, at a time when the college was developing into the university. He also began to write, his chief publication to this point having been a paper read to the Browning Society while he was still at Cambridge (Browning Society's 'Papers', no. 25, 1884). His first book was 'The English Novel' (1894), which he soon came to regard as ''prentice' work, but it exhibits his gift for lucid and lively narrative, covering the period up to the publication of Scott's 'Waverley'. It was followed by 'Robert Louis Stevenson: an Essay' (1895), a brief appreciation based on a lecture delivered at the Royal Institution, and 'Style' (1897), which he wrote with enthusiasm but afterwards disparaged as 'stuck up' -- its prose is certainly highly affected. He was Clark lecturer in English literature at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1899, and embodied his lectures in 'Milton' (1900), a penetrating study, which includes interesting analyses of the poet's language. Its admirers have included William Empson, who called it a 'splendid handbook' ('Milton's God', 1961, 9). The same year he edited, with a long introduction which broke new ground, Sir Thomas Hoby's 'Book of the Courtier, from the Italian of Count Baldassare Castiglione' for the 'Tudor Translations', a series of reprints projected by W. E. Henley. In addition to these five books belonging to the ten years of his professorship at Liverpool, Raleigh also contributed to 'English Prose Selections', edited by Henry Craik, and to periodicals such as the 'New Review' and the 'Yellow Book'. Although his appointment to the professorship had been thought to be risky, by 1900 he was winning recognition as the most original and stimulating of the younger critics. 
In June 1900 Raleigh was appointed by the crown to the chair of English language and literature at Glasgow University, again in succession to A. C. Bradley, and for the next four years he was one of the outstanding personalities there. Daily lectures to hundreds of students and continual administrative meetings left him less time for writing than he had enjoyed at Liverpool. But in the summer vacation of 1902, while staying at Stanford in the Vale, Berkshire, he wrote 'Wordsworth' (1903), a companion to his 'Milton' and a surprise to admirers of Wordsworth, who had not expected the author of 'Style' to appraise the poet's language and themes so sympathetically. He intended that his next book should be on Chaucer, whom, in contrast to Milton and Wordsworth, he called 'my man', but only disjointed lecture notes remain. Having been consulted by the Glasgow publishing firm of MacLehose about their projected series of English voyages, Raleigh promised an essay for their edition of Richard Hakluyt's 'Voyages'. This he wrote at Uffington, Berkshire, in the summer of 1904. It was published under the title of 'The English voyages of the sixteenth century' in 'Hakluyt's Voyages' (12, 1905) and in 1906 was published separately. He said more than once that it was his 'best book', though modern readers may find unacceptable his tolerance of some of the actions of the English seamen. 
In June 1904 Raleigh became the first holder of the new chair of English literature at Oxford, with a fellowship at Magdalen College. The school of English language and literature had been established in 1894, but its steady development began with Raleigh's appointment. His usual method as a lecturer was informal -- a few facts, the reading of passages (admirably interpreted), and a running commentary. Much depended on his mood at the time, but when he was at his best no student forgot the impression he had made. Believing that system and dogma are unreliable guides in the study of literature, he invited his listeners to read and think for themselves. His audience contained men of all ages -- during one term Robert Bridges attended regularly -- and to one and all he seemed to speak as an equal. This was a rare attitude at the time for a professor to adopt, but it aroused enthusiasm among his students. An important part of his work at Oxford was his acting as an adviser to the Clarendon Press. 
Raleigh's first essay written at Oxford was his introduction to 'Lyrical Poems of William Blake' (1905). He wrote 'Shakespeare' (1907) during the latter half of 1906, and of all his books it was this one which he was most pleased to have finished. 'I think Falstaff is good', he said, 'so are Shakespeare's women'. He realized the book's inequalities; but the chapter entitled 'Story and character' is important for its insights into Shakespeare's methods. One vital point which he makes is that Shakespeare could not work on his characters until he had created a situation: 'His plays open with a postulate; then the characters begin to live' (pocket edn, 1925, 134). 
Raleigh welcomed the relaxation offered by a voyage to South Africa in 1907, though during his two months there he lectured at Pretoria, Johannesburg, Durban, Grahamstown, Cape Town, and Stellenbosch. On his return he compiled a collection of Samuel Johnson's essays and notes on Shakespeare ('Johnson on Shakespeare', 1908). In 1910 he brought out 'Six Essays on Johnson'. This was his last book on a single author, and there are many critics who consider it his best. He was the Leslie Stephen lecturer at Cambridge in 1907 and went there as Clark lecturer for the second time, at Trinity College in 1911. In 1911 he was knighted on the occasion of the coronation of George V. 
Raleigh had never overrated the importance of the academic study of literature, and from his first years at Oxford, and even earlier, he had an increasing desire to write on men and things directly. It was significant of this changing interest that his next book should have been an edition of the 'Complete Works of George Savile, First Marquess of Halifax' (1912). His Henry Sidgwick memorial lecture on Dryden, delivered at Newnham College, Cambridge, in 1913, was largely on politics and the application of Dryden's satire to the present day. His essay on Burns (contributed to W. S. Douglas's edition of J. G. Lockhart's 'Life of Burns', 1914) he thought as good as anything he had written 'on a man'. But he had no heart for further literary criticism after the outbreak of war in 1914. He wrote only one more critical essay on a new subject, 'Don Quixote' ('TLS', 27 April 1916). In October 1914, when his Oxford professorship was reconstituted as the Merton chair of English literature, he became a fellow of Merton College. Other academic honours which he received were honorary degrees from the universities of Glasgow and Durham and honorary fellowships of King's College, Cambridge (1912), and Magdalen College, Oxford (1916). 
The war occupied Raleigh's thoughts for the rest of his life. 'Might is Right', written for the series of 'Oxford Pamphlets' (October 1914), was followed by addresses on 'The War of Ideas' (December 1916), 'The Faith of England' (March 1917), 'Some Gains of the War' (February 1918), and 'The War and the Press' (March 1918), and by his British Academy lecture, 'Shakespeare and England' (July 1918). These were collected into a volume entitled 'England and the War' (1918), the main subject of which is the English character. In 1915 he was responsible for ''The Times' broadsheets for soldiers and sailors'. In that year he went to the United States to deliver at Princeton University the two lectures published under the title of 'Romance' (1915); they were based on old material and delivered in the intervals of speaking about England and the war. His introduction to 'Shakespeare's England' (1916), a book which he had planned many years earlier, is a glorification of the Elizabethan spirit and ends on a patriotic note. 
Raleigh found a new interest in his lectures at Oxford after 1918, when men who had fought in the war crowded to hear him. At no time was he more sought after by the younger members of the university. These post-war years were busy, for in July 1918 he had accepted the invitation of the Air Ministry to write the official history of the Royal Air Force. He was able to complete only the first volume of 'The War in the Air' ('History of the Great War Based on Official Documents', 1922) but it remains his longest work. It was his first experience of writing history on a large scale, and he stated in his preface that 'The writer of this history has endeavoured to make his narrative intelligible to those who, like himself, are outsiders'. His style is here at its simplest, but the fervour of his admiration for the heroism of the air is everywhere apparent and finds memorable expression in the introduction. The volume was published a few weeks after his death. 
On 16 March 1922 Raleigh set out for the Middle East in preparation for the second volume of 'The War in the Air'. When he returned to London on 25 April he was in the grip of typhoid fever, contracted when his aeroplane was marooned for four or five days in the desert between Jerusalem and Baghdad. He died at the Acland Nursing Home, Oxford, on 13 May 1922 and was buried at Ferry Hinksey, Berkshire, the village near Oxford where he had lived since 1909 at The Hangings, the house designed for him by his friend A. H. Clough, the son of the poet. His wife survived him. 
Raleigh was a fine conversationalist, equally at his ease in very different kinds of company. His letters show a wide range of mood and often disguise their purpose in their jocularity. Reviewing the letters, however, Virginia Woolf thought that the 'excitement, the adventure, the turmoil of creation was unknown to him' (Woolf, 87). As a critic he came to write most freely when dealing with an author's character and outlook. His aim, he once said briefly, was 'to explain people', and he was more interested in men than in movements or theories. Yet he taught the continuity of literature and maintained that the English school at Oxford must be a school of the history of English literature and language. With Joseph Wright, C. H. Firth, and others, Raleigh reformed the examination structure and oversaw a considerable expansion in the number of students. His aims were not completely realized, since it proved impossible fully to integrate philological and literary studies in the degree course. 
A selection from Raleigh's lighter pieces in verse and prose, among them three 'little plays', was edited by his second son, Hilary Raleigh, in 1923 under the title 'Laughter from a Cloud', and in the same year fourteen of his occasional essays and addresses were collected in 'Some Authors', a volume which he had roughly planned. The longer passages in his notes for his lectures were edited in 1926 by George Gordon under the title 'On Writing and Writers'. His 'Letters' (2 vols.), edited by Lady Raleigh, also appeared in 1926. A memorial window to him by Laura Anning Bell was placed in the library of Merton College. The larger portion of the fund raised in his memory provides an income for the purchase of rare books for the English faculty library at Oxford, which he had been primarily responsible for founding in 1914. 


@@@@@


doc= 35657


Ralston, James Layton (1881-1948), politician in Canada, was born at Amherst, Cumberland county, Nova Scotia, Canada, on 27 September 1881, the eldest son of Burnett William Ralston, postmaster, and his wife, Bessie Chipman Layton. His father was of Scottish, his mother of united empire loyalist, descent. After attending the county academy at Amherst he studied at Dalhousie Law School, Halifax, and was called to the Nova Scotia bar in 1903. In 1907 he married Nettie Winnifred, daughter of John McLeod, a foreman iron moulder, of Amherst. They had one son, Stuart Bowman Ralston, who became a justice of the superior court of the province of Quebec for the district of Montreal. 
In 1908, when a young practising barrister, Ralston ran as federal Liberal candidate for Cumberland county. He was defeated, but was elected to the legislative assembly of Nova Scotia in 1911 and again in 1916. He had rapidly attained eminence in his profession, first in Amherst and later in Halifax, and was in much demand as counsel. He was made a KC in 1914. A 'slight, distinguished looking man, with good features and thoughtful eyes' (Creighton, 39), he had considerable energy and physical stamina as well as a fine mind. He was noted for the thoroughness with which he prepared his cases and the forcefulness with which he presented them. 
In 1915 Ralston enlisted as a lieutenant and in 1916 went overseas with the 85th Canadian infantry battalion as a major. He reached France early in 1917 and served continuously until the armistice, commanding the 85th from April 1918 to demobilization in June 1919. He was gazetted lieutenant-colonel in 1918, and colonel in 1924. He was wounded four times, mentioned twice in dispatches, and awarded the CMG (1918) and DSO with bar (1917 and 1918). The officers and men under Ralston's command were unusually devoted to him, a devotion not lessened by the exacting nature of his demands upon them, and which was enhanced by his well-earned reputation for personal bravery. 
In 1919 Ralston returned to England and then to Canada, where he re-entered practice in the firm of Maclean and Ralston. He was defeated in provincial elections in 1920 and 1925 and in the federal election of 1926 at a time when the fortunes of his party were low in his province. In 1926 he was taken into W. L. Mackenzie King's cabinet as minister of national defence and never thereafter suffered a personal electoral defeat. In 1922 he had acted as chairman of a royal commission on pensions and soldiers' civil re-establishment, appointed by the dominion government, and in later years he was actively concerned with the well-being of former servicemen. This had important results in 1944 when the measures known as the veterans' charter were under consideration by the government in which he was then minister of defence. From 1930 to 1935 he was in opposition, and acted as Mackenzie King's 'chief English-speaking stand-by in debate' ('The Times', 24 May 1948, 7e). He was a vigilant critic of the financial policies of the Conservative government and denounced the prime minister J. M. Bennett's 'New Deal' as a 'series of measures which prove to be only a hollow echo of the flow of fulsome rhetoric with which they were announced' (Thompson and Seager, 265). In 1931 he obtained admission to the Quebec bar and entered a firm in Montreal. After the death of his leading partner he had to choose between politics and the law, and for family reasons put law first. He retired from the Canadian House of Commons in 1935. 
When war broke out in September 1939 Ralston offered his services in any capacity to the prime minister, Mackenzie King, and entered the cabinet as minister of finance. He gave his usual exhaustive -- probably excessive -- attention to detail, but he did not neglect broader considerations and quickly mastered the underlying principles of war finance. Mackenzie King recognized Ralston's value in establishing public confidence in his wartime administration and in July 1940 he appointed him minister of defence. In this capacity Ralston made a monumental contribution to Canada's war effort. His labours were prodigious, his determination irresistible -- Canada's effort in mobilization of manpower met with striking success. In a sense he became the personification of Canada militant. The winning of the war became the one purpose to which all his thoughts and energies were directed. 
In winter 1940-41 Ralston visited Britain, where he had talks with Sir Archibald Sinclair about the Canadian contribution to the aerial war. The result was the Sinclair-Ralston agreement of January 1941, which provided for the eventual establishment of twenty-five Royal Canadian Air Force squadrons. In the meantime Canadian airmen would serve in the Royal Air Force. The agreement has been seen as a missed opportunity to create a Canadian air force, and Ralston's silence on this point as symptomatic of Canadian officials' lack of confidence in their dealings with British counterparts during the war. Vincent Massey, Canadian high commissioner in London, observed with regret that visiting Canadians 'frequently behaved like awkward and tongue-tied country cousins' (Creighton, 46). 
In all that he did Ralston aimed to keep faith with the front-line soldier and this led him in autumn 1944 to advocate compulsion for overseas service. The government had statutory powers to send those conscripted for home service overseas, but for political reasons it preferred to rely on a flow of volunteers. In September 1944 Ralston visited Canadian forces in Italy. The corps commander there emphasized the need for reinforcements and when Ralston arrived in Brussels in early October a colleague observed: 'Much of his sparkle and good humour had disappeared and he could think or talk of little else but the reinforcement problem' (Soward, 36). Directly on his return to Canada he recommended to the war cabinet that 15,000 fully trained infantry be sent to Europe as soon as possible. But with the war seemingly won, his colleagues were reluctant to believe that this politically inexpedient step was necessary. The attitude was epitomized by Mackenzie King, who on 2 November accepted Ralston's resignation. Three weeks later, however, in a remarkable volte-face, the government tabled an order in council providing for the immediate dispatch of 16,000 men to Europe. Ralston had been vindicated and he quit politics with his reputation considerably enhanced. 
Upon his retirement from the government, Ralston returned to his law practice in Montreal. He pursued his heavy labours with all his accustomed energy until stricken by a heart attack which resulted in his death in Montreal on 22 May 1948. 
Ralston held numerous directorships, reflecting his eminence as a corporation lawyer. He was also a prominent Baptist layman, a governor of Acadia and McMaster universities, and the holder of seven honorary degrees. His friends, however, thought of him primarily as a simple, direct, devout man, generous and considerate. As a soldier, cabinet minister, and head of a law firm, Ralston drove himself and his subordinates hard. But it is a measure of his integrity that he retained the loyalty of those with whom he worked. After his death his picture remained in every office of his law firm, where colleagues continued to refer with deep respect and affection to 'the Colonel'. 


@@@@@


doc= 35658


Ram, Sir (Lucius Abel John) Granville (1885-1952), parliamentary draftsman, was born on 24 June 1885 in Chester Square, Belgravia, London, the only surviving son of Abel John Ram (1842-1920), barrister, and his wife, Mary Grace O'Brien (died 1912), daughter of the thirteenth Baron Inchiquin. The family was of Anglo-Irish descent. His father specialized in local government work at the parliamentary bar. Granville, who had two sisters, went to Eton College in 1898 and Exeter College, Oxford, in 1904 where he took a pass degree in 1909 before studying law with H. A. McCardie. He was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1910. 
The First World War took Ram to Egypt, Gallipoli, and France as a captain in the Hertfordshire yeomanry, and he became adjutant of the South Irish horse. When demobilized in 1919 he entered the civil service as assistant solicitor to the Ministry of Labour, succeeding (Alfred) Clive Lawrence as solicitor in October 1923. His intention was to study government from inside as preparation for a parliamentary career. On 9 February 1924 he married Elizabeth Mitchell-Innes ('b'. 1901), daughter of a barrister. They had three sons and two daughters by 1938 and lived at Berkhamsted Place, an old mansion bought by his late father in Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire. A magistrate from 1923, Ram became deputy chairman (1932) and chairman (1946) of the Hertfordshire quarter sessions. Shooting and sailing were his hobbies. 
In February 1925 Granville Ram was appointed to the office of the parliamentary counsel to the Treasury, the small yet high-powered department that drafted all government legislation. As the third counsel of three, he worked on the text of a variety of bills, notably the 'Trade Disputes Act' of 1927, which outlawed sympathy strikes. Promotion to second parliamentary counsel in January 1929 and CB in January 1931 raised his expectations of the top job when Sir William Graham-Harrison resigned as first parliamentary counsel in November 1933; the selection of Maurice Gwyer came as an unwelcome surprise. Gwyer, who had no previous experience of drafting bills, tactfully allowed Ram a free hand with such important projects as the 'Unemployment Act' of 1934 and the 'Public Order Act' of 1936. The 'Abdication Bill' engaged them both in December 1936, when Ram belatedly noticed a flaw. Conventionally, an act of parliament takes effect at the start of the day on which it receives the royal assent. Edward VIII could not therefore give the royal assent to the 'Abdication Bill' (as it stood) without 'ipso facto' invalidating that purported royal assent. A hasty addition specified that the abdication would take effect on the royal assent being signified. 
Ram, 'a shortish bespectacled man with a suspicion of a paunch and a rather misleading air of Pickwickian benevolence' (Kent, 19), was perhaps less scholarly and certainly more rumbustious than the typical parliamentary counsel. He usually relied on his assistants to produce the first draft of a bill, before he pulled their work to pieces and comprehensively recast it. His pride in his own legal prose was such that he would repeatedly smother texts with stylistic alterations, some of them trivial. Subordinates, who favoured more functional wording, called him the Maestro behind his back. Not that Ram was indifferent to the content of legislation; on the contrary, he was remarkably free with opinions that went beyond the purely legal. Politics still fascinated him, and government ministers, once they grew used to his presumptuousness, came to appreciate an inventive draftsman who would readily consider how a particular form of words might play on the back benches. 
Ram succeeded Gwyer as first parliamentary counsel in January 1937 with a salary of $3000 per annum and a knighthood (KCB) a year later. The office now consisted of five counsel and three assistants. Sir Granville ran it as though it were his own legal chambers. Other civil servants had always to come to see him; even assistant counsel never went out to meet anyone less than a permanent secretary. He stoutly defended his staff at all times: the only person with a right to criticize them was himself, and he exercised it to the full. At his worst, Ram could reduce his secretary to tears, yet colleagues learned to tolerate his moods, for he was basically good natured and keen to advance their careers. His excesses moreover caused amusement. Relations between the parliamentary counsel and ordinary departments were inevitably tense, for laymen failed to understand the technical difficulties faced by lawyers. Ram relished confrontation; his idea of success was to leave a meeting without having given an inch. Quick to form decided views, he was very slow to revise them. 
For all his vigour, Granville Ram felt the strain of maintaining a full programme of legislation while also preparing a stream of emergency defence regulations for possible use in wartime. From late 1938 until 1940 he struggled to shake off a virus infection. Once back on form he drafted the 'Emergency Powers (Defence) Act' of 1940, giving power to require persons 'to place themselves, their services, and their property at the disposal of His Majesty'. It was legally otiose but just what Churchill wanted to express the will of the nation. Bombed out of the Treasury, the office moved to Old Queen Street, where, while his expanded staff toiled away at wartime control orders, Ram took charge of the 'Education Act' of 1944. He served as a governor of the Berkhamsted schools and the Francis Holland Church of England schools for girls and belonged to the Association of Governing Bodies of Public Schools. He was a king's counsel from June 1943. 
Despite his antipathy to socialism, Ram enjoyed the professional challenge offered by the rush of major legislation that followed the election of a Labour government in 1945. He persuaded Jowitt, the lord chancellor, to endorse his ambitious plans for an ideal statute book, in which statute law on any given subject would be found in a single act kept up to date by a continuous process of consolidation. The parliamentary counsel's office created a new branch to pursue this, and Ram took charge of it on retiring as first counsel in July 1947, combining the post with the chair of the statute law committee from December 1947. 
Though he came to London only twice a month from his new home at Furze Park, Polruan by Fowey, Cornwall, Ram achieved twenty-nine consolidation acts in five years, thanks to the 'Consolidation of Enactments (Procedures) Act' of 1949, which authorized the making of slight amendments. The purist doctrine of preserving ambiguities in the existing law had always struck him as absurd. He had time to become a lay preacher and a church commissioner from 1948. In spring 1952 Granville Ram developed leukaemia. The 'Magistrates' Court Act' of 1952 nevertheless kept him busy in the private wing of University College Hospital, Gower Street, London. He died there on 23 December 1952, having been the dominant personality in the office of the parliamentary counsel for a generation. 


@@@@@


doc= 35659


Raman, Sir (Chandrasekhara) Venkata (1888-1970), physicist, was born at Tiruvanaikkaval, near Trichinopoly, in the province of Madras, on 7 November 1888, the second of the eight children (five sons and three daughters) of Chandrasekhara Iyer ('b'. 1866) and his wife, Parvati Ammal (Saptarshi Parvati). His ancestors were Brahman landowners, exempt by their caste from manual labour, trade, and military service. Opportunities outside landowning depended on taking up English education and entering a profession. Raman's father taught at the local high school and, when Raman was four, moved to a lectureship in mathematics and physics at the Mrs A. V. Narashimha Rao College in Vizagapatam (Visakhapatnam). 
For ten years Raman studied at the high school, and then the college, in Vizagapatam. In 1903, aged only fourteen, he won a scholarship to the Presidency College in Madras. He graduated in 1904, being awarded the gold medal for both English and physics. With further education in England ruled out by delicate health Raman enrolled in the MA class at the Presidency College to study physics under R. Llewellyn Jones. Llewellyn Jones contributed little formally to his education but encouraged him to make free use of the laboratory. Raman was strongly influenced by the works of the third Lord Rayleigh, and Hermann von Helmholtz's 'The Sensations of Tone' which, he claimed, showed him how to conduct research. He worked within the tradition of classical wave theory established by these books throughout his life, using it to investigate and explain natural phenomena. This programme was well adapted both to Raman's strong aesthetic appreciation of natural beauty, and to the perennial lack of funds which dogged Indian science, for much could be achieved with little, and home improvised, apparatus. Raman's first publications, in the 'Philosophical Magazine', on the unsymmetrical diffraction of light and on the surface tension of drops, were published while he was still an MA student (1906, 1907). 
Raman took the MA exam in January 1907, coming top. Scientific careers for Indians were virtually non-existent, so he followed his brother into the financial civil service. While awaiting a posting, aged eighteen, Raman met Lokasundari Ammal (died 1980). Defying convention he insisted on marrying her, even though she belonged to a different Brahman sub-sect, and, even more remarkably, he refused a dowry. Intelligent, musical, and self-effacing, Lokasundari ensured that Raman enjoyed domestic peace. Throughout his life Raman worked long hours, typically 6 a.m. to 9 p.m. Lokasundari occupied herself in learning a number of languages and in social work. They had two sons. 
In mid-1907 Raman was posted as assistant accountant-general in Calcutta. He rapidly discovered the existence there of the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science (IACS), established in 1876 to encourage native Indian science. Once again Raman was given free access to laboratories and devoted all his spare time to physics. As well as optics he studied acoustics and musical instruments, later the subject of an article in the 'Handbuch der Physik' (vol. 8, 1927), and established violin research as a scientific discipline. The ensuing stream of papers raised the profile both of the IACS and of Raman, who emerged also as a superb popular lecturer. 
In 1917 Sir Ausutosh Mookerjee, a member of the IACS and vice-chancellor of Calcutta University, offered Raman the newly created Palit professorship of physics. Raman accepted, even though it meant almost halving his salary and relinquishing a highly promising career. He described the next fifteen years as his golden era. His new duties included supervising research students, and he became an inspiring group leader with an infectious enthusiasm. Throughout, vibrations and optics remained the main themes of his group's work. 
The discovery of the Raman effect, which established his position in modern science and won him the Nobel prize in 1930, was the culmination of nine years' interest in the molecular basis of refraction. That work started in 1919 with investigation of the Doppler effect in scattering, and was followed by extensive work on the blue colour of the sea, inspired by observations Raman made while returning from his first trip abroad, to England in 1921. Raman showed that, contrary to Rayleigh's suggestion that the sea reflected the sky colour, the blue was actually due to molecular scattering. His book 'Molecular Diffraction of Light' (1922) recounted all his scattering work to date. 
Following the discovery of the Compton effect in 1923, in which X-rays scattered by electrons suffered a discrete change in wavelength corresponding to absorption by the electrons of a quantum of radiation, Raman began to consider whether an optical analogue existed. His student Ramanathan had noticed that 'when sunlight filtered through a violet glass passed through certain liquids and solids... the scattered rays... contained certain rays not present in the incident beam' (C. V. Raman, presidential address to the Indian Science Congress, 1929). In 1925 another student, Krishnan, found that this 'feeble fluorescence' was partially polarized, unlike ordinary fluorescence. Further studies were hampered by lack of a sufficiently powerful light source. The problem was overcome in late 1927 when Raman redoubled his efforts to find evidence for optical scattering with a discrete wavelength change following the award to Compton of the Nobel prize. He used the IACS's new 18 cm refracting telescope coupled to a short focus lens to concentrate sunlight. Working with Venkateswaran and Krishnan, he found feeble fluorescence in a wide range of liquids and, on 7 February 1928, began interpreting this as the modified scattering predicted by the Kramers-Heisenberg dispersion theory. Experiments with a spectroscope on 28 February showed that wavelengths of modified scattered light did indeed differ from those of the incident light by discrete amounts, a result Raman rapidly published in 'Nature' (vol. 121, 619). The differences were proved to correspond to absorption by molecules of a quantum of vibrational or rotational energy and the Raman effect became one of the main methods for elucidating molecular structure. Its importance was enhanced in the 1970s following the invention of lasers, which allowed Raman spectroscopy to be extended and pushed to new limits. 
In 1932 Raman was offered the directorship of the prestigious Indian Institute of Science (IIS) in Bangalore, and was promised a new physics department there. He left Calcutta amid controversy over the appointment of a full time professor for the IACS. The Indian Institute was founded in 1911 following J. N. Tata's promotion of higher education and research as the key to solving India's technological, economic, and social problems. Bangalore was chosen largely for its climate, which proved so attractive to Raman that he remained there for the rest of his life. Yet once again he found himself embroiled in a power struggle. According to Max Born, who was visiting the Indian Institute, 'the deepest sources of the trouble are: the English group resented an Indian director, who, as a political principle, was wanted and pushed through by the powerful Tata group' (Born, cited in Venkataraman, 272). The Tatas apparently responded to commercial pressure from the English and soon turned against Raman, actively undermining his position. His personality made this easy. 'Raman is a very able physicist, full of enthusiasm... [His] European intensity alone would be enough to make Raman suspicious to the average Indian professor. Now Raman, far too much aware of his own superiority, likes to make other people seem small in his presence... Raman came to the Institute with the idea of making it a centre of science of international standard. What he found was a quiet sleepy place where little work was done by a number of well-paid people. (ibid.)' Raman, who had spent four months at the California Institute of Technology in 1924, aimed at something similar for the IIS. Lack of additional funding for the new physics department forced him to reallocate money from other areas of the budget and in his pursuit of excellence he antagonized many staff. The climax was his proposal to create a chair of mathematical physics for Born, the first, Raman hoped, of many distinguished refugees from Nazi Germany whom he wished to bring to India. In 1937 Raman was forced to resign, following a government review. 
Raman retained his professorship of physics. With his desire to pursue nuclear physics and develop a theory group thwarted by lack of funds and support, Raman reverted to optics and scattering problems. Inevitably the work was mainly experimental and his group's thinking remained largely classical. Most important was the development of the Raman-Nath theory of the diffraction of light by high frequency sound waves (C. V. Raman and N. S. Nagendra Nath, 'Proceedings of the Indian Academy of Science', 1935, 406, 413; 1936, 75, 119, 459). Raman and Nedungadi observed the vastly increased excitation of particular vibration modes at high temperatures, leading to deformation of the atomic arrangements and transition from the alpha to beta forms of quartz (C. V. Raman and T. M. K. Nedungadi, 'Nature', 1940, 147). This was twenty years before Cochran's well-known soft mode theory for such phase transitions. 
Above all, Raman established a very active physics research school at the IIS, one of his most enduring contributions to Indian science. His influence convinced both Homi Bhabha and Vikram Sarabhai, later founders of Indian nuclear physics and space science respectively, that they should remain in India. Born had commented that 'The 'clever' boys are very devoted to Raman, for he is most interested in their progress and asks very much of them' (Venkataraman, 274). He trained a number of students as first-class physicists, infecting them with his enthusiasm and accessibility. In a country where obtaining an interview with even minor dignitaries meant penetrating layers of officialdom, Raman was notable for leaving his office doors wide open to all, and for his willingness to help students with even the most mundane of manual tasks. 
In 1934 Raman established the Indian Academy of Science, remaining president until his death in 1970. He aimed to improve communication between scientists, to promote science policy in India and to publish a national journal, thus stemming the flow of good papers to foreign periodicals. Monthly 'Proceedings' appeared and, by hard work, Raman maintained his promise of punctual publication. The annual meeting became the high point of the year for Raman and many other scientists. 
Before retiring from the IIS at the age of sixty Raman managed to obtain grants from private individuals and industry to build the Raman Research Institute at Bangalore, which he described as 'a haven where I could carry on my highly personal research work' (Venkataraman, 468). The Indian government elected him as the first national professor with an honorarium sufficient for his personal expenses. Determined, though, that the institute should remain independent of government control, Raman started some chemical companies and used the profits to finance the institute. He later gave most of his property for the same purpose. Raman devoted considerable care to designing the institute gardens and toured them twice a day. The inspiration for many of his later papers came from the flowers there. 
Raman's fascination with natural phenomena and aesthetics had led, at the IIS, to research on iridescence and the optics of stratified media, and the discovery of the speckles effect in coronae. He now examined the colours of flowers, birds, and insects, and how the eye perceives them, publishing a treatise on 'The Physiology of Vision' in 1968 (when he was eighty). He built special galleries at the institute to display his specimens, pre-eminent among which were his diamonds and other gemstones. Raman had a passionate interest in the physics of diamond. While at the IIS he had investigated X-ray diffraction in diamonds, discovering some unexpected reflections of a different kind from the well-known Laue patterns. Studies of the Raman spectra of diamond, which appeared to show sharp lines, now led to a controversy with Born over lattice dynamics, the origins of which lay in Raman's isolation from developments in quantum mechanics (C. V. Raman, 'Proceedings of the Indian Academy of Science', 1951, 61; 1955, 163; 1956, 327). Raman's interest stimulated research in many laboratories. 
Raman's retirement coincided with India's independence and he became emotionally involved in efforts to transform society through science. Yet his views on how to do this differed markedly from those of the government. He deplored both the import of expensive foreign instruments that left India dependent on the West for instrumentation, and the emigration of good Indian scientists abroad. He feared that, despite the rhetoric, funding for universities and excellent fundamental research was still scarce and that mediocrity was becoming institutionalized. Raman expressed himself strongly and was bitterly attacked in the press. Deeply upset, he became a recluse. He erected a 'keep out' sign at the institute, resigned his fellowship of the Royal Society, to which he had been elected in 1924, and became estranged from his two sons. Raman recovered, at least as far as the company of children was concerned, a few years before his death. He had continued working throughout and expressed the wish that he might not survive his final illness if it left him unable to research. He died at his home at the institute on 21 November 1970, following a heart attack a few weeks earlier. He was cremated in its grounds. 
Raman became a legendary figure in Indian science. He published more than 500 papers and four books. Of medium height with striking eyes, Raman always wore a turban and adhered to a Hindu diet. Yet he had little interest in organized religion but sought God through understanding nature. His temperament has been likened to that of a child, and was expressed in his enthusiasms, his angers, his supreme ego, and his lack of tact, which hurt many. 
Raman travelled a number of times to Europe and North America, visiting colleagues in England, Canada, USA, Russia, Sweden, France, and Italy. He was knighted in 1929 and received the Nobel prize in 1930. He received honorary degrees from fifteen universities and was an honorary member of a number of scientific societies. He received the Matteuci medal of the Italian Academy (1928), the Hughes medal of the Royal Society (1930), the medal of the Franklin Institute of Philadelphia (1940), and the Lenin peace prize (1957). In 1954 the Indian government gave him the unique title of Bharat Ratna. 


@@@@@


doc= 35660


Ramsay, Alexander (1822-1909), newspaper editor, son of Alexander Ramsay, sheep farmer, was born in Glasgow on 22 May 1822. He was early orphaned and in 1824 his family removed to Edinburgh, where he was educated at Gillespie Free School and where, in 1836, he entered the printing office of Oliver and Boyd. The period 1843-4 he spent in London in the government printing office of T. and J. W. Harrison. Returning to Edinburgh in 1845 he took on literary work of different kinds until, in 1847, he was appointed editor of the 'Banffshire Journal', a post that he filled for sixty-two years. He greatly raised the position of that newspaper, in which he gave prominence to the subject of the sea fisheries, and made a special feature of agriculture, and the pure breeding of cattle. He wrote a life of Oliver Goldsmith (1858), and a 'History of the Highland and Agricultural Society of Scotland' (1879). He was joint editor of volumes 2 (1872) and 3 (1875) of the 'Aberdeen-Angus Herd Book', and sole editor of volumes 4 to 33 (1876-1905). As such, he made an important contribution to Scottish agriculture, which was recognized in 1898 by a presentation from breeders of polled cattle throughout the United Kingdom and others, and later by the presentation of a cheque for $150 by members of the Herd Book Society. 
A keen golfer, Ramsay was elected provost of Banff in 1894, and the next year received the honorary degree of LLD from Aberdeen University. He was twice married: first to Anne, daughter of John Chassar, engineer, of Auchinblae, and second to Jane, daughter of James Harper, commissary clerk of Banffshire. He died at his home, Earlhill, Banff, on 1 April 1909, his second wife surviving him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35661


Ramsay, Sir Bertram Home (1883-1945), naval officer, was born at Hampton Court Palace on 20 January 1883, the third son of Captain William Alexander Ramsay and his wife, Susan, daughter of William Minchiner, of Clontarf, co. Dublin. He was born into an old established but long removed family from the highlands of Scotland, the Ramsays of Balmain. The Ramsays were also a service family and young Bertie lived the life of an officer's son, at one stage coming into contact with a young subaltern named Winston Churchill when the latter served under his father's command. Ramsay spent some time at Colchester grammar school, where he was remembered as a quiet but intense boy with, despite his relatively small stature, a natural talent for sports -- riding, shooting, and running. Ramsay's older brothers followed the long family tradition by entering the army, but he followed a different path. It had become something of a tradition for youngest sons of larger families with some social position to enter the navy. An important reason for this was that the fees the navy charged for entry through the cadet ship 'Britannia' were far lower than those demanded by the public schools. Two years after his parents were posted to India Ramsay entered the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth, in January 1898. 
Ramsay passed out in May 1899 and received his commission in September. A fairly typical career for a junior officer then ensued, marked by a taste of active service in the Somaliland expedition of 1903-4. There Ramsay earned a mention in dispatches for his work in a sphere where he was destined to make his mark: combined operations with the army. This brought him promotion to lieutenant and varied appointments over the next five years, including service in the first commission of the 'Dreadnought'. The first promise of potential for great things came indirectly from Ramsay's decision to specialize as a signals officer, with a posting to the Royal Naval Signal School in Portsmouth for two years in 1909. One reason for this decision was an urge to defy the convention that gunnery was the road to flag rank; he cited a dislike of getting dirty hands as another! But the main reason was that Ramsay was more interested in moving fleets than ships, in grappling with bigger and broader naval problems. Signals training and sea duty brought him into contact with those parts of the navy dealing directly with new technology and the impact it would have on naval warfare. 
The creation of a naval war staff in 1912 at last gave the service an arm devoted solely to preparing officers to identify, study, and cope with all manner of challenges the navy might face. It also began to promote modern methods of organization and command, reducing the emphasis on one commander running a fleet by himself in favour of sharing that load with a staff trained to manage and administer a large organization. This was a long difficult process destined to absorb the energies of a generation of naval officers. There was much resistance to the idea that the navy's acquired wisdom and time-honoured methods might no longer be enough to fight and win wars. But from the start it was clear where Ramsay stood. 
Selected in 1913 for the second cohort of students at the Royal Naval War College, then at Portsmouth, Ramsay found the navy he was looking for. In some ways he personified its evolving blend, even as a junior officer just thirty years old. He was a stickler for observing customs and traditions which he felt contributed directly to efficiency and combat readiness: running a clean and well-organized ship, being well turned out in dress and deportment, looking aggressively to confront any challenges. But Ramsay's instincts and preferences led him to welcome the new emphasis on formal training, rather than reliance on the martial instincts of a supposedly superior social class to meet the challenge of war. He chafed at any method or procedure that was being followed only because it always had been. Passing out as a 'war staff officer' in spring 1914, promoted to the new rank of lieutenant-commander, Ramsay returned to the 'Dreadnought' as one of the new breed of naval officers determined to bring modern methods to bear in order to wean the Royal Navy away from now outmoded practices. The challenge came very soon with the outbreak in August of the First World War, met by Ramsay on his war station at sea with the Grand Fleet. 
Ramsay had mixed luck in his wartime service. Early in 1915 he turned down an offer to become flag lieutenant to commander cruisers, Grand Fleet, in the cruiser 'Defence', hoping to get his own command. After a short spell at the signal section of the Admiralty, he received his wish with the small monitor 'M.25' of the Dover patrol. 'Defence' was blown up at Jutland. Ramsay had two collisions while serving in the Dover patrol, one of which earned him a reprimand from his commander, Vice-Admiral Roger Keyes, when Ramsay put Keyes's back up by bluntly rejecting any blame for the incident. But he lived through active and enterprising service which brought him command of the destroyer 'Broke', much experience of operations in the channel in collaboration with ground and air forces, and another mention in dispatches. At the war's end Ramsay was given the honour of transporting George V to France for a visit to the troops and made MVO for his own services. 
In 1919 Lord Jellicoe selected Ramsay to be flag commander on his staff for an important tour of the dominions, to consider measures for future imperial defence. This exposure to the circles of power launched Ramsay on a post-war career path which, in the words of his biographer, 'might have been specially designed to fit him for the highest posts in the Navy' (Chalmers, 40). After two successive ship commands in the Mediterranean Ramsay was promoted captain in June 1923. This was followed by success in the senior officers' war and tactical courses, command of the cruiser 'Danae', then a spell as instructor at the War College. In 1929 Ramsay took command of the cruiser 'Kent' as flag captain on the China station. He went from there to the Imperial Defence College in London in July 1931 to serve as the naval instructor on the staff; while there he struck up a lasting friendship with Alan Brooke which both later counted on in desperate times. In November 1933 Ramsay took command of the battleship 'Royal Sovereign', and in May 1935 he was promoted to flag rank. 
Ramsay reached that exalted status after twenty-nine years of sea service and four staff postings, having had to endure only two shore billets despite his signals speciality. In large part this can be attributed to his early commitment to the war staff course and his strong support for the modernizing trends in the navy. With this blend of sea and staff experience he developed a broadness of vision on policy and strategy which reinforced his stature as a successful commander. Still only fifty-two, he had good reason to feel that the highest posts in the service were not out of reach. 
Ramsay's character has been well described as 'a mass of well-controlled contradictions' (Stephen, 58). He loved the service and devoted himself to it, but also loved the life of a middle-class professional. Adding a passion for polo and the countryside to his earlier sporting pursuits, Ramsay worked hard to live up to his ideal image of the squire-sailor. When in London he dined in the right restaurants and clubs, patronized the theatre, and liked to mention being in the same places with famous and powerful people. But this was not empty socializing. Ramsay was ambitious -- a meticulous organizer and systematic planner who never let himself drift along to no point or purpose. This is demonstrated by the story of his marriage. Reflecting contentedly on how well he was doing, he noted in his diary in 1925 that now all he needed was 'a charming wife and two good lieutenants'. An early romance in Australia on the Jellicoe tour had been cruelly cut short when the young woman died in the great influenza epidemic that swept the world in 1919. Home leave in 1925 led to an introduction to Helen Margaret, daughter of Colonel Charles T. Menzies. The Menzies came from the same border region of Scotland where Ramsay's own father had been raised. Helen was half his age, but shared his passion for life, horses, the countryside, and success. It took four years of determined courtship to win a proud and independent woman fully his equal in intelligence and ambition. They married in February 1929, by now devoted to each other. Two sons soon followed and Ramsay found in a happy and stable family an anchor in his life. 
Not surprisingly, Ramsay was something of an authoritarian, typical for his time and social and professional milieu. Politically his views were certainly conservative but not unconventional. Professionally, he was seen to be a stickler, always commanding the respect but not always winning the affection of his subordinates. Ramsay was very intelligent indeed, with great confidence in his own ability. This sometimes led him to be brash and he was impatient with anything that seemed outmoded or inefficient. He was regarded as fair, but also often as difficult by both superiors and subordinates. Ramsay had immense powers of concentration, was a superb organizer, and was always able to master the detail without losing sight of the big picture. Living up to his own creed he was always willing to delegate and to listen to the ideas of others. The picture that emerges as he reaches flag rank is that of a well-rounded individual who lived life with zest, but was so determined to improve his service that he could be awkward when faced with something he felt hindered it. This trait very nearly ended his career. 
Soon after reaching flag rank in 1935 Ramsay was invited by the incoming commander-in-chief, Home Fleet, Sir Roger Backhouse, to join him as his chief of staff. It was a prize posting and Backhouse was an old friend, their acquaintance stretching back nearly thirty years to when they were shipmates in the 'Dreadnought'. Ramsay could not resist the opportunity, but took up his posting with well-founded apprehension. The problem was professional. He was a modernist who strongly believed the navy had to be run by delegation and decentralization; Backhouse was of the old school, equally convinced of the traditional, centralized method of command and determined to practise it. As Backhouse was also a workaholic with strong views on all matters great and small, and just as much pride and self-confidence as Ramsay, a clash was unavoidable. Ramsay joined his staff in August 1935. Within a few weeks, they were at loggerheads. Backhouse tried to do everything by himself, which left Ramsay frustrated and unimpressed by what he thought was outmoded practice. His attempts to act as a more responsible chief of staff were seen by Backhouse as efforts to run the fleet for him. In December Ramsay asked to be relieved and soon found himself idle and on half pay. 
Their colleagues in the navy held both Backhouse and Ramsay responsible for this lamentable result -- Backhouse because he clung to outmoded command methods, Ramsay because he quit in frustration rather than try to change the system one step at a time. To the credit of both men their friendship survived this failure, and Backhouse strongly endorsed Ramsay's fitness for future employment. But Ramsay rejected a command on the China station, one suspects out of lingering resentment that the Admiralty did not support his views against Backhouse. When he reached the top of the rear-admirals' list in October 1938 without having hoisted his flag at sea, the navy placed him on the retired list. Ramsay had in the end to go through almost four years of nearly total retirement and in the navy his career was generally considered over. This hurt him more than he allowed anyone but his family to realize, as was suggested by a lengthy paper he wrote to explain to them why he had resigned. But in the long run it turned out for the best. 
Enforced idleness brought Ramsay closer to his wife and sons. They bought a property named Bughtrig in Berwickshire, and settled down to a happy life in the country. In the process there is no doubt that some of the rougher traits of his character faded considerably. In particular Ramsay seemed to become more patient with others, more aware of the need to get along with those he worked with and function effectively as a team player. In short it seems that in retirement Ramsay found the maturity which could make his great skill so much more effective. He also gained years of rest that would prove priceless in the coming trials. Those trials loomed even before he was officially retired, when the Munich crisis brought the country to the brink of war in September 1938. The Dover command was to be reactivated if war came but it had been dormant so long that a full investigation of what steps were to be taken was required. Backhouse, now first sea lord, nominated Ramsay to make the investigation, and to stand ready as potential flag officer, Dover. Ramsay's investigation revealed many deficiencies that needed to be made good and much progress was made in that direction before war finally did come in September 1939. He was the logical choice for an appointment which he took up, still officially retired, on 24 August -- and in December he persuaded the Admiralty to make Dover an independent command, himself becoming vice-admiral, Dover. 
When the Germans attacked France and the Low Countries in May 1940 Dover immediately became a scene of much activity; when their breakthrough cut off the British expeditionary force, Ramsay was ordered to undertake the largest seaborne evacuation ever attempted. The stakes were the highest -- without its trained soldiers the UK would be at the mercy of an invader. Ramsay had already anticipated the need and set to work with a will on 26 May. Over the next nine days he was directly responsible for the operation which successfully evacuated 338,266 allied soldiers -- the 'miracle of Dunkirk'. His Dover command went from a small headquarters to the one with the largest staff of any flag officer ashore or afloat. As the man on the spot Ramsay commanded over 900 vessels of literally all types and sizes, from the fabled small boats to fleet destroyers. Luck played a part in his success. The weather co-operated, the German advance was for a time halted, the rearguards fought stubbornly. But equally important was Ramsay's own ability to rise to the challenge and inspire his team to do the same. 
With no prior plans or preparations Ramsay and his staff had to improvise from the start, and then adjust to frequent changes in the situation and in policy. The original hope was to evacuate 45,000 troops in two days. Under Ramsay's command those targets were left behind. Indeed, this crisis showed just what Ramsay was made of. He selected the right people to handle the right jobs and left them to get on with it. He made bold decisions, such as using destroyers to lift troops directly off the harbour mole, which made the really big numbers possible. He was meticulous but flexible, organized but not rigid, drove his ships and men hard but knew when each had had enough. The heroism of many made the evacuation work, but the skill of Ramsay and his staff gave them the chance. Ramsay, seen as an orthodox admiral, brought off one of the navy's most unorthodox feats, earning the nation a fighting chance to survive and himself a well deserved KCB from George VI. 
For the next two years Ramsay was occupied by the struggle to ward off German invasion and to dominate the channel, working closely again with the army and the air force. The mine barrier, coastal flotilla, coastal batteries and the air force made the channel a dangerous place for enemy submarines and surface vessels -- and there was no invasion. On the other hand, Ramsay and the air force did fail to stop the 'channel dash', the embarrassing daylight run by German capital ships moving from danger in Brest to Germany in February 1942. Ramsay and nearly everyone else expected the enemy to run through the narrow Strait of Dover at night whereas they left Brest under cover of darkness and ran through at midday. This caught the available British forces off balance, but in any case those forces, naval and air, were woefully weak and not co-ordinated well enough to meet the challenge. None of this was Ramsay's fault, and he did not suffer from this one setback as a station commander. Indeed, very soon thereafter he took up the task that turned out to be his rendezvous with destiny -- planning and preparing for the combined operations with the army and air force that would carry the war back to the enemy, culminating in the invasion of Europe. 
Ramsay's experience in combined operations and his triumph at Dunkirk led to his appointment as flag officer, expeditionary force, in May 1942. As such he began to plan the invasion of Europe, working with the other services and with General Eisenhower, just arrived as commanding general, US army, in the European theatre of operations. Thus began a partnership and a mission that consumed almost all the rest of Ramsay's career. When allied grand strategy shifted the focus to an invasion of French north Africa in late 1942, Ramsay's task shifted accordingly. As a planner, Ramsay brought to bear his rare ability to master the detail but not lose the broad vision. This was invaluable in planning complicated amphibious invasions, which involved problems of movement, co-ordination, operations, and supply among three different services with different priorities, methods, and tasks. Equally necessary was the ability to issue clear instructions but delegate to others the job of executing them, and perhaps most important was the need to weld a team built from different services and different nations. Ramsay demonstrated all these qualities in abundance. He still fought his corner and drove his team hard, but now related much better to those with and for whom he worked. When it was decided that to reassure the Americans a more experienced and better known fleet commander must take charge, Ramsay was obliged to give way to Admiral Sir Andrew Cunningham and become his stay-behind deputy, remaining in London. His work there and the success of the invasion and subsequent advance in north Africa redounded to Ramsay's credit, and he landed the job of eastern task force commander when it was decided in early 1943 to pursue the Mediterranean campaign by invading Sicily. 
Ramsay's job was to plan and conduct the British portion of the invasion. In the process Ramsay scored one of the more remarkable naval triumphs of the war by winning both the friendship and the confidence of his army colleague, the notoriously difficult General Sir Bernard Montgomery. One of the very few commanders from any service able to work smoothly with the charismatic Monty, Ramsay achieved this by defending the navy's interests while being ready to meet the army's legitimate needs -- plus a healthy dose of patience and diplomacy! He was in fact a master of combined operations, lauded by Montgomery as the only sailor who truly grasped the essential fact: the invasion was only the beginning, not the end, of the combined mission. This praise was well earned. Ramsay revelled in leading his fleet to sea in July 1943 and executing the invasion of Sicily, but the armies were barely ashore when such success brought him the ultimate challenge. 
Ramsay returned to London that same month to rejoin the team preparing for the invasion of Europe. He gave an assessment of the problem of combined operations, written as a lecture, that was so masterful he was forbidden on security grounds to deliver it. In that text, Ramsay spelt out his concept: 'it must always be remembered that the guiding rule must be the operational plan first, and the administrative plan later, rather than the other way round. Once the Army have decided how they wish to fight the land battle it is necessary to examine how the troops can best be put ashore to give effect to the Army plan. In general it is the responsibility of the Navy to land the Army as they require, but as the plan develops Naval considerations will arise which must be discussed and agreed upon. (Ramsay MSS, file 8/22, CAC Cam.)' This spelt out the very essence of the problem now facing the allies: while effecting a landing against fierce German resistance was certainly going to be the most daunting amphibious invasion ever attempted, that would only begin the real struggle. From there the ground forces must be built up fast enough to repel a counter-attack, then made strong enough to drive back and finish off the German army in a continental campaign. The navy's role would merely change, not end, as the advance progressed. Ramsay was for many reasons the ideal choice for the appointment he received on 25 October 1943, allied naval commander, expeditionary force (ANCXF), followed the next day by promotion to the rank of acting admiral. His experience, character, and mastery of this most difficult operation of war had won him the confidence of his own boss, the army, the Americans, and above all the prime minister. Ramsay became the first service commander to start work on invasion preparations, taking responsibility for the assault plan codenamed Neptune. 
Ramsay was joined in January 1944 by the rest of the command team that developed operation Overlord, finding himself working once again under Eisenhower as supreme commander and alongside Montgomery, who took command of the twenty-first army group. If ever there was a right man in the right place at the right time, Ramsay was that man now. The task confronting the allies was to overcome the strongest coastal defences ever built, then mount a successful continental campaign. They had to master not just the defences but also the elements, their own differences between services, allies, and personalities, and debates over deployment of forces that dragged on long enough to make planning a nightmare. The naval commander had to draft the most complex assault plan ever conceived, marshal the largest armada ever assembled, work out sensible compromises with touchy peers and pull the whole gigantic task together in five months. Ramsay was certainly the only admiral in the Royal Navy who could have brought this off. Despite the enormous strain of the work, Ramsay inspired and directed an allied planning team which produced the most sophisticated staff work and operations plan in naval history. Ramsay kept Montgomery from sundering allied harmony, stood firm and won from Cunningham an allocation of forces the first sea lord considered excessive, demanded and received enough help from the US Navy to make the whole assault feasible, and submitted a plan that covered every contingency, including a full-scale action against the remainder of the German fleet. It assigned every vessel in the armada of over 3000 craft of all sizes specific orders on what to do and when to do it. 
Ramsay's work earned him just rewards. In March 1944 Prime Minister Churchill compelled the Admiralty to reinstate Ramsay to the active list as a full admiral. It complied in lukewarm fashion, stating only that it was necessary to regularize his status as an allied commander in the forthcoming campaign. Did his 1935 complaints still rankle? If so, Ramsay won complete vindication in every respect with the success of the D-day invasion launched on 6 June. Four years after rescuing the army from the Germans, Ramsay sent it back to seek retribution. The success of the invasion, and the subsequent vital race to build the ground forces up so that they could consolidate that success, was compelling proof that Ramsay had been right: the modern navy needed more than fighting instructions and Nelsonian leadership. Ramsay's ability to help pull together an allied combined operation of vast complexity, sort out the essentials, and apply the plan effectively proved to be of far greater value to the nation, let alone the service, than relying on natural sailors preparing to fight another Jutland and win the war single-handedly. 
As the campaign in north-west Europe progressed, Ramsay continued to play a vital role. When the allied armies advanced towards Germany in late August, he concentrated on keeping the supply lines flowing. Unlike Eisenhower and Montgomery, Ramsay kept his head in the euphoric days of early September and saw the greatest threat: if the enemy managed to block the channel to the massive port of Antwerp long enough, the allied armies would outrun their supply lines and grind to a halt. Unfortunately Ramsay's best efforts did not prevent the ground commanders from gambling that a quick strike could finish the enemy off. When it fell short, the naval forces were obliged to help clear the now heavily defended approaches to Antwerp along the River Scheldt, a job not completed until the end of November. This was the worst blunder Eisenhower's command team made in the campaign in north-west Europe; on that team, Ramsay stood out as the one senior commander who saw the danger and tried to head it off. 
Neither this nor any other strains of such great responsibility impaired Ramsay's working relationships with his superiors, peers, and subordinates. All rightly regarded him as a tower of strength in the allied command. Privately, he felt the strain, securing leave when he could, writing incessantly to his wife, looking forward to the end of what he hoped was his last command. It was therefore with some reluctance that he agreed to a request from the first sea lord to take on the job of preparing to disarm the German navy when the enemy finally collapsed. That commission was a mark of the favour in which he now stood with his superiors. Unfortunately, fate kept him from ever completing it. The last enemy counter-offensive was in the end defeated, but at the time it seemed to threaten the supply line through Antwerp. Attentive as always to the focal point, Ramsay kept hard at work over the last week of 1944 lobbying his fellow commanders to stay on top of the problem. On 2 January 1945 he left his headquarters to attend a conference at the twenty-first army group to discuss further operations. His aircraft crashed on take-off at Toussus-le-Noble, killing all on board. Ramsay was buried on 8 January at St Germain-en-Laye, mourned by a large number of allied political and military leaders led by Eisenhower and Cunningham. 
Ramsay's reputation has soared as the war in which he fought so well becomes a distant memory. He became known before the war for his insistence that a modern navy must emphasize training over instincts, organization over reflexes, and be far better prepared to handle those campaigns in which it would co-operate with the other services and allies. The course of the war and his own service in it vindicated all those insights. Ramsay never led a fleet to victory in a conventional engagement for command of the sea, but the whole point of his career was that the navy now needed more than this. Friends and peers such as Alan Brooke and Montgomery knew at the time what most historians now accept, namely, that in the eyes of the army at least, Ramsay was the most successful fighting admiral in the Royal Navy in the Second World War. 


@@@@@


doc= 35662


Ramsay, Sir James Henry, tenth baronet (1832-1925), historian, was the eldest son of Sir George Ramsay, ninth baronet (1800-1871), a philosopher, and Emily Eugenia (1806-1885), daughter of Captain Henry Lennon, of co. Westmeath. William Ramsay (1806-1865), the classicist, was his uncle. He was born at Versailles on 21 May 1832, and educated at Rugby School and at Christ Church, Oxford. He was awarded a second class in classical moderations in 1853, a first in 'literae humaniores' in 1854, and a first in law and modern history in 1855. He was elected a student of Christ Church in 1854, but gave up that position in 1861 on his marriage on 24 July to Mary (died 1868), daughter of William Scott Kerr, of Chatto and Sunlaws, Roxburghshire. There were three daughters of the marriage. Ramsay was called to the bar by Lincoln's Inn in 1863, but he does not appear to have practised. 
In 1867-9 Ramsay was appointed as an examiner in the Oxford school of law and modern history, and this experience convinced him that the current books on English political history were unsatisfactory. He records in his diary that in December 1869 he consulted Dean Henry Liddell, of Christ Church, on his intention to write a history of England. The necessary leisure and financial support were supplied in 1871, when he succeeded to the baronetcy and estates of Bamff, near Alyth in Perthshire. 
For a while, Ramsay was tempted to enter politics, and in 1872 he stood unsuccessfully for Forfarshire in the Liberal interest. Thereafter, although he continued to take a keen interest in politics, his activity was limited to local affairs. He had by this time settled down to writing a history of England from 55 BC to 1485 -- the period covered, from a different angle, by William Stubbs. However, while Stubbs lived an active academic and ecclesiastical life, in contact with other scholars and with practical problems, Ramsay was a solitary scholar. However despite his dedication to his work, he enjoyed and excelled in outdoor recreations. With a short sturdy figure, he was an admirable walker, skater, and mountaineer. With his brother George, Ramsay was a keen member of the Alpine Club, and he became a pioneer in ascending Mont Blanc from the Italian side. On 20 August 1873 Ramsay married Charlotte Fanning (died 1904), daughter of Major William Stewart, of Ardvorlich; there were two sons and three more daughters of the marriage, and Ramsay's elder daughters later gave him valuable assistance in his historical work. 
For twenty years the only visible products of Ramsay's labours were a series of articles in 'The Antiquary'. Then, in 1892, the first two volumes of Ramsay's work were issued. This instalment was, curiously, the concluding part, entitled 'Lancaster and York: a Century of English History, 1399-1485'. Six years later, in 1898, two further volumes appeared, under the title 'The Foundations of England', covering the period from 55 BC to AD 1154. Succeeding volumes followed in chronological order: 'The Angevin Empire, 1154-1216', in 1903; 'The Dawn of the Constitution, 1216-1307', in 1908; and 'The Genesis of Lancaster, 1307-1399', in 1913. 
Ramsay's avowed intention was to provide a verified and chronological narrative of political history, written around the king as the central figure. He gave, as far as possible, exact, authenticated references to the original authorities on which each statement rested, so that readers might have the material for forming independent judgements. This was the kind of guidance provided by the 'Jahrbucher des deutschen Reiches', differing in that he had less charter material, but made use of the invaluable financial rolls in the Public Record Office. His books had the defects as well as the qualities of good annals; lucid and concise, they were somewhat arid. Although he kept abreast of the work of other British scholars as it appeared, he failed to give attention to the findings of German and French historians; and inevitably there were misconceptions, especially in the early volumes. His books found a place in university and college libraries principally as works of reference, though some private scholars found the clarity and directness of the narrative enjoyable. One of his special interests was military history, and he based his battle narratives on personal visits to the sites. In this field his principal contribution was his insistence on the small size of medieval armies. A contemporary who heard him speak on the subject in 1913 remembered with admiration 'the vigour and vivacity with which the octogenarian scholar upheld his views' (Tout, 482). 
Ramsay's most original contribution to knowledge was the work he did on the revenues of the kings of England, based on his study of the issue rolls, receipt rolls, and enrolled customs accounts in the Public Record Office. Although he did not make use of all the available records, such as the calendars of chancery rolls, and was only partly familiar with the technicalities of exchequer accounting, his work was an important pioneering attempt to break into a new area of study. He achieved his aim of opening up the subject for further research by other scholars. This proved to be his most lasting historical achievement. 
After the completion of his 'magnum opus' Ramsay employed his leisure in editing, largely from the family charter box, 'The Bamff Charters and Papers' (1915). He also put together his researches on medieval finance, which were published as 'A History of the Revenues of the Kings of England, 1066-1399' (1925). 
Ramsay's work received some public recognition. The University of Glasgow conferred upon him the honorary degree of LLD in 1906. Cambridge gave him an honorary DLitt two years later, and he was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1915. 
Apart from his historical work, Ramsay's chief interest was in his family. He was a resolute advocate of the education of women, and a keen supporter of St Leonard's Girls' School at St Andrews, to which he sent four of his daughters. He was immensely gratified by the success of his third daughter by his first marriage, Agnata Frances Butler (1867-1931), who was placed by the examiners above the senior classic at Cambridge in 1887. Ramsay's last appearance at a political meeting took place when his daughter Katharine Stewart-Murray, duchess of Atholl (1874-1960), was nominated as candidate for the division of Kinross and West Perthshire in 1923. He died at Bamff on 17 February 1925, and was buried at Alyth on 21 February. He was succeeded as eleventh baronet by his only surviving son, James Douglas ('b'. 1878). 


@@@@@


doc= 35663


Ramsay, Sir William (1852-1916), physical chemist, was born on 2 October 1852 at 2 Queen's Crescent, Glasgow, the only child of William Ramsay (1811-1887), civil engineer and later surveyor to the Scottish Union Insurance Company, and his wife, Catherine (died 1891), daughter of Dr Archibald Robertson of Edinburgh, who was a governess before her marriage. On his father's side he was descended from a long line of chemist-dyers, and on his mother's side, physicians; both of his grandfathers published works on chemistry. His father had a good general knowledge of science and mathematics, while his uncle was the well-known geologist Sir Andrew Crombie Ramsay (1814-1891). Ramsay's own scientific interests developed at an early age, and despite his mother's initial intention that he should enter the Calvinist ministry, he had by the age of sixteen decided to become a chemist. 
When he was about six Ramsay was sent to a preparatory school kept by a Mr Stark. In 1862 he entered the Glasgow Academy, and four years later he matriculated at the University of Glasgow, where he studied classics, English literature, logic, and mathematics. In May 1869 he began to work in the laboratory of the city analyst, Robert Tatlock, as the university could not provide a full course of instruction for students who wished to take up chemistry as a profession. During the next eighteen months he continued as a pupil of Tatlock, while attending university lectures on physics, chemistry, anatomy, and geology; he did not take a degree. 
In October 1870 Ramsay went to Heidelberg, intending to study under Robert Bunsen, but decided to return to Glasgow for the winter. In April of the following year he entered the laboratory of the organic chemist Rudolf Fittig, in Tubingen, where he worked on the toluic and nitrotoluic acids; in August 1872 he received the PhD degree at Tubingen. In October he was appointed assistant in the Young Laboratory of Technical Chemistry at Anderson's College, Glasgow. In 1874 he became tutorial assistant to Professor John Ferguson in the chemistry department of the University of Glasgow, and carried out research in organic chemistry. He synthesized pyridine and a variety of pyridinic acids ('Philosophical Magazine', 1876, 1877), and showed the connection between the alkaloids and pyridine ('Journal of the Chemical Society', 1877, 1879). 
Ramsay's interest in physico-chemical problems grew out of his studies of the molecular volumes of elements at their boiling points, begun in 1879, and he continued this work after he was appointed professor of chemistry at University College, Bristol, in 1880. In 1882 Sydney Young became his assistant, and together they published over thirty papers on vapour pressure, the critical states of liquids, evaporation, and dissociation. The work required the design and construction of novel apparatus and a high degree of manipulative skill, and helped to establish the foundations for Ramsay's later experimental researches on gases. 
On 3 August 1881 Ramsay married Margaret Johnstone Marshall (died 1936), daughter of George Stevenson Buchanan of Glasgow. They had two children: Elizabeth Catherine (1883-1960), known as Elska, who married H. L. Tidy in 1906; and William George (1886-1927), who died early of disseminated sclerosis. In September 1881 Ramsay was appointed principal of University College, Bristol, in succession to Alfred Marshall. In that capacity he was instrumental in the successful movement to obtain government funding for the university colleges. He combined the post with his duties as professor until 1887 when, at the retirement of A. W. Williamson, he was elected to the chair of general chemistry at University College, London. 
In London Ramsay continued his research on critical states, with John Shields and others. He studied the variation of surface tension with temperature, confirming a linear relationship between them, and used the results to deduce the molecular complexity of associating liquids. During this period he became a strong proponent of the osmotic-ionic theories of van't Hoff, Arrhenius, and Ostwald, and helped to ease the introduction of the new physical chemistry to Britain. By 1894 his laboratory had become a centre of research activity and he had firmly established his reputation as a physical chemist. 
In 1894 Ramsay began his most important research, on the seemingly chemically inert, monatomic, elemental gases. The physicist J. W. Strutt (Lord Rayleigh) had found that the density of atmospheric nitrogen was consistently higher than that of chemically pure nitrogen, a discrepancy first noted by Henry Cavendish in 1785. Ramsay thought that this might be due to a heavy gas in atmospheric nitrogen, while Rayleigh ascribed it to a light gas in chemical nitrogen. Throughout the summer of 1894 they worked to find the source of the anomaly, using two different methods. Ramsay removed oxygen, water vapour, carbon dioxide, and nitrogen from air, the crucial step being the absorption of nitrogen by red-hot magnesium, and was left with a residue which appeared to be a new element. Rayleigh too had been partially successful, and in August 1894 they made a joint announcement at the meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. They named the new gas argon, from the Greek word meaning 'idle', and formally presented their results to the Royal Society in January 1895 ('PRS', 1895). Later that year they were awarded the Smithsonian Institution's Hodgkins prize, given for the most important discovery concerning atmospheric air. 
In February 1895 Henry Miers called Ramsay's attention to the work of W. F. Hillebrand of the United States Geological Survey, who had found that two uranite minerals, pitchblende and cleveite, gave off a considerable amount of gas when heated. Ramsay, seeking to determine whether the gas contained argon, repeated the experiments with cleveite and was able to isolate another inert elementary gas in March ('Journal of the Chemical Society', 1895). Spectrum analysis showed that it was identical with the element helium, which had in 1868 been spectroscopically detected in the sun's atmosphere by the astronomer J. N. Lockyer (who named it) and the chemist Edward Frankland, but had hitherto been terrestrially unknown. 
It had earlier occurred to Ramsay that there was room in the periodic table for a new, eighth, group of elements. The discovery of helium increased the likelihood that further 'inert' gases might exist, and in his book 'The Gases of the Atmosphere' (1896; 4th edn., 1915), he reproduced the periodic table with spaces reserved for several new elements. He made his ideas public in his presidential address, entitled 'An undiscovered gas', to the Chemistry Section of the 1897 British Association meeting in Toronto, predicting the existence of at least one other gaseous element whose atomic weight would lie between those of helium and argon. Working with his student Morris W. Travers from April 1895, Ramsay searched for further sources of both gases, and attempted to make them combine with other substances; J. N. Collie, Ramsay's assistant, worked with them until he left University College in 1896. Their discovery that thorium and uranium minerals produce helium was explained by subsequent developments in the study of radioactivity. 
Ramsay refined his experimental techniques during the work on helium, learning to manipulate increasingly small quantities of gas; he and Travers, both skilled glass-blowers, designed and constructed all the apparatus that they used. In 1898 they began to look for a third new element by liquefying argon and subjecting it to fractional distillation, a method made possible by William Hampson's independent development of a liquefaction process; Ramsay was on bad terms with James Dewar, who had pioneered the technology of liquid air. 
In May 1898, as a preliminary trial, Ramsay and Travers allowed a small quantity of liquid air to evaporate slowly, and collected the least volatile fraction. After removal of oxygen and nitrogen, spectroscopic examination of the residue showed the presence of an unknown gas, which they named krypton (hidden). It was heavier than argon, and was thus not the gas they had been looking for. They then condensed 15 litres of argon and collected the most volatile fraction; spectrum analysis revealed that they had found the light gas, which they named neon (new). In July they found that the heavy fraction of liquid air contained a gas more dense than krypton; in September they announced the discovery of xenon (stranger). Ramsay and Travers spent the next two years isolating the gases and determining their properties, thereby confirming the existence of a new group of elements in the periodic table ('PTRS', 1901). In 1904 Ramsay became the first British recipient of the Nobel prize for chemistry, in recognition of this unique achievement. 
In 1903, working with Frederick Soddy, Ramsay observed the spectrum of helium in the gaseous emanation from radium (radon), thus providing experimental evidence for Rutherford's theory of radioactive disintegration. Rutherford and Soddy had earlier shown that radon was probably a sixth member of the family of inert gases; in 1910 Ramsay and Robert Whytlaw-Gray confirmed this by determining its physical properties from minute samples ('PRS', 1911). In showing that its atomic weight differed from that of radium by the mass of one helium atom, they provided further proof that greekLetteralpha-particles emitted during radioactive decay were helium nuclei. Ramsay's research in the field of radioactivity was not always so fruitful: after 1905 he performed many unsuccessful experiments in attempts to discover whether chemical or physical means could cause the transmutation of elements. 
Ramsay was a man of many interests. He was concerned by the state of science education in Britain and was the first to write textbooks based on the periodic system of classification -- 'A System of Inorganic Chemistry' and 'Elementary Systematic Chemistry for the Use of Schools and Colleges' (both 1891). Throughout the 1890s he was involved in the movement to reorganize the University of London, which had been an examining body independent of the London colleges; he was a strong supporter of the role of research and teaching in a modern university. In 1900 he went to India at the invitation of J. N. Tata, who proposed to endow a technical research institution; he advised that it be sited in Bangalore, where the Indian Institute of Science was eventually established with Travers as its first director. 
At about this time Ramsay began to write magazine articles of a semi-popular nature, a selection of which were published in his 'Essays Biographical and Chemical' (1908). For many years he acted as a consultant to industry, advising on a wide range of chemical matters and appearing as an expert witness in several court cases. He was a member of the royal commission on sewage disposal (1898-1915), chemical adviser to the British Radium Corporation (1909-12), and a director on the boards of two short-lived chemical companies. After the turn of the century these commitments took up increasing amounts of his time. 
Ramsay received many awards and honorary degrees, and was elected a member of scientific societies in twenty countries. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1888 and awarded its Davy medal in 1895; in 1897 he received the Longstaff medal from the Chemical Society, of which he was president in 1907-9. He served three terms as a vice-president of the Institute of Chemistry, and was president of the Society of Chemical Industry (1903-4), the International Congress of Applied Chemistry (1909), and the British Association (1911). He was created KCB in 1902, was awarded the Prussian order of merit (1911), was an officer of the French Legion d'honneur, and a commander of the order of the Corona d'Italia. 
Ramsay was loved by his students, who affectionately called him 'the Chief'. He was unfailingly optimistic and enthusiastic; colleagues found him charming, witty, and generous. He had an aptitude for languages and music, and enjoyed travel and outdoor activities. At his retirement, in 1912, he was the most famous British chemist of the day. After moving to Hazlemere, near High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, he continued to work from his home, Beechcroft, and was engaged in work connected to the war effort when he died there of cancer on 23 July 1916. He was buried at Holy Trinity Church, Hazlemere, on 26 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 35664


Ramsay, Sir William Mitchell (1851-1939), classical scholar and archaeologist, was born in Glasgow on 15 March 1851, the youngest son of Thomas Ramsay and his wife, Jane, daughter of William Mitchell, both of Alloa. Ramsay came from a family of lawyers, his father, grandfather, and great-grandfather having all been advocates, his grandfather also procurator fiscal of Clackmannanshire. His father died in 1857, and the family returned to live in the country near Alloa. In his education his eldest brother and his maternal uncle, Andrew Mitchell, of Alloa, took an active interest. From the Gymnasium, Old Aberdeen, he went on to the University of Aberdeen and then won a scholarship at St John's College, Oxford, where he obtained a first class in classical moderations (1874) and in 'literae humaniores' (1876). In 1874, through his uncle's generosity, he was able to spend the long vacation at Gottingen, studying Sanskrit under a great scholar, Theodor Benfey. This was a critical period of his life: then for the first time, in his own words, he 'gained some insight into modern methods of literary investigation', and his 'thoughts ever since turned towards the border lands between European and Asian civilization'. A further stimulus was received from Henry Jardine Bidder, of St John's, who introduced him to the diverse elements which made up Hellenistic culture. 
The opportunity to begin what was to become Ramsay's life work -- exploration in Asia Minor for the study of its antiquities and history, with special reference to the influence of Asia on Greek civilization and the Graeco-Roman administration -- was provided by his election in 1880 to an Oxford studentship for travel and research in Greek lands. At Smyrna he met Sir C. W. Wilson, then British consul-general in Anatolia, who advised him to explore the unknown inland regions of the country and in whose company he made two long journeys in 1881-2. So started an exploration that was to be continued, save for one considerable break (from 1891 to 1899), until 1914. Further funds were provided by his election to a research fellowship at Exeter College, Oxford, in 1882, and by the establishment of an Asia Minor Exploration Fund supported by individuals and societies. From 1885 to 1886 he held the newly created Lincoln and Merton professorship of classical archaeology and art at Oxford and became a fellow of Lincoln College; he was then appointed regius professor of humanity at Aberdeen, where he remained until 1911. After his retirement he continued to devote himself to Anatolian studies up to the very end of his long life. 
Ramsay was knighted in 1906 and received many academic distinctions: three honorary fellowships of Oxford colleges (Exeter, 1898, Lincoln, 1899, and St John's, 1912) and honorary degrees from six British universities and from New York, Bordeaux, and Marburg. He was an original fellow of the British Academy but resigned in 1924. In 1893 he was awarded the gold medal of Pope Leo XIII, and in 1906 the Victoria medal of the Royal Geographical Society. He paid several visits to the United States of America to deliver courses of lectures, most of which were afterwards published. 
Ramsay married first, in 1878, Agnes Dick (died 1927), second daughter of the Revd William Marshall, of Leith, and granddaughter of the Revd Dr Andrew Marshall, of Kirkintilloch, Dunbartonshire, one of the original seceders from the Church of Scotland. She shared with her husband the discomforts of travel in Turkey and aided him in his work. They had two sons, the younger of whom was killed in action in 1915, and four daughters. He married second, in 1928, Phyllis Eileen, daughter of Alfred Ernest Thorowgood, of Old Bosham, Sussex, who survived him. He died at his home, 34 Wentworth Avenue, Bournemouth, on 20 April 1939. 
Ramsay's enduring claim to distinction is the immense advance, based upon a rich harvest of new evidence, which he achieved in the knowledge of the geography and topography of Asia Minor and of its political, social, and cultural (including religious) history. In his 'Historical Geography of Asia Minor' (1890) and in subsequent articles he worked out a topographical scheme which, while leaving much to be settled by discovery, laid a sure foundation for historical study. Topography and history are combined in his local history of Phrygia ('The Cities and Bishoprics of Phrygia', 1895, 1897), uncompleted for lack of adequate evidence. The value of his historical work as a whole, largely scattered in journals and elsewhere (listed down to 1923 in W. H. Buchler and W. M. Calder, eds., 'Anatolian Studies', presented to him), cannot be discussed here. In his lifetime he was best known for his contributions to early Christian history, beginning with 'The Church in the Roman Empire before A.D.' 170 (1893) and continuing in a series of books devoted mainly to St Paul and St Luke. His basic contention that St Luke was a first-class historian of the first century AD, remains a controversial issue and with it the value of the 'Acts of the Apostles' as a historical source. However, his view that the Galatians to whom St Paul addressed his epistle were those, not of Galatia proper, but of the southern part of the Roman province has gained general acceptance. The judgements and polemics expressed in his 'New Testament' studies have often been questioned subsequently, but not so the value of his topographical work and the stimulus which he gave to the exploration of Asia Minor in the early twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 35665


Ramsden, Omar (1873-1939), silver designer, was born on 21 August 1873 at 16 Fir Street, Nether Hallam, Walkley, Sheffield, the only son of Benjamin Woolhouse Ramsden (1833- 'c'.1898), engraver and cutlery manufacturer, and his wife, Norah (1850-1929), 'nee' Ibbotson, whose family dealt in ivory. 
Ramsden was apprenticed to a silver manufacturer in Sheffield by 1887, learning basic skills and workshop practice. From 1894 he won annual scholarships to study design at Sheffield School of Art, where he met Alwyn Charles Ellison Carr (1872-1940). They attended summer schools at the Royal College of Art, and studied in the Victoria and Albert Museum. In 1897 Ramsden won an open competition for a civic mace for the city of Sheffield, but he and Carr spent a year travelling in Europe before moving to London to set up a workshop and begin work on the mace. A joint mark for Ramsden and Carr was registered in 1898. The partnership prospered until 1914, and work of this period shows close study of Renaissance silver, with both arts and crafts and art nouveau influences. Their most important commission, in 1906, was a monstrance for Westminster Cathedral. 
In 1914 Carr joined the army, and Ramsden continued independently, building up a team of specialist workers for the increasing volume of commissions, registering his own mark in 1918. The partnership was formally dissolved in 1919. Ramsden kept the Chelsea studio, St Dunstan's, and the workshop in Maxwell Road, Fulham, and over the next two decades maintained a reputation as a fashionable designer of domestic, ceremonial, and church plate catering to the conservative taste of a moneyed inter-war society. His designs drew on Renaissance metalwork, and showed an awareness of the work of George Jensen (1866-1935). 
During the early 1920s Ramsden became interested in mazers, turned burr-maple bowls with silver mounts. He made a large number, culminating in the 'Three Kings Mazer' of 1937. The following year he published privately an illustrated booklet tracing the history of mazers. In addition to larger pieces of silver Ramsden produced quantities of personal objects, including jewellery, in silver with cabochons and enamel in medieval or art nouveau styles. In 1928 he designed an elaborate crown for a Madonna in Westminster Cathedral, reusing stones from jewellery given as votive offerings. He also made an 'everyday' crown, and in 1935 a morse or clasp for a bishop's cope. He was commissioned in 1929 by the Honourable Company of Master Mariners for a spectacular ceremonial collar, one of several such orders from City livery companies. 
At his Maxwell Road workshop Ramsden employed up to twenty men, including apprentices. Some spent nearly forty years in the spartan shop under the taciturn Ramsden's strict discipline. Surviving workbooks and working drawings record orders carried out between 1921 and 1939, costed in code. Despite the claim 'Omar Ramsden me fecit' on every piece, Ramsden worked only rarely at the bench and his role was principally to interpret customers' requirements for execution by the workshop. His championship of hand craftsmanship is challenged in that production pieces were usually spun by external contractors for finishing in the workshop. 
From the beginning St Dunstan's Studio had acted as a showroom where customers were received and stock displayed, and studio sales became a social event. Ramsden's genial charm towards his customers and skill as a salesman ensured the momentum of his success, helped by his flair for publicity and the business skills of his wife, Annie Emily Downes-Butcher, 'nee' Berrif (1871-1950), whom he married in St Augustine's, Kensington, London, on 3 September 1927. He died at St Dunstan's on 9 August 1939 and was buried in Ecclesall, near Sheffield. There were no children. 
Ramsden was regarded as an authority on his craft, and frequently participated in professional debates. In 1928 he contributed articles on modern silver design to the 'Goldsmiths' Journal'. Acclaimed in his day by his patrons and by the press as almost a latterday Cellini, and awarded many professional honours, Ramsden was later regarded as no more than a brilliant entrepreneur. Today he is recognized as influential in the revival of public taste in silver design, evocatively combining traditional and modern styles. Collections of Ramsden's work are held at Goldsmiths' Hall, the Victoria and Albert Museum, St Bartholomew-the-Great, Smithfield, and Westminster Cathedral, London; Birmingham City Museum, Graves Art Gallery, Sheffield, and the Campbell Collection, Toronto. Other examples are in public and private collections including churches and City livery companies. 


@@@@@


doc= 35666


Randall, Richard William (1824-1906), dean of Chichester, born at Bloomsbury Square, London, on 13 April 1824, was the eldest son of James Randall (1790-1882), archdeacon of Berkshire, and his wife, Rebe, only daughter of Richard Lowndes of Rose Hill, Dorking. A younger brother, James Leslie, was appointed suffragan bishop of Reading in 1889. Randall was educated at Winchester College from 1836 to 1842, and then at Christ Church, Oxford. He graduated BA in 1846, with an honorary fourth class in classics, and proceeded MA in 1849 and DD in 1892. In 1847 he was ordained curate to his father, the rector of Binfield, Berkshire. On 6 November 1849 Randall married Wilhelmina, daughter of George Augustus Bruxner, originally a merchant of St Petersburg, who had settled in the Manor House at Binfield. They had six sons and three daughters. 
In 1851 Randall was nominated to the rectory of Lavington-cum-Graffham, Sussex, in succession to Archdeacon Manning who had just seceded to Rome. Manning had already become his model and was influential in his adoption of Tractarian practices. At Lavington, Randall's innovations in high-church doctrine and ritual excited some opposition in 1858 and 1859, led by his own curate and taken up by the evangelical press. 
In 1868 Randall was presented by the trustees to the new parish church of All Saints, Clifton, designed by G. E. Street and intended as a centre of Tractarian worship and teaching in Bristol. Daily services as well as daily celebrations of the holy communion were instituted, and lectures, 'Bible' classes, guilds, and confraternities were organized in the parish. Randall showed himself a capable administrator, and raised large sums in support of church work. He gained a wide reputation as a preacher, was chosen by Bishop Samuel Wilberforce as preacher of Lenten sermons at Oxford, and became a well-known director of retreats. His few published works, mainly devotional, originated in this Clifton period. Randall was always a ritualist and a supporter of the English Church Union, and in 1873, owing to complaints as to certain practices at All Saints, Charles John Ellicott, bishop of Gloucester, refused to license curates to the church; however, he declined to allow proceedings to be taken against Randall under the 'Public Worship Regulation Act'. In 1889 the bishop resumed confirmations in the church, and in 1891 bestowed on Randall an honorary canonry in the cathedral, where he occupied the stall formerly held by his father. 
In February 1892 Randall was appointed dean of Chichester by Lord Salisbury. Here he introduced a daily celebration of holy communion, and undertook restoration work at his own expense. Despite suspicion and hostility he effectively began the long high-church tradition at Chichester Cathedral. Owing to ill health he retired in 1902, and settled for a time in London, before moving to Bournemouth. He died at his home, Pelham, Lindsay Road, Bournemouth, on 23 December 1906, and was buried nearby at Branksome. 


@@@@@


doc= 35667


MacIver, David Randall- (1873-1945), archaeologist and anthropologist, was born in London on 31 October 1873, the only son of John MacIver (died 1875), shipowner, and his wife, Eliza Mary Rutherford. His father died a young man and his mother later married Richard Randall, barrister, whose name MacIver added to his own. He was educated at Radley College and was elected a scholar of Queen's College, Oxford, where he obtained a first class in 'literae humaniores' in 1896. 
While at Oxford MacIver also found time to investigate the subject of anthropology, and was much influenced by E. B. Tylor. His first ambition was to follow up this interest by work in Yucatan. This project, however, came to nothing and instead, having obtained an introduction to Flinders Petrie, he went to Egypt. From 1899 to 1901 he excavated at Abydos for the Egypt Exploration Fund (later Society), and from 1900 to 1906 he was Laycock student of Egyptology at Worcester College, Oxford. In Egypt he included measuring skulls among the other duties of an excavator and thus added a new and highly important item to the essential data to be compiled by a field worker. He undertook an anthropometrical study of this craniological material under the supervision of the anatomist Arthur Thomson. Their results were published as 'The Ancient Races of the Thebaid' (1905). His many excavations during these years, and his able and prompt publication of reports on these early works, were of invaluable use to his successors in the field. Many of the major names in Egyptology in the first half of the twentieth century owed much to his pioneering work. 
In 1905 Randall-MacIver went to Rhodesia at the invitation of the British Association and the Rhodes Trustees to excavate at Zimbabwe and other sites. Although much had been written about the immense antiquity of these ruins, MacIver was able to suggest in his book 'Mediaeval Rhodesia' (1906; repr., 1971) a revised date of AD 1200 to 1500 (subsequently extended back to AD 1000 by others). In 1907 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London. 
After his Laycock studentship expired, Randall-MacIver, assisted by C. L. Woolley, directed (1907-11) an archaeological expedition in Nubia for the University Museum in Philadelphia, funded by a coal magnate, E. B. Coxe jun. His 'Areika' (1909) described the Meroitic civilization of the black nations to the south of Egypt during the period of the Roman empire. In 1911 he married Joanna (died 1931), daughter of W. H. Davidge, of New York, whom he had met through the Coxe family. In the same year he became librarian of the American Geographical Society, but in 1914, on the outbreak of the First World War in Europe, he returned immediately to England and served on the intelligence staff in both France and Macedonia. 
After the war Randall-MacIver settled in Rome and this period was perhaps the most fruitful in his long and varied career. His publication of 'Villanovans and Early Etruscans' (1924), which was produced during these years and which was perhaps his main achievement, was at the time an essential source for any student on the subject. To this period also belong other well-known books on Italian archaeology including 'The Iron Age in Italy' (1927), 'Italy before the Romans' (1928), and 'Greek Cities in Italy and Sicily' (1931). Following his wife's death he continued to live in Rome, making visits to Rhodes, Syria, Cyprus, and the Balearic Islands, spending summers in the USA. In 1936 he married Mabel, daughter of Edward S. Holden, of St Louis, USA, and widow of George Tuttle, of New York. 
In 1938 Randall-MacIver was elected FBA, an honour which greatly pleased him. He was in the United States on the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 and although unable to take an active part in the war he nevertheless found activities of a quieter kind to employ his wide experience. Among these was his invaluable assistance to those charged by the United States war department with listing Italian monuments to be protected from destruction. 
In the archaeological world Randall-MacIver was a much beloved and fascinating figure. His appearance throughout his life was extremely striking for he was very tall with bright blue eyes and wavy fair hair; to this was added a smiling sparkling charm of speech which gave a peculiar interest to everything he said and served to kindle in others his own unfailing enthusiasm and optimism. He was a worker with very high standards and he expected others to hold equal standards. Although he was intolerant of slipshod work or thought in any form, and never hesitated to denounce such weaknesses when he found them, he was also full of encouragement and interest in the efforts of others, and always ready to do anything within his power to help young students on the threshold of their own careers. 
Randall-MacIver was always exceedingly proud of his highland origin. He was a complete stranger to any form of narrow nationalism and spent his life with equal serenity in England, Italy, or America. He died on 30 April 1945 at his residence in New York. His second wife survived him, but both marriages were childless. 


@@@@@


doc= 35668


Randegger, Alberto (1832-1911), music teacher and composer, was born in Trieste on 13 April 1832. His father was a German schoolmaster and his mother, an amateur musician, was Tuscan. At the age of thirteen he was taught by Tivoli, of Trieste Cathedral, and then studied piano with Lafont and composition with Luigi Ricci. In 1850 he made the acquaintance of Verdi, who visited Trieste for the production of his opera 'Stiffelio' (which was to become 'Aroldo'), first performed on 16 November 1850. In 1852-4 he conducted at several theatres in Italy and Dalmatia, composed ballets and church music, and collaborated with other pupils of Ricci in the opera buffa 'Il lazzarone' (Trieste, 1852). His tragic opera 'Bianca Capello' was produced at Brescia in 1854, and its success brought him an offer to conduct it in America, but he was prevented from doing this by a cholera outbreak in New York. Later that year he stayed in Paris for a month and then, at the invitation of his eldest brother, visited London. He decided to stay, and established himself as a singing teacher, conductor, and composer. 
Randegger had never heard an oratorio, and is said to have been daunted by the huge number of performers at a performance at Exeter Hall of Handel's 'Messiah', and the strangeness of the style soon sent him to sleep. But on the advice of Sir Michael Costa he persevered, mastered the English language, and in 1855 published his first composition set to English words, a song entitled 'The Meadow Gate'. He took further lessons in composition in London from Bernhard Molique, and in 1857 conducted an opera season at St James's Theatre. From 1854 to 1870 he was organist at St Paul's, Regent's Park, and on the death of Prince Albert he composed an anthem performed there. 
Randegger was most successful as a teacher of singing, and in 1868 was appointed professor of singing at the Royal Academy of Music. It has been said that his compositions were distinguished by practical qualities, were always tasteful and externally effective, but had no deep originality, and soon fell into disuse. The most notable are the comic opera 'The Rival Beauties' (Leeds, 2 May 1864), dedicated to Costa, and a dramatic cantata 'Fridolin' (Birmingham festival, 28 August 1873). The trio 'I naviganti' (1862) was also popular. For Novello's series of primers he contributed 'Singing' (1893), which had an exceptionally wide circulation. He worked at the Carl Rosa Theatre (1879-85) and also at Covent Garden and Drury Lane (1887-98), conducting Italian opera for Sir Augustus Harris as well as many choral concerts. He also conducted the Queen's Hall Choral Society and the first two seasons of symphony concerts at Queen's Hall (1895-7), and he introduced many important novelties, mainly English, at the Norwich festival, which he conducted from 1881 to 1905 (taking over from Benedict). In addition he appeared at the Wolverhampton festival from 1868. He attended the Beethoven centenary festival in Bonn in 1870. He edited numerous collections of classical airs, including works by Handel and Mendelssohn, collaborated with T. J. H. Marzials on the libretto for Goring Thomas's 'Esmeralda' (1883), actively promoted Wagner's early operas, and was admired for his interpretations of Verdi's works. Besides his extensive practice at the Royal Academy of Music he also became in 1896 a teacher at the Royal College, sharing in the management of both institutions. He was much in request as an adjudicator in competitions, including various eisteddfodau, and was an honorary member of the Philharmonic Society of Madrid. In 1892 the king of Italy made him a cavaliere. In 1897 he married Louise Nancy Baldwin of Boston, USA. 
To the end of his life Randegger remained an indefatigable worker, and he attended the performance of new works with a score which he marked with all details of the performance. He was still actively engaged, and a familiar figure at London musical functions, in 1911, when, after a short illness, he died at his residence, 5 Nottingham Place, Marylebone, London, on 18 December; his wife survived him. He was described as a very kind man, and his memorial service, held at St Pancras Church by Canon Sheppard of the Chapel Royal on 21 December, was attended by many prominent musicians. He was cremated at Golders Green crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 35669


Randles, Marshall (1826-1904), Wesleyan Methodist minister, was born at Over Darwen, Lancashire, on 7 April 1826, the son of John Randles of Derbyshire and his wife, Mary Maguire. He was educated at a private school, and after engaging in business at Haslingden he was accepted as a candidate for the Wesleyan Methodist ministry in 1850; he studied at Didsbury College, Manchester. He commenced his ministry in 1853, and was stationed successively at Montrose, Clitheroe, Boston, Nottingham, Lincoln, Halifax, Cheetham Hill, Altrincham, Bolton, and Leeds. In August 1856 he married Sarah Dewhurst, second daughter of John Scurrah of Padiham; their son, Sir John Scurrah Randles, was Conservative MP for North-West Manchester. 
In 1882 Randles was elected a member of the legal conference, and in 1886 succeeded William Burt Pope as tutor in systematic theology at Didsbury. For many years he was chairman of the Manchester district, and in 1896 was elected president of the conference. In 1891 he received the degree of DD from the Wesleyan Theological College, Montreal. He retired in 1902 from the active ministry, and died at his home, 16 Brownsville Road, in Heaton Chapel, Lancashire, on 4 July 1904; he was buried in Cheetham Hill Wesleyan churchyard in the same county. 
A strong advocate of total abstinence, Randles first dealt with the question in 'Britain's Bane and Antidote' (1864). But his pen was mainly devoted to theology on conservative lines: 'the deposit of evangelical truth was sacred to him, in its form and expression, as well as its substance' ('Minutes', 155). In his best-known work, 'For Ever, an Essay on Everlasting Punishment' (1871; 4th edn, 1895), he defended the eternity of future punishment. Of kindred character was 'After Death: is there a Post-Mortem Probation?' (1904), in which he sought to refute 'Man's Immortality' (1903) by Robert Percival Downes. The view that God is incapable of suffering he strongly maintained, against James Baldwin Brown, A. M. Fairbairn, George Matheson, George Adam Smith, and others, in 'The Blessed God: Impassibility' (1900). His ablest criticism of scepticism is found in his 'First Principles of Faith' (1884), in which he dealt with the views of John Stuart Mill, Herbert Spencer, and Henry Mansel. He also published 'Substitution: a Treatise on the Atonement' (1877), and 'The Design and Use of Holy Scripture' (Fernley lecture, 1892), in which he incidentally acknowledged the service of the higher criticism. 


@@@@@


doc= 35670


Randolph, Sir George Granville (1818-1907), naval officer, born in London on 26 January 1818, was the son of Thomas Randolph, prebendary of St Paul's Cathedral from 1812 until his death in 1875, chaplain-in-ordinary to Queen Victoria, and rector of Hadham, Hertfordshire. Dr John Randolph, bishop of London, was his grandfather. George Randolph entered the navy as a first-class volunteer on 7 December 1830. He was commissioned lieutenant on 27 June 1838. In the following September he was appointed to the frigate 'North Star' (26 guns), under Captain Lord John Hay, commodore on the north coast of Spain. He next (from 1840 to 1844) served on the 'Vernon' (50 guns) in the Mediterranean, latterly as first lieutenant. In October 1844 he became first lieutenant of the 'Daedalus' (20 guns), on the East India station, and on 19 August 1845 commanded her barge at the destruction of Malloodoo, a pirate stronghold in Borneo. 
On 9 November 1846 Randolph was promoted, and a year later was appointed to the 'Bellerophon' (78 guns); in this ship and in the 'Rodney' he served for six years in the Mediterranean. In 1851 Randolph married Eleanor Harriet, daughter of the Revd Joseph Arkwright of Mark Hall, near Harlow, Essex; she died in April 1907. He was present in the 'Rodney' at the attack on Fort Constantine, Sevastopol, took part in other operations in the Black Sea, and served ashore in the naval brigade; he received the fourth class of the Mejidiye. He was made a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur, and promoted captain on 18 November 1854. He commanded the 'Cornwallis', coastguard ship in the Humber, and afterwards the screw frigates 'Diadem' and 'Orlando' on the North American station. 
The 'Orlando' was transferred to the Mediterranean in 1863, and Randolph remained in her until May 1865, when he was appointed to the guardship at Sheerness. He was awarded a good service pension in March 1867, and from September 1867 until March 1869 was commodore at the Cape of Good Hope. He received the CB in June 1869, and was promoted to his flag on 24 April 1872. From December 1873 to June 1875 he commanded the detached squadron, his last active employment. He was promoted vice-admiral on 16 September 1877, retired on 26 July 1881, and was promoted admiral on 8 July 1884. At the 1897 diamond jubilee celebrations he was made KCB. 
Randolph published in 1867 'The Rule of the Road at Sea', and in 1879, 'Problems in Naval Tactics'; he was a corresponding member of the Royal United Service Institution and a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society. He died on 16 May 1907 at his home, 70 Brunswick Place, Hove, Brighton, and was buried at Hove. 
A fine seaman and a brave officer, Randolph reached an appropriate peak in his career, commanding one of the last squadrons principally powered by sail. 


@@@@@


doc= 35671


Rankin, Sir George Claus (1877-1946), judge, was born on 12 August 1877 at Lamington in Lanarkshire, the second son of the Revd Robert Rankin, minister of Lamington, and his wife, Theresa Margaret, daughter of George John Claus, shipowner, of Liverpool. He was educated at George Watson's College, Edinburgh, and at the University of Edinburgh, where he graduated in 1897 with first-class honours in philosophy. He was awarded the Bruce of Grangehill and Falkland prize and won the Vans Dunlop (1897) and Ferguson (1899) scholarships. In October 1897 he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, as a sizar, becoming a scholar the following year, and was placed in the first class of both parts of the moral sciences tripos (1899, 1900). He twice won a Hooper declamation prize and in 1901 was awarded a Whewell scholarship to which he was re-elected in 1903. In 1901 he was also president of the union. 
In 1904 Rankin was called to the bar by Lincoln's Inn and entered the chambers of William Pickford, where he became acquainted with Lancelot Sanderson. He practised mainly in bankruptcy and commercial cases. In 1910 Rankin married Alice Maud Amy (died 1924), daughter of Geoffrey Sayer, of Bromley, Kent; they had two daughters. 
In 1916 Rankin received a commission in the Royal Garrison Artillery and served until 1918. On returning to the bar he found his practice dispersed and was faced with the uncertainty of regaining it, without the advantage of private means and with the anxieties of family responsibilities. So at the suggestion of Sanderson, then chief justice of Bengal, he accepted appointment as a puisne judge of the high court of Calcutta. In 1919 he served as a member of the Hunter commission appointed to report on the disturbances at Amritsar and the action taken by General R. E. H. Dyer. In 1924 he served as chairman of the civil justice committee appointed to make recommendations for the reform of legal procedure in British India, particularly with reference to the law's delays. In recognition of these services he was knighted in 1925, and a year later, on Sanderson's retirement, he was appointed chief justice of Bengal, the first puisne judge of the Calcutta high court to be so promoted. Early in 1934 his health failed; he returned to England on long leave and eventually resigned his office. 
In the following year Rankin's health was sufficiently restored for him to be able to resume work. He was appointed to inquire into the disorders at Barlinnie prison, Glasgow, was sworn of the privy council, and later in 1935 succeeded Sanderson in one of the two paid posts on the judicial committee of that body created by the 'Appellate Jurisdiction Act', 1929. He was elected a bencher of his inn and in 1937 received the honorary degree of LLD from Edinburgh University. In 1944 his health again broke down and he was forced to retire. 
In both his private and his professional life Rankin was remarkable for his unassuming modesty and natural courtesy. The latter quality in particular endeared him to his colleagues and to the bar, both in India and in Downing Street. It was a friendly courtesy, recognized by practitioners as no mere conventional politeness. But it did not permit the abuse of the time of the court: persistence too prolix in an unacceptable argument met with observations containing more than a touch of acerbity. 
Early in his tenure of office in India, Rankin applied himself to an exhaustive study of Hindu and Muslim law in both of which systems he attained a profound knowledge. His judgments delivered in India in cases governed by these laws were acknowledged to be of the greatest assistance to the judicial committee of the privy council in dealing with appeals from Indian courts. He also became thoroughly versed in all the complexities of the 'Bengal Tenancy Act', probably the most intricate code of law relating to land tenure ever devised by human wit. In dealing with cases which came before him, of whatever nature, Rankin excelled in quickly sifting out the essential questions of fact or law involved. His judgments were distinguished by great clarity of expression: only in rare instances did subtlety of thought find expression in a passage of some seeming obscurity. 
When he became a member of the judicial committee, it was soon apparent that Rankin was a real addition of strength. However modestly he expressed his views, however seldom he intervened during argument, he proved himself capable of great tenacity in upholding his own opinion. Lord Maugham, on the occasion of his death, wrote of him: 'there has been no judge of my time who more greatly impressed me in a sphere he may be said to have made his own' (private information). He was probably the greatest judicial authority on Indian jurisprudence of his time. Rankin's authoritative 'Background to Indian Law' appeared in 1946. Rankin died at the Beach Hotel, at Elie, Fife, on 8 April 1946. 
W. W. K. Page', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35672


Ransom, William Henry (1823-1907), physician and embryologist, was born on 19 November 1823 at Cromer, Norfolk, the younger son of Henry Ransom (1793-1832), a master mariner and shipowner, and his wife, Maria ('bap'. 1793, died 1861), daughter of the Revd Richard Jones (1756?-1814). Brought up in an evangelical atmosphere, Ransom was educated at a private school at Norwich and at sixteen was apprenticed for four years to a medical practitioner at King's Lynn. In 1843 he went to University College, London. Sitting the first part of his London University MB examination in anatomy and physiology, he competed with Thomas Henry Huxley (from Charing Cross Hospital) for an exhibition in 1845. Huxley, writing to Herbert Spencer in 1886, said, 'If Ransom had worked less hard I might have been first and he second,... in which case I should have obtained the Exhibition, should not have gone into the navy and should have forsaken science for practice' (Huxley, 142). After gaining his MB in 1847 Ransom held residential posts at University College Hospital. He then studied in Paris and Germany, and developed a continuing interest in continental medical and scientific literature. He graduated MD from the University of London in 1850. 
Ransom settled in Nottingham at 26 Low Pavement, and, while waiting for patients to arrive, he undertook chemical and physiological studies in two rooms he had fitted out as laboratories. He was interested in the embryology of fish, and the development of galls and tumours in plants. On 14 August 1860 Ransom married Elizabeth Bramwell ('bap'. 1830, died 1889), daughter of William Bramwell (1790?-1854), surgeon, who was related to the distinguished Edinburgh physician Sir Byrom Bramwell, and his wife, Elizabeth Tate (1789-1856); they had four sons and one daughter. Their eldest son, William Bramwell Ransom (1861-1909), succeeded his father as physician at the Nottingham General Hospital. 
W. H. Ransom was physician to the Nottingham General Hospital from 1854 to 1890, and later honorary consultant physician. He was a first-rate diagnostician and inspired confidence in his patients, although he could sometimes appear brusque. He emphasized hygienic principles when the Nottingham General Hospital was enlarged. The death of two of his children from scarlet fever directed his attention to infectious diseases, and in 1870 he devised a gas-heated, disinfecting stove for sterilizing infected clothing and bedding from fever patients. It was widely used until replaced by steam sterilization. Ransom became a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1869 and also of the Medical and Chirurgical Society and of University College, London. He was elected FRS in 1870 for his studies on the fertilization of fish ova, with the support of famous names such as Thomas Huxley, Joseph Lister, and James Paget. Ransom was president of the section of medicine at the British Medical Association meeting in Nottingham in 1892, where his address dealt with aspects of plant pathology, and in particular gall formation, which he regarded as relevant to human pathology. 
Ransom was active in the civic life of Nottingham. He was one of the first to join the Robin Hood 1st Notts rifle corps in 1857 and continued as a private for fifteen years. He was involved in the formation of the Nottingham Literary and Philosophic Society and Nottingham University College. He was on the governing board of the college and the high school, and campaigned for the Liberal Party during the 1860s. Ransom was also interested in geology and assisted in the exploration of Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire caves. He read a paper at the first meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science at Nottingham in 1866: 'On the occurrence of 'Felis lynx' as a British fossil'. Ransom's only book, 'The Inflammation Idea in General Pathology' (1905), was reviewed disparagingly in 'Nature' and the 'BMJ'. 
After being ill for three years, Ransom died from heart failure at his home, 17 Park Valley, Nottingham, on 16 April 1907. He was commemorated by a marble medallion by F. W. Pomeroy in the entrance hall of the Nottingham General Hospital. The medallion was later removed to the Ransom Hospital, Mansfield. In 1923 the Ransom Memorial Committee gave several thousand pounds to establish a pathology laboratory in the Nottingham General Hospital in memory of the Ransoms, father and son. 


@@@@@


doc= 35673


Ransome, Arthur Michell (1884-1967), journalist and writer, was born at 6 Ash Grove, Headingley, Leeds, on 18 January 1884, the eldest in the family of two sons and two daughters of Cyril Ransome, professor of history at the Yorkshire College (later Leeds University), who died in 1897, when Arthur was thirteen, and his wife, Edith (died 1945), daughter of Edward Baker Boulton, who had been a sheep farmer in Australia. He was educated at the Old College, Windermere, and then at Rugby School (1897-1901), but he was a reluctant pupil. Doggedly determined from early adolescence that he was going to be a writer, he spent two unprofitable terms at the Yorkshire College reading science before he threw in his hand and left for London, where he found a job for 8's'. a week at Grant Richards, the publishers. He was then seventeen. 
Ransome's bohemian life in London, with a brief period in Paris, lasted for some twelve years. He scratched a living by writing stories and articles, some of which appeared in book form; he reviewed and ghosted. His literary friends included Edward Thomas (who once described him as 'exuberant, rash, and Protean'), Lascelles Abercrombie, Gordon Bottomley, Robert Lynd and his wife, Sylvia, and Cecil Chesterton, brother of G. K. Chesterton. There were also actors and artists with whom he would celebrate the sale of an article or a picture by a flagon of Australian burgundy and a meal of macaroni cheese. Many of these met at the studio 'evenings' of Pamela Colman Smith (Pixie); he later said that it was from her telling of Jamaican folk-stories that he learned so much of the art of narration. He was very poor but nevertheless avidly bought books, and he later attributed his chronic digestive troubles to the meagre and erratic meals of that period. 
If there was time for a brief holiday and he could scrape together the fare, Ransome found himself hurrying 'through the big grey archway at Euston that was the gate to the enchanted North' on his way to the Lake District, where, before his father had died, his family had spent blissful summer holidays. There he passed much of his time with the family of W. G. Collingwood, adopted as an honorary nephew by the parents, camping and boating with the children, one of whom was Robin Collingwood. In 1928 he taught the next generation, Taqui, Susie, Mavis 
(1920-1998, known as Titty)
, and Roger Altounyan, children of the eldest daughter, Dora, to sail their dinghy 'Swallow'. From the idyllic summer that he spent with them on Coniston Water the story of 'Swallows and Amazons' evolved, although he later chose to disclaim this. Childlike himself, he did not much care for children unless they could share the activities he enjoyed, but those that did often found themselves featuring in one of his stories of holiday adventure. He hoped to marry Barbara, the second Collingwood daughter, but this never came about, and it was to escape the unhappy marriage that he did make, to Ivy Constance (1882-1939), daughter of George Graves Walker, on 13 March 1909, that he went to Russia in 1913. 
The winter of 1912-13 had been one of continual nightmare. A book commissioned by Martin Secker on Oscar Wilde had landed Ransome in a suit for libel issued by Lord Alfred Douglas; although judgment was given against Douglas in April 1913, it was a scarring experience. Meanwhile, seeing Russian folk-stories as the material for a new book, he decided to visit Russia itself. Arriving there in June 1913, he taught himself Russian, collected folklore, and busied himself with writing a guide to St Petersburg commissioned by an English firm. He completed 'Old Peter's Russian Tales' in 1915, during a bad bout of illness. These skilful retellings of traditional stories were published the following year, by which time he had taken on the post of Petrograd correspondent of the 'Daily News'. Paying regular brief visits to England, he was to stay in Russia until 1919, becoming friendly with Lenin (whom he habitually sentimentalized in his writing) and other Bolshevik leaders, especially Karl Radek, and making himself unpopular with the British Foreign Office by his pro-Bolshevik stance and opposition to foreign intervention in Russian affairs. Robert Bruce Lockhart, who headed a British mission in Moscow in 1918, described him as 'a sentimentalist, who could always be relied upon to champion the under-dog, and a visionary, whose imagination had been fired by the revolution'. In 'Six Weeks in Russia in 1919' (1919) he gave a picture of Moscow in those days of starvation and high hopes, and in 'The Crisis in Russia' (1921) he defended the Russian Revolution and pleaded for a more balanced view of its aims. Yet documents discovered in 2002 showed that Ransome was in fact a British secret agent working for MI6 and that he filed regular reports back to his superiors at the secret intelligence service (SIS), who were working to crush the revolution in Russia. It is likely that Ransome was recruited by Clifford Sharp, editor of the 'New Statesman', who ran the British propaganda bureau in Stockholm during the war, with the aim of infiltrating Russian revolutionary organizations. 
By that time Ransome was living in Estonia with Yevgeniya Petrovna Shelepina (1894-1975), daughter of Pyotr Shelepin. When he had first met her in 1917 she had been Trotsky's secretary. He was to marry her on 8 May 1924, after the dissolution of his first marriage. His connection with the 'Daily News' ended in 1919 after a change in editorship brought a change in its political viewpoint. But C. P. Scott recruited him for the 'Manchester Guardian', for which he was to continue to write until 1930. From Estonia he reported on the scene in Russia, and such time as he could spare from newspaper articles he spent in the fishing and sailing that all his life were an absorbing passion. In the 'Racundra', a 30 ton ketch, built to his specifications at Riga, he cruised round the Baltic in 1922, accompanied by his superior from SIS, Ernest Boyce. The log of this holiday was published in ''Racundra's' First Cruise' (1923), the first book that is characteristic of the sort of writing for which he is now remembered. 
At the end of 1924 Scott sent Ransome as correspondent to Egypt and then in 1925-6 to China, but Ransome was growing increasingly weary of political journalism and longing to settle to his own writing, in particular 'a brat book' as he himself termed it. (By this time he had bought a cottage, Low Ludderburn, on the fells above Windermere.) In March 1929 he began to write 'Swallows and Amazons'. Published in 1930, it was slow to sell. Jonathan Cape, the publisher, had received it politely but was more interested in his fishing essays, 'Rod and Line' (1929), originally published in the 'Manchester Guardian'. Nevertheless he persisted, following it up with a further account of the Walker children and their allies the Blacketts sailing Lake Windermere and exploring the fells -- 'Swallowdale' (1931). But only with his third story, 'Peter Duck' (1932), did he soar into the popularity that made his nine other books for children best-sellers. (It was in 'Peter Duck' that he first attempted his own illustrations, a practice he was to continue.) 'Winter Holiday' (1933) recalled a winter he had spent in the Lakes when he was at preparatory school. There were books such as 'Coot Club' (1934) about bird-watching and sailing on the Norfolk broads, near which he lived for a time from 1935 on the River Orwell, in Suffolk. For 'Pigeon Post' (1936) he received the Library Association's first Carnegie medal for the best children's book of the year. He became an honorary DLitt of Leeds University in 1952 and was appointed CBE in 1953. He published his last book, 'Mainly about Fishing', in 1959. 
Bald, vastly moustached as he became in later life, habitually dressed in a fisherman's sagging tweeds and a thimble of a tweed hat, Ransome still contrived to retain much of the appearance of the round, rosy, bright-eyed schoolboy that can be seen in early photographs. With it went a boyish charm of manner with its mingling of enthusiasm and fierce indignation; a deftness of fingers -- especially where tying flies was concerned -- and a stimulating ability to say something new and unexpected about almost any subject. 
Ransome died on 3 June 1967 at the Royal Hospital, Cheadle, Manchester, and was buried in Rusland church, Lancashire. His first wife had died in 1939, and his second wife died in 1975. He had one daughter from his first marriage, Tabitha ('b'. 1910). 


@@@@@


doc= 35674


Raper, Robert William (1842-1915), college teacher and founder of university careers service, was born at Llanwenarth, Monmouthshire, on 9 March 1842, the second son of Lieutenant-Colonel Timothy Raper (1790?-1862), of the 19th foot regiment, and his wife, Christian Mary (died 1858), daughter of Robert Steavenson MD of Newcastle upon Tyne. After being highly successful in the Ceylon expedition of 1815 his father settled at Hoe Court, Colwall, Herefordshire, on the west side of the Malvern hills. Raper's youngest brother, Allan Graeme Raper (1843-1906), followed his father's career to become major-general of the 98th foot and North Staffordshire regiments and assistant quartermaster-general at the War Office from 1895 to 1900. Raper had four sisters, all of whom remained unmarried. 
After spending two years at Cheltenham College from 1857 to 1859, Raper proceeded to Balliol College, Oxford, in 1861, but in his first term was elected to a scholarship at Trinity College. There in 1862 he obtained the university prizes for Greek and Latin verse and a first class in moderations, and in 1865 a first class in 'literae humaniores' and a fellowship at Queen's College. Having been a lecturer in classics at Trinity from 1866, he was in 1871 elected under a special statute to a life fellowship there, and thenceforth took a leading part in the administration of the college, as bursar from 1887 and vice-president from 1894, remaining continuously in residence until his death. He would probably have been elected president in 1878 if laymen had then been eligible (he was a professed agnostic); in 1887, 1897, and 1907 he declined to accept the post. 
In the university Raper soon acquired extensive though informal influence; he only once acted as an examiner, but he was a curator of the parks from 1885, of the botanic garden from 1887, and a visitor of the Ashmolean Museum from 1895 to 1908. He lectured mainly on favourite authors -- Homer, Virgil, Aristophanes, and Tacitus -- but he published nothing except articles in the 'Journal of Philology' (1885) and the 'Classical Review' (1913), a remarkable imitation of Walt Whitman in 'Echoes from the Oxford Magazine' (1890), and a few brilliant versions in Latin verse in the 'Nova anthologia Oxoniensis' of 1899. From 1907 it was Raper who supplied the Latin formulas required by the university's chancellor, Lord Curzon, of whom Raper had been a friend since Curzon's undergraduate days, and he managed to outdo Benjamin Jowett, another early friend, in a celebrated exchange ('Encyclopaedia of Oxford', s.v. Gordouli). 
From an early date Raper's wide acquaintance with influential Oxford men enabled him to recommend Trinity men of promise and others for tutorial, scholastic, and secretarial posts -- it was usual for tutors in other colleges to advise their pupils to 'call on Mr Raper of Trinity and tell him I advised you to do so'. Eventually, finding himself with more patronage than he had candidates to recommend, and stimulated by the earlier success of Professor W. J. Lewis in establishing the Cambridge Scholastic Agency to place graduates in teaching posts, in 1892 he founded the Oxford University Appointments Committee (OUAC). This was the earliest agency for the placement of graduates set up in any British university by a representative body of dons; Cambridge followed suit in 1899. Raper was chairman of OUAC (renamed the Oxford University Careers Service in 1991) from 1892 to 1899, and a permanent member from 1908 until his death. 
As an accomplished cricketer, rider, and skater, Raper was familiar with athletes as well as with reading men, and favoured making the services of OUAC available to women (1899); but he was best known, especially in his own college, as a genial and judicious host, a sagacious and witty counsellor -- 'silent and infinitely wise' according to John Buchan ('Memory Hold the Door', 1940, 49) -- and a sympathetic and, on the whole, sound disciplinarian; his bursarial notices to undergraduates of Trinity were lucid and entertaining. 
Raper was not drawn into public life except in connection with the preservation of open spaces. Aided by his Colwall neighbour Stephen Ballard (1804-1890), he defended the rights both of the commoners and of the general public to the enjoyment of the Malvern hills. With the help of John Gent (1844-1927), his colleague in jurisprudence at Trinity, he obtained the 'Malvern Hills Conservation Act' in 1884, by which he was named as a conservator; he was chairman of the conservators from 1884 to 1890. Raper himself gave 16 acres of land. In later life he lost local influence and became entangled in controversy and even litigation; but he was not unsupported, and in 1905 and later he conveyed some more land and manorial rights, which he had purchased to prevent encroachments and to control quarrying. He was named by Oxford University as its representative on the council of the National Trust from 1895, serving on an important subcommittee which considered the question of the protection of places or sites. 
Raper was a small man, with straggling hair and a pointed beard. He was unmarried. As a young man he was somewhat of an invalid, but later enjoyed life fully, until he failed rather rapidly, and died suddenly in his college rooms on 15 July 1915. He was buried at Colwall. 


@@@@@


doc= 35675


Rapson, Edward James (1861-1937), Sanskritist, was born at Leicester on 12 May 1861, the son of Edward Rapson, who later opened a school at Ledbury and afterwards became vicar of West Bradley, Somerset. His mother was Eleanor McArdle from co. Dublin. He was educated at Hereford Cathedral school, where he formed a lifelong interest in music, and from there went up to St John's College, Cambridge, in 1879, being elected to a foundation scholarship in 1883. He was awarded a first class in the classical tripos of 1883 and in the Indian languages tripos (Sanskrit and comparative philology) of 1885, as well as winning the Brotherton prize for Sanskrit (1884) and the Hutchinson studentship (1885). He studied Sanskrit under E. B. Cowell. His first published work, 'The Struggle between England and France for Supremacy in India' (1887), had gained for him the Le Bas prize in 1886, and in 1887 he was elected into a fellowship at his college, which he held until 1893. 
In 1887 after a short period as assistant librarian under Sir Monier Monier-Williams at the newly founded Indian Institute at Oxford, Rapson was appointed assistant keeper in the department of coins and medals at the British Museum. The rich collections of the museum provided ample scope for Rapson's talents and industry, and he soon established himself as a leading authority on Indian numismatics. His two major publications in this field are 'Indian Coins' (1898), which appeared as one of the volumes of J. G. Buhler's 'Grundriss der Indo-arischen Philologie und Altertumskunde', and the 'Catalogue of the coins of the Andhra dynasty, the western Ksatrapas, the Traikutaka dynasty, and the 'Bodhi' dynasty' (1908). The latter work is a masterpiece of reconstruction, and established for the first time some degree of clarity in a very obscure period of Indian history. 
Rapson married on 8 April 1902 Ellen Daisy (died 1921), daughter of William B. Allen, of West Bradley; they had no children. From 1903 to 1906 he occupied, concurrently with his post in the British Museum, the chair of Sanskrit in University College, London. He left the museum in 1906 on his election to the professorship of Sanskrit at Cambridge in succession to Cecil Bendall. A born teacher and never sparing of his own time and efforts, Rapson applied himself to his new duties with conspicuous energy and success. His duties as a teacher were by no means light, but they did not prevent him from continuing his literary and scholarly work. In 1914 appeared his 'Ancient India from the Earliest Times to the First Century AD' which provided for the general reader an excellent summary of all that was then known about the early history and culture of India. Two major works occupied his attention during his tenure of the professorship at Cambridge. In 1901 Aurel Stein had discovered in Chinese Turkestan a collection of ancient documents written in a variety of the Indian Kharosthi script. Rapson's preliminary decipherment appeared in 1905, and for many years, in conjunction with two French scholars, Auguste M. Boyer and Emile Senart, he worked on the task of editing the texts. The publication appeared in three parts between 1920 and 1929. His second important undertaking was editing the first two volumes of the 'Cambridge History of India'. The first volume was published in 1922. Preparation of the second volume occupied him for the rest of his life, but the difficulties inherent in a subject where so few collaborators could be found prevented him from realizing the project. 
As a scholar Rapson was distinguished by great thoroughness and strict adherence to scientific method. The same virtues characterized his teaching. He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1931. After holding his chair for thirty years he resigned it in 1936. A little over a year later, on 3 October 1937, he died suddenly, at St John's College, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 35676


Rashdall, Hastings (1858-1924), moral philosopher, theologian, and historian, was born at 34 St George's Road, Kensington, London, on 24 June 1858, the eldest child of the Revd John Rashdall (died 1869?), incumbent of Eaton Chapel, Eaton Square, London, and afterwards (1864-9) of Dawlish, and of Emily, 'nee' Hankey (1831-1923), who came from a prominent Clapham evangelical family. Although he was to reject evangelicalism, Rashdall retained the moral seriousness of his upbringing and the combination of broad sympathy and firm churchmanship presented by his parents. John Rashdall was widely read and travelled, with many literary contacts; as a clergyman he worked closely with dissenters, an example which his son followed. At the same time he had an intense love of church order and worship, from which Hastings derived an appreciation of beautiful ceremonial, and of the liturgical proprieties. As a small child he preached sermons to his brother and sister in a night-gown with a red stocking for a hood. On his father's death the family moved to Cheltenham. Rashdall remained particularly close to his mother, an intellectually serious woman, with whom he talked and corresponded about theology and religious history, among many other things. 
In 1871 Rashdall went to Harrow School, to the house of the headmaster, Montagu Butler, whom he greatly admired and from whom he drew the initial inspiration for his liberal churchmanship. When later asked whom he considered his most distinguished pupil, Butler replied: 'It is not easy to say, but, if you press me, I think -- Rashdall' (Matheson, 26). During his school holidays he visited art galleries and law courts, and developed a fascination for legal questions (indeed he later said that he would have liked to be a judge). In 1876 he became head of house and in 1877 head of school. In 1877 Rashdall won a scholarship to New College, Oxford, where he got a second both in classical moderations (1878) and in Greats (1881). He was never a very accurate classicist, and was probably not helped in examinations by his appalling handwriting. He had spent much of his time as an undergraduate working on history, and in 1879 won the Stanhope essay prize with an essay on John Hus. He twice failed to win a fellowship by examination, but won the chancellor's essay prize in 1883 for an essay on the universities of the middle ages. After teaching briefly at the recently founded Oxford high school he went in 1883 as a lecturer to St David's College, Lampeter (where he became a friend of T. F. Tout, then professor of history), and then to University College, Durham, between 1884 and 1888. In 1884 and 1886 he was ordained deacon and priest respectively. In 1888 he returned to Oxford as a fellow of Hertford College, to teach philosophy for 'literae humaniores'. He remained there until 1895, although in 1894-5 he held the fellowship in combination with the chaplaincy (and tutorship in divinity) at Balliol, where he lived. In 1895 he was elected to a fellowship and tutorship in philosophy at New College, a post which he held for the next twenty-two years. 
A legend for his absent-mindedness, untidy appearance, and lack of physical co-ordination, Rashdall was a much loved tutor, remembered for being fresh and interested during tutorials, and for taking his pupils for long argumentative walks or on reading parties, and for drawing out the socially awkward. A colleague recalled returning to his room to find all his chairs borrowed for one of Rashdall's fortnightly symposia on the philosophy of religion, which were occasions of great high spirits. His lectures attracted large audiences and provoked lively discussion. Even as an undergraduate he had been known as 'the Socrates of the Cornmarket': he believed in the challenge of critical exchange, whether in the lecture hall, in his study, in the park, or on street corners, and his fundamental seriousness of purpose was reinforced by an infectious sense of humour. A fairly short man, with a large round head and high brow, his thoughtful eyes under shaggy eyebrows were frequently filled with laughter. 
Rashdall corresponded extensively with former pupils, and with many who read and used his writings as aids to teaching or stimuli to creative thought. A man of vehement opinions -- 'It is astonishing how I hate a Tory peer' (Joseph, 276) -- and of great kindness -- a tory peer was in the flesh quite safe with him -- he was an influential teacher and critic, and in all that he did emphasized the importance of study as the prerequisite to action. 
During this period Rashdall wrote, preached, lectured, and published over an extraordinary intellectual range. He never thought in compartments. He had the spirit and courage to take on research projects which would have daunted others (he habitually worked late into the night) and to champion unpopular causes and lines of argument, to the ultimate detriment of his career in the church. The central contours of his thought remained consistent throughout his life. His first major publication, the three-volume historical work 'The Universities of Europe in the Middle Ages' (1895) -- an expansion of his chancellor's prize essay -- remains to this day a standard work. A volume of university sermons was published in 1898 as 'Doctrine and Development'. 'The Theory of Good and Evil' (1907) brought together and elaborated his lectures on moral philosophy. Both works incorporated distinctive and controversial arguments about the limitations of divine power. Both were widely read, and appreciated: Rashdall received many letters from lay people and clergy thanking him for making it philosophically respectable to be a theist. He also published extensively in periodicals such as 'Mind' and the 'International Journal of Ethics', as well as in the 'English Historical Review' from its first number. 
The historical perspective remained fundamental to Rashdall. His work on medieval universities focused on the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, significantly a period of revived incarnationalism and natural philosophy. The twelfth-century theologian Peter Abelard was a major inspiration, both in his stress on the exemplary aspects of the incarnation and the crucifixion, and in the attention which he paid to the context in which intellectual and theological positions were developed. Rashdall always stressed the importance of recognizing the existence of traditions, to which one should apply critical reason. He sharply attacked any philosophical approach which tried to present Christianity without reference to the historical person of Christ, and worked to demonstrate how the Christian tradition could be discussed in a modern intellectual context, and the implications of this for a successful moral philosophy. As a historian he pointed out the futility of looking for biblical proof texts to support particular social or moral positions, instead of realizing that the real meaning of an ethical formula can only be discovered from its context, which is a developing one. He was preoccupied with the fundamental nature of the relationship between philosophy and theology, and its bearing on moral understanding, and was concerned about how the philosophical trends of his day threatened to undermine the force of this relationship. His own philosophical position, which he called 'ideal utilitarianism' or 'empirical idealism', modified the extremes of both utilitarianism and idealism in an attempt to draw on the strengths of both Henry Sidgwick and T. H. Green. He tried to trace a path between the relativism which could come from fashionable reference to the psychology of religious experience, and the forms of philosophical absolutism which seemed to lower the philosophical status of personality and to deny significance to history. 
Rashdall's philosophical and theological concerns were always practical, and were always directed educationally. The full force of his invective was directed against facile polarization between the spiritual and the worldly, which could provide an excuse for failure to apply faith practically. He passionately believed that theology had to be reconstructed to be both metaphysically plausible and practically engaging. This project he pursued as a member of the Synthetic Society for philosophical and theological discussion, set up in 1896 (out of the Metaphysical Society) by Arthur Balfour, Wilfrid Ward, and Bishop E. S. Talbot to confront the challenge of agnosticism and to reinforce a working philosophy of religious belief. He pursued it more broadly in his work for the Workers' Educational Association, and in his lectures to university extension students and to Toynbee Hall in London. He was a founding member of the Christian Social Union from 1890, and from 1892 to 1910 was an editor of its organ, the 'Economic Review'. He was among the most effective defenders of the rationale for such a body, set up to stimulate Christian reflection on ethics and economics, and to revive a commitment to Christian social ethics. He published influential articles, especially on the relationship between the individual, the church, and the state. In 1897 he was appointed preacher (for five years) at Lincoln's Inn. From its establishment in 1898 he was vice-president of the Churchmen's Union 'for the advancement of liberal religious thought', and took an active role in its work (which was recognized by his election as its president in 1923). He published frequently in the 'Liberal Churchman' (later the 'Modern Churchman'). A supporter of progressive movements in general (such as women's suffrage), he was a liberal in politics (although unionist by inclination: until 1906 he opposed home rule for Ireland, and he argued strongly against disestablishment of the Welsh church). 
In July 1905 Hastings Rashdall married Constance Makins, and they settled in 18 Longwall, Oxford, where they entertained generously. Theirs was a very close and happy marriage. In Oxford, Rashdall continued to be active on many fronts, and was called on to contribute to the debate on university reform. His proposals on how to enhance the career of the college tutor had an influence on the revised statutes of 1926. He also strongly supported granting degrees to women in Oxford. In 1909 Rashdall was appointed by the liberal bishop John Percival to a canonry at Hereford, and to share in running a (short-lived) experiment in reformed clerical education. He was installed in 1910, and for the next seven years was resident for five months of the year, retaining his fellowship (without the tutorship) at New College, where he spent the rest of each year. Rashdall was consistently committed to improving clerical training, and believed that the church would lose its influence in national life if it failed to prepare the clergy better for responding to the intellectual demands of the laity. He emphasized that such intellectual demands came just as much from working people as from the middle classes, and regarded the wide range of contexts in which he pursued his own preaching and teaching ministry in this light. 
In 1913 Rashdall went with his wife to the United States to lecture in California and Ohio and to visit New York and Harvard. In 1915 he delivered the Bampton lectures in Oxford, published in 1919 as 'The Idea of the Atonement in Christian Theology', which drew on his lifelong engagement with Abelard's resolution of the relationship between the life and death of Christ in the work of redemption. The lectures were well received and reinforced the seriousness of his reputation as a theologian. Meanwhile, Rashdall hoped that the outbreak of war would focus the church more effectively on reforming itself and defining its role in national renewal. He continued to publish energetically, on the problem of evil, on the moral dilemmas associated with conscientious objection, on social and educational reform. He also yearned to find a way of getting personally involved in the war effort. He joined the volunteer corps in Oxford in 1915, and in 1917 finally obtained employment in the Admiralty intelligence department. In May 1917, under the aegis of the coalition government, he was appointed dean of Carlisle, and resigned the canonry and his fellowship at New College (he was elected to an honorary fellowship in 1920). He and Constance put enormous energy into their role in Carlisle. A notable feature of this was the bringing together of other city clergy and of nonconformist ministers in cathedral life and worship, which began during the last year of the war. Rashdall's consistent respect for nonconformity was rewarded when all the nonconformist ministers of Carlisle signed a letter of protest against allegations in 1921 that he had denied the divinity of Christ. These allegations caused Rashdall much distress, compounded by increasing problems of ill health. Long a sufferer from rheumatic pain, he was now diagnosed with cancer, and on 9 February 1924 he died at Worthing. He was buried on 13 February at Holywell cemetery in Oxford; his wife survived him. A memorial tablet was placed in New College cloister by the warden and fellows, and another was placed in the south aisle of Carlisle Cathedral by his wife, who also gave two bells to complete a peal to be rung annually on his birthday. An exhibition was founded by his friends for boys and girls from the diocese of Carlisle awarded scholarships or exhibitions at Oxford. 
Rashdall's personal influence was deep and extensive, as was revealed by the appreciations of his life by major figures in liberal churchmanship, as well as by the tributes paid by much wider circles of people. The fertility of his published work was striking. Yet his reputation suffered something of the fate which he perceived to have befallen several of the medieval philosophical and theological thinkers whom he himself had studied and in whose ideas he had helped to revive interest. His intellectual position was an independent one, for he stood outside established camps and was not by temperament a systematizer. He said of himself: 'My position is very difficult. You see I am on the left wing of the Church and the right wing of the philosophers' (Matheson, 78). Historians of religious thought have taken some account of his liberal churchmanship. But philosophers have underplayed the persistence and vitality of the idealist tradition in the early twentieth century, and have ignored as leading nowhere the distinctively modified idealism which Rashdall developed. They have tended to take an unhistorical view, and to regard as insignificant what seemed in terms of later philosophical fashion to be outmoded. Although even in his own day Rashdall was a maverick, he was highly respected as such, and the issues with which he engaged were central ones. The challenge of reinforcing an intellectually satisfactory Christian moral and social philosophy continued to be real, and was one to which Rashdall was principally devoted. Only from the late 1980s have there been renewed flickers of interest in Rashdall among liberal intellectual churchpeople facing a new set of challenges to the sorts of approach to faith and reason which he advocated. 


@@@@@


doc= 35677


Rassam, Hormuzd (1826-1910), archaeologist and civil servant, was born in Mosul, Mesopotamia, then within the Ottoman empire, afterwards in northern Iraq. He was the youngest son and eighth child of Antun and Theresa Rassam, who were members of Mosul's Christian Chaldean community, his father being archdeacon of the uniate Chaldean church there. Originally the family were designers of muslins, once Mosul's staple product. 
The family had British connections through the eldest son, 
As a child Hormuzd Rassam spoke Arabic and two dialects of Syriac. An Anglophile since boyhood, he learned English with the help of Maria Badger, his brother's mother-in-law, who also converted him to protestantism. In 1842 he first met, in his brother Christian's house, Henry Layard, who was then 'en route' for Constantinople from Persia, and would become Rassam's mentor and lifelong friend. Three years later, when Layard returned to Mosul to begin his excavations of the mounds of Nimrud and Kuyunjik, he engaged Rassam, who was then working as a clerk for his brother, as secretary, paymaster, and general factotum. Rassam remained with Layard throughout this expedition, which lasted from October 1845 to June 1847. 
Rassam travelled with Layard to England in December 1847 and spent some months in Oxford preparing to enter Magdalen College, but abandoned this idea when his brother Christian, who was funding his stay in England, persuaded him to return to Mosul with Layard. They reached Mosul at the end of September 1849 and Rassam worked with Layard in Assyria and Babylonia, as well as paying short visits to Van and Syrian Khabur before both men returned to London in spring 1851. Christian Rassam was left in charge of further work at Kuyunjik in their absence. 
In 1852, Layard having decided to enter politics, the British Museum appointed Hormuzd Rassam on a two-year contract to continue Layard's work under the nominal supervision of Henry Rawlinson, the British consul-general and resident in Baghdad. Rassam left London for Mosul in August 1852 to begin his career as an archaeologist in his own right; he remained in Mesopotamia until August 1854 when he returned to England. During this time he made some remarkable discoveries at both Nimrud and Kuyunjik, among them Ashurbanipal's north palace, and its lion-hunt sculptures and cuneiform texts. 
On his visits to England, Rassam was well received as the friend and close associate of the now celebrated Layard. He got to know Pusey and other leaders of the Oxford Movement but fell out with them over his evangelism. In 1854 he was invited by James Outram (whom he had first met in 1852) to become Arabic interpreter in Aden, where Outram was political agent. The British Museum hoped that Rassam would return to Mesopotamia but he opted for Aden, where he received steady promotion, becoming second then first assistant political agent. His main work was with the Arab tribes and he was commended and rewarded by the government of India for his handling of them during the Indian mutiny. He also became a magistrate, and was responsible for the post office, the municipality, and the waterworks. During 1860 and 1861 Rassam spent over a year in Muscat during negotiations for a settlement over Zanzibar, whose sovereignty was disputed between the sultan of Muscat and his brother. 
Rassam's responsibilities in both southern Arabia and the African coast opposite led to his selection in 1864 for the delicate and dangerous mission, carried out under the aegis of the Foreign Office, of delivering a letter from Queen Victoria to Emperor Theodore of Ethiopia. This was an attempt to secure the release of the British consul, Charles Duncan Cameron, and a number of Europeans, among them Henry Aaron Stern and other missionaries, some with families, who had been working for the London Mission to the Jews. All were held prisoner in the Ethiopian highlands. 
Rassam landed at Massawa in the Sudan, which was then under Egyptian rule, on 23 July 1864 and, apart from a short visit to Cairo, remained there for over a year before receiving Theodore's permission to enter Ethiopia. Accompanied by Lieutenant W. F. Prideaux of the Bombay staff corps and Dr Henry Blanc of the Indian Medical Service, Rassam eventually left Massawa in October 1865 on the long and difficult trek to Theodore's camp at Damot, where on 28 January 1866 he delivered the queen's letter to the emperor. At first all seemed to go well; the prisoners were released and allowed to join Rassam, and were ready to leave for the coast with him in April when the unpredictable Theodore had the whole party, including Rassam, arrested. They were taken to the mountain fortress of Magdala where they were put in chains, and where they remained until April 1868 when they were saved by the arrival of Sir Robert Napier and his troops from India. Remarkably, despite incarceration, Rassam remained on relatively good terms with the emperor and was able to communicate via Massawa with Aden. 
Rassam reached London on 22 June 1868. His detailed report on his mission to Ethiopia was published in December as a parliamentary paper, together with a letter to him from the foreign secretary, Lord Stanley, expressing the British government's: 'high sense of your conduct... you appear throughout to have acted for the best, and your prudence, discretion, and good management seem to have tended greatly to preserve the lives and thus to secure the ultimate release of the captives. ('Report')' He was also awarded $5000 as compensation for his four-year ordeal. 
Before retiring on an India Office pension at the end of 1869 Rassam took leave, and on 8 June 1869 married Anne Eliza, daughter of Captain S. C. Price, formerly of the 72nd highlanders. He also had his two-volume 'Narrative of the British Mission to Theodore, King of Abyssinia' published. There followed travels in the United Kingdom and the Near East before he settled in Middlesex, first at Twickenham and then at Isleworth. 
On the death of George Smith of the British Museum in 1876, Rassam accepted the trustees' invitation to return to Mesopotamia, primarily to continue Smith's search for inscribed tablets, interest in Mesopotamian archaeology having been revived by Smith's decipherment of a fragment describing the biblical flood. Rassam reached Constantinople early in 1877, a few months ahead of his old friend Layard, Britain's new ambassador to the Porte. Layard was able to obtain for him two firmans permitting both the renewal of his earlier work and simultaneous excavations virtually anywhere in the provinces of Aleppo, Van, and Baghdad (modern Syria, eastern Turkey, and Iraq). However, before this he spent from July to December in Asiatic Turkey investigating for the Foreign Office the condition of the Christian minorities there. In January 1878 he reached Mosul at the start of four seasons' work for the British Museum, ending in July 1882. He was on his own without an assistant, artist, or camera. On returning to London at the end of both his first two seasons he resigned as he wished to remain at home but, as the museum was unable to find a replacement, dutifully agreed to carry on. Throughout this period Rassam concentrated on Babylonia but also initiated excavations in Assyria, Van, and Khabur, moving rapidly from one site to another after leaving a trusted overseer in charge. He made some exciting discoveries, among them the bronze gates of Shalmaneser II's Balawat palace and a cylinder fragment recording Cyrus's capture of Babylon. He also discovered Sippar (Abu Habbah), the biblical Sepharvaim, where he unearthed 60,000-70,000 inscribed tablets and fragments. In all it is estimated that Rassam added some 134,000 such tablets, including some bought from dealers in Baghdad, to the British Museum's collection. Sadly, Rassam was unable to find a publisher in England and his account of the four expeditions, 'Asshur and the Land of Nimrud', was not published until 1897, and then in New York. 
Rassam was elected a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society in 1868 and became a British subject by naturalization on 14 October 1870. He had five daughters and one son. After 1882 he lived mostly in Brighton and Hove. There he wrote articles on Assyro-Babylonian exploration, the Christian sects of the Middle East, and current religious controversy in England. He ended his life in disappointment and relative obscurity. His reputation suffered both in his lifetime and afterwards from criticism of his archaeological methods. Undoubtedly, prejudices against his oriental origin told against him; he was hurt by press criticism of his performance in Ethiopia and by poor public recognition of his discoveries, some of the more important being attributed to others, and above all by stories emanating from Wallis Budge of the British Museum that he and his Chaldean relatives had been involved in the theft of antiquities. It was small comfort to win $50 damages against Budge in a libel action, which lasted five days in 1893. In this action he was strongly supported by Theophilus Pinches, then Britain's leading Assyriologist, and by Henry Layard, who had once described him as 'one of the honestest and most straight forward fellows I ever knew, and whose great services have never been acknowledged' (Waterfield, 478). In 1987, in tardy recognition of those services, the British Museum dedicated volume 7 of its catalogue of Babylonian tablets to his memory. 
Rassam died at his home, 30 Westbourne Villas, Hove, on 15 September 1910 and was buried in a cemetery in Brighton. He was survived by his wife. The manuscript autobiography he left has since been lost. 


@@@@@


doc= 35678


Rathbone, Eleanor Florence (1872-1946), social reformer, was born on 12 May 1872 at 14 Princes Gardens, London, the tenth of eleven children of William Rathbone (1819-1902), the last six of whom were born to his second wife, Emily Acheson Lyle (1832-1918). 
William Rathbone, merchant and philanthropist, was a Liberal member of parliament from 1868 until 1895, and Eleanor's childhood years were divided between London and Greenbank, the family home in Liverpool, where successive generations of Rathbones had played a prominent role in civic life. Important Liberal politicians, reformers, and intellectuals were regular visitors in the Rathbone home, and Eleanor grew up with the understanding that public service was, in a sense, a dynastic obligation. Yet her childhood was also rather lonely. The eight Rathbone sons were sent away to boarding-schools, and since her half-sister and sister were considerably her elders, Eleanor found herself often alone. She grew into an introspective and serious girl, much attached to her loving but moralistic father and anxious for parental approbation. 
Except for a year at Kensington Girls' School (1889-90), Eleanor's education was conducted at home. Years later she remarked that there were worse ways of educating girls than to let them roam freely through their fathers' libraries; certainly she preferred such solitary exploration to the social obligations of her first London season. In 1892 she began studying Greek with Janet Case, a recent student at Girton College, Cambridge, and -- encouraged by Case and by Oliver Lodge, professor of physics at Liverpool University and a close family friend -- broached to her parents the subject of attending Cambridge. Something of a family crisis ensued, for Emily Rathbone had other ambitions for her intelligent and attractive daughter, but with her father's support Eleanor was allowed to go to Somerville Hall, Oxford, in 1893, which was then only a hall of residence and had a less rigorously academic reputation than Girton. Yet Somerville declared itself a college one year later and provided her with an excellent education. The only Somerville student in her year to attempt Greats, she studied philosophy with David Ritchie, Charles Cannan, and Edward Caird, and Roman history with Henry Pelham. A mediocre classicist and technically poorly trained, she nevertheless impressed her tutors with her powerful mind. They, in their turn, gave her the same grounding in idealist thought that influenced Toynbee, Beveridge, and other prominent social reformers. 
Somerville also provided Eleanor with a community of like-minded friends and the intellectual freedom to work out her own views. Years later her fellow students recalled her intellectual seriousness, her addiction to smoking, her utter hopelessness at games -- and also her feminism. Surrounded from childhood by strong-minded women and influenced by Quaker and Unitarian principles, Eleanor arrived at Somerville a self-identified feminist. With Margery Fry, Hilda Oakeley, and a few other young women, she participated in a discussion group, the Associated Prigs, which canvassed intellectual and social questions. Her studies, her interests, and her college friendships all confirmed her sense of election and obligation; when, after her final examinations, she was awarded second class honours, she felt she had let her college and her sex down. She left Somerville in 1896, uncertain how to use her philosophical training or express her commitment to feminism. 
Eleanor returned to Liverpool rather than London, for her father had retired from parliament in 1895. She took over the secretaryship of the Liverpool Women's Suffrage Society and of the local branch of the Women's Industrial Council, but her return to the family home was not entirely easy. Her attempts to study were constantly interrupted by domestic plans; efforts to pick up journalistic work came to naught. Along with other socially concerned young women, she volunteered as a home visitor for the Liverpool Central Relief Society, taking a district and devising strategies to lift destitute families out of poverty. Although this work was painstaking and often frustrating, it gave her a sense of purpose and concentrated her mind; in reports summarizing efforts in her district she sought to understand not simply the personal failings that led to distress, but equally the wider causes of poverty. Her father, disappointed in his sons, encouraged these activities; as his health began to fail he came to rely on Eleanor to sustain his own philanthropic efforts. Encouraged by Charles Booth, father and daughter began a new investigation into Liverpool's system of dock labour. But early in 1902, with that work in embryo, William Rathbone died. 
Eleanor, now thirty, found his death devastating. From girlhood her father had been her confidant and guide. Like so many eminent Victorians, she worked through her grief with her pen, writing an admiring but restrained account of her father's life ('William Rathbone: a Memoir', 1905). Yet if her father's death was a great sorrow, it was also a liberation. Believing as he did in women's independence, William Rathbone had settled money on Eleanor before his death; in his will she received another substantial portion. Now a woman of some means, she had few domestic obligations. Her unmarried half-sister, Elsie, had always managed the Greenbank home; her mother, long since reconciled to Eleanor's unmarried state, was proud of her daughter's achievements. Moreover, as her father's last collaborator and his biographer, Eleanor established herself as his heir. She, rather than any of his many sons, continued the Rathbone philanthropic tradition. 
Over the next two decades, a period marked by the South African War and the death of her father on the one hand and the First World War and the death of her mother on the other, Eleanor Rathbone became the most prominent woman in Liverpool's public life. There was a dynastic element to her achievement, surely, for the name of Rathbone was one to be reckoned with in Liverpool politics. Yet if she drew on that tradition, she also in some ways broke with it: for example, to the distress of her male relations on the city council, she identified herself politically as an independent; both her vehement support for women's rights and her growing scepticism about the rationality of the market distanced her from her family's historic Liberalism. Her politics were thus shaped as much by her feminism as by her family inheritance; they were also increasingly linked to her own original economic thought. Rathbone's activities in these years are hard to disentangle, for her roles as a social reformer, social thinker, feminist, and practical politician fed off one another, together providing the foundation for her commanding role as the architect of a 'new feminism' after 1918. 
Initially, social work took centre stage. In 1903 Rathbone began working with the Victoria Women's Settlement, which had opened in 1898 and was now entering a moment of expansion. In 1902 the settlement had appointed a dynamic new warden, Elizabeth Macadam (1871-1948), a Scottish social worker who had trained at London's Women's University Settlement. Rathbone and Macadam probably met about the time of William's death, and the two became close friends and collaborators. Forthright where Eleanor was reserved, practical where Eleanor was abstracted, Macadam answered Rathbone's only half acknowledged need for friendship and a cause: over the next seventeen years the two used the settlement to anchor a growing local women's movement. They put the settlement on a solid financial footing, recruited some dozens of supporters and co-workers, established a training programme for social workers (a programme that was in 1910 brought under the umbrella of Liverpool University, which then appointed Macadam as a lecturer), and built up an array of social services for local women and children. Great believers in co-ordination between voluntary and public services, the two helped in 1909 to found the Liverpool Council of Voluntary Aid, an umbrella organization which gradually absorbed the work of many older philanthropic societies. 
As the settlement's honorary secretary until 1915, Eleanor Rathbone took part in all aspects of this expansion. She paid special attention, however, to social investigation, scrutinizing successive facets of Liverpool's economy and social life with a critical and feminist eye. Her most ambitious study focused entirely on men: her 'Report of an Inquiry into the Conditions of Dock Labour at the Liverpool Docks' (1904) laid bare the inefficiencies as well as the hardships of the casual labour system and catalysed later efforts at decasualization. Already in that study, however, she noted the devastating impact of erratic wages on dockers' wives; a later survey of household budgets ('How the Casual Labourer Lives', 1909) further dramatized their predicament. Her earlier studies of women's employment opportunities in Liverpool, undertaken for the Liverpool Women's Industrial Council in the 1890s, had shown that married working-class women had little chance to earn: demand for their labour was low, and most were fully occupied with their children. But must these women be condemned to poverty and dependence? With Liverpool's working mothers as her point of reference, Rathbone began to think more systematically about the problem of the lack of 'fit' between a labour market and wage system geared to compensate individual (and usually male) effort and the needs of women and children. In 1912, in essays published in the feminist press, she raised the possibility of direct state provision for the cost of raising children, and in her political interventions she became bolder as well. Having marshalled the support of the seamen's union and the great shipping lines, she helped to work out an arrangement in 1912 whereby seamen could have a portion of their wages paid directly to their wives; in 1914, after subjecting Liverpool's poor-law unions to a blistering attack ('The Condition of Widows under the Poor Law in Liverpool', 1913), she advocated state pensions for widows raising young children on their own. 
Behind Rathbone's new activism lay more than intellectual conviction: feminist political successes also fuelled her optimism. From the 1890s Liverpool women had served as poor-law guardians and (later) as school governors; in 1906 they won the right to stand for election to the city council. Almost inevitably, the first woman to exercise that right was Rathbone herself: in 1909, in a campaign run largely from the settlement, she won election as an independent representing Granby ward, a seat she held without interruption (and usually unchallenged) until 1935. On the council she became an energetic advocate for municipal housing and for the corporation's women employees, but she also expressed her suffragist views. In 1911, still the council's lone woman member, she persuaded her colleagues to pass a resolution in favour of a women's suffrage bill then before parliament. As both a practical politician and an outspoken feminist, Rathbone's position was not always easy: in 1910 she faced criticism from Archibald Salvidge and other Conservative opponents for endorsing a socialist parliamentary candidate who supported women's suffrage; on the other hand, after 1906 she found her constitutionalist views challenged by a local militant movement loyal to the Pankhursts. She remained, however, both staunchly constitutionalist and progressive: under her leadership the Liverpool Women's Suffrage Society repeatedly condemned militancy while also building up grass-roots support in the towns and rural areas of Lancashire and north Wales. By 1912, with the militant movement in decline, she had become the president of a regional federation of some twenty-seven constitutionalist suffrage societies. 
With her political acumen and independent base, Rathbone was an important asset for the national suffrage movement. She served uninterruptedly on the executive of the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies (NUWSS) from 1896, wrote regularly for the 'Common Cause', its affiliated paper, and took part in numerous deputations. She was also involved in formulating political strategy, reaching out to progressives within the Liberal Party and opposing the policy, crafted in 1912 by Catherine Marshall and supported by Millicent Fawcett, of allying with the Labour Party in order to put pressure on the Liberals. Convinced that this tactic would strengthen the Conservative Party and ultimately harm the women's cause, Rathbone organized an internal opposition to it, only to have her actions denounced as disloyal. Hurt and shocked, she resigned from the NUWSS executive early in 1914, but that break, while painful, proved temporary. Although horrified by the outbreak of war, she had no doubts of Germany's guilt or of British women's duty to support their country. When the pacifist wing of the executive resigned 'en masse' over the national union's relatively pro-war stance, Rathbone regained her position. From 1915 she was the dominant figure on the national union's executive and, effectively, Fawcett's successor-designate. She managed much of the negotiation over the suffrage issue when it re-emerged in 1916 and -- in spite of many feminists' reservations -- arranged for a successful amendment to the bill which extended the local franchise to the wives of male local government electors -- a provision that increased the women's local government electorate fourfold. 
The war also multiplied Rathbone's Liverpool involvements. At its outbreak Liverpool's mayor (and Eleanor's cousin), Herbert R. Rathbone, asked her and Macadam to organize assistance to soldiers' and sailors' wives. This proved to be a complex task, for the Liberal government had promised to pay 'separation allowances' to the families of volunteers, but had no machinery to cope with the half-million immediate claims. Philanthropic organizations were thus deputed to process applications and advance payment. In Liverpool, Rathbone pressed her settlement house allies into service, setting up several dozen local offices staffed by hundreds of voluntary workers. In time the war government transferred these functions to a new Ministry of Pensions, but Rathbone's Liverpool organization remained in operation, supplementing state payments, visiting wives and families, and becoming a model for family-based social work. At the end of the war she helped to create the Liverpool Personal Service Society to carry on such work and recruited Dorothy Keeling, a successful Bradford social worker, to run it. 
Rathbone's wartime work convinced her of the need for activist women to become involved in state administration itself; more importantly, it suggested a model for addressing the problem of women's dependence that had troubled her for so long. Separation allowances, although far from generous, were proportional to the size of the family and were paid directly into the woman's hands -- and Liverpool's poor wives and mothers, Rathbone discovered, usually had less trouble managing on such payments than on their husbands' pay. Already by 1916, then, Rathbone had begun to wonder whether separation allowances might not provide a model for a more comprehensive peacetime policy. In articles in the 'Economic Journal' and 'The Times' she laid out the intellectual case, and early in 1918, with six other collaborators (H. N. Brailsford, Kathleen Courtney, Mary Stocks, Maude Royden, Emile Burns, and Elinor Burns), published a practical proposal ('Equal Pay and the Family'). One benefit of family endowment, she argued, was that it would make equal pay between men and women possible: with direct state support of children, the case for the (already fictive and inefficient) male family wage would disappear. This group, now renamed the Family Endowment Committee, began presenting their case to public bodies, government planning committees, and the press, and in the statist and reconstruction-obsessed years at the end of the war they received a hearing. 
The war years consolidated Rathbone's Liverpool position and enhanced her national reputation, but they also posed a question about her future work. Although profoundly linked to Liverpool, by the end of the war she was travelling almost weekly to London; how, in the future, should she balance these demands? Personal crises sharpened this dilemma. Early in 1918 her mother, Emily, died, and the family home of Greenbank passed, as William had arranged, to her sister, Evie, and brother-in-law, Hugh Reynolds Rathbone, now effectively head of the family in Liverpool. Eleanor planned to share a house with Elsie, her elder half-sister, to whom she was very close, and hoped that Elizabeth Macadam would join them. At the end of the war, however, Macadam was offered the secretaryship of the new Joint Universities Council on Social Studies, whose headquarters were in London. Having just lost her mother, Eleanor thus faced the prospect of losing Elizabeth as well. This crisis made her acknowledge how important Elizabeth's love and support were for her; while she urged Elizabeth to pursue the career that would make her most happy, she promised, in essence, to follow her. In 1919 the two friends bought a house together in Romney Street, just off Smith Square and within an easy walk of parliament. Rathbone's Liverpool commitments remained substantial: she stayed on the city council, continued to lecture for the Liverpool School of Social Service, founded (and became president of) a new cross-party Liverpool Women's Citizens' Association, and made an unsuccessful bid for a parliamentary seat in the election of 1922. She kept a comfortable house in Liverpool -- initially with Elsie and after her death alone -- but with Elizabeth in London, Romney Street became her primary home. Cushioned by the fortune Elsie left to Eleanor on her death, Eleanor and Elizabeth lived comfortably together for the rest of Eleanor's life. 
The nature of that relationship is difficult to recapture, especially since both women were concerned to protect their privacy and arranged that their mutual correspondence be burnt after their deaths. It is not likely to have been actively sexual, for Rathbone in particular was somewhat prudish, hostile to Freudianism and other theories elevating the importance of instinctual life, and prone to define sexual feeling as a troublesome male failing. Yet, for her, Macadam was much more than a friend and companion. Eleanor once told Elizabeth that she had allowed no one else inside 'the ring-fence of my personality' (Stocks, 181); only with Elizabeth did she feel fully herself, only with Elizabeth could she be completely unconstrained. Rathbone took Macadam's advice on all aspects of her work, but she also relied on her practical and social skills, counting on Macadam to run their joint household and manage their schedules. Gradually, then, and especially after Rathbone's election to parliament in 1929, Macadam's independent career gave way to her role as Eleanor's trusted deputy, emotional support, and, in a sense, 'political wife'. This shift in the relationship caused some tension, for Macadam was a strong-minded but sensitive woman, proud of her own accomplishments and quick to resent those who saw her only as Eleanor's companion. Yet Rathbone, for her part, never took Macadam for granted; although the more prominent, she was also the more dependent. In 1919 Eleanor had written to Elizabeth that the prospect of a shared life dedicated to the work of social reform would bring her 'a happiness too great to seem possible' (letter, Rathbone papers); all the evidence is that it did so. 
After her death Eleanor Rathbone came to be remembered primarily for her successful campaign in support of family allowances, and indeed that cause figured prominently throughout her life. Yet such a characterization overlooks her central role in pre-war Liverpool politics; nor does it do justice either to the lasting importance of her economic thought or to the range of national causes on which she made a mark. After 1919 Rathbone took up five main political issues, those of the integration of women into political life, the development of state benefits for the family, the protection of women in Britain's colonial empire, the defence of democratic political ideals in the face of the rise of fascism, and the rescue and reception of refugees from Francoist Spain and Nazi Germany. She became the dominant figure in the first two arenas, and played a significant, if less well-known, role in the last three. And in all five areas she exhibited a combination of progressive idealism and pragmatic political acumen that mark her out as one of the most accomplished public campaigners of the years between the wars. 
Perhaps inevitably, feminism dominated Rathbone's thoughts after 1918. Millicent Fawcett's determination to step down as the leader of the constitutionalist suffrage federation, combined with the failure of all the women candidates (save Constance Markievicz, who did not take her seat) at the 'khaki' election, forced politically active women to think concretely about their aims and strategies. Rathbone knew what she wanted: as a political independent, she did not wish to see women simply absorbed into the established political parties; she was convinced that cross-party feminist activism remained essential to women's advancement. In 1919 she was elected to succeed Fawcett as president of the now renamed National Union of Societies for Equal Citizenship (NUSEC). 
During the years of Rathbone's presidency the national union pursued several feminist reforms, among them an equalization of the franchise, equal guardianship of children, divorce-law reform, and widows' pensions. Parliamentary and political activity remained the focus, and with the aid of her close friend Eva Hubback, who served as parliamentary secretary, Rathbone turned the union into a very effective lobbying organization, skilled in drafting legislation, adept at finding parliamentary allies, and capable of drumming up waves of resolutions from branches and allied women's groups across the country. These efforts met with some real success: by 1929, when Rathbone stepped down as president, she could point to a number of measures -- among them the introduction of widows' pensions in 1925 and the equal franchise legislation of 1928 -- that had improved the lives of many millions of women. 
Yet for all NUSEC's legislative success, the twenties proved difficult years for feminism. Without the vote to campaign for, feminist organizations proved hard to sustain: younger women professed themselves uninterested, while veteran campaigners often devoted themselves to single-issue causes. Rathbone responded to this problem creatively but controversially, insisting that feminists not only demand all those rights and privileges hitherto monopolized by men (a project she tended to identify as 'the old feminism'), but also begin to adapt social institutions to reflect women's own values and work. 'At last we can stop looking at all our problems through men's eyes and discussing them in men's phraseology,' she told a divided NUSEC conference in 1925. 'We can demand what we want for women, not because it is what men have got, but because it is what women need to fulfil the potentialities of their own natures and to adjust themselves to the circumstances of their own lives' ('Woman's Leader', 13 March 1925, 52). Such was Rathbone's standing that she brought her organization with her: NUSEC added family allowances to its programme in 1925 and, even more controversially, moderated its uniformly hostile stand on protective legislation in 1927. Yet these victories came at a real cost, for the 'new feminist' agenda alienated many old supporters; after the vote on protective legislation in 1927, fully half the executive committee resigned. Already much diminished, NUSEC could not afford these losses; in the thirties, after setting up the townswomen's guilds as a successful offshoot, it subsided into a still smaller National Council for Equal Citizenship, restricting its activity to specific lobbying efforts. 
If feminist organizations declined, however, some feminist politicians flourished, among them Rathbone. In 1929, at the urging of several friends at Liverpool and Manchester universities, she agreed to stand as an independent for the parliamentary seat of Combined English Universities. To her surprise, she won the seat easily -- and had little trouble holding it through three subsequent elections until her death. As MP for the Combined Universities, a political independent, and a woman, she might be thought entirely marginal to the Commons, but she made the first two liabilities work in her favour, taking advantage of her intellectual standing and non-party status to speak on the basis of conscience alone. Even more important, she made an impressive case for women MPs. True, she gave 'women's questions' special attention, and unlike many of her fellow women MPs did not hesitate to identify herself as a feminist. Yet she also followed colonial and foreign policy closely, and some of her very best speeches were on such questions as British policy towards Ethiopia or Home Office regulations on the admission of refugees. Always well prepared, pointed, and capable equally of espousing common sense arguments or of quoting Macaulay and Mill, she struck the 'Manchester Guardian''s parliamentary correspondent as having a 'masculine mind' -- but it would be truer to say that she established the principle that the mind has no sex, and that women could speak with as much force and intelligence as men on matters of national importance. Skilled lobbyist as she was, Rathbone also mastered the ways of the house, learning how to extract meetings or concessions from ministers with the threat of a parliamentary question and buttonholing government spokesmen, who, Harold Nicolson recalled, used to dive into doorways to avoid her. 
The status and rights of women was thus always one of Rathbone's central concerns in the years after 1919, but that focus often shaded imperceptibly into a second area of activity. By the end of the war she had become convinced that only by disaggregating male wages and paying mothers directly for the work of reproduction could women achieve full citizenship, and she never changed her view. Throughout the twenties she built up the intellectual case for and a political coalition behind the ideal of family endowment. The founding document was her own comprehensive but impassioned study, 'The disinherited family: a plea for direct provision for the costs of child maintenance through family allowances' (1924; rev. edn, 1927). Heralded by William Beveridge, Hugh Dalton, and other prominent economists as one of the most important modern treatises on distributive economics, Rathbone's book began with a cogent statistical proof of the lack of 'fit' between wages and family needs, proceeded to make the case for direct endowment of motherhood on moral, economic, humanitarian, and demographic grounds, and concluded with a thorough survey of the family allowance systems introduced on the continent and across the empire. 
Widely reviewed, 'The Disinherited Family' won a number of prominent converts, allowing Rathbone to set up a broader Family Endowment Society devoted to propagandizing the cause. From 1924 the society presented the case for family endowment to royal commissions and party committees, interested businessmen, and activist women. There were some victories: in 1925, with Beveridge's support, the royal commission on the coal industry recommended that a system of family allowances be set up to mitigate the effects of wage reductions for miners; in 1926 the Independent Labour Party made a system of state-funded family allowances the cornerstone of their expansionist platform, 'Socialism in our time'. Yet there were few practical experiments. Beveridge set up a family allowances programme at the London School of Economics; a few progressive employers introduced firm-based schemes; a few city councils introduced rent rebates for families with young children. But no major party came out in favour of the policy: even the Labour Party, which looked likely to support it in the run-up to the general election of 1929, in the end bowed to trade-union fears of possible effects upon wage bargaining. And as the slump worsened in the early thirties, family endowment looked likely to be postponed for ever. 
Yet Rathbone found a way to adjust even to these dismal circumstances. As she noted, in a period of downturn it was even more crucial to put the welfare of children first, and in 1934 she founded the Children's Minimum Campaign Committee to press for better social services -- including free milk and school meals -- for children in poverty. That men with large families could sometimes receive more from unemployment insurance and assistance (which included children's allowances) than they could earn as unskilled labourers also crystallized the argument for universal allowances. By the late thirties such planning advocates as the Next Five Years Group and the management research groups had taken a new interest in family endowment; populationist concerns brought such Conservatives as Leo Amery on board. By the spring of 1941 more than 150 MPs joined Rathbone in a petition urging the government to introduce a state scheme; one year later such a resolution passed the Commons. When William Beveridge worked out a comprehensive plan for social security during the Second World War, he made a universal system of children's allowances (for the second child and beyond) one of the assumptions of his plan. In the end the wartime government bowed to the inevitable and introduced a 'Family Allowances Bill', but only after serious pressure from Rathbone and the women's organizations would it contemplate making the payment directly to the mother. Rathbone, who was suffering from an injured leg, attended the bill's final stages in a wheelchair; characteristically, she was embarrassed and confused when the house rose to cheer her. 
Her desire to improve the status of mothers always lay at the heart of Rathbone's social policy efforts, and they motivated her ten-year excursion into colonial questions as well. In 1925 she had been appointed assessor, representing the international women's organizations, to the child welfare committee of the League of Nations. The Geneva conferences she attended drew her attention to the oppression of women and children in other parts of the world; increasingly, she saw feminism in an international and imperial frame. In 1927, when the American muckraker Katherine Mayo published 'Mother India', her tendentious expose of the sexual subjection of Indian women and children, Rathbone sprang into action. At two NUSEC-sponsored conferences and in an early article she urged British women to take up the domestic subjection of colonized women. For the next eight years in parliamentary questions, articles, speeches, and a short book on the subject ('Child Marriage: an Indian Minotaur', 1934) she argued for a robust campaign against child marriage by British authorities and Indian reformers alike. 
Yet her foray into Indian questions proved difficult. Rathbone assumed that the British authorities in India could best act to stamp out child marriage: to her surprise, however, neither politically active Indian women nor the government of India shared her views. Progressive Indian women had been profoundly offended by Mayo's openly racist views and insisted that India's social problems should be addressed by Indians alone; the India Office and the government of India, for their part, were reluctant to undertake legislation likely to cause local unrest. After two years of fruitless parliamentary lobbying Rathbone changed tactics. From 1930 until 1935, when the 'Government of India Act' finally passed, she worked indefatigably to increase Indian women's representation, both as electors and as legislators, in the new constitution. Once again her proposals drew criticism from some Indian feminists eager to maintain the principle of strictly equal qualifications for women and men, and her six-week trip to India in 1932 only partially dispelled their suspicions. Yet she pursued her goal with great skill, keeping in close touch with Indian progressives and feminists (even those with whom she disagreed), cultivating successive secretaries of state for India and their under-secretaries (she became close to Lord Lothian in particular), giving evidence to the round-table conference and its subcommittees, setting up a formidable British women's lobby to press her proposals, and arranging for the introduction of a raft of amendments during the bill's final stages. By 1935 many in Britain and India agreed about the need to improve women's political representation, but the form in which this was done -- through a special wife's franchise and reserved women's seats -- owed much to Rathbone's interventions. 
Nor was India Rathbone's only colonial cause. In December 1929, in an act of remarkable political courage, she and the duchess of Atholl rose in the Commons to denounce the practice of clitoridectomy in some African territories and to ask whether some African women's situation did not resemble slavery. With Atholl and Josiah Wedgwood, she founded a small, cross-party committee for the protection of coloured women in the crown colonies, which gradually extracted some information about African women's social conditions from a reluctant Colonial Office. Rathbone also kept a watching brief on women's political rights across the colonies, speaking up to defend women's franchise in Bermuda and Palestine, and to argue for British women's right to retain their nationality on marriage. A visit to Palestine with Macadam in 1934 at the invitation of the Palestine Women's Equal Rights Association aroused an incipient Zionism. Impressed with Jewish settlers' educational and social institutions, and struck by the equal role accorded women, she told the association that, had she her life to live over again, she might choose to return as a Jew in Palestine. 
Rathbone's colonial involvements, which dominated her life in the early thirties, were always principally feminist in aim: she wished to improve women's position in all Britain's imperial possessions. Yet her efforts brought about a subtle shift in her thought, for if she began by asserting British women's rights to protect colonized women, she ended by seeking to extend such women's own political rights. This shift strengthened her core democratic principles: to those who claimed that Indian or Arab women were too illiterate or backward to exercise political power Rathbone retorted -- following Mill -- that through such exercise women would grow in capacity and knowledge. Gradually, then, a fundamentally humanitarian approach gave way to an overtly political stance, positioning her well for the role she played as democratic tribune in the last decade of her life. 
Rathbone took up that role early. In April 1933 she was already pointing to the danger posed to European democracies by the Nazi seizure of power and arguing against a policy of conciliation. In the following year, in parliament and on the executive of the League of Nations Union, she urged a vigorous defence of Ethiopia in the face of Italian aggression. Frustrated by the union's dilatory procedures and by the widespread public sentiment in favour of peace at almost any price, she tried allying with an assortment of groups -- Lloyd George's Council of Action, the National Council for Civil Liberties -- which she hoped might take a more robustly anti-fascist line. Usually, however, she worked with a few trusted friends, especially the duchess of Atholl, who shared her disgust at the policy of appeasement. In February 1937 she and Atholl met political leaders and intellectuals in Romania, Yugoslavia, and Czechoslovakia to urge them to resist German influence; in Britain as well Rathbone warned that fascist powers would be encouraged and not appeased by concessions. The democratic powers must defend the principles of the league, with force if necessary, she wrote in 'War can be Averted', published by the Left Book Club in early 1938. Yet, looking at the 'doubtful hesitating set of men' on the front bench ('Hansard 5C', 343, 31 Jan 1939, 149), she felt anything but optimistic. Having predicted as early as 1936 that only a 'real National Government' led by Churchill and backed by Labour would effectively stand up to the fascist powers (Rathbone papers, XIV.3.34), in the wake of the Munich crisis she set up a cross-party parliamentary action group which helped to pave the way for Churchill's accession. 
But it was the Spanish conflict that most absorbed Rathbone's energies in the late thirties. Although anything but a communist, she saw it in black and white terms: to her mind, a democratic republic was seeking to defend itself from precisely the same forces as had seized control in Italy and Germany. She could not, then, understand why the democratic powers refused to come to the republic's defence. Critical from the outset of the policy of non-intervention, Rathbone publicized information about German and Italian violations of the pact and bombarded the government with parliamentary questions (by the late thirties well over half of her questions were about this conflict). She also took on extensive extra-parliamentary commitments. At the end of 1936 she accepted the vice-chairmanship of a newly formed national joint committee for Spanish relief, which organized the evacuation, care, and eventual repatriation of some 4000 refugee children. With the duchess of Atholl, Ellen Wilkinson, and Dame Rachel Crowdy, she travelled to Spain in the spring of 1937 -- braving bombardment in Valencia -- to review the situation of refugees and political prisoners for herself. Nothing she saw there diminished her enthusiasm for the republican cause, and as its fortunes worsened, she put herself at some political risk to try to get refugees out. By the spring of 1939, unable to mobilize either the Foreign or Home Office and with the republic all but defeated, she simply tried to charter a ship to run the blockade and remove from Valencia republican sympathizers sure to suffer Franco's vengeance. 
Rathbone's Spanish adventures turned her into a refugee expert. She harangued and pleaded with a reluctant Home Office for more generous policies on entry and, when she found herself inundated by individual requests for aid, set up a parliamentary committee for refugees to take up such cases. As she saw it, having so singularly failed to defend Europe's vulnerable democracies, Britain was morally required to give shelter once those democracies had fallen. Late in 1938 she tried to secure entry for Czech and German socialists and Jews threatened by Nazi occupation of the Sudetenland; January 1939 found her in Prague, trying to make sure that such refugees were not simply -- in compliance with Nazi wishes -- shipped back to Germany. This was a strenuous life for a woman who was almost seventy, but she seems to have thrived on it: there is no suggestion before the 1940s that foreign travel, long hours, constant smoking, and sporadic sleep taxed her robust constitution. 
With the outbreak of war Rathbone felt a measure of relief as well as horror: the expiation for appeasement was finally at hand. Certainly, she dreaded the loss of life and utterly rejected the idea that it should fall on young men alone. To the contrary, she insisted on women's duty to risk their lives and eagerly backed the campaign, run mostly by her fellow women MPs, to bring women into all (and even the most dangerous) of wartime occupations. Both she and Elizabeth filled out their voluntary service forms, Rathbone professing herself in excellent health, able to drive, and willing to do anything required. Both women refused to leave London during the blitz and simply moved round the corner to Tufton Court when Romney Street was destroyed by bombs in 1940. Rathbone had a busy war, reviving the family endowment campaign, helping to found the Citizens' Advice Bureau, entering into a much reported if ill-advised correspondence with Jawaharlal Nehru, and, especially, carrying on with her refugee work. 
In June 1940, with an invasion of Britain possible, the Home Office interned some tens of thousands of 'enemy aliens'; to Rathbone's horror, these included socialist and Jewish refugees from Nazism -- who remained, in Home Office eyes, German. Refugees interned in haste were released at leisure, and Rathbone and her allies found themselves locked in combat with Herbert Morrison and his under-secretaries both about policy and about individual cases. Her persistence and expertise made her at the same time respected and (in some cases) disliked by the officials and ministers whom she badgered almost daily. So strained did her relations become with Morrison in particular that Rathbone, fearing that his hostility would jeopardize particular cases, began working through other MPs. Yet within the refugee community itself and among a loyal group of parliamentary and political co-workers she won a reputation for her almost saintly devotion and integrity. As always, much of her work was funded from her own pocket. 
As news of Nazi mass murders made its way to Britain, Rathbone's parliamentary committee joined Jewish organizations in trying to frame some response. When Jan Karski reached England late in 1942 bringing word of extermination camps in Poland and the early use of gas, Rathbone was among those he contacted. For the next two years this issue almost blotted out all others. Together with Victor Gollancz, Victor Cazalet, and others, she founded a new organization, the National Committee for Rescue from Nazi Terror, to press the government to mount efforts to rescue those threatened with annihilation. A wide range of proposals -- from underground work to pressure on neutrals and the satellite states and an actual offer to Hitler to take in all Jews from occupied lands -- made their way from her committee to the Foreign and Home offices. Until 1944 at least its efforts met with very little response: officials adopted a dilatory, wait and see attitude and, to Rathbone's fury, tied the question up in leisurely international consultations. Repeatedly warned by officials that publicity might lead to retaliation against those she wished to help, she usually held her tongue; on a few occasions, though, she and her allies forced bitter Commons debates. Although Rathbone accepted that military efforts must come first, she could not understand the government's unwillingness even to contemplate attempts at rescue. As the death toll mounted, a sense of impotence occasionally overwhelmed her. Yet she never succumbed to despair or to talk of revenge: she was one of the few British politicians to denounce forthrightly the deportations of Germans at the end of the war and, together with Victor Gollancz, spearheaded a civilian effort to send foodstuffs to her former enemies in that dreadful post-war winter. She was caught up in this effort when she died suddenly of a stroke at her home, 26 Hampstead Lane, Highgate, Middlesex, on 2 January 1946. She was cremated and her name added to the family monument in the Smithfield Road cemetery, Liverpool. 
A wave of tributes from parliamentary allies and humanitarians followed. A memorial lecture series was established at the civic universities and a home for refugee children built in Rathbone's memory in Israel. Over the next thirty years, however, she slipped out of the public mind. The university seat which she represented with such distinction was abolished soon after the war; moreover, given her political independence, no party could claim -- and thus publicize -- her achievements. Her name was associated with family allowances, but during the post-war economic boom these were allowed to stagnate and found few advocates. 
In the 1970s, however, Rathbone's life and, more importantly, her ideas won renewed attention. Economic downturn and the emergence of such lobbies as the Child Poverty Action Group put family allowances back on the political agenda, and with the rise of second-wave feminism the efforts of earlier women activists received another look. Sometimes that effort at recovery generated as much heat as light. The battles of the 1920s between 'new feminists' and 'equalitarians' were refought in the pages of academic journals in the 1980s, with Rathbone's ideas often caricatured or singled out for particular praise or blame. Gradually, though, scholars came to see British feminism's inter-war quarrels as part of a broader argument over citizenship and social rights played out in most western states in the wake of the First World War, and to appreciate the combination of pragmatism and analytical power Rathbone brought to that debate. Having spent many years among Liverpool's working-class families, she had the wit to recognize that mothers raising children were indeed working and the moral imagination to envisage a world in which such work might carry its own economic reward. She was, then, one of the first thinkers to move beyond an arid argument about whether women should seek equality or ask for the accommodation of difference and to recognize the profoundly gendered -- to use twenty-first-century terminology -- nature of labour markets, wage systems, and political structures. In her insistence that feminists pursue not only equal opportunities within that gendered system but equally the reconditioning of those structures to eradicate their masculine bias Rathbone anticipated much later feminist thinking and politics. Few have thought so creatively and at the same time so practically about what it would take to bring about a genuinely equal citizenship for women. 
But the renewed interest in Rathbone's life and work came from a second direction as well. Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, as the official records on Indian policy, appeasement, the Spanish Civil War, and allied responses to the holocaust began to open, scholars working in all these areas were surprised to find the figure of an indomitable middle-aged humanitarian constantly crossing their path. In her own day Rathbone's central role in many of the international and reform movements of the thirties and early forties escaped public notice, for she tended to work through sympathetic fellow MPs or cross-party lobbying groups and to use the threat of publicity to force reluctant ministers to hear her out. But those who worked with her closely found her (as Harold Nicolson recalled) to be a subtle tactician and an adept political operator; certainly no other back-bench MP of this period can be credited with such a range of accomplishments. 'No Parliamentary career has been more useful and fruitful,' the 'Manchester Guardian' insisted on her death ('Manchester Guardian', 3 Jan 1946, 3), and as scholars bring to light her central role in humanitarian causes ranging from better child nutrition to Spanish relief, from family allowances to the release of interned aliens, this verdict seems justifiable. 
Rathbone herself would have been bemused by this posthumous attention. Personally reticent and driven by conscience rather than ambition, she found public attention disconcerting and embarrassing. She could not be persuaded to accept an honour for her work in either the First World War or the Second (although she did accept honorary degrees from Durham, Liverpool, and Oxford) and, when a group of friends insisted on having her portrait painted in 1932, she was quite taken aback. 'I do not believe that I belong to the small class of persons who justify public portraits,' she protested in a letter; fifty years from now, she predicted, that portrait would languish forgotten in some dark corner or cupboard (Beveridge papers, II b, 31, London School of Economics). But here her predictive antennae proved faulty. James Gunn's portrait of Eleanor Rathbone was hung in the National Portrait Gallery, and her ideas and achievements continue to compel our attention. Brilliant, systematic, and pragmatic enough to translate visionary ideas into piecemeal reforms, she stands as both the most significant feminist thinker and the most effective woman politician of the first half of the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 35679


Rathbone, William (1819-1902), merchant and philanthropist, was born in Liverpool on 11 February 1819, the eldest son of William Rathbone (1787-1868) ['see under 'Rathbone, William (1757-1809)] and his wife, Elizabeth Rathbone, 'nee' Greg (1789/90-1882). After passing through schools at Gateacre, Cheam, and Everton he was apprenticed (1835-8) to Nicol, Duckworth & Co., Bombay merchants, in Liverpool. In October 1838 he went with Thomas Ashton (1818-1898), the father of Baron Ashton of Hyde, for a semester at the University of Heidelberg. From Heidelberg he toured Italy (1839), and on his return obtained a clerkship in the London firm of Baring Brothers. In April 1841 the senior partner, Joshua Bates, took him on a business tour to the United States; the impression of this visit and two later ones made him a committed free-trader. 
At the end of 1841 Rathbone became a partner in his father's firm, Rathbone Brothers & Co., which was then at a low point in its fortunes; by 1842 its capital had fallen to $40,000. With his brother Samuel Greg Rathbone, who became a partner in 1847, he rebuilt the firm's position and diversified its operations, expanding the range of commodities handled, establishing branch houses in China and an agency in New York, increasing its consignment business, and building up a fleet of clippers. Although William Rathbone withdrew from active management of the firm after his entry into parliament, just as it was reaching the height of its prosperity, his partners continued to rely on his advice, especially during financial crises in the 1880s and 1890s. On 6 September 1847 he married Lucretia Wainwright Gair, the eldest daughter of his former partner at Baring Brothers, Samuel Gair; the couple had four sons and one daughter. 
Rathbone's high ideals of public duty were formed under the influences of his mother, Elizabeth Greg, the daughter of Samuel Greg of Quarry Bank and an authority on school management, and of John Hamilton Thom, minister of the Renshaw Street Unitarian Church in Liverpool, who had married his sister Hannah in 1838. Convinced that wealth was a 'trust', Rathbone determined at an early age to devote an ever-increasing proportion of his income to public objects. Three causes in particular absorbed his attention. First, he was closely concerned with the relief of poverty and the organization of philanthropic efforts in his native town. He worked as a collector for the District Provident Society from 1849, thus gaining some insight into the living conditions of the poor; he helped to raise and administer the $100,000 that Liverpool contributed to the Cotton Famine Relief Fund in 1862-3; he served on the executive of the Liverpool Central Relief and Charity Organization Society; and he was a member of the Liverpool select vestry from 1867 until his death. In his best-known work, 'Social duties: Considered in Reference to the Organisation of Effort in Works of Benevolence and Public Utility' (1867), he denounced 'the desultory nature of much of our charity', and argued that philanthropic efforts must both be better organized and serve to rebuild 'relations of personal kindness and friendly intercourse' between rich and poor. In 1871 and again in 1887 he persuaded the Local Government Board to investigate the system prevalent in Elberfeld and some German towns whereby volunteer almoners accepted responsibility for administering poor relief; while there was little national enthusiasm for this system, in the late 1880s he convinced the Liverpool Central Relief Society to set up district committees and enlist volunteer 'friendly visitors' to investigate and manage cases. 
Rathbone had greater success in a second field of endeavour, the establishment of district nursing. His first experiment in this area arose out of personal tragedy -- the death, on 27 May 1859, of his wife. Having witnessed the extent to which skilled nursing had eased her suffering, he engaged Mary Robinson, the nurse who had attended her, to work in the homes of the poor. Convinced of the extent of the need, and after consultation with Florence Nightingale, he established the Liverpool Training School and Home for Nurses, which began work on 1 July 1862. By the end of 1865 Liverpool had been divided into eighteen districts, each provided with nursing under the superintendence of ladies who made themselves responsible for expenses; for about a year Rathbone himself took the place of one of the superintendents during her absence. Rathbone also achieved the reform of nursing in the workhouses, by securing in 1865 the invaluable services of Agnes Elizabeth Jones (1832-1868). For three years he bore the entire expenses. His nursing reforms were extended to Birmingham and Manchester, and to London in 1874, when the National Association for Providing Trained Nurses was formed, with Rathbone as chairman of its subcommittee for organizing district nursing. In 1888-9 he was honorary secretary, and subsequently vice-president, of Queen Victoria's Jubilee Institute for Nurses, to which the queen had devoted $70,000 out of the women's offering. In his work with district nursing he was greatly assisted by his second wife, Emily Acheson Lyle (1832-1918), the daughter of Acheson Lyle of Londonderry (and a second cousin), whom he married on 6 February 1862, and with whom he had two daughters and four sons. 
Rathbone also played a large part in efforts to improve educational provision. He helped to found the University College of Liverpool, which was opened in January 1882; with his two brothers he endowed the King Alfred chair of modern literature and English language; and he was president of the college from 1892. In addition he was very active in the movement for establishing the University College of North Wales (opened in October 1884), of which he was president from 1891. He was actively concerned in the 'Welsh Intermediate Education Act' of 1889. Liverpool gave him the freedom of the city on 21 October 1891. In May 1895 he was made LLD by Victoria University. 
The Rathbones were one of Liverpool's pre-eminent Liberal families: William's father and two brothers all served on the city council. His own political activity began in 1852, when he organized the Liberal election campaign in the north end of the city; subsequently he became chairman of the local party. Gladstone's election in 1865 for South Lancashire owed much to his energy. In November 1868 he was elected as one of the three members for Liverpool. Among other matters he took part in shaping the 'Bankruptcy Bill' of 1869. He was especially interested in measures for local government, about which he published several essays, and in the licensing laws, opposing prohibition and demanding not more legislation but stricter administration. He sat for Liverpool until 1880, when, after declining to pledge to support the views of the Home Rule Association, he chose to stand aside in Liverpool and instead to contest South-West Lancashire. He was defeated, but was returned in the following November at a by-election for Caernarvonshire; he sat for the county until 1885, and from 1885 for North Caernarvonshire. He remained in the Gladstonian wing of the party, but refused to vote for the third reading of the 'Home Rule Bill' in 1893. In 1895 Rathbone retired from parliament. He was deputy lieutenant for Lancashire. 
Rathbone's contemporaries considered that 'straightforwardness and pertinacity, with entire unselfishness', were the essential features in his character. He lacked the bonhomie and humour of his father, but although his manner was dry, his actions witnessed to his deep humanity. His private correspondence reveals a man deeply devoted to his wife and full of anxious concern for the moral development of his children, several of whom sought to carry on his business, political, and philanthropic interests. His sons William Gair (1849-1919), Thomas Ashton (1856-1895), and Francis Warre (1875-1939) became partners in Rathbone Brothers; his daughter Elizabeth Lucretia (1851-1920) helped with the management of district nursing and became a poor-law guardian; another daughter, Emily Evelyn (1865-1954), and her husband, Hugh Reynolds Rathbone (1862-1940), were greatly concerned with the management of Liverpool University; his son Acheson Lyle (1868-1923) served on the city council. But it was his youngest daughter, Eleanor Rathbone (1872-1946), who most resembled him in character, became his assistant and confidante after his retirement from parliament, wrote his biography after his death, and succeeded him as a municipal reformer and in parliament. The conventions of biography seek to isolate individual contributions, but many of Rathbone's projects were collaborative and much of his influence lay in his ability to inspire and organize broader efforts. He died at his home, Greenbank, Toxteth Park, Liverpool, on 6 March 1902, and was buried in Toxteth cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 35680


Rattigan, Sir William Henry (1842-1904), jurist in India, was born at Delhi on 4 September 1842, the youngest son of Bartholomew Rattigan, who left his home, Athy, co. Kildare, at an early age and entered the ordnance department of the East India Company, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Abbott, of Deptford. Educated at the high school, Agra, Rattigan entered the 'uncovenanted' Bombay civil service in youth and was an extra assistant commissioner at Lahore in the Punjab, acting for a short time as judge of the small causes court at Delhi. Dissatisfied with his prospects he resigned, against his family's wishes, to study law. Enrolled as a pleader of the Punjab chief court on its establishment in 1866, he built up an extensive practice, first in partnership with Mr Scarlett, and then on his own account. 
Rattigan was admitted a student of Lincoln's Inn on 3 November 1871, and was called to the bar there on 7 June 1873, also studying at King's College, London. He returned to Lahore where he speedily rose to be head of his profession. He was for many years government advocate, and in 1880, 1881, 1882, and 1886, for varying short periods acted as a judge of the chief court. In November 1886 he resigned his acting judgeship to continue his practice without interruption. A linguist of unusual ability, he mastered five European languages, several Indian vernaculars, and Persian. German he studied assiduously, and he translated as 'Jural Relations' (1883) the second book of Savigny's work on modern Roman law. In 1885 he took the degree of DL, with first-class honours, at Gottingen. 
In February 1887 Rattigan became vice-chancellor of Punjab University, then on the verge of bankruptcy. He succeeded in regenerating it and was reappointed biennially, retaining the vice-chancellorship until April 1895. He was made a DL of the university in January 1896, and LLD of Glasgow in 1901. In 1891 he accepted the presidentship of the Khalsa College committee, and by his energy and influence overcame dissension among the Sikhs, with the result that an institution for their higher education on a religious basis was established at Amritsar in 1897. When he retired from India in April 1900 the Sikh council appointed him life president, and on his death a memorial hospital was erected at the college (opened in 1906). He was an additional member of the viceroy's legislative council in 1892-3 and of the Punjab legislative council in 1898-9. 
A self-made man, without advantages of family influence, Rattigan made substantial contributions to legal literature amid his professional and public labours. He published 'Selected Cases in Hindu Law Decided by the Privy Council and the Superior Indian Courts' (2 vols., 1870-71), 'The Hindu Law of Adoption' (1873), and 'De jure personarum' (1873), and he collaborated with Charles Boulnois (1832-1912) of the Punjab chief court in 'Notes on the Customary Law as Administered in the Punjab' (1878). His most important book, 'A Digest of Civil and Customary Law of the Punjab' (1880), which reached a seventh edition (1909), was designed to classify material for a future codification, and rendered Rattigan a foremost authority on customary law in northern India. His other works were 'The Science of Jurisprudence' (1888), which, chiefly intended for Indian students, reached a third edition (1899); 'Private International Law' (1895); and a pamphlet on the international aspects of the case of the Netherlands South African Railway (1901). Rattigan was knighted in January 1895, made QC in May 1897, and elected bencher of his inn in June 1903. 
Rattigan was married twice: first, on 21 December 1861 at Delhi to Teresa Matilda (died 1876), daughter of Colonel A. C. B. Higgins CIE, examiner of accounts, public works department; and second at Melbourne -- in a marriage that could not then legally have taken place in England -- on 1 April 1878 to her sister Evelyn. By his first marriage he had two daughters and four sons, and by his second three sons. 
Rattigan settled in England in 1900, and practised before the privy council. In the 1900 'khaki' general election he contested as a Liberal Unionist the largely mining constituency of North-Eastern Lanarkshire and was defeated by the Liberal candidate. However at a by-election there on 26 September 1901, with the anti-Unionist vote split between the Liberal candidate and Robert Smillie of the Scottish Workers' Representation Committee, Rattigan was elected on a minority of votes and sat until his death. Speaking rarely, and chiefly on Indian subjects, he was respected by all parties. He was killed in a motor accident at Langford near Biggleswade, Bedfordshire, on his way to Scotland, on 4 July 1904, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery, London. He was survived by his second wife. A memorial window was placed in the chapel of Harrow School, where his sons were educated, and a tablet in Lahore Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 35681


Rau, Sir Benegal Narsinga (1887-1953), judge and diplomatist, was born at Karkala, near Mangalore, in the Madras presidency, south India, on 26 February 1887, second of the four sons of Benegal Raghavendra Rao, a doctor in the Madras medical service, and his wife, Radha Bai (1864/5-1947). It was a remarkable family. Of his brothers, B. Sanjiva Rao became a distinguished educationist, B. Rama Rao a governor of the Reserve Bank of India, and B. Shiva Rao the Delhi correspondent for the 'Manchester Guardian' and a member of India's parliament. Narsinga Rau was educated at Kanara high school, Mangalore, and Presidency College, Madras, where he graduated in 1905 with a triple first in English, physics, and Sanskrit. In 1906 he took up a government scholarship to Trinity College, Cambridge, and on graduating as ninth wrangler in 1909 turned down a Trinity fellowship in favour of the Indian Civil Service. He returned home in November 1910 to a post as an assistant magistrate in Bengal. 
In 1920 Rau was transferred to Assam. A witty and engaging man, he was popular with his fellow officers, not least for his talent at the quintessentially British pastimes of bridge, tennis, billiards, and golf. In 1925 he was appointed secretary to the provincial legislative department and legal remembrancer, and in 1933 was dispatched to London to argue Assam's case before the joint select committee on India's constitutional reforms. He was appointed CIE in 1934 and in 1935 was offered a judgeship on the Calcutta high court, but opted instead for the more challenging, if less remunerative, post of draftsman in the law department of the government of India. In just eighteen months he revised India's vast body of central and provincial statutes to bring them into line with the 'Government of India Act' of 1935, thus enabling the new constitution to take effect, as scheduled, in 1937. Meanwhile Sir Maurice Gwyer, the first chief justice of the federal court in New Delhi, was anxious to get Rau as a colleague, but to qualify Rau had first to serve at least five years as a High Court judge, so in December 1938 he finally took up a seat on the Calcutta high court. He had been knighted the previous June. Ironically, such was the government's demand for Rau's skills that he never completed his five-year apprenticeship. At the government's request, he chaired an inquiry into disputed wages and conditions at the Great Indian Peninsula Railway Company, presided over a committee exploring the codification of Hindu law (1941), and headed the Indus waters commission (1942) charged with determining the equitable distribution of the Indus's liquid wealth among the provinces and states of western India. 
In 1944, with the federal judgeship still beyond reach, Rau retired from the civil service and accepted the prime ministership of Kashmir, but the politics and intrigue of an Indian court were alien to the traditions of the civil service and, after eighteen difficult months, he resigned the post. The Calcutta high court beckoned again, but Rau let it be known that he wanted to share in the drafting of the laws for federation and the other big constitutional changes which lay ahead. In September 1945 Lord Wavell, who thought highly of his skills, set him to work in the reforms office on an Indo-British treaty to be implemented after independence. 
In July 1946, with independence in sight but still of indistinct form, Rau was appointed constitutional adviser to the constituent assembly. It was an honorary appointment, taken on, he insisted, as 'a labour of love' (Rao, xxix). He was a popular choice. The leaders of the Indian National Congress respected his objectivity and silent patriotism, most recently in evidence when he had quietly assisted in the defence of the Indian National Army men who were tried for treason in 1945. But the leader of the Muslim League, M. A. Jinnah, was also friendly to Rau and valued his scrupulous constitutionalism. Amid India's plans for the future, Rau also found time to assist neighbouring Burma in drafting her constitution too. 
After independence Jawaharlal Nehru, India's first prime minister, was keen to make the most of the man whom he described as 'the perfect civil servant' ('The Hindu', 1 Dec 1953, 4) and in 1948 Rau was appointed a member of India's delegation to the United Nations general assembly. In 1950-51 he represented India on the Security Council, and was president of the council in June 1950 when North Korea crossed the 38th parallel and the UN recommended intervention to help South Korea. He was the architect of the first Asian-African bloc in the UN and, with his detailed knowledge of Kashmir, proved a worthy opponent of the Pakistanis. He was touted as a future secretary-general, but he was increasingly afflicted by stomach cancer. In December 1951 he was elected to the International Court of Justice at The Hague, but he was barely a year in the post when a recurrence of the cancer put him in a nursing home in Zurich. He died there on 29 November 1953. He was cremated on 1 December and his ashes returned to India. 
Rau was one of the outstanding members of the Indian Civil Service, whose integrity and legal acumen won worldwide recognition. He was a suave, immaculately dressed man, of small build with refined features crowned, in later years, with luxuriant silver hair. Friends and colleagues remembered him as an elegant, even precious speaker, an intensely private man whose courtesy disguised a resolute and hard-headed pragmatism. He never married. In 1960 his brother Shiva brought together some of the many constitutional schemes which he had drafted in a book entitled 'India's Constitution in the Making'. 


@@@@@


doc= 35682


Raven, Charles Earle (1885-1964), theologian, was born on 4 July 1885 in Paddington, London, the eldest of the three children of John Earle Raven, barrister, and his wife, Alice, daughter of Edward Comber, a Liverpool merchant. His younger brother was Edward Earle Raven who was chaplain of St John's College, Cambridge (1921-6), and dean from 1927 until his death in 1951. Charles Raven was educated at Uppingham School, in Fircroft House which was then under his uncle, the Revd Tancred Earle Raven. He won a classical scholarship to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, and obtained a first class in part one of the classical tripos in 1907, and a first with distinction in part two of the theological tripos in 1908, specializing in early Christian doctrine. In July 1906, while still an undergraduate, he became engaged to the master's niece, Margaret Ermyntrude Buchanan (Bee) Wollaston, whom he married in 1910. They had a son and three daughters. Raven started his career as assistant secretary for secondary education under the Liverpool city council (1908-9), where he was miserable; for the first time, however, he saw beyond his middle-class upbringing, to understand the meaning of fellowship and dedication, when he engaged in the work of a boys' club. In 1909 he was offered the position of lecturer in divinity, fellow, and dean of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, provided he would be ordained that December. The idea fitted his newly found sense of vocation, and he took up the post at the beginning of 1910. There he was instantly thrown into a tense college and university controversy as the master, William Chawner, had issued a pamphlet declaring that Christian orthodoxy was indefensible: Raven, 'ex officio' at the centre of the ensuing storm, went through a time of intense anxiety. 
After the outbreak of war, Raven was assistant master at Tonbridge School, in 1915-17, and a front-line army chaplain in France during 1917-18, where he suffered slightly from being gassed. He returned to Emmanuel and, needing a home for his wife and four children, accepted the college living of Bletchingley, Surrey, where he was rector for four years, until he became residentiary canon of the new Liverpool Cathedral from 1924 to 1932. Raven was already well known for his oratory, and as early as 1920 he was appointed a chaplain to the king. Within the life of the travelling preacher he managed to write two important books. 'Christian Socialism, 1848-1854' (1920) was the first to treat this important Victorian movement historically; he felt strong links with the ideals of Christian socialism, and was one of the chief organizers of the influential Conference on Christian Politics, Economics and Citizenship (Copec) in 1924: he was its joint secretary from 1920 to 1928, under the chairmanship of William Temple, who remained a lifelong friend. In 1923 he published 'Apollinarianism', a sober and fundamental study of a then neglected aspect of primitive Christian thought, which made his name in a different world, that of academic divinity, and gained him a Cambridge DD. In 1932 he was appointed regius professor of divinity at Cambridge. With the chair he held a canonry at Ely Cathedral (1932-40), a fellowship at Christ's College, and from 1939 to 1950 the mastership of Christ's. 
As professor Raven had a full audience; he would lecture 'extempore', pacing with restless energy about the room. The lectures were not geared to undergraduates' needs to pass examinations, nor easy to summarize in the form of notes. The austere Cambridge tradition of linguistic knowledge and historical texts he regarded as excellent but far too narrow. He long argued for a wider syllabus, especially to include the place of theology in the modern world, and like many reformers he did not see the reform for which he had worked until after he had retired. But his own lectures took the great Christian themes one by one -- God, Christ, Holy Spirit, creation, creed, future life, idea of the church -- and tried to expound them in the context of a scientific world and contemporary social need. The thinkers to whom he loved to point were those who tried to marry faith with the reason and science of their own day: the Alexandrian fathers in the third century, or the Cambridge Platonists in the seventeenth. The difficulty, as in all his writing, lay in showing how the drastic reinterpretation which he called for would differ from the watering down of Christianity (as he thought it) in the work of scientific modernists such as Ernest William Barnes or James Bethune-Baker. He had a deeper sense of immediacy -- even ecstasy -- in religious experience, and a quicker perception of the numinous in nature, which he could more easily make men feel than himself analyse. A brilliant scholar, he had too large a heart to attain the detachment of the pure academic. 
From boyhood Raven loved birds and insects and wild flowers, and as an adult he made himself expert in the history of the life-sciences. He wrote a happy little book, 'In Praise of Birds' (1925), painted wild flowers and birds with exquisite precision, and was a pioneer of the photography of birds in flight. His desire to heal the breach between faith and reason turned slowly towards reconciling science and religion: he believed that the evolutionary process could be accounted for only in terms of the movement of spirit. He wrote and lectured more on the theme of science and religion than on any other subject: to him, science meant biology and evolution, and religion a humane and liberal interpretation of Christianity. The most ambitious of these efforts were the Gifford lectures at Edinburgh for 1951-2, published as 'Natural Religion and Christian Theology' (1953). But his best books in the field were more modest endeavours to explain early English science: 'John Ray, Naturalist' (1942) and 'English Naturalists from Neckam to Ray' (1947 -- which won a James Tait Black prize) were notable contributions to the history of biology. As war approached in the late thirties, liberal divinity was assailed as too facile for the ills of the age. Raven vehemently denounced the swing against reason and the leaders of European intellectual reaction headed by Karl Barth. In his later years as professor he felt grief that young men seemed to be neglecting his type of liberal thought, and it came as a relief when the French Jesuit Teilhard de Chardin won posthumous celebrity for a proposal to reconcile evolution with faith along lines which were in substance those proposed by Raven himself three decades before. In 1962 Raven published the first English biography of de Chardin. 
Meanwhile Raven met the course of the world head on over the question of pacifism. During the twenties he slowly came to adopt the position as faithful to the 'New Testament', and in 1932 he became chairman of the Fellowship of Reconciliation and two years later one of the sponsors of the Peace Pledge Union with the Revd H. R. L. (Dick) Sheppard; he delivered an impressive apologia in his Halley Stewart lectures of 1934, published as 'Is War Obsolete?' (1935). This movement lost influence unsteadily from 1937 as the Nazi threat grew, but Raven was a man who committed his heart to a cause and did not waver, in spite of frustration and depression of spirit. At the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 he therefore faced unpopularity and contempt, although he gave unfailing help to refugees in England, and at times even he could not quite be constant, as when he gave thanks in the college chapel for the victory at El Alamein. He would have liked high office in the Church of England, but so much controversy surrounded his name during the years when he was the right age that he was passed over. In 1947, however, Cambridge University unexpectedly summoned him to be vice-chancellor. His two years of office were difficult, with so many returned soldiers crowding two into a room; but Raven confounded prophets who predicted that so charismatic a man could not administer a great institution. As one who had long contended for the advancement of women (including their ordination) he had the special happiness of presiding over the belated but at last unopposed admission of women to full membership of the university, and of bringing the queen to an honorary degree as the first women graduated in 1948. In the same year he helped to choose J. C. Smuts as the university's new chancellor; they had been friends for many years. 
On his retirement from both chair and mastership in 1950, Raven accepted the position of warden of Madingley Hall, which the university had just bought as a hostel. The hall needed a good secretary, not one of the principal orators of Europe who felt that it was 'a backwater' offering little scope for his talents; the result was not altogether happy, and he gave up the wardenship in 1954. However, Raven travelled, lectured, and preached more widely than ever after his retirement, visiting the United States several times, Australia and New Zealand (1950), Canada (1952), Russia (1954), and India in 1955-6. He spent much time in visiting schools, too, where he would both preach and talk informally to the boys, and it was said that his ministry to sixth-formers may have been the most influential of his career; he was also a popular figure on radio and television (once the wartime ban on his voice as a pacifist had been lifted), giving a new dimension to religious broadcasting. All his adult life he had been a great preacher and a natural leader of men: tall and spare, with chiselled features, brilliant eyes, a youthful appearance, dynamic energy, and a magical voice, he never spoke without riveting attention; yet he never outgrew a certain nervousness before preaching, and would privately rehearse like an actor in order to speak without notes. On religious subjects he felt passionately, and at his best he could communicate the fervour and agony which were a part of his being. With an evangelical gospel, he was simultaneously an intellectual and a classicist trying to integrate his own faith and that of his hearers into the honest apprehension of a scientific world -- a quality which made him wanted as a lecturer and in pulpits everywhere. He retained the magnetic power of his oratory until the end of his life. 
Raven was a trustee of the British Museum from 1950, a fellow of the British Academy from 1948, president of the Botanical Society of the British Isles in 1951-5, and fellow of the Linnean Society; and he received honorary degrees from many universities: the one he valued most was a doctorate of science from Manchester. He wrote many books besides those mentioned: the most important were his Hulsean and Noble lectures of 1926-7, combined as 'The Creator Spirit' in 1927; 'Jesus and the Gospel of Love' (1931); 'Evolution and the Christian Concept of God' (1936); 'Science, Religion and the Future' (1943, the published version of his Cambridge Open lectures); and 'Good News of God' (1943). 
Raven's first wife died in 1944 -- a shattering blow, only a year after his own serious illness. After her death his eldest daughter, Mary, presided at the lodge, until in 1954 he married Ethel, widow of John Moors, of Boston, Massachusetts, with whom he had worked closely in the pacifist cause. She was already eighty, and died on honeymoon within a fortnight of the marriage. In 1956 he married Helene Jeanty (Ninette), a former worker in the Belgian resistance whose first husband had been shot by the Nazis; living partly in Cambridge and partly in Brussels, they dedicated themselves to a mission of reconciliation between students of different races. Raven died at his home, 10 Madingley Road, Cambridge, on 8 July 1964. His only son, John Earle Raven (died 1980), became a fellow and dean of King's College, Cambridge, and an authority upon both ancient Greek philosophy and mountain plants. 
Owen Chadwick', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35683


Raven, John James (1833-1906), antiquary and campanologist, born on 25 June 1833 at Boston, Lincolnshire, was the eldest son of eight children of John Hardy Raven, of Huguenot descent, rector of Worlington, near Mildenhall, Suffolk, and his wife, Jane Augusta, daughter of John Richman, attorney, of Lymington, Hampshire. His younger brother, the Revd John Hardy Raven (1842-1911), was headmaster of Beccles School. 
Educated at home, Raven entered St Catharine's College, Cambridge, on 18 October 1853, and migrated in December that year to Emmanuel College with an exhibition. A senior optime in the mathematical tripos of 1857, he proceeded MA in 1860 and DD in 1872. He married on 19 March 1860, at Mildenhall parish church, Suffolk, Fanny, youngest daughter of Robert Homer Harris of Botesdale; they had two daughters and seven sons, three of whom took holy orders. 
In 1857 Raven was appointed second master of Sevenoaks grammar school, and was ordained curate of the parish church there. In 1859 he became headmaster of Bungay grammar school, an office always in the gift of Emmanuel College. He improved the school, and raised money for a new building, which was opened in 1863. From 1866 to 1885 he was headmaster of Great Yarmouth grammar school, where a tower commemorates his time. He served for some time as curate of the parish church in Great Yarmouth, and was from 1881 to 1885 vicar of St George's in that town. In 1885 he was presented by Emmanuel to the cure of Fressingfield and Withersdale, and in 1895 to Metfield, all in Suffolk. An honorary canon of Norwich from 1888, and rural dean of Hoxne from 1896, he was co-opted as a founder member of the county education committee in 1902. 
Raven began his lifelong antiquarian studies by examining the bells of the churches near his home at Worlington, and was only twenty-one when he contributed to the Parkers' 'Ecclesiastical History of Suffolk' in 1855. He served from 1881 until his death on the committee of the Norfolk and Norwich Archaeological Society, which he joined in 1871, was a vice-president of the Suffolk Institute of Archaeology, and was elected FSA on 23 April 1891. A keen bell ringer, and president of the Norwich Diocesan Association of Change Ringers, Raven was a leading writer on campanology among those then publishing county surveys. His 'Church Bells of Cambridgeshire' (1869), 'Church Bells of Suffolk' (1890), and 'Bells of England' (1906) remain standard works of reference. He also published a popular 'History of Suffolk' in 1895, which he fittingly claimed was 'a personal intercourse with all classes', and was a contributor to the 'Victoria county history' of Suffolk. 
Raven died at Fressingfield vicarage on 20 September 1906, and was buried in the churchyard there on 24 September. A reredos was erected to his memory and a lectern provided in the church. His fine library of county and bell literature was sold at Fressingfield in November 1906. 


@@@@@


doc= 35684


Hill, Leonard Raven- (1867-1942), illustrator and cartoonist, was born at 18 New Bond Street, Bath, Somerset, on 10 March 1867, the son of William Hill, a master umbrella maker, and his wife, Anne Scott. He was educated as a day boy at the old Bristol grammar school and afterwards went to the Devon county school. He proceeded to study at the Lambeth School of Art, working side by side with C. Ricketts and C. Shannon, and later at the Academie Julian under W.-A. Bouguereau and with Aime Morot (1885-7) in Paris. He exhibited paintings at the Salon, the Royal Academy, the New English Art Club, and the Royal Society of Painters in Water Colours, but his own inclination led him towards pen-and-ink work. Raven-Hill served as a volunteer with the 2nd Wiltshire voluntary battalion which provided plenty of pictorial copy and which accounts for some of the insights in his drawing during the war. 
Raven-Hill became a regular contributor of joke cartoons, theatrical caricatures, and illustrations to a variety of publications including 'Black & White', 'The Idler', the 'Pall Mall Magazine', and the 'Windsor Magazine' -- his career coincided with new methods of mechanical reproduction and the proliferation of 'light papers'. In 1890 he was appointed the art editor of 'Pick-Me-Up' and was largely responsible for its success, and became a founder joint editor of the 'Butterfly' (1893) which ranked high among the artistic periodicals. He was a celebrated draughtsman when his first drawing in 'Punch' appeared on 28 December 1895. In 1889 Raven-Hill married Annie (died 1922), daughter of Mark Rogers, a woodcarver. Following her death, he married in 1923 Marion Jean Lyon (died 1940), for a number of years the able advertisement editor of 'Punch'. 
Raven-Hill joined the 'Punch' staff and table, which he duly initialled, in 1901 on the same evening that Sir John Tenniel appeared at it for the last time, and he became a political cartoonist on the death of E. Linley Sambourne in 1910. He was second cartoonist (1910-35) to Sir Bernard Partridge, producing some notable work at a time when 'Punch' was a national institution. He excelled in vitality and energy of line, and was never so pleased as when called upon to represent a scene of violent action at the shortest possible notice. If, as sometimes happened, his design for a 'Punch' cartoon proved unsatisfactory, he was willing, and even pleased, to draw an entirely different one on the same morning. He considered the political cartoon more serious, requiring careful thought, classical treatment, and considerable pains in draughtsmanship. Among the favourite subjects of his social cartoons were East End Jews, London street scenes, bridge players, deer-stalking, and motor-car incidents. He illustrated several books including 'Stalky and Co.' for Kipling, and 'Kipps' for H. G. Wells, to the complete satisfaction of both authors. His own publications include 'The Promenaders' (1894), 'Our Battalion' (1902), and 'An Indian Sketch-Book' (1904). He was convivial, irascible, and often inarticulate in speech as he was eloquent with his pen. Failing eyesight and his health generally forced his retirement. Raven-Hill's earlier social cartoons, influenced by Charles Keene, evince an original sense of humour and strong powers of characterization but his reputation is inextricably linked to his long association with 'Punch'. He died at Ryde, Isle of Wight, on 31 March 1942. Examples of his drawings are in the 'Punch' archive and library, the British Museum and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, and Birmingham City Art Gallery. 


@@@@@


doc= 35685


Raverat, Gwendolen Mary (1885-1957), artist, the daughter of the astronomer Sir George Howard Darwin (1845-1912) and his wife, Maud du Puy (1861-1947), of Philadelphia, was born on 26 August 1885 in Cambridge, where she spent her childhood, though she made periodic visits to Down House in Kent, the home of her paternal grandfather, Charles Darwin (1809-1882). Her father was professor of astronomy and she had two uncles at Cambridge, while her mother's uncle by marriage was Sir Richard Jebb, professor of Greek. 
By the age of ten Gwen Darwin was already drawing continuously from life and strongly wished to become an artist. In 1908 she went to the Slade School of Art, then under Frederick Brown and Henry Tonks, where she learned painting, but she taught herself wood-engraving. At Cambridge before the First World War she found herself a member of a group of talented young men and women, of whom the most prominent was Rupert Brooke. She fell in love with Jacques Pierre Raverat, a young French mathematical student from the Sorbonne who was continuing his studies at Emmanuel College, and persuaded him to become a painter and join her at the Slade. They were married in 1911. 
At the outbreak of war the Raverats were living in Cambridgeshire, but in 1915 they went to Le Havre to be near his family. Jacques Pierre Raverat, by then suffering from disseminated sclerosis, tried to join the French army as an interpreter. He failed, and the couple returned to England and lived at Weston, near Baldock, Hertfordshire, where their two daughters were born. In 1920 they went again to France and lived at Vence, where Gwen Raverat nursed her husband through his long final illness, until his death in 1925. She then returned to England to live at the Old Rectory, at Harlton, near Cambridge. In 1941 she moved into rooms in Cambridge, and finally took the Old Granary at the end of the garden of her birthplace, Newnham Grange. 
Everything that Gwen Raverat undertook was done with intelligence and skill -- her graphic work for the Admiralty in the Second World War, as well as her theatre designs and paintings and drawings -- but it was through wood-engraving that she was able to communicate her vision most fully. In her engraving she did not aim at decoration or use a strong decorative line, like her friend Eric Gill; nor was she a naturalist interested in the rendering of a bird's plumage or an animal's fur, like Thomas Bewick. Rather, she was a master of light, shade, and the interplay of textures, with a deceptively simple technique, and a bold sense of design. 
Apart from illustrating 'Spring Morning' (1915), a little paper-bound book of early poems by her lifelong friend and cousin Frances Cornford, Raverat's work until the 1930s consisted of single prints. These were widely exhibited, and gave her a standing among fellow artists and collectors. She was a founder member of the Society of Wood Engravers in 1920, and active on its committees, which met at her studio in Mecklenburgh Square, London. Margaret Pilkington reported in her diary (1931) how 'Gwen presided over the tea table like a beneficent deity'. After 1932, when the Cambridge University Press published her engravings for a second edition of 'The Cambridge Book of Poetry for Children', selected by Kenneth Grahame, her work was in continual demand from publishers. Her illustrations, including a few examples in colour, have the seriousness and vividness of the best Victorian work, and often a sharp sense of humour. Her last important work was the writing of 'Period Piece' (1952), a perceptive account of her upbringing and family. She contributed art criticism to 'Time and Tide' between 1928 and 1939, but, never having thought of herself as a writer, was amazed to find 'Period Piece' a best-seller on both sides of the Atlantic. 
After a stroke in 1951 Raverat could no longer engrave, but she continued to paint. She was short in stature, and in her last years became stout, and she looked like one of her own engravings of an ancient. 'You 'are' an old monolith', Virginia Woolf once said to her. She enjoyed the company of the young, who gave her their respect and affection. She died in Cambridge on 11 February 1957. Her engravings can be seen in the Victoria and Albert Museum; the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge; the Whitworth Art Gallery, Manchester; and the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 35686


Raverty, Henry George (1825-1906), army officer and orientalist, born at Falmouth on 31 May 1825, was the son of Peter Raverty of co. Tyrone, a surgeon in the navy. His mother belonged to the family of Drown of Falmouth. Educated at Falmouth and Penzance, at fifteen or sixteen he resolved to become a soldier. The interest of Sir Charles Lemon secured him a cadetship, and he sailed for India. Appointed to the Welch fusiliers, he soon (in 1843) transferred to the 3rd Bombay native infantry. With his regiment he was present at the siege of Multan in 1848; he served in Gujarat and in the first frontier expedition in 1850 against tribes on the Swat border. Raverty held a civil appointment as assistant commissioner in the Punjab from 1852 to 1859. He was promoted major in 1863 and retired from the army the following year. He settled in England, first near Ottery St Mary, Devon, and afterwards at Grampound Road, Cornwall. In 1865 he married Fanny Vigurs, only daughter of Commander George Pooley RN; they had no children. 
Raverty pursued until the end of his long life various oriental studies, which he had begun in India. Although he lacked academic training, he was gifted with scholarly instincts, and devoted himself to linguistic, historical, geographical, and ethnological study. In India he first learned Hindustani, Persian, Gujarati, and Marathi and for his knowledge of these languages gained the 'high proficiency' prize of 1000 rupees from his government. A 'Thesaurus of English Hindustani Technical Terms' (1859) proved his linguistic aptitude in Hindustani. His transfer to the north-west frontier at Peshawar in 1849 had meanwhile directed his chief attention to the Pushtu or Afghan language, history, and ethnology. To the 'Transactions' of the Geographical Society of Bombay, Raverty contributed in 1851 'An account of the city and province of Peshawar', illustrated with maps and sepia sketches. In order to acquire practical knowledge of the Pushtu tongue he had to collect, arrange, and systematize almost the whole of the needful grammatical and lexical material. In 1855 he published his 'Grammar of the Pushto or Language of the Afghans', which Dr Dorn, the eminent orientalist of St Petersburg, warmly commended. In 1860, besides a second and improved edition of the grammar (3rd edn, 1867), he published his monumental 'Dictionary of the Pushto or Afghan Language' (2nd edn, 1867), and his admirable anthology of Pushtu prose and poetry entitled 'Gulshan i Roh'. He was as well acquainted with Pushtu literature as with the spoken language. In 1862 there followed 'Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans from the Sixteenth to the Nineteenth Century' in an English translation. 
After leaving India Raverty published in 1871 a translation of 'Aesop's Fables' into Pushtu, and in 1880 a 'Pushtu Manual'. Between 1881 and 1888 he issued in four instalments his ponderous work 'Notes on Afghanistan and Baluchistan'. This book was never generally available and remains little known except to specialists. Although it contains a great deal of useful geographical and ethnographic data, Raverty's lack of formal academic training is most evident in this volume. The 734-page work has no table of contents, no maps, and no bibliography; only a serviceable index saves it for research purposes. Sources quoted in the text are rarely identified in a satisfactory manner and one is frequently at a loss to know whether Raverty is quoting from a manuscript or speaking from his own knowledge. 
Simultaneously Raverty was working at his translation of the 'Tabakat-i-Nasiri' which was published in 1881. It is a rendering from Persian into English of Minhaj ibn Siraj's work on general history, with special reference to the Muslim dynasties of Asia, and particularly those of Ghur, Ghaznah, and Hindustan, AD 810-1260. By his critical remarks and copious illustrative notes derived from his wide reading of other eastern authors, Raverty vastly enhanced the historical value and completeness of Minhaj's work. 
Other of Raverty's valuable studies appeared chiefly in the 'Journal of the Asiatic Society', Bengal. Among these papers were 'Remarks on the origin of the Afghan people' (1854); 'Notes on Kafiristan and the Siah-Posh Kafir tribes' (1858); 'On the language of the Siah-Posh Kafirs of Kafiristan' (1864); 'An account of Upper Kashghar and Chitral' (1864); 'Memoir of the author of the Tabakat i Nasiri' (1882); 'The Mihran of Sind and its tributaries -- a geographical study' (1892); and 'Tibbat three hundred and sixty-five years ago' (1895). 'Muscovite proceedings on the Afghan frontier' was reprinted from the 'United Service Gazette' in 1885. 
Raverty died at his home, Florence Villa, Grampound Road, Cornwall, on 20 October 1906. His wife survived him. Raverty, whose frankness in controversy cost him many friends, received small recognition in his lifetime from his fellow countrymen, but his immense labours gave him a high reputation among foreign oriental scholars. At his death he had no fewer than seven important works either completed in manuscript or in preparation, among them 'A history of Herat and its dependencies and the annals of Khurasan from the earliest down to modern times', based upon the works of eastern historians, which are treated with critical acumen; the six bulky quarto volumes of manuscript, the result of fifty years' research, are now at the India Office. 


@@@@@


doc= 35687


Ravilious, Eric William (1903-1942), artist and designer, was born at Acton, London, on 22 July 1903, the second son and youngest of three surviving children of Frank Ravilious, coach builder and owner of a furniture and upholstery business, and his wife, Emma, daughter of William Ford, farmer, of Kingsbridge, Devon. His unusual name he claimed to be of Huguenot origin. His family moved to Eastbourne, Sussex, where his father started a business as a dealer in antiques and second-hand books. 
Ravilious was educated at the Eastbourne Municipal Boys' School and the Eastbourne School of Art, and gained a scholarship in September 1922 to the Royal College of Art. He had a winning personality and was an accomplished games-player. A fellow student at Eastbourne, John Lake, wrote that even as a young man 'he always seemed to be slightly somewhere else, as if he lived a private life which did not completely coincide with material existence' (Binyon, 23). At the royal college he made firm friends with Edward Bawden. Both were in the school of design and belonged to a select group who learned wood-engraving under Paul Nash, whose dry watercolour style they emulated. Ravilious specialized in mural design for his final exam. He and Bawden used the resources of the Victoria and Albert Museum to good effect and also found sympathetic antecedents in the work of Francis Towne, J. S. Cotman, and Samuel Palmer. Ravilious left the college in 1925 with a travelling scholarship. He spent the summer in Florence but was not visibly affected by the experience. The talents of Bawden and Ravilious had been noticed even by 1924. Early in his career Ravilious enjoyed the patronage of Sir Geoffrey Fry, private secretary to the prime minister, Stanley Baldwin. He specialized in wood-engraving, his first book illustrations being for Martin Armstrong's novel 'Desert' (1926). The folk-art quality of his earliest wood-engravings soon changed to a distinctive and controlled linear style, exploring architectural space and landscape laden with reverie and suggestion, populated by doll-like figures, and designed with a pattern of black and white. He illustrated private press editions for the Golden Cockerel Press, including 'The Twelve Moneths' (1927) and 'Twelfth Night' (1932). A set of zodiacal signs for the Lanston Monotype Corporation in 1929 indicated his ability in resurrecting the graphic quality of traditional symbolism. In 1938 he illustrated 'The Natural History of Selborne', by Gilbert White, for the Nonesuch Press. His wood-engravings became familiar to a wide public through their use by London Transport, Dent's 'Everyman's Library', and Wisden's 'Cricketer's Almanac'. He made pictures of unusual shop fronts, drawn as lithographs in three colours, which were given a text by his friend the architectural critic J. M. Richards and published in 1939 as 'High Street'. 
Ravilious and Bawden shared the design and execution of murals in the refreshment room at Morley College, Lambeth, funded by Lord Duveen and opened early in 1930 after two years' work. Depicting scenes from Shakespeare and his contemporaries these were lighthearted but fine-tuned in their colour and drawing, and were an instant success. In 1972 Bawden recalled their collaboration thus: 'Elizabethan plays, Shakespeare, Olympian gods and goddesses, Punch and Judy, a Miracle play and a doll's house -- Gosh! what a riot it was. Whatever beneficial influence Italy had had on Eric was now to some extent revealed, not by plagiarism, rather by his skill in organising space and in creating it for figures to be sent dancing and swinging in ballet movement across the walls. ('Eric Ravilious, 1903-1942', exhibition catalogue)' The murals were destroyed by bombing. Ravilious painted others at the Midland Hotel, Morecambe, in 1933, now lost through water damage, and in the Pier Pavilion, Colwyn Bay, 1935, now also lost. 
Throughout his life Ravilious painted watercolours, mostly of rural scenes, buildings, and machinery, and occasionally of interiors, to which he gave a quality of imaginative intensity. The technique that he and Bawden developed together became more refined, and Ravilious was the more delicate in atmosphere, touch, and colour. In 1930 he and Bawden rented part of Brick House, Great Bardfield, Essex, and spent holidays and weekends there, furnishing the house in a distinctive decorative style. Ravilious preferred the landscape of Sussex, however, and many of his paintings were done while staying with the artist Peggy Angus in her cottage, Furlongs, near Glynde. He was self-critical and destroyed much of his work but held one-man shows in London, at the Zwemmer Gallery in 1934 and 1937, and at Arthur Tooth's Gallery in 1939. His favourite subjects included ships, railways, quarries and their machinery, quaysides, the interiors of greenhouses, and deserted downland with figures cut in the chalk. His work was admired by modernists for its abstract quality, while always remaining figurative. 
Ravilious combined painting with design activity, working for the potters Josiah Wedgwood in the design of transfer patterns for use on existing shapes; he began with the 1937 coronation mug, a mixture of traditional symbolism (a royal arms simplified in silhouette) and almost abstract patterning based on fireworks, with loosely brushed colour recalling Staffordshire or Sunderland ware of the 1820s. He designed other commemorative pieces, notably the Boat Race bowl and goblet (1938) and three complete services: 'Persephone' (1936), 'Travel' (1938), and 'Garden' (1938). The most popular design, reissued several times, was 'Nursery china' (1937), usually described as 'Alphabet'. He designed a dining-room table and chairs of Regency inspiration for the firm of Dunbar Hay, as well as china and glass made by Stuart Crystal of Stourbridge; he was also involved in experimental textile pattern design with lithography for the Cotton Board in 1941, producing some specimens of a decorative child's handkerchief. 
On 5 July 1930 Ravilious married Eileen Lucy 
(Tirzah; 1908-1951)
, daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Frederick Scott Garwood, Royal Engineers, who had been a pupil of his at Eastbourne School of Art and was a fine wood-engraver. She also made marbled paper and, in later years, imaginative framed models of typical country village buildings. They had two sons and one daughter; having children made it difficult for her to work as an artist. They lived in Earls Court, then near the Thames in Hammersmith, and continued sharing Brick House before moving to Bank House, Castle Hedingham, Essex, in 1935. Ravilious was attractive to women in general and between 1934 and 1938 had an affair with the artist Helen Binyon, a fellow student from the Royal College of Art, who finally broke it off and remained friendly with Tirzah. Encouraged by the children she wrote a monograph on Ravilious which was published posthumously in 1983. 
In December 1939 Ravilious was invited to serve as a war artist with the Admiralty and given the rank of captain in the Royal Marines. His talents were well matched to subjects involving sea, sky, ships, aircraft, and such unexpected occurrences as the quilted counterpane of a sick bay at Dundee (painting, Imperial War Museum, London) or the inside of Corporal Steddiford's mobile pigeon loft (painting, Whitworth Art Gallery, Manchester). He produced some of his best paintings in this role and also worked on a series of lithographs of submarines, intended for a book to promote the navy that was never brought to publication. At the end of August 1942 he flew to Iceland to paint the Norwegian squadron. He joined an air sea rescue flight from Kaldadarnes on 2 September, in order to observe it in action, but the plane went missing and no trace of it was ever found. 
Ravilious's work contributed to a new style of representing England and Englishness, both topographically and in official commissions, such as the catalogue covers that he executed for the British pavilions at international exhibitions in Paris (1937) and New York (1939). His graphic, wiry style was influential in the design of the Festival of Britain in 1951 and has subsequently attracted a small but avid and increasing interest. 


@@@@@


doc= 35688


Rawling, Cecil Godfrey (1870-1917), army officer and explorer, was born at Stoke, Devonport, on 16 February 1870, the second son of Samuel Bartlett Rawling, of Stoke, and his wife, Ada Bathe Withers, of Purton, Wiltshire. He was educated at Clifton College, Bristol. 
Rawling entered the army through the militia and was commissioned on 10 October 1891 a second lieutenant in the Somerset light infantry. He was promoted lieutenant on 1 February 1896 and spent most of his service in India, where his love of hunting took him on leave into and across the Himalayan mountains. In 1902 he crossed the Lanak-la Pass into Tibet as a preliminary reconnaissance for a more ambitious expedition. Rawling, accompanied by Lieutenant A. J. G. Hargreaves, retraced his steps the next year and crossed the same pass on an unofficial exploration mission. Over the next nine months his party explored and mapped approximately 38,000 miles of hitherto unsurveyed country in western Tibet and Rudok, an achievement for which they later received the thanks of the government of India. 
Rawling was employed in 1904 with the Lhasa mission. When Sir Francis Younghusband, the British commissioner, returned from Lhasa to Gyantse he selected Rawling to lead the very important exploration of the upper Tsanpo River (the Brahmaputra) in 1904-5. This was recognized as a potentially hazardous undertaking since the Tibetans were thought to be hostile and the return journey to Simla would have to be made in the middle of winter. Rawling's small detachment left the main party at Gyantse, and travelled west along the north of Nepal, through Gartok, and then on to Simla; during its journey the party clearly identified Mount Everest, for the first time from the north. He briefly returned to England, and then in 1909 was made a CIE and was appointed a surveyor to the Ornithologists' Union's scientific expedition in Dutch New Guinea, of which he later took successful command when its leader was invalided. He mapped a large area of this hitherto unknown country and was the first European to encounter the Tapiro pygmies. For his services Rawling received the thanks of the Dutch government. Rawling was also rewarded by the Royal Geographical Society with the Murchison bequest (1909) and the patrons' gold medal (1917). In 1911 he returned to his regiment and on 27 November 1913 he was promoted major. 
Following the outbreak of the First World War Rawling, promoted temporary lieutenant-colonel on 11 August 1914, raised and trained the 6th (service) battalion of the Somerset light infantry. He subsequently commanded this unit in France with the rank of colonel. Rawling fought at Hooge in July-August 1915, served during the winter of 1915-16 in the Ypres salient, and then took part in the battle of the Somme, including the capture of Fricourt, Mametz Wood, and Gueudecourt after fierce fighting. He was created CMG and in July 1916 was promoted brigadier-general. During the summer of 1917 he participated in fighting on the Hindenburg line, and later he was at Passchendaele in command of the 62nd infantry brigade, and was awarded the DSO. On 28 October 1917 Rawling was killed, at the age of forty-seven, outside his brigade headquarters at Hooge by a stray shell. He was buried at the Huts cemetery, near Ypres, in Belgium. 


@@@@@


doc= 35689


Rawlinson, George (1812-1902), historian and Church of England clergyman, born on 23 November 1812 at Chadlington, Oxfordshire, was the third son of Abram Tyzack Rawlinson (1777-1845), a landowner and racehorse breeder, and his wife, Eliza Eudocia Albinia (died 1863), daughter of Henry Creswicke of Morton, Worcester. Sir Henry Creswicke Rawlinson, first baronet, was his brother. Educated at Swansea grammar school and at Ealing School, he matriculated in 1834 at Trinity College, Oxford, as a commoner, and in 1838 took a first class in the final school of classics, graduating BA in that year and proceeding MA in 1841. He played for Oxford in the cricket match with Cambridge in 1836 and was president of the Oxford Union Society in 1840. He was elected fellow of Exeter College in 1840 and tutor in 1841. In 1841 and 1842 he was ordained deacon and priest, and gained the Denyer prize for a theological essay twice -- in 1842 and 1843. He vacated his fellowship and tutorship on his marriage (6 July 1846) to Louisa Wildman, daughter of Sir Robert Alexander Chermside. They had four sons and five daughters. 
Rawlinson remained prominent in university affairs. He was one of the first moderators (1852-4) in the newly organized intermediate examination of classical moderations and was an examiner in 'literae humaniores' (Greats) in 1854, 1856, and 1867. He was interested in the relations between the university and the city, serving as a poor-law guardian from 1860 to 1863, and was a founder member of the Oxford Political Economy Club. He was particularly active on the committee of the Oxford Tutors' Association, which was revived in 1852 following the report of the royal commission on the university. Resisting the commissioners' proposals for strengthening the professoriate on German lines, the association defended the college system and tutorial teaching. On 20 December 1853, together with W. C. Lake, he put the views of the association to Gladstone in person, and thus had an important influence in shaping the 'Oxford University Act' of 1854. Gladstone's interest in Rawlinson, with whom he frequently corresponded, was said to date from this interview. 
During the 1850s Rawlinson prepared his best-known work, an English translation of 'The History of Herodotus' (4 vols., 1858-60), which was dedicated to Gladstone. The annotations, in which he was assisted by his brother and Sir J. Gardner Wilkinson, who produced important supplementary essays, drew upon advances in Egyptology and Assyriology. The work reached a third edition in 1875 and was reprinted in 'Everyman's Library' (1910). At the same time he was the champion of a learned orthodoxy in theology. His Bampton lectures in 1859, published as 'The Historical Evidences of the Truth of the Scripture Records Stated Anew' (1859; 2nd edn, 1860), which defended the scriptures against the findings of modern criticism, received a critical review by Rowland Williams ('Westminster Review', July 1860). He also contributed an article, 'On the genuineness and authenticity of the Pentateuch', to 'Aids to Faith' (1861), the high-church counterblast to the liberal 'Essays and Reviews'. His orthodox churchmanship was a factor in his election by Oxford's largely clerical convocation to the Camden chair of ancient history in October 1861. 
As professor Rawlinson was a prolific author of scholarly summaries of the results of research and archaeological excavations in the Middle East, which remained standard during his lifetime. His 'Five Great Monarchies of the Ancient Eastern World' (4 vols., 1862-7; 2nd edn, 3 vols., 1871) surveyed what was then known of the histories of Chaldea, Assyria, Babylonia, Media, and Persia. It was followed by similar works on Parthia (1873), the Sassanid empire (1876), ancient Egypt (1881), and Phoenicia (1889). He used archaeological evidence to support orthodox scriptural interpretation, contributing the essay 'The alleged historical difficulties of the Old and New Testaments' for the volume of 'Modern Scepticism' (1871), produced by the Christian Evidence Society. As a biblical commentator and expositor he wrote on several 'Old Testament' books for the 'Speaker's Commentary' edited by F. C. Cook (1871-88) and for the 'Old Testament' commentary edited by C. J. Ellicott (1884-92). 
In 1872, on Gladstone's recommendations, Rawlinson was made a canon of Canterbury, where he lived until his death, though he retained his Oxford chair (which carried, until 1882, the comparatively small stipend of $140 a year). His connections with the university were much reduced and he played little part in the creation of a major school of ancient history at Oxford in the latter part of the century, which was largely the work of college tutors. Ironically, in view of his earlier advocacy of tutorial interests, he complained to the 1877 statutory commission that as professor he was virtually excluded from undergraduate teaching and examining. In 1885 no students attended his termly courses, and he stated that he regarded his main contribution to his discipline as writing books. For their part tutors circulated tales of his unwillingness to attract students; one story had it that after advertising a course of lectures outside the area in which undergraduates needed to study for their examinations, he would peer out from his window in the King's Arms Hotel, where he stayed on his rare visits to the university, to check that no auditors had come to hear his first lecture and then promptly leave the city until the start of the next term (Jones, 190). He eventually resigned the Camden chair in 1889. 
At Canterbury, also, Rawlinson's position was questioned, as canons were increasingly expected to assume diocesan and parochial duties. At the 1889 visitation he defended his academic role within the cathedral, listing the numerous theological books he had published during his tenure of the canonry, and pointed out that at the time of his appointment it was intended that he should devote his time to literary work. He suffered from an indistinctiveness of speech, which made him a poor preacher. In 1888 the cathedral chapter presented him to the wealthy living of All Hallows, Lombard Street; he later made valuable gifts to the cathedral. The last of his many published works was a life of his brother (1898). He was a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society, and a corresponding member of the Royal Academy of Turin and the American Philosophical Society. Rawlinson died at his home in the precincts, Canterbury, on 6 October 1902, his health having given way two years earlier. He was buried in Holywell cemetery, Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 35690


Rawlinson, Henry Seymour, Baron Rawlinson (1864-1925), army officer, was the elder son of Sir Henry Creswicke Rawlinson, first baronet (1810-1895), and his wife, Louisa (died 1889), daughter of Henry Seymour. Rawlinson was born at Trent Manor, Dorset, on 20 February 1864, and educated at Eton College. His enthusiasm for sports secured him a comfortable passage through school. His father, a notable Assyriologist, saw military service in India, and formed a strong association with Frederick Roberts, subsequently commander-in-chief in India. This association was to assist the younger Rawlinson in his service career. Rawlinson entered the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, just before turning nineteen and soon thereafter served in India and Burma. In 1889, owing to the illness (soon followed by the death) of his mother, he returned to England, where he undertook the care of his ageing father, to whom he was much attached, and whom he succeeded in the baronetcy in 1895. On 6 November 1890 he married Meredith Sophia Frances (died 1951), daughter of Coleridge John Kennard of Hampshire. The marriage endured for the rest of his life. There were no children. 
In 1893 Rawlinson entered the Staff College, Camberley, where he profited greatly from the teaching skills and engaging personality of the military historian G. F. R. Henderson. Although India at this time remained the centre of Britain's military concerns, Henderson also took his students through events more appropriate to the coming European struggle: the American Civil War and the Prussian campaign against France in 1870-71. The latter inspired Rawlinson to tour the battlefields of the Franco-Prussian war, and to visit the military establishments of Germany and France. He drew useful conclusions. For example, he noted that the German army did not keep its various elements -- infantry, artillery, cavalry -- in watertight units but got them working together. He regretted that in the British army, by comparison, 'It is no one's business to pool experience' (diary, CAC Cam., Rawlinson MSS). 
In 1895 Rawlinson went to Aldershot with the rank of brigade major, and established a reputation as a promising staff officer. In January 1898, by chance or good management, he found himself in Cairo (where his wife had been directed for her health) just as General Kitchener was mounting his expedition against Khartoum. Needing a staff officer to manage the influx of troops, Kitchener turned to Rawlinson, who consequently secured for the first time a responsible position during a major military episode. Kitchener habitually operated with a less than sufficient staff, so that Rawlinson was soon fully engaged in transferring fresh arrivals to the front and coalescing them into a division. Kitchener was suitably impressed. 
A year later Britain entered its largest and most testing colonial war: the South African War. Rawlinson soon took up a staff appointment there, and in short order found himself besieged in Ladysmith. He rapidly formed a favourable opinion of the Boers' skill with artillery, contrasting this with British gunners who 'think too much of their horses and not enough of their guns' (diary, CAC Cam., Rawlinson MSS). His developing awareness of the importance of artillery had a practical consequence. Before the Boer trap closed on Ladysmith, Rawlinson managed to bring in some long-range naval guns which proved serviceable in the subsequent siege. 
Ladysmith was relieved early in March 1900. By then Rawlinson's long-term benefactor, Lord Roberts, had taken command in South Africa, with Kitchener as his chief of staff. Rawlinson was appointed to their staff and invited to live in Roberts's house: 'so I have kept up my practice of falling on my feet' (diary, CAC Cam., Rawlinson MSS). He was soon forging a coherent force out of the dispersed and diverse bodies of troops which were to accomplish the advance on Pretoria, thereby gaining experience in expanding a peacetime army into the much larger force required by war. 
Roberts returned to Britain in November 1900, assuming that the South African War was as good as over. Rawlinson went with him. But the Boers resorted to an effective form of guerrilla warfare, and Rawlinson forthwith returned to join Kitchener. After performing much the same staff duties as before, he managed to persuade Kitchener to give him a command in the field. The ensuing brief periods of action seemed to him pretty enjoyable, even though once he became -- if only for a matter of minutes -- the prisoner of two Boers who had shot his horse from under him. 
Rawlinson emerged from this spell with a reputation as an efficient commander in the field. Kitchener, he related on 2 January 1902, 'has been very nice to me and very complimentary' (diary, CAC Cam., Rawlinson MSS). Rawlinson was next placed in command of a big column to hunt the Boers in the Orange River Colony ('I am going up in the world'), and when the enemy there surrendered he was transferred to the western Transvaal, where he participated in the last Boer defeats of the war. Rawlinson noted that, between his taking up command on 1 April 1901 and the Boer capitulation in May 1902, his forces had marched 5211 miles, taken 1376 prisoners and 3 guns, and inflicted on the Boers 64 killed and 87 wounded, while the British had sustained casualties of 12 killed and 42 wounded. In terms of the large distances travelled and the small number of losses suffered by both sides, this was a very different war from the next in which he would participate. 
On his return to Britain in 1902, Rawlinson was first assigned to the newly created department of education at the War Office, then appointed commandant of the Staff College; after that he was given command of an infantry brigade at Aldershot. He was then promoted to the rank of major-general and for four years commanded a division on Salisbury Plain. He travelled much, including a visit to the Sambre valley, where German railway building towards the Belgian frontier suggested ominous developments. All the time Rawlinson was seeking to divine the lessons to be learned from recent wars and changes in military technology. So in reflecting on the Russo-Japanese war of 1904-5 he noted the importance attached by the Japanese army to the employment of engineers, and their superior use of machine-guns in support of infantry. 
Rawlinson did not always draw appropriate conclusions. He exaggerated the importance of morale on the battlefield as against weaponry, and he failed to recognize the potency of trench defences in slowing Japanese operations against the Russians. But, overall, when war came to Europe in 1914 he seemed well equipped to exercise command in battle. 
As chance had it, on 1 August 1914 Rawlinson was not employed. Having recently handed over command of his division, he was on half pay and unoccupied. Britain's declaration of war on Germany on 4 August changed that, but not initially to his satisfaction. Instead of a command in the field, he was appointed director of recruiting at the War Office, renewing acquaintance with Kitchener (just appointed secretary of state for war) and drawing the same conclusions as his chief about the probable lengthy duration of the war. 
Rawlinson soon made the transition to the battlefield. Briefly he replaced the injured commander of 4th division on the Aisne and caught a glimpse of the stalemated trench warfare already developing in France. Then, at the beginning of October 1914, he was given charge of an infantry and a cavalry division intended to assist the Belgians in the defence of Antwerp. In the event, Antwerp was doomed by the time he arrived, and his force was withdrawn to west Belgium to join the main British expeditionary force (BEF). Rawlinson was given command of the 4th corps, consisting of two infantry divisions, which took up position at Ypres on 14 October. There the Germans, seeking to strike towards the port of Calais, fell upon it, in what became the first battle of Ypres. 
Rawlinson extricated his force from a potentially dangerous situation with skill, but in so doing aroused the displeasure of the commander-in-chief, Sir John French, who had expected him to show more aggression. It was the start of strained relations which would continue until, late in 1915, French was replaced. 
Rawlinson was to participate in some of the key battles fought by the BEF in 1915, as a corps commander serving in Douglas Haig's First Army in a low-lying (and damp) part of Flanders. In March Haig directed him to devise a plan for seizing the village of Neuve Chapelle and proceeding on to the Aubers Ridge: the first set-piece attack against an entrenched position by the British army in this war. Rawlinson, from the outset, identified artillery predominance as vital to success, even against the single trench line which at the time was the norm. And he directed his attention just to the capture of this line and the village of Neuve Chapelle, notwithstanding Haig's directive that he should aim to press on to Aubers Ridge and open the way for cavalry exploitation. 
The opening phase of the attack on 10 March 1915 was markedly successful, thanks to Rawlinson's well-calculated concentration of artillery. But then his forces passed beyond the support of the guns and were stopped by a hail of fire from German strongpoints. Renewed endeavours on the two days following achieved nothing, and the operation petered out. In the aftermath, Rawlinson blamed one of his divisional commanders for failing to press home the initial success, and called for his removal. It then transpired that any blame rested with Rawlinson. His conduct further stimulated French's antipathy towards him, and only the intervention of Haig saved him from demotion. That established a pattern. Rawlinson hereafter was dependent for advancement on Haig's goodwill. 
Rawlinson derived clear lessons from Neuve Chapelle. Success against trench defences depended on artillery superiority. Cavalry had no part to play in such endeavours. And a limited advance ('bite and hold') was the most that could be hoped for. However, such insights did not inform all his subsequent actions. When called on to deliver a further attack on Aubers Ridge on 8 May, he deemed the guns 'well registered and we have enough' (diary, CAC Cam., Rawlinson MSS). Yet by Neuve Chapelle standards he clearly did not have enough, and the result was a costly fiasco. By contrast, when he attacked at Givenchy a month later, with similar results, he realized in advance that his artillery was insufficient. 
Late in September 1915 Rawlinson was involved in the much larger operation at Loos. The available gunnery was recognized on all sides to be inadequate (only pressure from Kitchener, citing the needs of Britain's allies, caused the attack to be undertaken), but poison gas was employed in the hope of making good the deficiency in shells. Rawlinson's expectations ranged from the muted to the fairly optimistic. In the event, his forces overran their first objectives, but were then halted by an unimpaired second line of German defences. The only reserves available for the operation arrived late, having been kept under French's personal command. This hardly mattered. In the absence of adequate artillery support, the reserves had little chance of improving the situation whenever they appeared. But Rawlinson concluded otherwise. He took the view that only French's misuse of the reserves had denied him a considerable success. And, in company with others (including Haig), he conveyed this view to important people in London. In December 1915 French was replaced by Haig as commander-in-chief. 
The change soon led to Rawlinson's advancement. Initially he was given temporary command of First Army. Then, in January 1916, Haig called into being a new Fourth Army, largely made up of recruits raised and trained since the outbreak of war. Haig not only appointed Rawlinson to its command but assigned to it the principal role in Britain's major campaign for 1916: a large offensive astride the River Somme. 
In his planning for this endeavour, Rawlinson straightaway stressed the primacy of artillery, disregarded the cavalry, and devised an operation that was essentially bite and hold. He proposed a bombardment lasting for several days to a depth of just 1 to 2000 yards. Thereby he would overwhelm and occupy the German first line. Then the artillery would move forward and the process be repeated against the second line. Haig was not impressed. In the first phase of planning, he proposed a scheme to capture the German second line at an early stage of the attack and to advance southwards along it so as to aid the French, who would be carrying out the major part of the offensive astride the Somme. Later, as it became clear that German operations at Verdun would force the French to play only a minor role on the Somme, Haig demanded of Rawlinson a new plan for overwhelming all three German defensive positions at the outset so as to open the way for cavalry exploitation. 
Although clearly uneasy about this major extension of his first-stage objectives, Rawlinson did not protest. The most he felt able to do was persuade Haig to forgo the hurricane bombardment he favoured, although without bluntly telling his chief that his forces did not possess sufficient guns to dispatch the available shells except over an extended period. But he capitulated to Haig's insistence that the limited quantity of shells at their disposal should be spread to the depth of the entire German defensive system. The result was predictable. The preliminary bombardment had neither the weight nor the volume to eliminate the successive lines of enemy trenches. So when Rawlinson's forces went over the top on 1 July 1916, they suffered casualties unprecedented in British military history, and made no advance on two-thirds of the front attacked. 
The campaign was not abandoned. Britain's New Army had spent two years training and accumulating munitions for this operation. France needed Britain's aid to relieve the terrible pressure being exerted by the Germans at Verdun. And early setback did not diminish Haig's conviction that, in time, he could still accomplish the sweeping advance promised for the first day. 
Rawlinson's performance during the ensuing four and a half months, until rain and mud and diminishing manpower forced the British command to halt, was decidedly mixed. On some occasions, such as 14 July and 25 September, he employed large quantities of artillery against limited sectors and achieved moderate, and not too costly, advance. More often he allowed small units unsynchronized with one another to deliver piecemeal attacks which attracted disproportionately heavy resistance. Thereby he sustained severe casualties and made only trivial gains of ground. And although he sometimes acknowledged that such operations were not rewarding and were even being delivered in the wrong sectors, he persisted in these operations. He welcomed the appearance of the tank, which first saw battle in his large offensive of 15 September, but by rendering his artillery subordinate to the tanks he ensured that neither tanks nor infantry would achieve much. Overall, between the start of July and the middle of November 1916, Rawlinson's operations inflicted substantial casualties on the enemy but brought even greater losses to his own army and advanced his line a bare 4 miles without strategic gain. The cost to the British army was 400,000 casualties. 
Perhaps strangely, Rawlinson emerged from the Somme campaign a figure of note. He was promoted to full general, and written up favourably in the press. But his eminence was insubstantial. Lloyd George, who became Britain's prime minister in December 1916, had spoken of him disparagingly even before the Somme campaign began. And his conduct during that long endeavour had sometimes displeased his commander-in-chief. Haig had told him bluntly on 24 August that 'something is wanting in the methods employed', and had delivered him a lecture on the appropriate conduct of an army commander (general headquarters to Fourth Army, OAD 123, 24 Aug 1916, Fourth Army MSS). 
So in 1917 Rawlinson found himself directing no large operations, and was soon writing of the Cinderella role assigned to his forces. In March and early April, as the enemy in his sector fell back to powerful defended positions (the Hindenburg line), he followed up cautiously, more convinced of the dangers of being counter-attacked in the open than he was eager to seize hypothetical opportunities. In May, after believing himself assured that he would direct Britain's next big offensive, he was (as he confided to his diary) 'very much disgusted and disappointed' to learn that he had been passed over. Although there would indeed be another great offensive, in the second half of 1917, the most that Rawlinson was asked to command was a subsidiary operation that would be delivered from the sea in conjunction with an advance along the Belgian coast once the main attack had made considerable progress. 
The Ypres offensive never achieved this sort of success, so the proposed coastal operation remained a pipe dream. For Rawlinson the resulting inactivity was galling. 'I do not find much to occupy my time', he lamented in September; and, in October, 'I find it hard to get through the day'. Early in November he was belatedly placed in charge of the dying phase of the Ypres operation. Then, in February 1918, he was assigned to a different role. He was appointed British representative on the executive war board of what was euphemistically called the supreme war council, a body set up by Lloyd George to diminish Haig's role in military decision making. By nominating Rawlinson, Haig intended to ensure that little diminution would take place. 
After a month Rawlinson was rescued from this unrewarding activity by dramatic events on the battlefield. On 21 March 1918 the Germans launched a massive, and initially successful, offensive against an undermanned British sector on the Somme. 'Not good days on the battlefront', Rawlinson noted in his diary. They proved, nevertheless, to be useful days for Rawlinson. On 28 March he was summoned to take command in the area of the setback. The situation awaiting him seemed perilous. His forces were drained in manpower, and few reinforcements were readily available. But the position was not beyond hope. The German advance had sustained heavy casualties and had outrun its artillery support. And in order to regain momentum, the German command decided to strike elsewhere, with only spasmodic efforts in Rawlinson's sector. By mid-year, with reinforcements and large quantities of weaponry to hand, and with raids by his Australian forces alerting him to the indifferent quality of the defences and troops opposing him, Rawlinson drew an important conclusion. The situation was hopeful for a counter-offensive with limited objectives. A trial run was carried out at Hamel on 4 July and yielded encouraging results. So in the next few weeks the Canadian and Australian corps and the British 3rd corps were concentrated near Amiens, and large supplies of weaponry brought in amid great secrecy. By employing, with all the skill now at his disposal, devastating amounts of artillery in combination with machine-guns and mortars and tanks and aircraft, he might, at tolerable cost in the lives of his troops, suppress enemy trenches and big guns long enough to get his forces forward at least to the distance that his artillery could bombard. 
On 8 August 1918, outside Amiens, Rawlinson's forces attacked on a 19,000 yard front. By the end of the day, for moderate losses, they had overrun the main defended positions and eliminated six enemy divisions. The assault continued for three more days, but with steadily diminishing results. Rawlinson was then persuaded by his corps commanders that the operation should be halted. He succeeded in pressing this judgement on Haig. At last, and in marked contrast to the enemy's conduct so far that year, a measure of realism was prevailing in Britain's higher military circles. 
On 23 August, after his artillery had moved forward, Rawlinson attacked again, once more driving the enemy from their defended positions. From then to 3 September his forces made limited advances daily. The German high command (much against its will) was obliged to withdraw to its 1917 stronghold, the Hindenburg line. Rawlinson's forces attacked these seemingly impregnable entrenchments in two operations. On 18 September they captured the ridge overlooking the main line, thereby securing artillery domination. Then on 29 September, after a truly massive bombardment, they pressed right through the Hindenburg positions. It was the British army's most distinguished operation of the war. By this stage Rawlinson was trusting to the expertise of a myriad of subordinate commanders, rather than dominating events himself. Yet he still had a role to play, for example by extending the length of front attacked on 29 September and so incorporating the area where the decisive advance was made. 
With this triumph and with the accelerating advance of the other British armies, along with the French and the Americans, Germany's capitulation could only be weeks away. It came on 11 November 1918. Rawlinson did not pass into retirement. In mid-1919, simultaneous with being created Baron Rawlinson of Trent and receiving a grant of $30,000 from a grateful parliament, he was sent to north Russia to evacuate British troops engaged (unavailingly) in aiding anti-Bolshevik forces. Back in Britain in November, he took over the Aldershot command. Then in August 1920, in fulfilment of a long-standing ambition, he was appointed commander-in-chief in India. 
This was a difficult time in India, with the demands for self-government gaining momentum. Rawlinson, nevertheless, experienced a relatively successful occupancy. He decentralized the army headquarters. He ended a long controversy by establishing his post as the sole source of military advice to the Indian government. He countered the onset of economic stringency by reducing the military budget and the size of the Indian army while improving equipment and not harming efficiency. Although proving less than welcoming to the demand for full Indianization of his forces, he conceded enough to avoid severe confrontation. And by construction of roads and the establishment of military stations, he advanced military control into disaffected parts of the north-west frontier. 
By early 1925 Rawlinson deemed his role in India fulfilled. He intended to return to London, but on 24 March 1925, while only sixty-one years of age and in seeming good health, he was taken ill following games of polo and cricket. Four days later, in Delhi, after an operation, apparently for appendicitis, he died. His remains were returned to England and interred at his home at Trent, Dorset, on 30 April. Since then Rawlinson has been largely forgotten. His private life lacked drama, and his diaries, when published, proved wanting in extreme malice. As regards his career, military rule in the British empire has ceased to attract attention. And although interest in the First World War continues unabated, the part played by army commanders is usually disregarded or judged adversely. At least as concerns Rawlinson's operations in 1918, this may seem less than just. 


@@@@@


doc= 35691


Rawlinson, William George (1840-1928), art historian and collector, was born on 23 December 1840 in Silver Street, Taunton, Somerset, the only son of William Rawlinson, who owned a silk mill there, and his wife, Harriet Jeboult. Nothing is known of his education; about 1865 young Rawlinson joined a London silk firm, James Pearsall & Co., which handled the produce of the mill at Taunton. Later, as a partner in that business, he helped to create the English embroidery-silk trade, until then a German monopoly. In conjunction with Sir Thomas Wardle of Leek he reintroduced old methods of dyeing silk with the natural dyes of the East. On 26 September 1867 he married Mary Margherita ('b'. 1847/8), daughter of the Revd Alexander Cridland, incumbent of Hensall-cum-Heck, Snaith, Yorkshire; they had one son and three daughters. He retired from business in 1908. 
Rawlinson is chiefly remembered for his scholarly publications on the engraved work of J. M. W. Turner, of whose drawings and prints he was an assiduous collector. In 1878 he published 'Turner's Liber Studiorum: a Description and a Catalogue', which he described in the preface as 'mainly compiled -- a labour of love indeed -- in such intervals as I have been able to snatch from City work' (Rawlinson, 'Turner's Liber Studiorum', vii). Based on the pioneering catalogue of the Burlington Fine Arts Club 1872 'Liber' exhibition, and much influenced by the writings of John Ruskin, this was the essential guide for all students and collectors of 'Liber' prints. A second, much revised, edition appeared in 1906, and was only superseded in 1924 by the more exhaustive catalogue of A. J. Finberg. 
However, Rawlinson's other major Turner publication, the two-volume 'Engraved Work of J. M. W. Turner' (1908-13), remains the only extensive catalogue of the nearly 900 prints, in addition to the 'Liber Studiorum', by and after Turner. The researches that led to these invaluable catalogues were based on Rawlinson's own collection. His collecting of the artist's watercolours is reflected in his contributions to a special number of 'The Studio' on Turner's watercolours published in 1909. His choice collection of Turner watercolours was sold in 1917 to R. A. Tatton, after whose death it was dispersed at Christies on 14 December 1928. Rawlinson's collection of 'Liber' proofs, of which he had issued a privately printed catalogue in 1887 (with a revised edition in 1912), was sold later in that year to Francis Bullard, of Boston, Massachusetts, and formed part of that collector's great bequest to the Boston Museum of Fine Arts in 1913. Rawlinson's unrivalled collection of other Turner engravings was bought, as a whole, in 1919 by S. L. Courtauld, and is now in the Yale Center for British Art, New Haven. Late in his career as a collector Rawlinson also became interested in coloured aquatints of the early nineteenth century and in blue and white Chinese porcelain. 
For many years until he left it in 1919, subsequently taking a flat in Chelsea, Rawlinson's house on Campden Hill was the centre of a large circle of friends, especially writers and artists. He died at his home, 26 Cadogan Court, Draycott Avenue, Chelsea, on 13 May 1928. 


@@@@@


doc= 35692


Rawson, Sir Harry Holdsworth (1843-1910), naval officer, second son of Christopher Rawson of Woolwich, JP for Surrey, and his wife, Frances Emily Wright, was born at Walton on the Hill, Lancashire, on 5 November 1843. He was at Marlborough College from February 1854 to Christmas 1855. Rawson entered the navy on 9 April 1857, and was appointed to the 'Calcutta', flagship of Sir Michael Seymour, on the China station. He served through the Second Opium War, being present in the 'Calcutta''s launch at the capture of the Taku (Dagu) forts in 1858, and in 1860 he was landed as aide-de-camp to Captain R. Dew of the 'Encounter', with whom he was present at the second capture of the Taku forts, at the battle of Palikiao (Baliqiao), and at the taking of Peking (Beijing). 
Rawson saw much active service against the Chinese rebels; for the capture of Ningpo (Ningbo), which he afterwards held for three months against the rebels with 1300 Chinese under his command, and for Fungwha (Fenghua), where he was severely wounded, he was mentioned in dispatches. He was also thanked on the quarter-deck for jumping overboard at night in the Shanghai River to save life. Rawson was promoted sub-lieutenant on 9 April 1863, and lieutenant a month later. In the same year he was one of the officers who took out to Japan the gunboat 'Empress', a present from Queen Victoria to the emperor and the first ship of the modern Japanese navy. Rawson then qualified as a gunnery lieutenant, and after serving a commission as first lieutenant of the 'Bellerophon' in the channel, was appointed in January 1870 to the Royal yacht, on which on 7 September 1871 he was promoted commander. In August 1871 he gained the silver medal of the Royal Humane Society for saving life at Antwerp. He married on 19 October 1871 Florence Alice Stewart, daughter of John Ralph Shaw of Arrowe Park, Cheshire; they had five children. 
As commander Rawson served two commissions in the 'Hercules', in the channel, and in the Mediterranean, and on 4 June 1877 he was promoted captain. In the November following he was appointed to the 'Minotaur', as flag captain to Lord John Hay, commanding the channel squadron; and, after going to the Mediterranean in 1878, he received the thanks of the Admiralty for a report on the capabilities of defence of the Suez Canal. He hoisted the British flag at Nicosia, Cyprus, and was for a month commandant there. Following this service he was again flag captain in the channel squadron, this time until March 1882, and he was then appointed to the troopship 'Thalia' for the Egyptian campaign, during which he served as principal transport officer. He was awarded the third class of the Osmanieh, and the CB. From February 1883 to September 1885 he was flag captain to Lord John Hay, at that time commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean, and in October 1885 he became captain of the steam reserve at Devonport, where he remained until 1889. He was a member of the signal committee of 1886, was captain of the battleship 'Benbow' in the Mediterranean from 1889 to 1891, and became an aide-de-camp to Queen Victoria in August 1890, a position he held until promoted to flag rank on 14 February 1892. 
Rawson was a member of the international code signals committee from 1892 to 1895; in 1893 he was one of the umpires for the naval manoeuvres, and in May 1895 he was appointed commander-in-chief on the Cape of Good Hope and west coast of Africa station, with his flag in the cruiser 'St George'. He held this command until May 1898, and during it organized and carried out two expeditions. In August 1895 he landed at Mombasa the naval brigade which, with a force of askaris, captured Mweli (some 15 miles from the coast), the stronghold of Mbarak bin Rachid, a Mazaria chief. In August 1896, following the unexpected death of Sultan Hamed bin Thwain, part of Rawson's squadron bombarded the palace at Zanzibar and deposed the claimant, Seyyid Khalid. Rawson received the Brilliant Star of Zanzibar, first class, in acknowledgement from the sultan; his action was officially approved, and he received the thanks of the Admiralty. In February 1897 he landed in command of a naval brigade from his squadron, with which, together with a force of Hausa, he advanced to Benin city to punish the massacre in January of British political officers, led by J. R. Phillips, the acting consul-general. In March Benin was captured and looted, then accidentally burnt. Rawson was created KCB in May 1897. On 19 March 1898 he was promoted vice-admiral. 
Rawson commanded the channel squadron from December 1898 to April 1901, after which he was appointed president of the committee which investigated the structural strength of torpedo-boat destroyers. This was his last naval service. In January 1902 he was appointed governor of New South Wales, 'a post for which his tact, kindliness, and good sense were sturdy qualifications.' Lady Rawson died in the Red Sea on 3 December 1905, while on passage to Australia. Despite this personal tragedy Sir Harry was a successful and popular governor, and in 1908 his term of office was extended by one year to May 1909. He was promoted admiral on 12 August 1903, and retired on 3 November 1908; he was made a GCB in June 1906 and a GCMG in November 1909. He died at 3 Devonshire Terrace, Marylebone, London, following an operation for appendicitis, on 3 November 1910, and was buried at Bracknell parish church on 8 November, a memorial service being held at St Margaret's, Westminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 35693


Read, Sir (Charles) Hercules (1857-1929), museum curator, was born at Gillingham, Kent, on 6 July 1857, the third son of John Finsbury Read and his wife, Catherine, daughter of Hercules Angus, of Shetland. His father was a colour sergeant. He was apparently educated privately, and went to work at the South Kensington Museum at the age of sixteen or seventeen, but in 1874 was employed privately by A. W. Franks to act as his clerk and to assist in registering the ethnographical collections which Henry Christy had bequeathed to the British Museum in 1865. In 1880 Read was appointed assistant in the department of British and medieval antiquities and ethnography, of which he became keeper in succession to Franks in 1896. He retired in 1921. 
Read is an enigma; good-looking and socially accomplished, he clearly had a chip on his shoulder concerning his lack of university education. He owed everything to Franks, with whom he travelled and through whom he became acquainted with many of the leading antiquaries of his day. Franks encouraged his career, made him secretary of the Society of Antiquaries in 1892, and ultimately made him the chief executor of his remarkable bequest to the museum (a difficult job, which Read took seriously). Kipling described Read as 'externally... very handsome, but his professional soul was black, even for that of a Curator...' (Kipling, 84-5), while his obituaries hint at an uneasy manner and shallow scholarship. He was deeply resentful that he did not succeed Maunde Thompson as principal librarian of the museum in 1909 and this is perhaps the 'unhappiness' mentioned by his obituarists. His successor, the gentle O. M. Dalton, wrote of him, 'he had a militant side to his nature, and what may be described as his imperfect sympathies were neither concealed nor readily abandoned' (Dalton, 529). He could be tough as an administrator, often for the right reasons, but attempts to humanize him sound stilted. One colleague, however, wrote more warmly that: 'His geniality and talent as a raconteur often enlivened the little marble-topped table round which his staff used to foregather with ritual punctuality at 4 p.m., and where the more entertaining experiences of museum life were interchanged in a social atmosphere. (Braunholtz, 112)' Read was, in effect, the first professional ethnographer in the British Museum, in which role he must have been trained by Franks; but like all members of staff at the time he had to range very widely in covering the department's collections, from Africa to Greenland and from America to Japan. His breadth of knowledge is agreed by all; but his knowledge was not deep. He was successful in acquiring material for the museum and was one of the founders of the Friends of the British Museum (one of the elements which later fused into the National Art Collections Fund). He wrote no major book, but he contributed many articles to professional journals and encouraged his staff to publish catalogues; he also initiated the series of popular departmental guides which are still useful works of reference. Rather surprisingly he was elected to the British Academy in 1913. 
Read was a public man and an impressive speaker; he was twice president of the Society of Antiquaries of London (his predecessor Lord Lubbock, who was chancellor of St Andrews, obtained for him an honorary degree). As was then normal his presidency of the Society of Antiquaries led to his knighthood in 1912. He was president of section H of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, twice president of the Anthropological Institute, and a member of the Burlington Fine Arts Club. He had a broad range of acquaintanceship, none perhaps more important than his friendship with the American collector J. Pierpont Morgan, with whom he occasionally travelled. It was probably through Morgan that he was offered a post -- reluctantly rejected -- in the USA. Read married on 17 August 1880 Helen May, elder daughter of Frederick George Smith of Chelsea; they had two daughters. He died after a long illness at the Grand Hotel Excelsior, New Casino, Rapallo, Italy, on 11 February 1929. 


@@@@@


doc= 35694


Read, Clare Sewell (1826-1905), agriculturist and politician, the eldest son of George Read of Barton Bendish Hall, Norfolk, and Sarah Ann, daughter of Clare Sewell, was born at Ketteringham on 6 November 1826. His ancestors had been tenant farmers in Norfolk since the end of the sixteenth century. He was educated privately at King's Lynn and from the age of fifteen until he was twenty learned practical agriculture on his father's farm. Before he was twenty-one he was managing the large farm of Kilpaison in Pembrokeshire, and was afterwards resident agent on the earl of Macclesfield's Oxfordshire estates. On returning to Norfolk in 1854, he took his father's farm at Plumstead, near Norwich, until 1865, when he succeeded a relative at Honingham Thorpe, and farmed about 800 acres there until Michaelmas 1896. In 1859 he married Sarah Maria, only daughter of J. Watson, former sheriff of Norwich; they had four daughters. 
Read represented East Norfolk as a Conservative from July 1865 until the 'Reform Act' of 1867, when Norfolk was divided into three constituencies. He sat for South Norfolk from 1868 to 1880, losing at the general election by one vote. He then declined to stand for North Lincolnshire and for Cambridgeshire, but in February 1884 was returned unopposed for West Norfolk; he retired from that seat in 1885, and in July 1886 unsuccessfully contested Norwich. 
Read was an old-fashioned high-churchman who expressed the need for caution on the question of further extension of the parliamentary franchise. His object in entering parliament, however, was to represent the interests of farmers, especially tenant farmers, and in his speeches he confined himself to agricultural issues on which he was recognized as a distinguished authority. He commanded the attention of the house, and Gladstone made a point of listening to him and of himself referring to Read's views. In his first speech in parliament, in 1866, in support of Sir Fitzroy Kelly's motion for the repeal of the malt tax, Read suggested, as an alternative, a beer tax of 1died per gallon on all beer that was sold; he also proposed that a licence should be paid by private brewers, and that all cottagers should be free to brew their own beer -- a concession later granted. He strenuously supported and promoted all the acts of parliament passed for the suppression of cattle plague and all other imported diseases among livestock; advocated the inalienable right of the occupier of the land to destroy ground game; persistently contended for the compulsory payment by landowners for tenant farmers' improvements to the land; argued that all property, and not land and buildings alone, should contribute to local as well as national taxes; and in 1876 carried a unanimous resolution in the House of Commons in favour of representative county boards. 
In 1865 Read served on the cattle plague commission, and for twenty years sat on almost every agricultural committee of the House of Commons. In February 1874 he was appointed by Disraeli parliamentary secretary to the Local Government Board, but resigned in January 1876, when the government refused to extend the 'Cattle Diseases Act' to Ireland. This, however, soon afterwards became law. On resigning his government appointment, he was presented by the farmers of England with a silver salver and a purse of $5500 at a dinner given at the Cannon Street Hotel on 2 May 1876. When the duke of Richmond's royal commission on agriculture was appointed in June 1879, Read and Albert Pell were made assistant commissioners to visit the United States and Canada to inquire into and report on the conditions of agriculture there, particularly as related to the production of wheat for export to Europe. They were away six months and travelled 16,000 miles. 
In 1848 Read won the Royal Agricultural Society's prize with an essay on the farming of south Wales, and in 1854 and 1856 obtained the society's prizes for similar reports on Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire. He contributed numerous other papers to the Royal Agricultural Society's 'Journal', and acted frequently as judge at the Royal, Smithfield, Bath and West of England, and other agricultural shows. He also wrote on Norfolk agriculture for the fourth edition of White's 'History, Gazetteer and Directory' of that county (1883). In January 1866 he joined the Farmers' Club (founded in 1842), and was an active member until his death, frequently reading papers at meetings, serving on the committee, and acting as chairman for two years, once in 1868 and again in 1892 (the club's jubilee year). He was a member of the council of the central chamber of agriculture (of which he was chairman in 1869) and of the Smithfield Club. He also served as a Norfolk magistrate. 
When his intention to give up farming in Norfolk was made known, a county committee organized a fund for presenting Read with his portrait. In his later years he lived in London at 91 Kensington Gardens Square, where he died on 21 August 1905, but he was buried in his native soil at Barton Bendish. 
Read was excellent company and a well-known and genial figure in farming circles. He was fond of the country, and particularly of shooting, and was said to detest town life and late hours. With his practical experience of farming and of land management he was one of the first members of parliament to speak with authority on agricultural matters, although his own background was more that of the squirearchy than of the ordinary farmers. 


@@@@@


doc= 35695


Read, Sir Herbert Edward (1893-1968), poet, literary critic, and writer on art, was born on 4 December 1893 at Muscoates Grange, near Kirkby Moorside, in the North Riding of Yorkshire, the eldest of the four children of Herbert Edward Read (1868-1903), tenant farmer, and of Eliza (1867-1914), daughter of William Strickland, also a Kirkby Moorside tenant farmer, and his wife, Sarah. Read gives a dream-like account of his early childhood in the Vale of Pickering in his vivid autobiographical essay 'The Innocent Eye' (1933). 
Read's father, 'a man of austere habits and general uprightness' (Read, 'Annals', 31), died of fever following a hunting accident in February 1903. Read and his brother William were sent to board at the spartan Crossley and Porter Orphan Home and School in Halifax, from which Read emerged a precocious Disraelian Conservative. He worked, unhappily, from 1909 to 1912 as a clerk at the Skyrac and Morley Savings Bank in Leeds, but he continued his schooling at evening classes, matriculating in 1911. In 1912, aged nineteen, on the strength of a legacy held in trust by an uncle, Read enrolled at Leeds University, where he studied law and economics. That same year he joined the Leeds Arts Club, home to a northern avant-garde that promoted Nietzsche, theosophy, women's rights, various strands of ethical socialism, and, during the time of Read's membership, modernism in the visual arts. In this setting the markedly dichotomous nature of Read's personality, simultaneously coolly rational and intensely romantic, intellectual and instinctive, began to emerge. 
Read formed important friendships with the painter Jacob Kramer and with Frank Rutter, the curator of Leeds City Art Gallery. He gained access to the collection of advanced European art, including work by Gauguin, Kandinsky, and Klee, being formed by the vice-chancellor of Leeds University, Michael Sadler. Read embarked on an eclectic course of extra-curricular study with Nietzsche as his 'real teacher' (Read, 'Annals', 86). In 1912 he lost his religious faith in favour of political beliefs shaped through reading John Ruskin, William Morris, Peter Kropotkin, and Georges Sorel. The stimulation he experienced during his course of hard-won self-education left him with a distrust of formally trained minds schooled in classics at Oxford or Cambridge. He knew Latin but no Greek and taught himself French, German, and Italian in order to read poetry. 
In 1915 Read was commissioned as a second lieutenant in a battalion of the Yorkshire regiment, the Green Howards. He found his fellow officers, mostly masters and senior boys from Eton and other public schools, less sympathetic than the private soldiers under his command. As he experienced the horror of trench warfare, he discovered that 'men of imagination' like himself were 'the men of courage' (Read, 'Annals', 147). He drew and painted in a vorticist manner and his intense analytical letters from the western battlefront were addressed to a fiercely intelligent Leeds science student, Evelyn May Roff (1894-1972), whom he married on 7 August 1919; they had one son, John Read (1923-2011), later a pioneering documentary film-maker. Read left the army a captain, a convinced pacifist, a war poet, and a youthful war hero who had been awarded the Military Cross (1917) and the DSO (1918). 
In 1919 Read joined the civil service, working first in the Ministry of Labour, then at the Treasury, and in 1921 becoming private secretary to the controller of establishments. But his career as a modern poet and literary critic was already well under way. During the course of the war, in snatched opportunities on leave, Read met the key figures in London's literary and artistic modern movement. With Frank Rutter he founded the journal 'Art & Letters' (1917-20). In 1917 he met and impressed T. S. Eliot and in the autumn of 1918 he came to know the Sitwells, Ezra Pound, Wyndham Lewis, Richard Aldington, and Ford Madox Ford. He learned his skills as an essayist under the tutelage of A. R. Orage, editor of the 'New Age', and in 1921 took over Orage's 'Readers and writers' column in that journal. 
Read always saw himself primarily as a poet, and his verse was much admired in his lifetime. 'Songs of Chaos' (1917) was strongly influenced by William Blake and Ralph Hodgson. His subsequent wartime publications, 'Naked Warriors' (1919) and 'Eclogues' (1919), were cooler in tone, in the spirit of the imagist poetry of T. E. Hulme and Ezra Pound. War poems like 'Liedholz' (1919) had memorable directness but Read's thoroughly decent humanist poetic voice was ultimately ill-served by tight diction and unrelenting emotional logic. However, 'Vocal Avowals' (1962), a late series of short poems, was truly experimental, coming close to pure sound, untrammelled by verifiable meaning. 
From 1923 Read contributed regularly to T. S. Eliot's journal 'The Criterion' (founded 1922). For Read, Eliot was 'rather like a gloomy priest presiding over my affections and spontaneity' (King, 77). In turn Eliot disliked Read's use of psychoanalytic theory, the results of which were probing if highly subjective. For example, in his fine Clark lectures, delivered at Trinity College, Cambridge, and published as 'Wordsworth' (1930), Read's description of the Lakeland poet's character as at once cold and passionate comes close to self-analysis. Read's unswerving commitment to literature was given further practical form when in 1937 he became literary adviser to the publishers Heinemann and Routledge and Kegan Paul. He worked with the latter until 1961, ending up as director. At Routledge's Read was able to give generous support to younger poets such as Sidney Keyes, John Heath Stubbs, and Henry Treece. 
In 1922 Read left the civil service for a more congenial post as curator in the department of ceramics and glass in the Victoria and Albert Museum, subsequently becoming the director's assistant. He turned his attention to the applied arts. In 'English Pottery' (1924), written with Bernard Rackham, Read went beyond classification to discuss national identity and to establish modernist standards of judgement that gave a context for the new art of studio pottery. In 1929 he was invited to contribute 'Weekly notes on art' to 'The Listener', short essays which were the basis of his brilliantly compressed primer 'The Meaning of Art' (1931). The foundations for his approach had been laid when he edited T. E. Hulme's 'Speculations' (1924), leading him to translate Wilhelm Worringer's 'Formprobleme der Gotik' (1912) as 'Form in Gothic' (1927). Worringer distinguished between empathetic art, expressing a confidence in the external world, and abstraction, reflecting human alienation and insecurity, thus providing Read with a reasoned justification for the artistic relativism already espoused by Roger Fry. 
In 1931 Read took up the Watson Gordon professorship in fine art at the University of Edinburgh. Intellectually this brief academic interlude proved disappointing; Read resigned for personal reasons in 1933, becoming editor of the 'Burlington Magazine' (1933-9). By 1929 his marriage to Evelyn Roff was failing, and in 1933 he left Edinburgh and his professorship precipitately with a young musician, Margaret Ludwig ['see below']. They married on 12 February 1936 following Read's divorce, having already settled in Hampstead, London. There, during the happiest period of his life, Read wrote his only novel, 'The Green Child' (1935), part adventure story, part contribution to utopian literature. Read's subsequent independence of institutions, particularly academic ones, helped give his thought and writing its daring breadth. But money was always a problem. Alimony paid to his first wife; three further sons and a daughter, all sent at his second wife's behest to Catholic boarding-schools; and in 1949 the purchase of Stonegrave House (a substantial old rectory near his Yorkshire birthplace) condemned Read to a ceaseless round of writing and lecturing, particularly after the Second World War. 
Nowhere was Read's independence more marked than in his politics. He was an early critic of Nazi rule in Germany. He rejected Soviet communism and in 1937 he declared himself an anarchist, a decision that brought him moral peace, especially during the cold war. He was associated with the Freedom Press and when four fellow anarchists were arrested in 1945 for possessing and distributing seditious literature he spoke out against the 'fascist plutocracy' of post-war government (Read, 'Freedom', 5). He publicly defended a set of principled political values until the end of his life, joining sit-down protests against nuclear war in 1961, deploring the Vietnam War, and refusing to visit Spain under Franco. 
Read personified the responsible, artistically minded intellectual in a democratic age. His sensitive, reticent features were recorded by many artists, including a fine drawing by Jacob Kramer (1914), a witty collage by Kurt Schwitters (1944-7), and Barbara Hepworth's haunting 'The Poet Reading to his Children' (1948), variously showing his strength of character, his sense of fun, and his sweetness of nature. A memorable photograph of the 1940s shows a watchful, smiling Read in a tweed suit, a bow tie, and an anarchist's beret, and holding croquet mallets and hoops. 
There were contradictions in Read's anarchism; but it was his second wife who persuaded Read, incongruously, to accept a knighthood for services to literature in 1953. To an extent her ebullient, dominant nature complemented his reserve. The daughter of a shipping broker, Charles Frederick Ludwig, and his wife, Helene Meid, 
It would be difficult to overestimate Read's importance as an interpreter of continental art and as a supporter of advanced British work in the inter-war period. His contact with German theorists and his awareness of expressive central European and Scandinavian modernism as well as of the school of Paris greatly enriched his polemical 'Art Now' (1933). In 'Art and Industry' (1934) Read went on to suggest a practical role for the abstract artist -- one he had already hinted at in his editorship of the book 'Unit One' (1934) -- as a designer for mass production. In design and content 'Art and Industry' combined the Bauhaus principles of Walter Gropius and Laszlo Moholy-Nagy with a historicist sensibility that enabled Read, for instance, to juxtapose eighteenth-century British silver with modern movement metalwork. 
In the early 1930s Read was a tireless supporter and friend of Barbara Hepworth, Henry Moore, and Ben Nicholson, but in 1936 his dialogic and generous mind and his psychoanalytical interests led him to endorse and write the catalogue introduction for the International Surrealist Exhibition held at the New Burlington Galleries, London. This was in part to take up a political position in which surrealism stood for individual freedom against the rising tide of fascism in Europe. Similarly liberal ideals informed two further books, 'Art and Society' (1937) and 'Education through Art' (1943), and his support for the Society for Education through Art and the 'Pictures for Schools' exhibitions begun in 1947. As director of the Design Research Unit (1943-5) he sought to involve artists with industry. 
After the Second World War Read served on numerous committees. Characteristically, he would sit silently, and suddenly make a quiet remark that would settle the matter. He lectured internationally and wrote influential syntheses such as 'A Concise History of Modern Painting' (1959) and 'A Concise History of Modern Sculpture' (1964). He shaped the British art world of the 1950s, supporting individuals, helping set up the Gregory fellowships for poetry, art, and music at Leeds University, co-founding the Institute of Contemporary Art with Roland Penrose in 1947, and selecting a new post-war generation of British sculptors for the British Pavilion at the Venice Biennale of 1952. But with time he became less receptive to innovation. He found pop art tedious and in 1966 objected to the purchase of Roy Lichtenstein's 'Whaam!' by the Tate Gallery. In 1964 a malignant tumour was removed from his tongue; however, his programme of work continued relentlessly. In January 1968 Read spoke at the International Cultural Congress at Havana, Cuba; in March he endured the last among a series of painful operations. He died in his sleep at Stonegrave House on 12 June 1968 and was buried three days later at St Gregory's Minster, Kirkdale, the church where he had worshipped as a small boy. 


@@@@@


doc= 35696


Read, Herbert Harold (1889-1970), geologist, was born on 17 December 1889, at Whitstable, Kent, the third of four children of Herbert Read, dairy farmer, and his wife, Caroline Mary, 'nee' Kearn. He was descended from a long line of small farmers in east Kent, and Whitstable was to remain his family home. He was educated, with a scholarship, at Simon Langton School, Canterbury, where he became head boy, and then from 1908, at the Royal College of Science, London, where he graduated with first-class honours in 1911. After three years on the staff, during which time he gained an MSc, Read joined the Geological Survey of Great Britain. By then he had begun the revision of the already well-established 'Rutley's Elements of Mineralogy', a task he continued through eight successive editions until shortly before his death. 
Read's career with the geological survey was interrupted by the First World War, in which he served with the Royal Fusiliers in the Mediterranean and France. He was invalided out in 1917 with the rank of corporal, his discharge papers recording him as 'sober and industrious and suitable for a minor post of trust'! He was still a patient in hospital in Sheffield when, on 21 June 1917, he married Edith Browning ('b'. 1889/90), daughter of Frederick Thomas Browning, coal merchant. 
When he returned to the geological survey, Read was assigned to a mapping project in north-east Scotland, his director arguing that a diet of fresh fish in the fishing villages of Banffshire would improve his health. Read's health did improve, and the posting also initiated one of the most fruitful geological research projects of that era. Beginning in Banffshire, his geological studies later extended into Sutherland and thence to Unst, the most northerly of the Shetland Islands, the resulting maps and memoirs including the classic 'The Geology of Central Sutherland' (1931). 
In 1931 Read was appointed to the chair of geology in the University of Liverpool from where, in 1939, he moved to Imperial College, London, holding the chair of geology there until his retirement in 1955. In both universities he established a strong research tradition, recruiting some of the most able students of his day. Indeed, several of the research projects that he early initiated continued long after his death, particularly those dealing with the metamorphic and migmatitic rocks of northern Scotland and Shetland, and also the granites of Donegal, Ireland. The thrust of his research concerned the nature of regional metamorphism and its variations. Above all, he was concerned with the interrelationship between metamorphic rocks and granites, and the very nature of granite itself. 
Read's views were highly influential, not least because he was an enthusiastic teacher, a highly accomplished lecturer, and a master of lucid prose. Although never averse to the introduction of new laboratory-based techniques he retained a certain scepticism concerning the over-enthusiastic application of the early experimental results to complex geological phenomena and enjoyed his reputation as one of the most effective of disputants in some of the central debates of his time. The series of challenging addresses that he gave while presiding successively over the British Association, section C (1939), the Geologists' Association (1942-4), the Geological Society of London (1947-8), and as a keynote speaker at international conferences, were reprinted in book form as 'The Granite Controversy' (1957), which remains a geological classic. He is said to have composed the elements of these important essays while on firewatching duties on the roof of Imperial College during the Second World War. A crowning achievement was his presidency, in 1948, of the eighteenth International Geological Congress in London. 
Long after his retirement, Read's geological hammer continued to resound in the field, particularly in Donegal, and from his pen flowed further important contributions which included three popular textbooks, two of which were written in conjunction with Janet Watson. Read received many honours including election to the Norwegian, French, and Belgian academies. He had been elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1939 and in 1963 he received the royal medal. He was also awarded the Bigsby, Wollaston, Penrose, and Steinmann medals, the principal awards of the geological societies of London, the United States, and Germany. Other honours included honorary doctorates of Columbia University (1954) and Dublin (1956), and honorary membership of the Royal Irish Academy. He came to be revered as an elder statesman, both in geological circles and at Imperial College, where he was successively dean of the Royal School of Mines (1943-5), pro-rector (1952-5), and acting head of the college (1954-5). 
A plain-speaking and modest man, Read nevertheless viewed life with acuity, being fully awake to its vagaries. He was deeply religious, and during his many years of residence in his native Whitstable took an active part in the work of the parish. He died at his home, 35 Millstrood Road, Whitstable, on 29 March 1970, survived by his wife, Edith, and their only daughter, Marguerite. 


@@@@@


doc= 35697


Read, Sir Herbert James (1863-1949), civil servant and colonial governor, was born at Honiton, Devon, on 17 March 1863, the second son of Charles Read, proprietor of a drapery store, and his wife, Mary Ann Avery. Read was educated at Allhallows School, Honiton, and at Brasenose College, Oxford, where he was an exhibitioner and gained a first in mathematics in 1884. He was also a good classical scholar, and his knowledge of the history of London in recent times was encyclopaedic. 
Read entered the civil service as a higher division clerk at the War Office in 1887. In 1889 he was transferred to the Colonial Office where he remained until retirement. As a civil servant Read linked the Colonial Office to the world of science, championing -- from within Whitehall -- the practical application of scientific innovation for the benefit of those living and working in the empire, a generation before 'development and welfare' became serious official concerns. Throughout his career his work was mainly concerned with Britain's tropical African empire. In the colonial secretary, Joseph Chamberlain, who selected him as his assistant private secretary in 1896-8, Read found an appreciative and congenial chief. In turn, Read 'stimulated his chief's interest in tropical medicine', ensuring Chamberlain's 'desire to innovate was well fed, and that Colonial Office inertia was circumvented' (Kubicek, 'Administration of Imperialism', 20, 142). He played a vital role in the early twentieth-century drive against tropical diseases, and matched scientific and technical advances with official support for their application throughout the empire. 
Read was exceptional among his official colleagues, most of whom were graduates in the arts, in his quick recognition of the importance of scientific research in the future administration and development of tropical dependencies. He was largely instrumental in stimulating official interest in organizations concerned with tropical medicine and agriculture and in establishing contacts between his department and scientific institutions, some of which, such as the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine and the Commonwealth institutes of entomology and mycology, owe their inception largely to him. The early investigation of trypanosomiasis in Uganda was directly due to his influence. 
Read's promotion within the Colonial Office was rapid: he rose to be head, in turn, of both the east and west African departments. In 1911-12 he visited east Africa at a time when overseas visits by Colonial Office officials were rare. In 1916 he was appointed an assistant under-secretary of state with supervision over the two African departments. He became a prominent member of several committees which were greatly indebted to him for their achievements. This was due to his 'veritable genius for committee work, not only setting them up, but for seeing there was work for them to do and that they got on with it' (Mason-Bahr, 128). 
Read was chairman of the colonial survey committee in 1905-24, of the colonial advisory medical and sanitary committee in 1909-24, of the committee on staffing of the agriculture departments in the colonies in 1919, and of the Bureau of Hygiene and Tropical Diseases in 1908-24. He served as British delegate to several international conferences, including the African liquor conference, Brussels, 1895, the commission on the Anglo-German frontier in east Africa, Berlin, 1905, the sleeping sickness conference, London, 1907-8, and the African arms traffic conference, Brussels, 1908. He was senior member of the Colonial Office delegacy to the Paris peace conference in 1919. Read went overseas as governor of Mauritius from 1925 to 1930 for the final phase of his official career. He was a vigorous governor, but his tour was hampered by the depression in the sugar industry on which the island depended, and by the death of his son there. He is remembered in Mauritius more for his good intentions than for his concrete achievements. 
In retirement Read resumed the activities in keeping with his aptitudes, serving on a large number of committees concerned not only with scientific research but with social welfare, an interest to which he was now able to devote more time. He was an active member of the Reform Club, a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society, and an honorary fellow of the Society for the Preservation of the Fauna of the Empire. He was a long-standing member of the committee of the Imperial Cancer Research Fund, a crown trustee of the London Parochial Charities, chairman of the Corona Club, and Colonial Office representative on the governing body of Imperial College, and later chairman of its executive committee. He was a member of the court of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Colonial Office representative on the governing body of the Seamen's Hospital Society, and Colonial Office representative on the council of the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, and later honorary vice-president of the school. These latter positions provided the institutions with a Colonial Office link. 
Tall, stooping, and superficially shy, Read had a lovable nature and ready sense of humour, and was effusive and genial in private. He endeared himself to his junior colleagues -- particularly by his habit of retreating before them during discussion conducted standing up -- and enjoyed a happy domestic life. He married in 1905 Violet Kate (died 1951), daughter of Major Duncan Maclachlan, 90th regiment; they had one son and one daughter. 
Read was appointed CMG in 1907, promoted KCMG in 1918 and GCMG in 1935, and appointed CB in 1914; he became a commander of the order of the crown of Belgium in 1919. He died at the Clarence Nursing Home, Tunbridge Wells, on 16 October 1949. 


@@@@@


doc= 35698


Read, John (1884-1963), organic chemist, was born in Maiden Newton, Dorset, on 17 February 1884, in his father's seventieth year, the younger of two children of John Read, yeoman farmer, and his wife, Bessie Gatcombe. Apart from his sister, Read also had five older half-brothers and six older half-sisters. Both his parents were descended from a long line of farmers, and he was the first member of the family not to become a farmer. 
Read was identified early as a clever boy at the village school at Sparkford, and proceeded after only three years to Sexey's School, Bruton, at the top of the county junior scholarship list; he left there in 1901 as head boy with a senior Somerset county scholarship of $60 per annum. He then spent four years at Finsbury Technical College, London, where he attended courses in both science and engineering before obtaining the college's diploma and chemistry prize in 1904, and becoming for a short time a college demonstrator in the department of chemistry. He was then awarded a London county council senior scholarship which enabled him to leave London, which he disliked, for the University of Zurich, to study for a doctorate under Professor Alfred Werner, then in the prime of his scientific life. 
It is clear from his writings that Read enjoyed Zurich University. Not only did he find the scientific scene stimulating and rewarding, but he was able to develop his interest and proficiency in foreign languages, an interest which he maintained throughout his life. Although not directly involved in Werner's renowned research on the stereochemistry of inorganic complexes -- that is, a study of the consequences of the three-dimensional structure of molecules containing metallic ions -- he was greatly influenced by the stereochemical concepts being widely discussed. Consequently, after a successful defence of his PhD thesis in 1907, two years after his arrival in Zurich, Read decided to spend the remaining year of his scholarship at the Municipal School of Technology in Manchester, working with W. J. Pope, who had earned an international reputation for his studies of the stereochemistry of organic compounds (those based on carbon). Read's decision was important in determining his career, because in 1908 Pope was appointed to the chair of chemistry at Cambridge, and took Read with him as his assistant. Read became a member of Emmanuel College with the status of advanced student. In 1912 he was granted an MA. 
For the next eight years Read was committed to his chemistry and made significant discoveries in the field of organic stereochemistry. His dedication is illustrated by the story of his synthesis of methyl ethyl selenide, which not only has one of the most offensive smells known, but can be detected at remarkably low concentrations. In view of this Read felt it wise to synthesize the substance in the open air on the roof of his laboratory; unfortunately his efforts coincided with a number of garden parties held to celebrate the Darwin centenary, and the subsequent furore forced Read into the fens to complete his work. There he noted that both insects and cows were attracted by the smell: 'Their whole behaviour indicated that they felt they were missing something really good'. 
A major change occurred in 1916 when Read, at the age of thirty-two, was appointed to the chair of organic chemistry in Sydney, Australia. After a long and anxious voyage he arrived to find that he was required to give his first lecture that very day. The problems facing him were now very different. Large classes, the design and supervision of the construction of a new chemistry building, and the administration of the department all combined to reduce the time available for research. Nevertheless, Read initiated and pursued what came to be recognized as a significant investigation of the structure (and stereochemistry) of a series of organic materials which he isolated from Australian flora. These studies were all the more commendable because Read had very little research assistance. 
While in Australia, in 1916 Read married Ida, daughter of Arthur Suddards, of Bradford, Yorkshire; they had two sons. Read was very happy in Sydney and his decision in 1923 to accept an invitation to succeed Robert Robinson in the Purdie chair of chemistry at St Andrews was not an easy one. The department there, first under Thomas Purdie, with his foresight in recognizing the importance of research in the context of university chemistry, and then under his outstanding pupil J. C. Irvine, had a reputation which had been enhanced by Robinson, despite his short stay (1921-2). Read soon settled down in the St Andrews atmosphere of scholarship and went on to produce a steady stream of original papers as well as a very successful series of textbooks; his 'A Direct Entry to Organic Chemistry' (1948) ran to many editions and Read received, in 1949, the Premio Europeo-Cortina, a prize of 1 million lire for the best popular work in the field of physical science published in Europe in the preceding five years. 
Read had always been interested in history; he said that, given a choice and free from the pressures of a science-orientated school, he would have specialized in history or languages, rather than science. Once at St Andrews he devoted more time to these interests, building up and writing about an extraordinarily important collection of manuscripts, books, and engravings relating to the history of science, and to alchemy. One notable outcome was his 'Humour and Humanism in Chemistry' (1947). His interest in the dialects of Somerset and Dorset also found expression in a series of plays and 'The Farmer's Joy' (1949). His wide distinction is summarized by the citation of Read as 'one of the most versatile of Scientists as well known for his literary accomplishments as for his researches in organic chemistry', on his receiving the Dexter award for services to the history of chemistry, from the American Chemical Society (1959). 
Read remained in St Andrews for almost forty years. He was widely acclaimed during his lifetime and was elected FRS in 1935, having gained his ScD at Cambridge in 1934. He was most proud, however, of the esteem in which he was held by his pupils. He was an excellent teacher and kindly man, who appeared untouched by the hurly-burly of modern chemical life. 
Read died at his home, 1 Donaldson Gardens, St Andrews, on 21 January 1963, just one month short of his seventy-ninth birthday. He was survived by his wife. 
John Cadogan', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35699


Read, Walter William (1855-1907), cricketer, son of Robert Read and Elizabeth Jane, 'nee' Allwork, was born in West Street, Reigate, Surrey, on 23 November 1855. He was educated at the Reigate Priory School, of which his father was headmaster. For Reigate Priory club, at the age of thirteen, he scored 78 not out against Tonbridge. In 1873 he was introduced to Charles William Alcock, the secretary of Surrey County Cricket Club, and he played for the county from that date until 1897. He played an important part in Surrey's success in winning the county championship in every year except one between 1887 and 1895. He made 366 appearances and when at his best, in the late 1880s, he scored in successive matches in June 1887 against Lancashire and against Cambridge University 247 and 244 not out respectively, and, in the following year, 338 against Oxford University. 
Read played on twenty-three occasions for the Gentlemen against the Players (1877-95), making 159 at the Oval in 1885. He also made seventeen appearances for England against Australia (1882-93), his most memorable performance being in 1884. Despite the fact that he was top of his county averages, his captain, Lord Harris, put him in to bat at number ten. Read responded with 117 runs, which over a century later was still the highest score to have been made by an England number ten. Two of his tests were in Australia, where two sides visited in 1887-8. On that occasion Read captained an England eleven drawn from both visiting sides. He led England to victory, as he did in South Africa at Cape Town in March 1892. 
In his career Read scored 22,349 runs and made thirty-eight centuries. Of strong physique, he was a punishing front-foot player and a very safe fielder, especially at point. From being a fast right-arm bowler, he became a slow left-arm 'lob' or underarm bowler. Like W. G. Grace, he provides an outstanding example of an amateur of his day being rewarded financially as if he were a professional. After assisting in his father's school, he was assistant secretary of Surrey County Cricket Club (1881-97) at a salary of $100 per annum. The county records give little indication of his doing very much work in the post. Surrey regularly gave him a bonus of $100 a season and they awarded him match expenses of 4 guineas. A testimonial raised $800 and he was twice given an 'ex gratia' payment of $250. A partnership in an auctioneering and surveying firm in the City of London also assisted his finances. 
John Shuter, Read's county captain, in an introduction to the latter's 'Annals of Cricket' (1896), called him a model cricketer, modest and unassuming. The book itself is a secondary source on the game, drawing heavily on such authorities as James Pycroft. Read, a married man with three sons and a daughter, died on 6 January 1907 at 5 Colworth Road, off Bingham Road, Addiscombe Park, Croydon, and was buried at Shirley cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 35700


Reade, Thomas Mellard (1832-1909), architect and geologist, was born on 27 May 1832 at 31 Mill Street, Toxteth Park, Liverpool, where his father, William James Reade (1794-1867), ran a small private school. The Reade family, formerly Staffordshire yeomen, included Joseph Bancroft Reade and Sir Thomas Reade, deputy adjutant-general at St Helena during Napoleon's captivity. Reade's mother was Mary Mellard (1790-1866) of Newcastle under Lyme, who was aunt to the novelist Dinah Maria Mulock ['see 'Craik, Dinah Maria]. 
Reade was educated in private schools before beginning work at the age of twelve in the offices of Edward Eyes & Sons, architects and surveyors in Liverpool. In 1853 he became a draughtsman for the London and North Western Railway Company, initially based in Warrington, subsequently in Liverpool. In 1860 he successfully set up in private practice as architect and civil engineer, working in and around Liverpool. He laid out the Blundellsands estate in 1865 and, from 1868 onwards, lived there in a house he had himself designed. On 19 May 1866 he married Emma Eliza Taylor, 'nee' Fox (died 1895), the widow of his long-standing friend Alfred Taylor. They had three sons and a daughter. Reade became architect to the Liverpool school board in 1870 and thereafter designed most of their school buildings, until 1902 when the board was taken over by the city council. In 1890, while president of the Liverpool Architectural Society, he helped to found the school of architecture at University College, Liverpool. 
As a result of his engineering work, Reade became interested in geology. He joined the Liverpool Geological Society in 1870 and subsequently published almost 200 scientific papers. Much of his early work concerned the local glacial and post-glacial deposits; it remains of great value since many of the sites and sections described are now built over and inaccessible for study. 
In 1873, when the proposal to build a rail tunnel under the Mersey was being considered, Reade predicted the existence of a deep buried channel beneath the river. When the project was approved, the engineers prudently modified their plans so that the tunnel ran through bedrock below the supposed channel. Reade later had the satisfaction of visiting the tunnel works and seeing the bottom of the channel he had predicted in the roof overhead. However, some of Reade's other scientific work was less successful, including an attempt to estimate the age of the earth from the amount of lime carried in solution by rivers. In 1886 he published 'The Origin of the Mountain Ranges' which was well received by his contemporaries. However, Reade's theories therein have not stood the test of time and are now of only historic interest. What is still of interest is an unusual geological memorial. In 1898 Reade persuaded Crosby district council to excavate an 18 ton erratic boulder from the glacial clays being worked in a local quarry. The boulder, which consisted of white gypsum, was then placed on public display. Now somewhat weatherworn, it still stands in Coronation Park, Great Crosby. 
An illness in early childhood severely impaired Reade's hearing and the resulting deafness became increasingly pronounced in middle age. Consequently he found large meetings difficult to follow and rarely attended them. Nevertheless he became a fellow of the Geological Society of London in 1872 and was awarded its Murchison medal in 1896. He was president of the Liverpool Geological Society three times, president of the Liverpool Architectural Society, a fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects, and an associate member of the Institution of Civil Engineers. Reade died at his home, Park Corner, Blundellsands, on 26 May 1909; he was buried at Sefton, Lancashire. 


@@@@@


doc= 35701


Redmayne, Sir Richard Augustine Studdert (1865-1955), mining engineer, was born at South Dene, Low Fell, co. Durham, on 22 July 1865, the fourth son of John Marriner Redmayne, alkali manufacturer, and his wife, Jane Anna Fitzgerald Studdert. Educated privately and at the Durham College of Science, Newcastle upon Tyne, he became an articled apprentice of William Armstrong, a prominent north-country mining engineer, and was trained at Hetton Collieries, co. Durham. There he rose to be an under-manager, before leaving for South Africa in 1891, where he spent two years managing collieries and making reports and surveys on mining properties in Natal. He returned to England in 1894, and became the resident manager at Seaton Delaval Collieries, Northumberland. In 1898 he married Edith Rose (died 1942), daughter of Thomas Picton Richards, shipowner, of Swansea; they had one son, John, and two daughters. 
In 1902 Redmayne was appointed professor of mining at the newly created University of Birmingham. The mining industry at that time laid less stress on university education than on apprenticeship or practical experience, supplemented by education at local technical colleges. Redmayne studied the methods followed by advanced mining schools in North America, where in laboratory, classroom, and field, the conditions were simulated in which the student would later work professionally. With these in mind, Redmayne organized a mining department which, for the first time in Britain, included an ore-dressing laboratory and a model underground coalmine, where practical problems could be studied. His pioneer work greatly encouraged higher education and training for mining engineers. 
Redmayne served as a mining expert on a number of official inquiries into the organization and safety procedures of the coal industry. In 1906 he was a member of the committee which inquired into the economic effect of an eight-hour working day for coalminers. Following the committee's recommendation, the government introduced the 'Eight Hour Act'. In 1908 Redmayne became chairman of the royal commission appointed to study the causes and prevention of accidents in mines arising from falls of ground, underground transport, and in shafts: its main recommendations were subsequently incorporated in legislation. In the same year Redmayne was appointed a commissioner to inquire into a disaster at Hamstead colliery and between 1908 and 1913 he conducted similar inquiries at Maypole, West Stanley, Wellington, Hulton, Cadeby, and Senghenydd collieries into disasters which caused a loss of 1250 lives. He was knighted in 1914. 
Redmayne resigned his professorship in 1908 to join the Home Office as the first chief inspector of mines in Britain. His primary responsibility was for safety in the mining industry, and involved supervising the work of district inspectors of mines, advising the secretary of state on mining matters, conducting inquiries into accidents in mines, and editing the annual report on mines and quarries. One of his most notable contributions as chief inspector was his work with Sir Malcolm Delevingne on the framing of the comprehensive 'Coal Mines Act' of 1911 which enforced higher standards of safety in mines. From 1917 to 1919 he was chief technical adviser to the controller of coalmines, and in 1919 he acted as assessor to Sir John Sankey, chairman of the royal commission on coalmines. 
In 1919 Redmayne resigned from his post as chief inspector in order to devote himself to the work of the Imperial Mineral Resources Bureau (amalgamated in 1925 with the Imperial Institute), of which he was chairman from 1918 until 1935, and to practise as a consulting engineer. Chairman of the board for mining examinations from its inception in 1912 until 1950, he also became, in 1922, the first president of the Institution of Professional Civil Servants, an office to which he was re-elected annually until his death. He played an active part in the work of professional engineering institutions, and was elected honorary member of the Institution of Mining Engineers in 1909, president of the Institution of Mining and Metallurgy in 1916, and president of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1934-5. During the 1930s Redmayne held a number of senior non-executive appointments. He was the independent chairman of the national conciliation board on road motor haulage (1934-8), and also acted as chairman of the road haulage wages board from 1938 until 1941. 
An able administrator and speaker, a man of fine presence, tact, and charm, Redmayne also enjoyed the confidence of the miners with whom his work brought him into contact. Possessing a keen sense of humour, he was a superb teller of stories in the Tyneside dialect. He also made numerous contributions to professional and technical journals and was the author of several authoritative books on mining. He was the co-author of 'Colliery Working and Management', first published in 1896, which became a standard work; and also of 'Modern Practice in Mining' (5 vols., 1908-32). His autobiography, 'Men, Mines and Memories' (1942), throws interesting light on little-known aspects of British industrial life. He died, aged ninety, at his home, Lodge Farm, Little Hadham, Hertfordshire, on 27 December 1955. 


@@@@@


doc= 35702


Redmond, John Edward (1856-1918), politician, was born on 1 September 1856 at Ballytrent House, co. Wexford, an old family mansion. He was the elder son of William Archer Redmond MP (died 1880) and his wife, Mary, daughter of Major Hoey of Hoeyfield, co. Wicklow. Of his sisters, one (who died young) became a nun of the order of Marie Reparatrice and the other married L. G. Howard, an Englishman in New South Wales. The Redmonds were an established Catholic gentry family in the county and had long been associated with Wexford town. One of the family became member for Wexford in 1859 and on his death in 1872 was succeeded by his nephew Redmond's father, a supporter of the home-rule policy of Isaac Butt. 
Redmond's family heritage was rather more complex than that of most of his colleagues in the nationalist political class. His mother came from a protestant and unionist family and, though she converted to Catholicism on marriage, she never converted to nationalism. His uncle General John Patrick Redmond, who had inherited the family estate, was created CB for his role during the Indian mutiny; he disliked his nephew's involvement in agrarian nationalism of the 1880s. John Redmond liked to boast of his family's involvement in the 1798 rising in co. Wexford: a 'Miss Redmond' had ridden to the support of the rebels, and a moderate Father Redmond was hanged by the yeomanry, as was a maternal ancestor, William Kearney. But another ancestor, William Redmond, had been on the yeoman side and John Redmond's nationalist colleague John Dillon privately insisted that the Redmonds of the 1790s had been prosperous drapers who were even more conservative than their protestant neighbours. 
From 1868 to 1874 Redmond and his brother Willie were educated by the Jesuits at Clongowes Wood, co. Kildare, where John was regarded as the best speaker in the college debating society and performed the lead in school plays. After leaving Clongowes, he entered Trinity College, Dublin, but left in 1876 to live with his father in London, with a view to becoming a barrister. He acted as his father's assistant at Westminster; even at this stage, politics was more of a fascination than law. Redmond's father inclined to the conservative nationalism of Isaac Butt, but in 1877 -- in a gesture which reflects above all the sentimentalism which surrounded the Fenians a decade after their spectacularly unsuccessful rising -- he took his two sons to the reception in a London hotel to mark the release of a celebrated Fenian prisoner, Michael Davitt. This seems to have been John Redmond's first recorded political act. In 1880 he took up a paid clerkship in the House of Commons; though there is a suggestion of familial pressure in the opposite direction, he increasingly identified his fortunes with those of C. S. Parnell, a noted 'obstructionist' in the House of Commons and president of the Land League movement founded in 1879. 
In the spring of 1879 Redmond attended with Parnell the meeting at Enniscorthy, when the supporters of the then representative for Wexford County, The O'Clery, attacked Parnell's platform. After Redmond was knocked down by the crowd, Parnell commented drily 'well, you have shed your blood for me at all events' (Bew, 'John Redmond', 8). When his father died later in 1880, Redmond sought Parnell's support as the natural replacement as the MP for Wexford. Parnell, however, insisted that his then secretary, Tim Healy, was the better candidate. Reluctantly swallowing his disappointment, early in the next year Redmond was to become the official candidate for New Ross in a by-election, and was returned unopposed. On election (31 January 1881) he rushed straight away to the House of Commons, where there were stormy scenes following the arrest of Michael Davitt, by then a Land League leader. The next day Redmond took his seat, made his maiden speech, and was expelled from the House of Commons all on the same evening. 
The Land League conflict now entered a very turbulent phase; unlike most of the other Parnellite lieutenants, Redmond managed to stay out of gaol. This, in part, reflected Wexford's relatively low-key involvement in agrarian disturbance. Even the beleaguered Irish government regarded him as decent and moderate. In early 1882, by luck in the ballot, he won first place for a bill to amend the 'Land Act' of 1881; his bill became the focus of attempts to reach a compromise between the Land League and the government and played a part in the events leading to the Kilmainham 'treaty' of 1882. 
In early 1882 Redmond and his brother Willie were sent to Australia on a fund-raising mission; despite bad publicity resulting from the Phoenix Park murders, the trip was a success, both in political and personal terms. Not without arousing local jealousy -- expressed in a fist fight on the eve of the wedding -- he and his brother married into the prosperous Daltons, an Irish-Australian family, with Redmond marrying Johanna Dalton in September 1883. She died in early 1889, having borne Redmond three children; but it was a happy, if short-lived, marriage. Although he was to use more extreme language on American trips in 1884, 1886, and 1904, the Australian trip had an enduring moderating effect on Redmond's political outlook: in part, because as William O'Brien noted in 1886, he found his contacts with Irish-American extremism daunting. Impressed by the success of Irish Australians such as the Daltons, he now embraced an Irish version of Liberal Imperialism; he was always anxious, for example, to retain Irish representation at Westminster even after the implementation of home rule. During the debate which followed Gladstone's conversion to home rule in 1886, he declared: 'As a Nationalist, I do not regard as entirely palatable the idea that forever and a day Ireland's voice should be excluded from the councils of an empire which the genius and valour of her sons have done so much to build up and of which she is to remain. (D. Gwynn, 55)' In 1888, following an unusually strong and conceivably intimidatory speech, Redmond received five weeks' imprisonment with hard labour. Having belatedly qualified as a barrister (he was called to the Irish bar in Michaelmas 1887), he now busied himself with agrarian cases; he was involved in an appeal in such a case to the Clonmel county court judge in November 1890, when he heard of the news of Parnell's decision not to contest the O'Shea divorce petition. As he immediately told a journalist friend: 'I don't know what you will do but I'll stick to Parnell' ('Freeman's Journal', 9 March 1918). This he did, despite his very conventional Catholic religious views, though some detected a wavering when he did not attend -- as advertised -- Parnell's last public meetings. Following Parnell's death, and by now the undisputed leader of Parnellism, he resigned the Wexford seat which had been his since the 'Redistribution Act' of 1885, and stood unsuccessfully for Cork, which Parnell had represented. He did, however, win a seat in Waterford a few months later, on 23 December 1891. 
As leader of the small Parnellite minority of MPs, Redmond pushed policy in a novel conciliatory direction -- though hints of his approach can be found in Parnell's increasingly moderate speeches of 1890-91. He also dropped all interest in agrarian radicalism and, unlike the mainstream nationalists, worked alongside Unionists in the recess committee of 1895 which led to the establishment in 1899 of the department of agriculture. After the democratization of Irish local government in 1898, he argued that Parnellite voters should use some of their electoral clout to return public-spirited non-nationalists -- the 'policy of toleration', as it was known. In 1899 Redmond married his second wife, Ada Beesley, an English protestant who later converted to Catholicism (but only after his death). 
In 1900 the split in parliamentary nationalism was healed. Redmond was elected chairman of the new party but he was never granted the authority and prestige of true leadership by powerful colleagues such as John Dillon, William O'Brien, Tim Healy, and Joe Devlin. Leadership was at best a balancing act; following the amicable land conference of 1903, involving landlord and tenant leaders, the benign and imaginative Wyndham 'Land Act' of 1903 was passed. Redmond, in tune with his characteristic themes of the 1890s, was inclined to see a great opportunity for a new strategy of conciliation of those in Ireland who were traditionally suspicious of nationalist objectives. Dillon in his famous 'Swinford revolt' blocked any such move; William O'Brien urged Redmond to follow his own deepest convictions but, fearing another split, he quietly endured Dillon's diktat. He was also weakened at that moment by the general bad publicity arising out of the price he had originally sought for the sale of the family estate inherited from General Redmond: it seems also that General Redmond had so arranged his will that the inheritance was financially and politically a burden. 
The Liberal landslide of 1906 gave an increasingly rotund Redmond renewed opportunities for working with, rather than against, the grain of government policy. He was privately keen to accept the scheme of devolution offered in 1907, but a convention of his party insisted that only the full measure of Gladstonian home rule was acceptable. Redmond also had to accept with great reluctance the revival of agrarian radicalism in the ranch war of 1916-10 but help was at hand. The closely fought general elections of 1910, combined with the destruction of the veto power of the House of Lords, gave him the balance of power at Westminster and thus the ability to pursue a Dublin parliament more seriously. In February 1912 the third 'Home Rule Bill' was introduced; Redmond had at last become a nationalist hero of Parnellite stature. But like many of his colleagues in the nationalist leadership, he knew little of Ulster and the intensity of Unionist sentiment there. Protracted attempts to broker a compromise with the Unionist leader, Sir Edward Carson -- with whom he had always had good personal relations, based on shared experiences at Trinity College, Dublin, and the Irish bar -- eventually failed at the Buckingham Palace conference of July 1914. Many feared that Ireland was drifting towards massive civil strife as Unionist and nationalist volunteers drilled openly and armed; but the First World War intervened. Redmond reacted in a precisely calculated fashion when, in exchange for prime minister H. H. Asquith's commitment to place the 'Home Rule Bill' on the statute book (and to make some later provision for Ulster), he supported the British war effort. His reasons were complex; he had a niece who was a nun in Belgium and this led him to sympathize profoundly with the anti-German cause. He also hoped that common sacrifice by Irish nationalists and Unionists would bring them closer together; even if not, Irish nationalists could not afford to allow the Ulster Unionists to cash the benefits of being the only 'loyal' faction in Ireland. Nevertheless, following his declaration of a pro-British policy at Woodenbridge, the Irish Nationalist Volunteers split; a large majority, calling themselves 'national volunteers' supported him but a vocal and increasingly influential minority, the Irish Volunteers, broke away and provided the cadre for the Easter rising of 1916. Until Easter 1916 -- judged by the steady, if decidedly unspectacular, electoral success of the Irish Parliamentary Party in every contested Irish by-election -- he held the support of a majority of nationalists for this approach. He felt strong enough to turn down the offer of a cabinet place in 1915, even though this would have given him greater opportunity to influence the War Office, which he felt was guilty of insensitivity in important matters of Irish military symbolism. It would also have 'balanced' Sir Edward Carson's appointment to the war cabinet. Redmond flew the union flag alongside the green flag at Augavanagh; and he was the first to sing the national anthem at Westminster social gatherings while some of his fellow countrymen looked on in disbelief. 
Despite friendly warnings from Bonar Law and others, Redmond had not expected the Easter rising and certainly felt that the execution of the inner core of its radical nationalist leaders was just. Later in 1916, and finally and most gallantly at the 1917 Irish convention representative of the principal political interests in the country, he made desperate efforts to broker a new compromise with Irish unionism but, as public opinion in nationalist Ireland turned decisively against his party, these efforts had little chance of success; Unionists clearly perceived that he could no longer deliver on his side of any bargain. A series of blows fell that were political but with a bitter personal element. His brother Willie died gallantly at the front, but in July 1917 his seat in East Clare was won by Eamon de Valera, the most senior surviving commandant of the Easter insurgents. In September de Valera's campaign organizer, Thomas Ashe, died on hunger strike; Redmond's son-in-law Max Green was chairman of the general prisoners' board and involved in key decisions concerning the Ashe case. Inevitably, Max Green became the object of much caustic nationalist comment. Redmond himself was assaulted in the street by a crowd of young Dublin Sinn Fein supporters, including C. S. 'Tod' Andrews, one of the most single-minded (some would say narrow-minded) apparatchiks of the approaching new revolutionary order. 
Redmond had a conciliatory agenda -- 'a plea for concord between the two races that providence has designed should work as neighbours together' -- as he expressed it in his final words in parliament. But this agenda often remained hidden as he was forced to pursue the twin objectives of survival and party unity. As Warre B. Wells, one of his biographers, explained: 'In retrospect, one sees the dominant purpose of his political life as a recurrent 'motif' of gathering force: the Recess Committee, the Land Conference, the Convention, that last chance of recovering the lost and misused opportunity which the war created -- in these episodes most unmistakably the purpose grows and broadens. (Wells, 204)' But 'in retrospect' is the key phrase here; Redmond's public purposes were often unclear; for every moderate speech there was a militant counterpart. Above all, during the Ulster crisis, he seems to have accepted the concept of a (non-time limited) county opt-out from the home-rule scheme, but failed to give it real political expression until it was too late. There is an Irish nationalist view that he was 'let down by everyone', in particular the Ulster Unionists, the British tories, and both the British government (especially Lloyd George) and the War Office during the war. But this is to ignore the well-advertised convictions of the Ulster Unionists, the relative indeterminacy of view among the British tories on the eve of the home-rule crisis, and the priorities of the British war machine, locked as it was in a life or death struggle with imperial Germany. Redmond, it should not be forgotten, was supremely confident and optimistic on the eve of the Easter rising; it was the insurrection which destroyed his plans, as he himself always acknowledged. He was allowed one posthumous victory of note: his son Captain William Archer Redmond retained his Waterford seat in 1918, despite the Sinn Fein landslide, in part because of his father's excellent record as a local member. Indeed, the family's strong political influence survived in Waterford well into the 1930s, as a reminder of a more cosmopolitan and relaxed form of nationalist politics in which an Irish parliament existed for democratic reasons, not to fulfil some intense racial and cultural agenda handed down by history. 
Aloof, often a recluse at Parnell's old shooting lodge when in Ireland, Redmond had a distinctive Irish political temperament that can be detected in an elegant phrase by Alexander Sullivan: 'He was slow, cautious, cynical, with a prejudice in favour of truth that was almost English' (p. 137). His health was permanently affected by an accident in 1912. By mid-1917 he was visibly in decline; an operation in March 1918 to remove an intestinal obstruction followed, after which he at first made good progress but then suffered heart failure. He died a few hours later in a London nursing home at 8 York Place on 6 March 1918. After a funeral mass in Westminster Cathedral his remains were interred in a family vault at St John's graveyard in Wexford town. 


@@@@@


doc= 35703


Redmond, William Hoey Kearney (1861-1917), Irish nationalist, second son of William Archer Redmond (1825-1880), and the younger brother of John Edward Redmond, was born in Grassendale, Liverpool, on 13 April 1861. He came from a Catholic family associated with co. Wexford for centuries. His father sat in parliament for the Home Rule Party from 1872 to 1880. His mother, Mary Hoey, of protestant stock, was from co. Wicklow. He had two sisters. He grew up at Ballytrent, at the south-eastern tip of co. Wexford. He was educated at Carlow College (1871-2) and Clongowes Wood College (1873-6). 
After leaving Clongowes, Redmond served in the merchant marine. He then took a second lieutenancy in the Wexford militia in December 1879 (becoming lieutenant in October 1880), and contemplated a regular army career. But he resigned from the militia to join the Land League agitation. He was arrested in February 1882 in possession of seditious literature and sentenced to three months' imprisonment. At Kilmainham he shared a cell with Charles Stewart Parnell, to whom his political loyalty never wavered. He went to the United States in June 1882 with Michael Davitt to collect funds for the Land League. In February 1883 he arrived with his brother in Australia, with which he developed close links. Here he met Eleanor Mary Dalton (died 1947), eldest daughter of James Dalton, of Orange, New South Wales (he married her in London in February 1886); her aunt, James Dalton's half-sister, Johanna, married John Redmond in September 1883. The Redmonds collected $15,000 for the Irish National League, and then travelled to the United States and collected $15,000 more. In his absence, in July 1883, he was elected MP for Wexford, his father's old constituency. 
Willie Redmond sat as an MP until his death, representing Wexford (1883-5), North Fermanagh (1885-92), and East Clare (1892-1917). He was a frequent speaker in the Commons, but the ardour of his speeches often exceeded their intellectual coherence. He was ejected several times from the house for his excesses and involved in several violent confrontations with Unionist MPs. He remained popular, even with his political opponents. He was even less restrained on Irish platforms and there often spoke of violent insurrection (when the time was ripe). Yet he remained a constitutionalist at heart. He was imprisoned for three months in September 1888 for helping to resist an eviction. When the Irish party split in 1890 he supported Parnell completely. His only child, a boy aged five, died early in 1891; he had no more children. After Parnell's death in October 1891, under stress of emotion, he lost all sense of political direction for a time. One of the most devout Catholics in the Irish party, he was deeply grieved by the opposition of that church to Parnell. In 1891 he was called to the Irish bar, but never practised. 
Redmond joined with younger nationalists, such as Arthur Griffith and Maud Gonne, to oppose the South African War. He was co-treasurer to the Irish Transvaal committee. He was imprisoned again in November 1902 for inflammatory speeches. He made numerous visits to Irish communities worldwide, and wrote two books on his Australian journeys: 'A Shooting Trip to the Australian Bush' (1898) and 'Through the New Commonwealth' (1906). The dominion status enjoyed by Canada and Australia influenced his conception of eventual Irish home rule. A strict teetotaller but inveterate smoker, he devoted much time to encouraging tobacco growing in Ireland. 
Willie Redmond will be remembered for his part in the First World War. He threw himself behind his brother's support for the war. Although fifty-four, he enlisted as a captain in the 6th Royal Irish regiment of the 16th (Irish) division, largely composed of nationalists. He went overseas in December 1915, and commanded B company of his battalion for six months. He wrote several newspaper articles (published posthumously in 1917 as 'Trench Pictures from France'). The Easter rising of 1916 shook him, and he seems to have realized that the tide was now turning away from constitutional nationalism. His health broken, he was transferred to a staff post. He was promoted major in July 1916. When on leave he spoke in the Commons, most famously in March 1917, when he defended Irish involvement in the war and asked for immediate home rule. He believed that by serving together in the trenches the Unionist and nationalist traditions could be reconciled after the war. 
Redmond got permission to join his battalion for the attack on Wytschaete on 7 June 1917. Wounded, apparently lightly, he died that day at Dranoutre, Belgium, in the field hospital of the Unionist 36th (Ulster) division, which attacked alongside his unit. His death caused grief worldwide. He was buried the next day in the garden of the convent at Locre in Belgium. The grave, symbolic perhaps in its isolation, is still there today. Commemorations at Loker (organized by local people) took place in 1967 and 1997. In Wexford there is a bust of him in a local park. His Irish home, Glenbrook, Delgany, co. Wicklow, still stands. His wife survived him. 
Willie Redmond was very different from his brother: open-hearted, volatile, pugnacious, and garrulous. Until the war rapidly aged him he had a perennially youthful (albeit well-rounded) aspect. He was more radical than his brother on many social issues, such as female suffrage. He seems now the most representative figure of the thousands of Irish nationalists who served with the British forces in 1914-18. The East Clare constituency left vacant by his death was, tellingly, won by Eamon de Valera of Sinn Fein. 


@@@@@


doc= 35704


Redpath, Anne (1895-1965), painter, the second child of Thomas Brown Redpath (1863-1933), a tweed pattern weaver, and his wife, Agnes Milne, was born at 89 Scott Street, in the mill town of Galashiels, Selkirkshire, on 29 March 1895. Thomas Redpath's four children were given a strictly nonconformist upbringing. As the daughter of a tweed designer, Anne Redpath gained an early understanding of colour and texture. Years later describing the weaver's technique of colour flecking used for scumbling she explained: 'I do with a spot of red or yellow in a harmony of grey, what my father did in his tweed' ('Anne Redpath', 1). She attended Hawick high school (1901-13) and in 1913 enrolled at Edinburgh College of Art. Parental permission for this course was granted with the proviso that she should concurrently train as an art teacher at Moray House, Edinburgh, where she qualified in 1917. Instruction at Edinburgh College of Art was rigorous and academic; among her tutors were Henry Linlott, Robert Burns, and D. M. Sutherland. Anne Redpath gained her diploma in 1917 and after a postgraduate year was awarded a travelling scholarship which, in 1919, enabled her to visit Brussels, Bruges, Paris, Florence, and Siena. She returned profoundly impressed by the works of the Sienese primitives. 
On 21 September 1920 Anne Redpath married at Teviothead church James Beattie Michie (1891-1958), a young architect about to take up an appointment with the Imperial War Graves Commission in northern France. The house at St Martin, Pas-de-Calais, where their first two sons were born, was large and their finances strained. It was then that Anne Redpath began to decorate simple furniture with bright flowers, birds, and garlands, which later featured in her still-life paintings. Her family was her primary concern but by 1921 she had produced sufficient work, mainly watercolours in muted tones, for an exhibition at St Omer. Some years later James Michie became architect to a millionaire in the south of France. A third son was born and the family lived in idyllic surroundings at St Raphael and St Jean, Cap Ferrat. Anne Redpath's painting output was sparse but she maintained artistic contacts. The painter William Mactaggart who had been a fellow student at Edinburgh was a frequent visitor. In 1928 she exhibited at the casino at St Raphael. 
In 1934 James Michie's employer lost his fortune. Anne Redpath and her sons returned to Hawick and James Michie found work in London. Soon after her return she began to show at the Royal Scottish Academy and in many group exhibitions. Many of her paintings at that time were competent landscapes of views around Hawick often recorded in her 'Notes from Nature' sketchbooks and painted in her studio. But it was in a domestic setting that her highly individual viewpoint expressed her affection for familiar household objects. Cups, jugs, teapots, and flowers disconcertingly displayed on a tilting table-top became characteristic of her style. The pure and effortless quality of her painting, particularly in the handling of white, could make a collection of flowers lyrical, almost ethereal. Early in the 1940s Redpath created one of her most significant works, 'The Indian Rug' ('Red Slippers'; Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art, Edinburgh). This painting signalled a release of ideas long held in reserve and presaged a new and liberated approach. The placing of a vivid red chair, comfortable slippers, and folk-art rug clearly defined on a black background and formalized into a flat surface pattern demonstrates her mastery of structure. The boldly painted 'Still Life with Orange Chair' (1944; priv. coll.) also exemplifies a sense of continuity with the Scottish colourists Francis Cadell and Samuel Peploe. 
From 1944 to 1947 Redpath was president of the Scottish Society of Women Artists. She became an associate of the Royal Scottish Academy in 1947 and in 1952 was the first woman painter to be elected academician. Critical acclaim for her exhibition at the Scottish Gallery in 1950 brought public recognition for the distinction of her work but Redpath's vision was never static; she was responsive to post-war art movements and like Matisse, whom she admired, pursued her own rigorous path. 
A journey to remote northern Spain in 1951 called for new strengths in Redpath's work. Her style radically altered becoming more emotive and her palette sombre reflecting the stark landscape and poverty of the hill villages as in 'Rain in Spain-Ubeda' (1951; Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art, Edinburgh). Subsequent visits to Corsica, Brittany, and the Canary Islands released fresh colour harmonies; rich chestnut browns, purples, and rare pinks surged from her brush. The resultant landscapes, painted with new urgency and expressionist fervour, were enthusiastically received at the Scottish Gallery's 1960 Edinburgh festival exhibition. 
In 1955 Anne Redpath became an OBE and was also granted an honorary LLD by Edinburgh University. The following year she attended a comprehensive exhibition of her work in the four main galleries of the Royal West of England Academy in Bristol. She became an academician of that society in 1959 and an associate of the Royal Academy in 1960. Redpath paintings were acquired by the Tate Gallery and many public collections. In her lifetime there were frequent exhibitions in Britain; she enjoyed the ensuing celebrity, wearing spectacular hats and designer clothes and talking with animation at convivial gatherings. On one occasion she discussed volubly with Chagall in fluent French the joys of being 'an old peasant' (Bourne, 54). This light-hearted acceptance of fame contrasts with her solemn self-portrait in the Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh (another is in the Glasgow Art Gallery and Museum) which indicates her steady contemplative nature. She was deeply interested in world affairs from which she felt that art should not be isolated. Many guests remember evenings spent in her colourful room among bright pictures and painted furniture discussing art, politics, and social justice. Her generous spirit and engagement with humanity give even her lesser works a life-enhancing quality. The mature paintings of golden baroque altars and richly glowing church interiors in Lisbon and Venice painted in her last years are considered by many to be her finest achievements. Earlier heart attacks had brought grave health warnings but, undaunted, Anne Redpath's determination to develop her work never faltered. Such inspired commitment and sustained vitality have ensured her an enduring place in the history of twentieth-century Scottish painting. Following a fall in her Edinburgh home, 7 London Street, Anne Redpath died on 7 January 1965 at 19 Drumsheugh Gardens, Edinburgh, and was cremated on 9 January at Warriston crematorium, Edinburgh. Her work is represented in public collections in Aberdeen, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Hull, Manchester, Newcastle upon Tyne, and Preston, as well as in London and several Commonwealth galleries. 


@@@@@


doc= 35705


Redpath, Henry Adeney (1848-1908), biblical and linguistic scholar, was born at Sydenham, Kent, on 19 June 1848, the eldest son of Henry Syme Redpath, solicitor, of Sydenham, and his wife, Harriet Adeney, of Islington. In 1857 he entered Merchant Taylors' School, London, and in 1867 he won a scholarship to Queen's College, Oxford. He was awarded a second class in classical moderations in 1869 and a third class in 'literae humaniores' in 1871; he graduated BA in 1871, MA in 1874, and DLitt in 1901. Ordained deacon in 1872 and priest in 1874, Redpath, after being curate of Southam, near Rugby, and then of Luddesdown, near Gravesend, was successively vicar of Wolvercote, near Oxford (1880-83) and rector of Holwell, Sherborne (1883-90). On 5 October 1886, at Marsh Caundle, Dorset, he married Catherine Helen, daughter of Henry Peter Auber of Marsh Court, Sherborne. They had one son before her death at Shottermill, Surrey, on 26 August 1898. 
Redpath served as vicar of Sparsholt with Kingston Lisle, near Wantage, from 1890 to 1898, when he exchanged this job to become rector of St Dunstan-in-the-East, in the City of London. He was also sub-warden of the Society of Sacred Study in the diocese of London, and examining chaplain to the bishop of London from 1905 to 1908. Redpath, who had learned Hebrew at Merchant Taylors' School, specialized while a country parson in the Greek of the 'Septuagint', completing and publishing a work which the theologian and religious historian Edwin Hatch had left unfinished: 'A Concordance to the Septuagint and other Greek Translations of the Old Testament' (3 vols., 1892-1906). The work found recognition both in England and in Europe. Redpath was Grinfield lecturer on the 'Septuagint' at Oxford from 1901 to 1905, and shortly before his death he designed a 'Dictionary of Patristic Greek'. 
Redpath's biblical scholarship was conservative. He was reactionary in his opposition to the critical approach to the 'Old Testament', arguing in 'Modern Criticism and the Book of Genesis' (1905), published by the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, that 'Genesis' was not of a composite structure. A work which was much more favourably received was his painstaking 'Westminster Commentary' on 'Ezekiel', with introduction and notes (1907). He also contributed to James Hastings's 'Dictionary of the Bible' (4 vols., 1904) and to the 'Illustrated Bible Dictionary'. Redpath died at 35 Kirkdale, Sydenham, on 24 September 1908, and was buried at Shottermill, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 35706


Reed, Austin Leonard (1873-1954), tailor and retailer, was born on 6 September 1873, at 12 Howard Street, Reading, Berkshire, the eldest son of William Bilkey Reed, hosier and hatter in Reading, and his wife, Emma Florence Bowler. 
After education at Reading School and some experience working in his father's shop, Reed joined the staff of a firm of hosiers in Ludgate Hill, London, as a clerk. In 1893 he went to the United States, where he worked in Wannamaker's General Store in Philadelphia, and with Hackett, Carhart & Co., clothiers of New York, and Lincoln Bartlett, menswear importers in Chicago. He went back to Britain in 1896 with the ambition of founding a store inspired by those in America, which could provide the expanding ranks of new white-collar city workers with the latest in modern men's clothing. On 7 July 1900 Reed opened a new branch of the family shop under his own name in Fenchurch Street, London. This was followed by the opening of a second City store in 1905, by which time Reed's father had retired, selling the Reading business and leaving his son in control of a thriving London concern. 
From the beginning Reed worked on clear principles. High-quality but unpretentious merchandise was to be presented through honest promotion with prices plainly marked and close attention paid to customer service. Much effort was devoted to originality in window display and shop fittings, and from the first advertising played an important part in the expansion of the business. Traditional press publicity was dropped by 1907 in favour of poster campaigns and a concentration on direct mailing, adapted to the particular requirements of individual clients. By 1908 there were three shops in the City and in 1911 the first West End branch was opened in Regent Street. In 1913 Reed made his first excursion into the provinces, in Birmingham. Manchester followed the next year and by 1930 most of the major cities in England were served, as well as Glasgow and Belfast. In 1929 a shop was opened aboard the liner 'Aquitania', and two were later opened on both the 'Queen Mary' and the first 'Queen Elizabeth'. 
In 1910 the concern had become a private company and in 1920 Austin Reed Ltd offered their shares to the public on the stock exchange in an attempt to provide capital for continued growth. Although the post-war slump in the economy limited the take-up of shares, Reed put his faith in increased expansion, and, following careful customer research and a further trip to America, he implemented his plan to provide what he called 'a Savile Row suit for the middle-class man' at a price he could afford. He deplored what he saw as the decline in British taste and, in competition with the democratizing trends of 'made to measure' tailoring chains such as Burtons and Hepworths, offered a range of 'New Tailoring' from 1925. It was distinctive through its good workmanship, wide variety of fittings, and heightened sense of fashionableness. 
The new Regent Street shop, opened in 1926, provided a worthy setting for Reed's ideas. Nash's Regent Street was in process of demolition and Reed was lucky to obtain a place in the Quadrant at the lower end designed by Sir Reginald Blomfield. There the firm was able to provide every modern facility. Reed was a founder member of the Regent Street Association and its chairman in 1927. He was also a founder member of the National Association of Outfitters, president of the City of London Trade Association, a council member of the Multiple Shops Federation, and master of the Glovers' Company. 
Through the 1920s and 1930s Reed ensured that the company retained its reputation for innovation, employing modernist designers including Tom Purvis and Fougasse, who lent a contemporary identity to promotional material. Employees also experimented with publishing 'Modern Man', a fashion magazine for men, and directed their energies towards niche marketing, supplying the clothing needs of Britain's colonial administrators in particular. On the outbreak of war in 1939, Reed deferred plans to retire. The provision of officers' military uniforms occupied the business until demobilization, and the return to civilian dress provided new challenges from 1945. Reed finally retired from the chairmanship in 1948. 
Austin Reed was not only a highly skilled businessman, but won wide regard and friendship by his ideals of simplicity, sincerity, and a service devoted to good distribution with fair dealing and avoidance of exploitation. He combined these with a flair for forward-looking retail methods which reflected and encouraged the concurrent modernization of British menswear. He was an active Congregationalist and was deeply influenced by Frank Buchman, founder of the Moral Re-Armament movement, whom he met in 1933. 
On 10 March 1902 Reed married Emily (died 1953), daughter of Alfred Wilson, a Reading butcher; they had two sons and four daughters. The younger son was killed as a fighter pilot in north Africa during the war. The elder son, Douglas, became vice-chairman of the firm in 1953. Austin Reed died at his home, Garden Reach, Camp Road, Bulstrode Park, Gerrards Cross, on 5 May 1954. 


@@@@@


doc= 35707


Reed, Sir Edward James (1830-1906), naval architect, was born at Sheerness on 20 September 1830, the son of John Reed. He became an apprentice at Sheerness Dockyard where his outstanding ability led to selection in 1849 for the Central School of Mathematics and Naval Architecture at Portsmouth, which had opened the previous year with Dr Joseph Wooley as principal. There were nine students in his year, several of whom were to become his assistants in later years. In 1851 he married Rosetta Barnaby, sister of Nathaniel Barnaby, a fellow student, and eldest daughter of Nathaniel Barnaby of Sheerness. Reed graduated in 1852, and was appointed a supernumerary draughtsman, working in the mould loft at Sheerness. Although this was a normal first appointment Reed found the work frustrating and lacking in responsibility, and even his first book of poetry, 'Corona and other Poems' (1857), failed to satisfy his creative instincts. It is said that he regarded compulsory service in the militia as the last straw. 
In 1853 Reed accepted the post of editor of the 'Mechanic's Magazine', an influential journal widely read among the rising number of engineers and technicians. The following year he offered the Admiralty a design for an armoured frigate but the concept was ahead of its time and, engaged in war with Russia, the Admiralty saw no requirement for such a ship. At the end of 1859 Scott Russell called a meeting which led to the formation of the Institution of Naval Architects, and at the first meeting in January 1860 Reed was appointed secretary and editor of the 'Transactions'. 
In 1861 Reed sent a design to the Admiralty for an armoured corvette, acknowledging the help of his brother-in-law. In the following year he proposed a scheme for converting wooden sloops into armoured ships and was invited to develop these ideas within the Admiralty. He also produced, with assistance from Barnaby, designs for larger ships for which he was later to receive an 'ex gratia' payment of $5000 from the Admiralty. When Isaac Watts retired in 1863 the first lord (the duke of Somerset) invited Reed to become the chief constructor. This appointment was criticized in parliament on the grounds of Reed's lack of experience but he defended himself vigorously, and to such an extent that he was forced to apologize. 
As more and more powerful guns became available, ships required thicker protective armour, but the weight of armour meant that the area to be protected had to be reduced. Reed tackled this in two ways: he concentrated the armour in a shallow waterline belt with a short armoured battery amidships; and he made his ships relatively shorter. The length of the ship was determined by the number of guns carried and his short ship was possible only because fewer of the new, bigger guns were required. There was a considerable power penalty for the shorter ship but the overall cost was less. Particularly after the battle of Lissa (1866) there was emphasis on end-on attack, including ramming. Reed developed a number of features such as movable bulwarks and recessed gunports, which were not entirely satisfactory, to enable guns in his central battery to fire parallel to the keel. In the 'Bellerophon', and other earlier ships, a lightly protected battery was arranged in the bow. Reed and Barnaby saved further weight in the 'Bellerophon' by a lighter structure, better aligned to the loading. This system, known as the 'bracket frame' system, was also easier to build and had been little changed in principle when the long reign of the battleship ended in the Second World War. 
In 1865 Reed was given permission to design the 'Fatikh' for Turkey, later sold to Germany, which was to influence the double deck height battery in the British 'Audacious' class, designed with a shallow draught for overseas service. This class introduced further weight-saving measures, mainly ones concerned with reducing the thickness of the structure away from amidships. Reed also intended to take account of William Froude's early work on rolling in waves by reducing the metacentric height. It appears that his reduction in stability was too much and the class required a considerable amount of ballast. Once this was installed they proved successful and well-liked ships. 
Under Reed there was a complete revolution in the way ships were designed; rules of thumb gave way to calculations based on theoretically sound principles and careful experiment. He encouraged work on stability by Barnes and others of his staff; with the assistance of White, Reed himself developed a method of calculating loading on a ship at sea which led to a rational structural design method. Both of these advances depended on the accurate estimate of the weights of a new ship. Having adopted Froude's early work on rolling, he encouraged Froude's later work on the use of models to improve hull forms and to estimate power requirements. It was Reed who persuaded the Admiralty to pay for Froude to build the first ship model test tank at Torquay which began to operate in 1872. 
Reed was always interested in technical education, and strongly supported the establishment of the Royal School of Naval Architecture and Marine Engineering at South Kensington in 1864. This school was transferred to the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, in 1872 and moved to University College, London, in 1967. He contributed to the work of the school and helped to progress the careers of its graduates. From 1872 to 1875 he was proprietor and editor of 'Naval Science', an influential technical quarterly, and contributed many articles himself. 
This era shows Reed at his best, initiating work himself, encouraging his staff -- he was far more willing to give credit to his assistants than most men of his age -- and also adopting and supporting work from outside. Less obvious, these new procedures marked the change from the individual designer to the leader of a team. Reed owed much to the wise guidance of the controller, Spencer Robinson. 
Reed developed the centre battery ship with full sailing rig in a number of successful designs such as that of the 'Hercules' and the 'Sultan'. In 1866 the government of the colony of Victoria asked the Admiralty to design a low freeboard coastal defence turret ship based on Ericsson's 'Monitor'. Though Reed was impressed by many features of Ericsson's ship he thought the low freeboard unsafe, and in developing the design of 'Cerberus' he added an armoured breastwork which raised the turrets and provided protected access and ventilation for the low main hull. The remains of 'Cerberus' may be seen today in the outskirts of Melbourne. He designed similar ships for India and for the Royal Navy, culminating in 1869 with the design of the much larger 'Devastation' for the Royal Navy. She was the first battleship for the navy designed without sailing rig and her style may be seen as the prototype for all later battleships. Her two main turrets were mounted high up on the breastwork at each end, and this gave them wide arcs of fire. Her sister, 'Thunderer', introduced hydraulic loading for her 12 inch muzzle loaders. The low freeboard of the main hull made these vessels poor seaboats, and they lost speed rapidly in a head sea. 
In the meantime Captain Coles, the designer of the turret gun mounting, was agitating for a low-freeboard, fully-rigged sailing battleship. Reed and many seamen felt that the combination of sails and low freeboard was unsafe and after a searching inquiry in 1865 the Admiralty decided to build a rigged turret ship but with a considerable freeboard. Reed designed the 'Monarch' on this basis but though she had a long career and was liked in the service, Reed felt that she offered no advantage over a centre battery ship. Coles, too, was unhappy and eventually persuaded the first lord (Somerset) to agree to a ship of his concept. The design work was carried out by Lairds but the design revolution described above had not reached Birkenhead and the company greatly underestimated the weight of such a ship while its estimate of the height of the centre of gravity was an inaccurate guess. 
Reed and Spencer Robinson gave specific warnings of the dangers of the proposed ship but the first lord (Pakington) ordered the 'Captain' to be built by Lairds who were entirely responsible for her. Technical evidence of serious problems accumulated during her building and she completed grossly overweight, floating 22 inches deeper than intended; this further reduced her already inadequate freeboard to 6 feet 7 inches. She performed well on her first two voyages but prior to the third an inclining experiment was carried out to measure her stability. It was found to be perfectly adequate for small angles of heel but disappeared at larger angles. The theory of large angle stability was known from Attwood's work in the late eighteenth century but the solution of the equations was too difficult until one of Reed's assistants, Barnes, developed a practical method in the late 1860s, the 'Captain' being only the second ship to which it was applied. 
Unfortunately the 'Captain' had sailed on her third voyage before Barnes completed his calculations on the vessel, which showed her to be unsafe at over 20 degrees heel. This result was confirmed when she capsized on 6 September 1870 with the loss of nearly 500 men, including Coles. By this time Reed had already resigned, tired of quarrels with ministers over 'Captain' and other technical issues, though the prolonged argument over his salary in 1869-70 may have contributed to his decision. He joined Whitworth briefly but in 1871 he became chairman of Earle's shipyard in Hull while at the same time launching his own naval architecture consultancy in London. 
Reed designed ships for other countries, including Germany, Brazil, and Chile. One of these, a turret ship generally similar to the 'Monarch', was purchased for the Royal Navy as the 'Neptune'. Though these ships were reasonably successful they lacked the originality of his earlier work, confirming that Reed was a brilliant team leader, working best with guidance from above and support from his staff. His last major design was for two Chilean battleships which were bought for the Royal Navy as the 'Swiftsure' and the 'Triumph'. His paper on their design to the Institution of Naval Architects drew strong criticism: they were seen as a mere copy of White's big cruisers. 
Reed wrote clearly and both his technical papers and his more popular works were easily understood. His most important technical works were his Royal Society paper on structural design in 1866 and that on stability of low freeboard sailing ships to the Institution of Naval Architects in 1868. 'Our Ironclad Ships' (1869) was a more popular, though technically correct, justification of his design work. 'Shipbuilding in Iron and Steel' was a very readable textbook on the subject. There were other books and papers on warships, two on travels in Russia and Japan, a novel, and a second book of poems. He wrote frequent letters to 'The Times' and various journals on a range of topics, the majority of these being criticisms of Admiralty design policy. In particular he advocated armour belts from end to end, seeing subdivision as inadequate protection even though some of the last designs while he was chief constructor incorporated this feature. 
As a result of one such campaign of criticism a well qualified committee was set up in 1878 to examine the design of the 'Inflexible', their report dismissing Reed's fears. In 1889 he was to criticize White's design for the 'Royal Sovereign'. White was permitted to present a very detailed paper to the Institution of Naval Architects and in a very long and heated debate fully justified his work with firm evidence to rebut all Reed's allegations. 
Reed unsuccessfully contested Hull in 1873 but was elected MP for Pembroke district in 1874. From 1880 to 1895 and from 1900 to 1906 he represented Cardiff district, serving briefly as a lord of the Treasury in 1886. He was a Liberal until March 1905 when he joined the Liberal Unionists. For many years he was a JP in Glamorgan. He served on several parliamentary committees including the Load Line committee of 1884 and the Manning committee of 1894, both of which made important contributions to merchant ship safety. He was the commissioner for the investigation into the capsize of the 'Daphne' on launching with the loss of 124 lives. He advocated the construction of a tubular railway across the bed of the English Channel as an alternative to Sir Edward Watkin's tunnel scheme. 
Reed was a strong supporter of the Institution of Naval Architects and was elected to council following his resignation as secretary in 1863; he became vice-president in 1865 and honorary vice-president in 1905, a position in which he served until his death. He presented a number of papers and took an active part in many discussions. Reed was active in other institutions and was a member of council of the Institution of Civil Engineers from 1865 to 1896. He was elected FRS in 1876, created CB in 1868 (advanced to KCB in 1880), and awarded decorations by Russia, Austria, Turkey, and Japan. 
A son, Edward Tennyson Reed, was born in 1860 and later became an artist for 'Punch'. In later years his daughter, Emily Sarah, who had a strong mechanical bent, acted as his secretary. She was to persuade Eustace Tennyson-D'Eyncourt to become a naval architect. Reed died at 65 Savoy Court, the Strand, London, on 30 November 1906, and was buried at Putney Vale cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 35708


Reed, Edward Tennyson (1860-1933), cartoonist and caricaturist, was born on 27 March 1860, at Greenwich, London, the only son of the naval architect Sir Edward James Reed (1830-1906) and his wife, Rosetta, eldest daughter of Nathaniel Barnaby of Sheerness, Kent, and sister of the naval architect Sir Nathaniel Barnaby. He was educated at Harrow School and at the age of twenty had visited Egypt, China, and Japan. As a young man he spent time at the House of Commons sketching politicians in action. In March 1890 he became a permanent member of the staff of 'Punch', having been recommended by his friend and fellow cartoonist Linley Sambourne. He had very little early training as a draughtsman, but he conceived the idea of applying a burlesque of prehistoric life to contemporary events and persons and called the series 'Prehistoric Peeps'. Thus 'A Quiet Game of Whist in Early Times' demonstrates the inconvenience caused to card-playing cave dwellers by the presence of the stegosaurus, the triceratops, and the pterodactyl. The drawings, which were executed in a spirit of broad and riotous comedy, became fashionable, and no doubt the fact that the Natural History Museum at South Kensington had not been open long enough for the skeletons of ancient monsters to lose the charm of novelty, greatly added to their appeal. It is certain that scientific lecturers bore witness at the time to their probable verisimilitude, and that schools applied for the use of Reed's pictures as instructional magic-lantern-slides. For many years he used palaeontology, archaeology, and heraldry as the basis of his humour. 
In 1891 Reed married Beatrice, daughter of William Bullen of Earlsfield; they had a son and a daughter. He succeeded Harry Furniss in 1894 as the illustrator of 'Punch''s parliamentary pages under the title 'Essence of Parliament', a post which he held for eighteen years. His style was similar to that of his rival Sir Francis Carruthers Gould in the 'Westminster Gazette'. He captured the likenesses of politicians with the soft shading of a pencil. He was a popular after-dinner speaker and lecturer, and his cartoons were purchased by politicians. George V visited his exhibition at the Dudley Gallery in Piccadilly and purchased two cartoons. Many of his drawings were published in collections, notably 'Mr. Punch's Prehistoric Peeps' (1896), 'Mr. Punch's Animal Land' (1898), 'Mr. Punch's Book of Arms' (1899), and 'The Tablets of Azit-Tigleth-Miphansi the Scribe' (1900), the last-named (as the portentous paronomasia implies) being a mock-historical record of current politics illustrated in the Assyrian monumental manner. 
Reed left the staff of 'Punch' in 1912 and subsequently drew for 'The Bystander', the 'Passing Show', the 'Sunday Times', 'Pall Mall Gazette', 'Sunday Evening Telegraph', and the 'Evening Standard'. He died in London on 12 July 1933 after a long illness. 


@@@@@


doc= 35709


Reed, Sir (Herbert) Stanley (1872-1969), newspaper editor and politician, was born in the Ashley district of Bristol on 28 January 1872, the son of William Reed, a grocer of Fremantle Villa, Bristol, and his wife, Amelia Whitney. He was educated privately, became a journalist, and in 1897 joined the staff of the 'Times of India' in Bombay, then under the editorship of Thomas Bennett. As a young bachelor Reed entered fully into the lively social life of Bombay at the turn of the century, enjoying sailing, riding, and hunting over the dry rice fields of the surrounding countryside; he was eventually to become an enthusiastic member of the Bombay light horse and to command that volunteer body with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. In 1901 he married Lilian (died 1947), daughter of John Humphrey. They had no children. She fully shared his interest in India, where they spent much of their married life and made many friends. 
From the time of his arrival in India, Reed was keen to travel and see as much of the country as possible, and in 1900 he broke new ground for his newspaper with an extensive tour of famine-affected areas. He sent reports of what he had seen in the countryside not only to his own newspaper but also to the 'Daily Chronicle', as its special correspondent. In his book 'The India I Knew', published in 1952, Reed described how he invaded the placid leader writing sanctum of Bennett with this revolutionary suggestion: 'I am doing little or nothing here. Yet the city is ravaged by plague. Poona is deserted.... The Black Death has swept over Sholapur, Surat and Ahmedabad.... The embers of the famine are slowly dying and we have nothing about these great happenings.' That was the start of travels which ranged over the length and breadth of India. Reed accompanied George V and Queen Mary when, as prince and princess of Wales, they toured India in 1905. His dispatches were republished in book form in 1906, with a preface by Sir Walter Lawrence, who abandoned his intention of writing an official record of the royal visit when he found that Reed had virtually done the job for him. During these travels Reed acquired the profound knowledge and sympathetic understanding of the Indian people which were later to stamp his writing as an editor and his speeches as a British parliamentarian. 
Reed was appointed editor of the 'Times of India' in 1907, and under his control the newspaper became not only one of the two most influential journals in India (the other was 'The Statesman', based in Calcutta on the other side of the subcontinent), but in its general conduct and appearance able to challenge comparison with any English daily. Under the editorship of his predecessor, Lovat Fraser, the status of the 'Times of India' had been raised from that of a respectable provincial newspaper into an Indian organ of opinion which Lord Curzon of Kedleston described as the leading paper of Asia. Reed saw that it lacked two things: a sensible selling price and a comprehensive foreign news service. He persuaded its proprietors to drop its selling price from 4died to 1died This led to a fourfold rise in circulation in three days, and Reed went on to play an influential role in the Imperial Press Conference in 1909, where the case for cheap telegraphic rates between the countries of the empire was pressed. 
In the First World War, Reed was director of publicity to the government of India, and towards its end he was called upon to counsel on the functions and organization of the central publicity board, of which he became vice-president (1918). This was a belated attempt to improve the understanding of the people of India about a war to which they had been committed four years earlier by Lord Hardinge of Penshurst, then the viceroy. Reed had, in the columns of his newspaper, written very critically about the military disaster in Mesopotamia and was in consequence not universally popular at government headquarters in Simla, but he pressed through a number of reforms aimed at helping the press and some sections of the public to understand how and why the war was being fought. The isolation of the government of India from public opinion at that time, Reed wrote many years later, was almost inconceivable. In 1919 he was created KBE, having been knighted in 1916. 
Reed retired from India in 1923, having founded the 'Indian Year Book' in the previous year, but continued to write for his paper from London for many years. With Patrick Cadell he wrote 'India: the New Phase' (1928), which presented a lucid summary of the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms introduced by the 'Government of India Act' of 1919. He quickly became involved in British politics and in 1929 unsuccessfully contested the Stourbridge constituency in Worcestershire as a conservative; but in 1938 he fought and won a by-election in the Aylesbury division of Buckinghamshire. The first suggestion that he should stand for parliament had come from the Labour Party secretary, Arthur Henderson, when they were both members of the British delegation to the League of Nations in 1924. Reed had certain natural affiliations with the Labour Party but he professed himself unable to swallow nationalization and the capital levy, and it was finally his old Indian guru, Sir Walter Lawrence, who persuaded him to enter the lists on the tory side. He contributed many useful speeches to the House of Commons on Indian questions and on a variety of other topics and, if his independence of mind did not always endear him to the whips, his well studied briefs ensured him an attentive audience. He and Alan Herbert jointly presented a private member's bill to amend the law of defamation; this ended in the appointment of a committee presided over by Lord Porter, which for a variety of reasons could not report until 1948. It was, however, on Indian subjects that Reed spoke most frequently, and his support for Indian independence after the war was tempered with regret that Britain had taken so long to complete a process which, he reminded the house, had begun in 1917. He retired from politics in 1950 and lived on in London until he died in Westminster Hospital on 17 January 1969. 
Evan Charlton', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35710


Reeves, Sir William Conrad (1821-1902), politician and judge in Barbados, was born in Bridgetown, Barbados. His father, Thomas Phillipps Reeves, who was white, was a skilled apothecary and his mother was a free black woman, Phyllis Clarke. As a 'free person of colour', Reeves was born into a slave society whose main divisions were those of colour and legal status. Free people of colour faced a variety of restrictions, including limits on occupations and on participation in political life. During Reeves's childhood, free coloureds in Barbados became the legal equals of white people and slavery itself was abolished in 1834; but the pattern of discrimination against the free people of colour continued after the abolition of slavery. 
For Reeves, this meant an education in schools specifically established for free children of colour. As a young man he worked under the leading free coloured journalist of the period, Samuel Jackman Prescod. Prescod edited a radical paper, 'The Liberal', and had a distinguished career in the press and as a member of the Barbadian house of assembly. He was a strong believer in representative institutions as well as in the reform of the house of assembly and, in both areas, had a significant influence on Reeves's subsequent development. 
In addition to working on 'The Liberal', Reeves was also a member of the debating club in Bridgetown. His success in debating and in public oratory encouraged some of the leading men of colour as well as the wider coloured community to support his legal education in England. He became a student at the Middle Temple in May 1860 and was called to the bar in January 1863. While in London he also wrote for the Barbados press. He returned to Barbados in 1864, where he practised law. From May 1867 he acted for a short period as attorney-general of St Vincent. In 1868 he married Margaret, eldest daughter of T. P. R. Budder of Bushey Park, St Thomas, Barbados. They had a daughter, who subsequently married and lived in Europe. 
In 1874, when he was well over fifty years old, Reeves was elected to the house of assembly for the parish of St Joseph. He was appointed solicitor-general in 1875, but less than a year later resigned from his post in the middle of the federation crisis. This arose because of a Colonial Office plan to federate Barbados with the Windward Islands. Federation would result in Barbados losing its representative system of government and becoming a crown colony, a development which had occurred throughout the West Indies in the wake of the Morant Bay rebellion in Jamaica a decade previously. For the Colonial Office, and for the governor appointed to carry out this task, John Pope-Hennessy, this was desirable not only on administrative grounds but also because of their view (largely justifiable) that the assembly had failed to represent the interests of black people in the post-emancipation period. Advocates of crown colony government maintained that the Colonial Office would act impartially on behalf of the people, something it believed was impossible for a largely white oligarchy in control of the house of assembly. 
For Reeves the survival of the house of assembly and of representative institutions in Barbados was a matter of grave importance. He therefore resigned his official post in the government and successfully led the opposition against Pope-Hennessy's proposal of confederating Barbados and the Windward Islands. Similarly, two years later, he opposed a Colonial Office proposal to appoint two crown nominees to represent the government in the house of assembly. Again, he believed that this plan was contrary to the principle of representative government, a system which had been in place in Barbados for well over two centuries. 
However, in 1881 Reeves was prepared to modify his views on the relationship between the executive and the assembly. He suggested that a small committee of the legislature prepare bills for the house. After considerable debate the assembly passed an act along these lines: four members of the house and one member of the legislative council would work with the executive to prepare governmental measures. This development was in keeping with Reeves's views about representative government, as the members of the executive committee were representatives of the people rather than responsible to the crown. 
For his support of the government, Reeves was appointed attorney-general in 1882 and was created KC in 1883. In 1884 he was instrumental in the widening of the franchise. As part of this process, the freehold qualification was reduced from a $12 freehold to one worth $5. Yet in spite of the reduced franchise requirements, the electorate was not significantly increased. In 1886 Reeves became chief justice of Barbados and was knighted in 1889. His legal judgments were regarded as clear and well worded and were subsequently collected in a volume co-edited by Sir William Herbert Greaves, a future chief justice of Barbados. 
Reeves died on 9 January 1902 at his home, the Eyrie, in St Michael, Barbados. He was accorded a public funeral, the first part of which was held in a packed cathedral. The route to the cemetery was lined by thousands of people paying their respects to one of the most illustrious figures of nineteenth-century Barbados. 
His role in the confederation crisis and in the subsequent constitutional developments marked him out but, unlike Samuel Jackman Prescod, he was not a radical; instead he espoused a conservative ideology. He believed that property was the only possible basis for the exercise of political power, and he could be complacent about the plight of black people who faced problems of unemployment and emigration. None the less, he was a clever and far-sighted politician. His resignation from the government during the confederation crisis might well have led to political obscurity; instead it brought him financial reward and subsequent political preferment. 


