@@@@@


doc= 35711


Regan, Charles Tate (1878-1943), zoologist and museum director, was born at Long Street, Sherborne, Dorset, on 1 February 1878, the only son of Charles James Regan, music master at Sherborne School, and his wife, Maria Jane, daughter of William Tate, author of 'The Modern Cambist' (1829). He was educated at Derby School and at Queens' College, Cambridge, where he studied zoology under Adam Sedgwick and was awarded a first class in part 1 (1900) and a second in part 2 (1901) of the natural sciences tripos. 
In 1901 Regan was appointed assistant (later known as assistant keeper) in the British Museum (Natural History) and was posted to assist George Albert Boulenger in curating the collection of fishes. At the museum he made his mark, soon taking sole charge of the fishes, becoming keeper of the department of zoology in 1921 and director of the museum in 1927. Regan married on 12 July 1905 Elsie Alice ('b'. 1882), daughter of George Marlow, land surveyor. They had two sons and two daughters. 
Regan's publications numbered some 260. Among these 'The Freshwater Fishes of the British Isles' (1911) embodies the results of his observations as an angler and of his museum researches in a way which makes it an authentic and readable reference book for both anglers and naturalists. He edited 'Natural History' (1936), in which he wrote the section on fishes. Most of his works, however, were specialist contributions to the zoology of fishes. His anatomical studies were mainly on the skeleton, and aimed to elucidate relationships and evolutionary trends. Modifying and amplifying earlier classifications, he defined and surveyed some forty orders of fishes, producing a comprehensive classification which became accepted as a basis by ichthyologists. This was summarized in his articles on fishes and selachians in the fourteenth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. His work on the fish collections of the 'Scotia' and 'Terra Nova' Antarctic expeditions and on Central American fishes, among others, produced illuminating zoogeographical generalizations. 
Regan described the complicated copulatory organs of the tiny East Indian Phallostethid fishes; and in the viviparous fishes of the Cyprinodont family Poeciliidae it was he who first showed that the clue to their classification lay in the detailed structure of the anal fin of the male. It was Regan who, in 1925, first recognized the parasitic dwarf males in certain deep-sea angler-fishes, and he later published two monographs, the second in collaboration, on the 'Dana' collections of this remarkable group. To him the Danes also entrusted the description of the Stomiatoid fishes of their Atlantic and Mediterranean expeditions. 
In 1925 Regan was president of the zoology section of the British Association meeting at Southampton, and entitled his address 'Organic evolution'. It was his interest in evolution which led him to study and to inspire others to study the species flocks of cichlid fishes in the African lakes, but the completion of this work was left to his successors. He was also interested in the primates and their relationship to the insectivorous mammals. Of this work only a preliminary summary was published in 1930. 
Regan was elected FRS in 1917, appointed an honorary fellow of Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1928, and awarded the honorary degree of DSc from Durham University in 1929. The greater part of Regan's administrative duties, when keeper of zoology, was devoted to improving accommodation for the collection. The New Spirit Building, based on his plan, was completed in 1930. One of his first duties as director was to report to the royal commission on national museums and galleries. The commission recommended independence from the British Museum, staff increases and immediate expenditure on new buildings. He was thus enabled to enter on his directorial period in an optimistic atmosphere with a practical plan for the reorganization of the museum according to modern ideas. The financial slump of 1929-31, however, so delayed the building programme that the greater part of the plan remained unrealized when the outbreak of war in 1939 suspended work. The 'British Museum Act' (1930) made the British Museum (Natural History) at South Kensington, and its director, an autonomous institution independent of the British Museum at Bloomsbury. Regan tried then, and again in 1936, to alter the official title to British Museum of Natural History in keeping with English grammar and usage, but at neither time would the trustees permit the change. During Regan's directorship women were admitted to the scientific staff for the first time. 
When Regan retired in 1938 it was without the knighthood with which his predecessors had been honoured. He had been in poor health, and his highly strung temperament had made him unpopular with some trustees. Regan died at his home, 8 Carlton Avenue, Feltham, Middlesex, on 12 January 1943. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35712


Reich, Emil (1854-1910), historian, son of Louis Reich, was born on 24 March 1854 at Eperjes in Hungary. After early education in schools at Eperjes and Kassa he went to the universities of Prague, Budapest, and Vienna; at the last he became a doctor of laws. Until his thirtieth year he studied almost exclusively in libraries. He then decided -- finding books inadequate for 'a real comprehension of history' -- to learn by travelling. 
In July 1884 Reich, with his parents, his brother, and two sisters, emigrated to America, where after much hardship he was engaged in 1887 by the Appleton firm of New York in preparing their encyclopaedia. On his father's death, his mother and one sister settled in Budapest; the brother and other sister settled in Cincinnati, the one as a photo-engraver, the other as a public school teacher. In July 1889 Reich went to France. At the end of the year he visited Britain. In February and March 1890 he delivered at Oxford four lectures, subsequently published as 'Graeco-Roman Institutions' (1890; French translation, 1891), in which he attempted to 'disprove the applicableness of Darwinian concepts to the solution of sociological problems'. His theory of the hitherto unsuspected influence of 'infamia' on Roman law at first aroused opposition, but later was developed in Britain and France. Reich spent his time mainly in France until 1893, when he married Celine Labulle of Paris and settled in Britain for good. There, as a writer, as a lecturer to popular and learned audiences in Oxford, Cambridge, and London, and as a coach at Wren's establishment for preparing candidates for the civil service, he displayed remarkable vigour, versatility, and self-confidence. His breadth of interests appealed to Lord Acton, who described him as 'a universal specialist' and for Acton he wrote on Hungary and the Slavonic kingdoms for volume 1 of the 'Cambridge Modern History'. 
Reich's work, though full of stimulating suggestions, was often inaccurate in detail, and omission of essential facts discredited his conclusions. A lover of paradox, and a severe censor of established historical and literary reputations, he nevertheless made useful contributions to historical criticism in his lectures on 'Fundamental principles of evidence' and in his 'The Failure of the Higher Criticism of the Bible' (1905), in which he combated modern methods of biblical criticism. Of 'A general history of western nations from 5000 BC' to 1900 AD, the first partntiquity', was published in two volumes in 1908-9. In it Reich laid heavy stress on environmental, geopolitical, and economic conditions. He also unjustifiably charged A. H. J. Greenidge with adopting without acknowledgement some researches of his own ('Antiquity', 2.339-40n.); the accusation provoked a stout defence from Greenidge's friends in the 'Times Literary Supplement' (23 and 30 July, 13 and 20 August 1908). Reich's most successful published work was his 'Hungarian Literature' (1897; 2nd edn, 1906). In the dispute between British Guiana and Venezuela (1895-9) in regard to the Venezuelan boundary, Reich was engaged by the British government to help in the preparation of its case. A course of lectures on Plato at Claridge's Hotel, London, in 1906, which were attended by prominent female members of London society, brought him much public notoriety. 
Reich published many other works on a wide variety of subjects. Especially notable are his 'Handbook of Geography, Descriptive and Mathematical' (2 vols., 1908) and 'Woman through the Ages' (2 vols., 1908). His attack on German militarism, 'Germany's Swelled Head' (1907), was a best-seller in a revised edition by 'J. B. R.' in 1914. Reich died after three months' illness at his home, 33 St Luke's Road, Notting Hill, London, on 11 December 1910, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. His wife, with a daughter, survived him. Reich was fond of music and was an accomplished pianist. 


@@@@@


doc= 35713


Reid, Archibald David (1844-1908), painter, was born on 8 June 1844 in Aberdeen, the fourth of the five sons (in a family of thirteen children) of George Reid, blacksmith and later manager of the Aberdeen Copper Company, and his wife, Esther Tait. Archy, as he was known, was the younger brother of the painter Sir George Reid (1841-1913); his younger brother Samuel Reid (1854-1912) was also an artist. In the summer of 1854 Reid's father was declared bankrupt; his brother George was removed from Aberdeen grammar school and Archibald himself was sent to Robert Gordon's Hospital, a charity school. He left school at fourteen and was employed in the counting-house of the flour miller, art collector, and connoisseur John Forbes White. One of the earliest collectors of contemporary Dutch and French painting in Britain, White developed close links with the artists whose paintings he had bought, particularly Gerrit Mollinger and Jozef Israels. He sent both George and later Archy to study in the Netherlands. 
In Aberdeen, Reid gained his first practical training in art at the mechanics' institute. At the age of twenty-three he went to Edinburgh for three years, where he attended the classes of the Trustees' Academy and, later, the life class of the Royal Scottish Academy. This training, however, seems to have had far less effect on his art than did the influence of the realist art of his Dutch and French contemporaries and of his artist friends in north-east Scotland, particularly his brother George, their mutual friend George Paul Chalmers, and the mentor to all three, John Forbes White. White became Archy Reid's guardian, teacher, and promoter. As he had with George, White set out to define Archy's art, to alter his subject matter, and to improve his technique (even to the point of painting on his pictures when he felt it necessary). For Archy the effect of the contact with White was, if anything, still more profound than it had been for George. Reid could, when required, turn out works in an earlier style: minutely realistic, colourful scenes of the local fishing villages such as 'Boys and Buoys' (Aberdeen Art Gallery) fall into this category. However, the influence of realism and its accompanying emphasis on tonality soon came to dominate his art, as is revealed in paintings such as 'On the Aberdeen Bents' (Aberdeen Art Gallery), which is a direct translation of Israels's much employed theme of a girl waiting on the shore for the return of the men from fishing. Reid's painting has less sombre realism than many Dutch works on this theme: he relieves the tension somewhat by depicting the girl busy mending nets rather than gazing out to sea. The atmosphere is altogether bleaker, however, in 'A Lone Shore' of 1874 (Aberdeen Art Gallery): in this large painting the outcome of the fishing trip -- a wrecked boat -- is clearly visible. 'A Lone Shore' was accepted to hang at the Royal Academy in 1875, but the bleakness of the subject matter and treatment did not appeal to the public and it remained unsold in the artist's studio until his death. 
As a young man Reid was dark-haired and blue-eyed, and sported a neat beard and moustache, and a jaunty tam-o'-shanter. Without the same familial responsibilities as his older brother, he was free to travel extensively; a persistent illness (he had an operation in 1887) further reduced the family's expectations of him. He painted in France and in 1874 was in the Netherlands; White funded a journey to Spain. Reid also visited Italy and in 1878 he studied at the Academie Julian in Paris. The careers of the two brothers, George and Archibald, were closely interlinked: George influenced Archibald in his choice of subject matter. (He painted, for example, some of the first still lifes of flowers in Scottish art, a subject which had been introduced to Scotland by his brother.) He also had a career as a portrait painter but this was never as successful as that of George, though he would occasionally take over commissions which George had declined. George was, however, scrupulous in avoiding any hint of nepotism, voting for election to the Royal Scottish Academy other artists in preference to his brother. Indeed, it was not until 1892 that Archy Reid was elected to the Royal Scottish Academy and then only as an associate member. Five years later he became a member of the Royal Institute of Painters in Oils. He was also a member of the Royal Scottish Society of Painters in Watercolour. 
From 1883 Reid lived at St Lukes, Kepplestone, George Reid's home in Aberdeen. Ten years later, on 26 July 1893, he married Margaret Sim ('b'. 1839/40), daughter of George Sim, a farmer from Kintore, Aberdeenshire; they had no children. In Aberdeen, Reid moved in a lively intellectual circle. He was a member of the New Deer Academy, which included the theologian and semantic scholar William Robertson Smith and the astronomer David Gill. He was also actively involved in the organization and hanging of the Aberdeen Artists' Society exhibitions which began in 1885. Towards the end of his life he produced many landscapes in charcoal. He made some etchings and also some illustrations, including some for the menus for the meetings of the Aberdeen Pen and Pencil Club, of which he was a member. He died of heart failure at Wareham, Dorset, on 30 August 1908 and was buried in St Peter's cemetery, Aberdeen. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35714


Reid, Forrest (1875-1947), novelist and literary scholar, born at 20 Mount Charles, Belfast, on 24 June 1875, was the sixth and youngest son of Robert Reid (1825-1881), manager of a felt works, who came from a well-established upper-middle-class Ulster family, and his second wife, Frances Matilda Parr (died 1901), a collateral descendant of the sixth wife of Henry VIII. He was educated at the Royal Belfast Academical Institution. After some years as apprentice in the tea trade, he went to Christ's College, Cambridge, at the age of thirty and took his degree in 1908 with a second class in the medieval and modern languages tripos. He then settled down to write in Belfast, which, apart from periods of travel, remained his home for the rest of his life. 
Reid wrote sixteen novels, two volumes of autobiography, two collections of short stories, critical studies of W. B. Yeats and Walter de la Mare, and a definitive work on the book illustrators of the 1860s and numerous essays and book reviews. The novels fall into two fairly distinct groups. The first includes the books written before the publication of his first volume of autobiography, 'Apostate', in 1926. These include his first published book, 'The Kingdom of Twilight' (1904), 'The Garden God' (1905), 'The Bracknels' (1911), 'Following Darkness' (1912), 'The Gentle Lover' (1913), 'At the Door of the Gate' (1915), 'The Spring Song' (1916), 'Pirates of the Spring' (1919), and 'Pender among the Residents' (1922). Of most of these Reid himself had a low opinion, considering them 'false starts'. 'Following Darkness' and 'Pirates of the Spring', however, stand easily with his later and most accomplished writing. The second group of novels, in which he found his subject, that of youth and its adult recall, includes 'Demophon' (1927), 'Uncle Stephen' (1931), 'Brian Westby' (1934), 'The Retreat' (1936), 'Peter Waring' (1937), and 'Young Tom' (1944). 
Boyhood and adolescence seen through the understanding eyes of an older man supply the subject of most of Reid's work. It is, however, an exaggeration to claim, as some critics have done, that he could not create a believable character over the age of twelve, but there is a definite sense of a 'King Charles's head' in much of his fiction -- his adult characters are invariably less rounded than his juvenile ones. In book after book humorous, gentle, intelligent boys wander on seashores, in woods, along rivers, in the gardens of houses. There is a whole gallery of them -- Peter Waring, Denis Bracknel, Brian Westby, Grif Weston, Beach Traill, and his most successful creation, Tom Barber -- who would not take happily to life in an industrial city; who all have a sensitive leaning towards the dumb natural life of a landscape, to the extent at times of an adoration of certain phenomena, such as the moon. Graham Greene's observation that obsession lies at the heart of many modern writers applies particularly well to Reid's output, and a fruitful lead was provided by an anonymous reviewer who suggested that 'E. M. Forster's heroes are the sort of men Forrest Reid's boys might have grown into, if Forrest Reid had allowed them to grow up.' 
Reid's reputation has perhaps understandably suffered from these apparent obsessions. It is possible to regard him as an 'escapist' novelist. This is the view that his abiding concern with childhood, with youth, and with the loss of innocence, often observed in an unreal quasi-paradisal setting, are the trivial concerns of a hence justifiably minor writer. However, the Elysian landscapes which he evokes again and again in his books are essentially the landscape with which he was most familiar -- the Ulster landscape. His landscapes are not alternative imaginative topographies but are based upon firm Ulster realities, and he wrote about the links between personality and landscape in a lucid rhythmic prose. 
Reid was unmarried. He led a retired and outwardly lonely life but had many varied interests. He was an expert croquet player, a lover of animals and the country, an opera enthusiast, a discriminating collector, a wide reader, and a stimulating and clear-minded conversationalist. He was close with many writers of his own generation, and was generous with help and advice to young authors. 
Reid was one of the founder members of the Irish Academy of Letters and received the honorary degree of DLitt at the Queen's University of Belfast in 1933. He was awarded the James Tait Black memorial prize for his last novel, 'Young Tom'. Reid died at 15 Seaview, Warrenpoint, co. Down, on 4 January 1947 and was buried on 7 January in Dundonald cemetery, Knock, Belfast. 


@@@@@


doc= 35715


Reid, Sir George Houstoun (1845-1918), prime minister of Australia, was born at the manse, Johnstone, near Paisley, Renfrew, on 25 February 1845, the fifth of the seven children of John Reid (1800-1867), a Presbyterian minister, and his wife, Marion, 'nee' Crybbace (1809?-1885). In 1852 the family emigrated to Victoria. Reid attended the Melbourne Academy until 1858, when he moved with his parents to Sydney. After some time in a merchant's office he became a clerk in the public service, and by the age of twenty held a responsible position in the treasury. By 1879, when he was admitted to the bar, he was permanent head of the attorney-general's department. He had also published several works on intercolonial problems, on the colony's resources, and fiscal policy, of which the most significant was 'An Essay on New South Wales, the Mother Colony of the Australias' (1876). In 1880 he was elected to the New South Wales legislative assembly, and in 1883 he became minister of public instruction. Unseated on a technicality in 1884, he was again returned the following year, to represent the same area in colonial and federal politics for a generation. 
Between 1885 and 1891 Reid was often irregular in his attendance, devoting his time to building up a lucrative legal practice and enjoying an active social life: he thrice declined office under Sir Henry Parkes. When Parkes made a dramatic gesture towards federating the Australian colonies, Reid, suspecting that it would involve a threat to the free-trade policy of New South Wales, was the principal advocate of caution. After a draft constitution was drawn up in 1891 he strongly criticized its illiberal elements, and the movement temporarily petered out. This marked a turning point in his life. He became more active politically, and on 5 November 1891, to the surprise of his bachelor friends, he married Flora Ann, the daughter of John and Suzannah Brumby of Longford, Tasmania, who was twenty-four years his junior. They had two sons and a daughter. 
The government fell shortly afterwards, and when Parkes resigned his leadership of the Free Trade Party, Reid, rather unexpectedly, succeeded him. His effective criticism of the new government's protectionism, and his success in putting forward an alternative policy based on direct taxation, won him a resounding electoral victory in 1894, confirmed the following year after a crisis brought about by the upper house. As premier he reshaped the colony's finances, made significant reforms in other areas, and managed the nascent Labor Party very well. He also took up the federal question, which was, after the debacle of 1891, being pushed by Edmund Barton. Reid convened the premiers' conference which led to the convention in 1897-8 and worked very hard as a delegate. During an adjournment he visited London for the diamond jubilee and the colonial conference. He was sworn of the privy council and entrusted with the Colonial Office's views on the draft constitution. But he was very disappointed at the outcome of the intercolonial bargaining, seeing some of the provisions of the final draft as disadvantageous to his colony, others as potentially undemocratic. He announced his personal intention of voting 'yes' in the referendum on its acceptance in 1898, but his frank criticisms led to its narrow defeat in New South Wales (the critical colony) on 3 June 1898. There followed further negotiations which resulted in substantial improvements, and its endorsement the following June; but the more enthusiastic federalists had already branded him as a fence-sitter, 'Yes-No Reid', and took part in an intrigue which cost him both the premiership of his colony and the first federal prime ministership. 
Reid entered federal politics as acknowledged leader of the opposition, but under serious disadvantages. With parliament meeting in Melbourne and his practice, at which he could earn at least ten times his parliamentary stipend, centred in Sydney, he was forced to leave much work to his deputy. Remaining a convinced free-trader, he nevertheless became convinced that the fiscal issue should be compromised in the face of the rise of the Labor Party, which he condemned, rather misleadingly, as 'socialist': his real objections were those of a liberal to the Labor Party's rigid caucus system. The confused political situation produced by the existence of three almost equal parties in the second parliament made Reid prime minister in a coalition from August 1904 to July 1905, but the 'fusion' of the old Free-Trade and Protectionist parties which he advocated did not come until 1909, when he stepped aside to make co-operation between his followers and those of Alfred Deakin (a late convert to the idea) possible. His appointment as first high commissioner in London later in 1909 was in part a reward. He formally held the post from 1910. 
Aided by his strong sympathy with English Liberalism, Reid made a great success of what he saw as the primary task: an indefatigable trencherman, with a wit to match his vast waistcoat, he was in constant demand as an after-dinner speaker. On these as well as more formal occasions he let no opportunity pass to emphasize the advantages his country offered to investors and potential emigrants. He travelled widely and built up an efficient office organization to support his efforts. The outbreak of war widened his responsibilities greatly. 
Disappointed when he failed to get his term extended beyond January 1916, Reid was delighted to be returned, without opposition, to the House of Commons. In the winter of 1917-18 he undertook a strenuous semi-official speaking tour of the United States in support of the war effort. He had little time to make a mark in the house, though he did help to defuse an embarrassing resolution on the government's Irish policy. He died suddenly of cerebral thrombosis at his home, 1 Melbury Road, Prince's Gardens, London, on 13 September 1918 and was buried at Putney Vale cemetery on 18 September after a service at St Columba's Church of Scotland, Pont Street. He had been appointed KCMG (1909), GCMG (1911), and GCB (1916). In 1917 his wife had been appointed DBE for her efforts on behalf of wounded servicemen. 
Ludicrous obesity, a walrus moustache, thin, sandy hair, and an unruly monocle made Reid a cartoonists' delight. The caricature has often, wrongly, been confused with the man. He was in fact a clever politician, an efficient premier, and a very successful high commissioner; and no one did more to ensure that Australia's federal constitution should be both liberal and workable. 


@@@@@


doc= 35716


Reid, James Smith (1846-1926), classical scholar and historian, was born at Sorn, Ayrshire, on 3 May 1846, the eldest son of John Reid, schoolmaster, and his wife, Mary Smith. Among collateral relatives on his mother's side he reckoned Adam Smith, author of 'The Wealth of Nations'. He was educated first in Arbroath and then at the City of London School, and entered Christ's College, Cambridge, as a scholar in 1865. Three years later (1868) he was bracketed senior classic, and was awarded the Browne medal for a Latin epigram. He was senior chancellor's medallist in 1869, and the same year was elected a fellow of his college. While studying classics Reid also studied law, and was Whewell scholar in 1870 and graduated LLM in 1872. In the same year he married Ruth, daughter of Thomas Gardner, and sister of Professor Percy Gardner, Professor Ernest Gardner, and Miss Alice Gardner. They had three sons and one daughter. 
From 1873 to 1878 and again from 1880 to 1885 Reid was classical lecturer at Pembroke College, and in 1878, having ceased to be a fellow of Christ's on his marriage in 1872, he was elected to a fellowship at Gonville and Caius College, where he remained a fellow for forty-four years. Here, together with the Revd E. S. Roberts (master of the college, 1903-12), he built up a brilliant classical school. In 1899 he was elected first professor of ancient history in the university, and held this chair until 1925. He received the honorary degrees of LittD of Dublin University and LLD of St Andrews University, and in 1917 he was elected a fellow of the British Academy. He was also an honorary fellow of Christ's College, where he had continued to lecture until 1880. 
Reid's main interests were in Roman literature and history, and he quickly established himself as a leading Ciceronian scholar, bringing to the elucidation of the texts a particular mastery of idiom. He was greatly influenced by the work of the Danish philologist Johan Nicolai Madvig. In the early stages of his career he produced several compact editions of philosophical and oratorical works of Cicero. These were chiefly designed for undergraduates preparing for the classical tripos, which underwent several revisions in this period. The most important of these editions was of the 'Academica' (1874) which appeared in an enlarged edition in 1885, and for which he gained the degree of LittD at Cambridge. 
Reid's considerable teaching commitments together with his tutorship at Caius (1885-99) and his tenure of the chair of ancient history (1899-1925) greatly delayed the publication of his major work -- an edition of 'De finibus'. Although he had produced a translation in 1883, the edition which he had begun to prepare at the same time was not published until 1925 and only covered books one and two. It was unfortunate that Reid's advanced age and failing health made it impossible for him to revise his text in the light of new approaches to the manuscript tradition. Nevertheless the edition shows a deep understanding of the Greek philosophical sources as well as the linguistic idioms of Cicero's work, and its value is increased by the copious illustrations of usage provided. 
As first professor of ancient history Reid took on a heavy burden of lecturing which limited his published work. He produced several articles on Roman law and constitutional history, and made contributions to the 'Cambridge Companion to Latin Studies'. His only historical book -- 'The Municipalities of the Roman Empire' (1913) -- was the published version of his Lowell lectures. Although the chapters on the theory and history of the Roman municipality in the abstract are valuable, the absence of documentation limits its use. 
Reid played a large part in the foundation in 1910 of the Society for the Promotion of Roman Studies, of which he succeeded F. J. Haverfield as president in 1916. He was an active member of the editorial committee of the 'Journal of Roman Studies' and of the council of the British School at Rome. For fifteen years he was a tutor of Caius, but his forte was in scholarship and teaching rather than in administration. For university affairs he had little taste. In politics he was a Liberal of the old school, and was for some years chairman of the party in the town of Cambridge. His personality, in which the desire to shine found no place, was gentle and kindly. He retired from his chair on the ground of failing health in 1925, and died at Cambridge on 1 April 1926. 


@@@@@


doc= 35717


Reid, Sir John Watt (1823-1909), surgeon and naval officer, born in Edinburgh on 25 February 1823, was the younger son of John Watt Reid, surgeon in the navy, and his wife, Jane, daughter of James Henderson, an Edinburgh merchant. Educated at Edinburgh Academy, at the university there, and at the extra-mural medical school, he qualified LRCS (Edinburgh) in 1844. He entered the navy as an assistant surgeon on 6 February 1845, and spent two years in the Haslar Royal Naval Hospital, Hampshire, before serving a commission on board the 'Rodney' in the channel, where he was commended by his commanders-in-chief. He was appointed in March 1849 to the naval hospital at Plymouth, and received Admiralty approval for his services there during the 1849 cholera epidemic. In January 1852 he was appointed acting surgeon to the sloop 'Inflexible', in the Mediterranean; on 12 September 1854 he was promoted to surgeon, and in June 1855 appointed to the line-of-battle ship 'London', on the same station. In these two ships he served in the Black Sea until the fall of Sevastopol; he was thanked by the commander-in-chief, Sir James Dundas, for his services when the crew of the flagship 'Britannia' was stricken with cholera in 1854. On 22 October 1856 he was awarded the MD at Aberdeen, and in April 1857 was appointed to the hospital ship 'Belleisle', in which he continued during the Second Opium War, in 1857-9. 
In January 1860 Reid was appointed to the 'Nile' (90 guns), and served in her for four years on the North American station. On 6 July 1863 Reid married Georgina, daughter of C. J. Hill, of Halifax, Nova Scotia. He earned his captain's commendation for his zeal and professional ability, especially during an epidemic of yellow fever, while he was medical officer in charge of the temporary hospital in Halifax, Nova Scotia. Vice-Admiral Sir Alexander Milne considered him an officer in whom he could invariably place implicit confidence. He served in the Haslar Hospital from 1864 until 1867, being promoted to staff surgeon on 5 September 1866. After further service in the Mediterranean, in the 'Duncan' and the 'Lord Warden', he was placed in June 1870 in charge of the naval hospital at Haulbowline, co. Cork, where he remained until 1873. During the concluding months of the Second Anglo-Asante War he served in the 'Active' and in the 'Nebraska', a troopship converted to receive casualties from the naval brigades, at Cape Coast Castle; he was mentioned in dispatches, and on 31 March 1874 was promoted to deputy inspector-general. In that rank he had charge of the medical establishments at Bermuda from 1875 to 1878, when he was appointed to the Haslar Hospital. On 25 February 1880 he was promoted to be inspector-general and was appointed medical director-general of the navy. In this capacity he carried through important and lasting reforms proposed in 1883 by the Hoskins committee, of which he was a member. They included a naval medical school at the Haslar Hospital, the organization of the naval sick-berth branch, and the naval nursing service. 
On Reid's retirement in 1888 the Board of Admiralty recorded its high opinion of his zeal and efficiency. He became an honorary physician to Queen Victoria in February 1881 and to Edward VII in 1901. He was created KCB (military) on 24 November 1882, and awarded the LLD of Edinburgh University on 17 April 1884, the jubilee medal in 1897, and a medical good-service pension in July 1888. 
Reid died at his London home, 106 Queen's Gate, South Kensington, on 24 February 1909, and was buried on 26 February at Bramshaw, Hampshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 35718


Reid, Sir Robert Gillespie (1842-1908), railway contractor and entrepreneur in Canada, was born on 12 October 1842 in Coupar Angus, Perthshire, Scotland, the son of William Robertson Reid, a linen miller, and his wife, Catherine Gillespie. He was educated locally, and trained as a stonemason. In 1865, drawn by the gold rush, he emigrated to Australia, but was disappointed as a prospector and worked on railway viaducts in the Blue Mountains. He was back in Scotland between 1869 and 1871, then moved to Canada, where by 1872 he was working on the Grand Trunk Railway's bridge between Fort Erie (Ontario) and Buffalo (New York). His family -- he had married Harriet Duff in Auckland, New Zealand, in 1865 -- joined him the following year. 
During this period Reid established himself as a builder of railway bridges. In the late 1870s and early 1880s he worked in the United States, but returned to Canada in 1883 to take a series of bridge contracts with the Canadian Pacific Railway (CPR). He was closely involved with the line being built by the CPR along the north shore of Lake Superior, including the very difficult Jackfish Bay section. In 1886 he completed the Lachine Bridge near Montreal, where he was then living. The following year he contracted to build his first railway line -- the CPR's Sudbury branch -- as well as, on Cape Breton, the foundations of the Grand Narrows Bridge and a section of line for the Intercolonial Railway. 
By this time Reid was wealthy, well established, respected for his professional skill and reliability, and closely connected to the prominent and influential Montreal businessmen who controlled the CPR, of which he became a director. It is not surprising, therefore, that in 1890 the government of Newfoundland, led by Sir William Whiteway, awarded him, in partnership with G. H. Middleton, the contract to complete a partially built railway from St John's, the capital, to Hall's Bay on the island's north-east coast. In a second contract, settled in 1893, Reid and the government agreed to abandon the idea of a terminus at Hall's Bay and to continue the line across the island to Port aux Basques, where a ferry could connect with the Intercolonial on Cape Breton. In addition, Reid agreed to operate the railway for ten years in return for substantial land grants -- 10,000 acres per mile, for a total entitlement of nearly 4000 square miles. 
Reid's financial stability was threatened in 1894-5, when, in the wake of the collapse of the colony's two banks, the Newfoundland government hung on the edge of bankruptcy. Reid was being paid in government bonds, which suddenly became virtually worthless. His precise role in the events which followed is unclear, but it is probable that he encouraged the Bank of Montreal, with which he was closely connected (he later became a director), to go to Newfoundland, take over the government's accounts, and advance temporary loans. Reid also did his best to facilitate the negotiation of terms of union between Newfoundland and Canada in March 1895. When it proved impossible to arrive at suitable terms he used his influence to help Robert Bond obtain an emergency loan in Montreal, which enabled the colony to avoid default and to stabilize its finances. 
The main line of the Newfoundland Railway was completed in 1897. The following year Reid signed a third contract with a new government led by Sir James Winter. It was a complex and wide-ranging document, which represented the aspirations of his family as much as himself. At that point, suffering from 'inflammatory rheumatism', Reid lived in Montreal, spent much time abroad unsuccessfully seeking a cure, and visited Newfoundland infrequently; the business there was looked after by his sons (the eldest, William D. Reid, was general manager). The deal provided that Reid would operate the entire Newfoundland railway system for fifty years, at which time it would become the property of his successors. Reid would pay $1 million and receive an additional 2400 square miles in land grants. He agreed in addition, among other concessions, to take over the government's telegraph system and dry dock, and to operate the Gulf ferry and a coastal steamer service. Clearly, the Reids intended to become much more than railway contractors. 
The new contract sparked heated controversy within the colony, and was severely criticized by the colonial secretary, Joseph Chamberlain. The Winter government was eventually defeated in the legislature and replaced by an anti-contract government led by Bond, who was confirmed in office by a landslide election victory in 1900. The result of prolonged negotiations was a revised contract in 1901 whereby 'Czar Reid', as the local press called him, surrendered the reversionary interest in the railway, the telegraph system, and a large amount of land in return for financial compensation (to be decided in part by arbitration) and permission to assign his assets to the Reid Newfoundland Company, of which he became the first president. 
It was not long before relations between Bond and the Reid interests deteriorated, so much so that in 1905 Reid offered to sell out to the Newfoundland government. When the offer was rejected, Reid and his sons made a determined and successful attempt to destroy Bond and install a more friendly administration. This was by no means the first time they had intervened in local politics, but perhaps the most blatant example. Their candidate to replace Bond was Sir Edward Morris, who had supported the 1898 contract. In 1907 he left the Bond government, and the following year, funded largely by Reid money, started a new party and a new newspaper. By the spring of 1909 he was prime minister. 
Sir Robert Reid -- he was knighted in 1907 -- died at 275 Drummond Street, Montreal, on 3 June 1908, before these plans had come to fruition; he was cremated on 6 June at the city's Mount Royal crematorium. The company he had founded, with its virtual monopoly on public transportation and its extensive land holdings, remained a major factor in the colony's political and economic life into the 1920s. In addition to the operation of the railway and their steamers, the Reids were closely involved with the development of Newfoundland's newsprint and electricity industries. Reid himself, quiet and unostentatious, was remembered more with respect than with affection as a competent, dependable contractor of considerable integrity -- the blame for the family's questionable political behaviour being placed, with some justice, on his sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 35719


Reid, Robert Threshie, Earl Loreburn (1846-1923), lord chancellor, was born on 3 April 1846 on the island of Corfu, the second son of Sir James John Reid (1805-1876), of Mouswald Place, Dumfries, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Robert Threshie, of Barnbarroch, Kirkcudbrightshire. His maternal forebears came from Norfolk. Both his father and grandfather were lawyers. Sir James had been appointed chief justice of the Ionian Islands, then a British protectorate, by Lord Grey of the 'Reform Bill'; and Reid spent an exotic boyhood on Corfu, returning with his family to Dumfries when his father's term of office expired. He was educated at Cheltenham College, where he proved an outstanding scholar and athlete, becoming head of the school and excelling at cricket, football, and racquets. After winning a demyship at Magdalen College, Oxford, he decided to try for a scholarship at Balliol; and although the president of Magdalen refused his characteristically bold request for permission to make the attempt without forfeiting his demyship, he won the Balliol scholarship anyway. Intellectual and athletic prowess made him the classic Balliol all-rounder. He won his blue for racquets, played cricket for the university, and was reckoned a wicket-keeper of national calibre. 'You will get a Third, Mr Reid', the redoubtable Benjamin Jowett, master of Balliol, warned of these sporting predilections ('Contemporary Review', 33); but by dint of all-out effort Reid confounded the prediction, gaining first-class honours in both classical moderations and 'literae humaniores' (1868) and carrying off the leading classical scholarship, the Ireland. 
Failing, however, much to his disappointment, to win a fellowship, Reid decided on a legal career. He was called to the bar of the Inner Temple in 1871 and joined the Oxford circuit. The same year he married Emily Douglas, daughter of Captain Arthur Fleming, of the 1st dragoon guards. His rise at the bar was rapid. He reputedly earned several hundred pounds in his first year. For a time he 'devilled' for Henry James (later Lord James of Hereford), a former pupil at Cheltenham, but soon established his independence. His strong points were common sense, mastery of facts, and ready grasp of issues. Especially able in commercial suits, 'he could unravel complicated details in a partnership and track a fraud through all its windings' ('The Times', 1 Dec 1923). A stout, bluff, good-natured man, addicted to his cup of tea and his clay pipe, with a strong physique and a large head (which critics called 'swelled'), determined in his opinions, yet kindly and soft-spoken, he was well liked for his frank, open demeanour, his informality, and his sportsmanship. In an age when first names were less frequently used than later, he was widely known as 'Bob' Reid. 
Reid was an admirer of W. E. Gladstone and entertained political ambitions. Through the further influence of Sir Henry James, he stood as Liberal candidate for Hereford in the general election of 1880, and was elected to parliament as the borough's second Liberal member. In 1882 he took silk, only eleven years after call and at the then exceptionally early age of thirty-six. He appeared frequently before the House of Lords and the judicial committee of the privy council; but his performance as a 'leader', though competent, was felt to fall below his early promise, his political pursuits having outstripped his interest in law. When Hereford became a single-member constituency in 1885, Reid sought another seat. He was narrowly defeated at Dunbartonshire, but secured election as a Gladstonian Liberal in June 1886 as member for Dumfries burghs, which he represented for nineteen years until he became lord chancellor in 1905. 
Reid made no special mark in the House of Commons, but was much in demand across the country as a popular and attractive speech maker. A lucky chain of events propelled him suddenly from the back benches to high office. In the summer of 1894 the solicitor-general, Sir John Rigby, was made attorney-general, and Reid became a candidate for the vacancy. His main rival was Haldane, strongly supported by Asquith; but Haldane, like Rigby, was a Chancery lawyer, and it was felt that 'it would not do to have him as well as Rigby for Law Officers' (Brooks, 132). With some reluctance, the prime minister, Lord Rosebery, appointed Reid as solicitor-general; he was knighted in the same year. In October 1894, when Rigby was raised to the Court of Appeal, Sir Robert Reid, as he then was, became attorney-general. His tenure lasted only a few months, however, for when the Unionists returned to power the following July, he was out of office for a decade. 
During these years in opposition, Reid's practice declined; but the Unionist government thought sufficiently highly of his judgement and character to invite him to act as arbitrator in the boundary dispute between Venezuela and British Guiana in 1899, for which he received the GCMG, and in the Alaska boundary dispute in 1903. A 'Little Englander' (though he repudiated the expression), like the Liberal leader, Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman, he denounced both the government's policy towards the Boers and its imperialist supporters prominent in his own party. During the South African War he continued to speak out for the Boers 'with characteristic disregard of his professional and political interests' ('The Times', 1 Dec 1923). After the war he helped Campbell-Bannerman to draw up the settlement which restored self-government to Transvaal and Orange River Colony. 
Even before the Liberals returned to power, there was much intriguing for the office of lord chancellor. As in 1894, Haldane, once more a contender, canvassed the prime minister, again with Asquith's support; but Campbell-Bannerman preferred Reid on both personal and political grounds, and appointed him to the woolsack in December 1905. He took the title of Baron Loreburn of Dumfries (from 'lower-burn', a district of Dumfries, and the city's ancient motto and rallying cry). When Campbell-Bannerman died in 1908, Loreburn's was one of several names proposed to succeed him instead of Asquith. Widowed in January 1904 after a long and happy marriage, in 1907 Loreburn married a close friend of his late wife, Violet Elizabeth, elder daughter of William Frederick Hicks-Beach, of Witcombe Park, Gloucestershire, and niece of the well-known Conservative statesman, Michael Hicks Beach, first earl of St Aldwyn. There were no children of either marriage. 
Loreburn was a vigorous, reforming lord chancellor. He established the office of public trustee, a long-awaited measure designed to obviate the defalcations of unscrupulous solicitors. His most important achievement was the establishment in 1907 of the court of criminal appeal, another reform long overdue, which he carried through despite much opposition from his fellow lawyers. He was constantly importuned by Liberal MPs to nominate large numbers of their supporters as justices of the peace after a glut of Unionist appointments by Lord Halsbury. Resolved to appoint on grounds of fitness alone, he indignantly resisted these efforts by what he called 'the caucus' of his party, including the chief whip, as he wrote to George Whiteley on 10 December 1906, 'to force upon me what I regard as a prostitution of my office, and... I will resign the Great Seal sooner than do it' (Heuston, 156). He would gladly redress the political balance, he declared, but on conscientiously investigating the names submitted to him rather than approving them on the nod, as had been customary, he found many which he felt bound to reject. 'I should be a coward', he wrote to Arthur Ponsonby on 22 November 1906, 'if I made what I think unsuitable appointments to appease the clamour of MPs' (Heuston, 154). Chastened by his own experience, in 1910 he introduced the present system of local advisory committees responsible to the lord chancellor for recommending candidates for the magistracy. His impartiality and discernment were likewise apparent in his nominations to the county court and High Court. He showed the same staunch independence of mind in his refusal 'to hawk justice', as he put it (Fitzroy, 335), by bowing to political pressures, which, again, had certainly influenced the process hitherto. As he observed with pride on raising J. C. Bigham to the presidency of the Admiralty, Probate, and Divorce Division in 1909, 'there were no damned politics about the appointment' (Mersey, 227). To a candidate disappointed of judicial office who pleaded his political services, Loreburn explained loftily that politics did not come into it; to which the infuriated aspirant retorted that but for politics Loreburn himself would have risen no higher than a county court bench (Ashley, 224-5). His High Court nominees included such luminaries as Parker, Eve, Bankes, Avory, Horridge, Lush, Scrutton, and Hamilton (later Lord Sumner). 
As speaker of the House of Lords, it fell to Loreburn to introduce a succession of radical and controversial measures against strenuous opposition from the hereditary Unionist peers with their huge entrenched majority. Legislation ranged from an act for the taxation of Scottish land values in 1908 to the 'Trade Union Act' of 1913, which, reversing the decisions in the Taff Vale and Osborne cases, empowered trade unions to levy a political fund and to sponsor members of parliament. Loreburn led the house at a period of inter-party strife and constitutional crisis unprecedented in modern times and which intensified when the peers rejected the 'People's Budget' in 1909. Emotions ran particularly high during the debates on the 'Parliament Act' of 1911, which drastically reduced the power of the Lords to delay legislation. Yet unexpectedly, Loreburn established and maintained a marked ascendancy in the upper house, winning respect and even affection for the honesty, straightforwardness, and patience which accompanied and set off his absolute determination. His dignity and pluck and the patent sincerity of his belief in the reforms which he advocated appealed to his opponents' sporting instincts; so did his good humour, as when he offered to go tiger shooting with one of the leading 'die-hards', Lord Willoughby de Broke. 'If he was a strong partisan' the latter recalled, 'no one thought the worse of him for that' (Broke, 259). He also impressed George V, at whose insistence he was raised to an earldom in the coronation honours of 1911 after only five years in office; and he was one of four named councillors of state during the king's absence in India. 
As a law lord, Loreburn set high standards of courtesy. He listened to counsel instead of arguing with them: 'an appeal became again a hearing and not a debate' ('The Times', 1 Dec 1923); and when he did interrupt, it was only for clarification and invariably sweetened by an apology. He was an expeditious and practical judge rather than a great jurist, his first concern being, unusually, for the litigant rather than the law. A leading case on punitive damages, for example, 'Addis v. Gramophone Company Ltd' (1909), he saw primarily in human terms as 'a most unfortunate litigation, in which the costs must far exceed any sum there may be at stake'. 'A little common sense', he observed, 'would have settled all these differences in a few minutes.' He deprecated 'long rambling judgments loaded with irrelevant learning' ('The Times', 1 Dec 1923), and his own rulings, while clear and concise, were often brief to a point. His primary aim in disposing of a case was to do justice between the parties, without enlarging on the legal principles involved. As lord chancellor, this exposed him to justified criticism. In R. V. Heuston's view 'he was not interested in law and his perfunctory judgments are of no interest to the jurist' (Simpson, 445); and it is true that he seldom broke new ground unless his particular interest was aroused, when he could produce a judgment that was workmanlike if not particularly inspiring. In 'Hulton & Co. v. Jones' (1910), where the defendant newspaper had never heard of the plaintiff, one Artemus Jones, believing that it had merely satirized a fictitious character, Loreburn ruled that once the libel was proved, it was no defence that it was unintentional. In the 'Tamplin Steamship Company' case (1916) he explained the principle of frustration of contract as founded on an implied term, absolving the parties under certain untoward circumstances from their future obligations. He took a measured view of the force of precedent. While agreeing that 'great importance is to be attached to old authorities, on the strength of which many transactions may have been adjusted and rights determined', he also insisted that 'when they are plainly wrong', it was 'the duty of this House to overrule them' ('West Ham Union v. Edmonton Union', 1908). 
The ardours of office, the long hours and manifold duties, the diverse political pressures on Loreburn at a time of acute political tensions, were compounded by his growing unease at the government's conduct of foreign affairs since the death of Campbell-Bannerman -- an issue on which he contemplated resigning. He was never an easy colleague in cabinet. Under Rosebery he 'had shown a good deal of discontent' (Brooks, 133), and even under his friend Campbell-Bannerman, Lloyd George noted, 'he grumbles the first half of the time and sulks the second half' (J. Wilson, 501). He was also much exercised by his public opposition to the 'Women's Suffrage Bill' (1912), which, liberal though he was, he felt to be a 'constitutional outrage' (Vincent, 270). The accumulated strains told on his health: in 1911 he complained in the House of Lords that they 'may prove too much for the strength of anybody'. It was noticed that he was tired, depressed, and eager to leave office. In June 1912 he fell seriously ill with heart trouble and was obliged to resign very suddenly. 
Loreburn retired to Kingsdown House, near Deal in Kent, making various subsequent interventions in public life, notably on the 'Irish Home Rule Bill' of 1912. Though hitherto considered 'the best friend of Irish nationalism in the Cabinet' (Vincent, 270), a supporter since Gladstone's day of 'Home rule all round', and vehemently opposed to excluding Ulster from home rule, he feared, not without reason, that the current political crisis might erupt in civil war. In September 1913 he published a letter in 'The Times' proposing all-party constitutional talks, to include discussion of special provisions for Ulster. This volte-face, presented 'with a typical elder statesman's show of non-partisan wisdom' (Jenkins, 287) from 'an always disgruntled ex-colleague' (David, 147), annoyed and embarrassed the government; but the king welcomed it, and it prompted his attempt to ease the crisis at the Buckingham Palace conference in 1914. 
Loreburn was a self-proclaimed radical, a follower of Bright, Cobden, and Gladstone, who strove to revive traditional Liberal and pacifist values. In advance of the Hague Peace Conference of 1907 he urged the cabinet to champion immunity from prize law of goods at sea, publishing his ideas in a book entitled 'Capture at Sea' (1905, reprinted 1913). These efforts were scorned by the Admiralty and the Foreign Office. Lord Hardinge complained of 'the peace at any price section of the Cabinet headed by the Lord Chancellor' (Monger, 255), who, with all the radical's distrust of France, urged rapprochement with Germany and deplored the government's policy of aligning Great Britain with France and Russia. During the Agadir crisis (1911), fearing imminent war with Germany and conscious of his isolation and impotence in the cabinet, Loreburn enlisted C. P. Scott of the 'Manchester Guardian' to campaign for British non-intervention. Out of office in the crisis of 1914, he again urged a policy of non-intervention; and while he came to accept that Germany's violation of Belgian neutrality made British involvement inevitable, he never ceased to deplore the secret military conversations between Britain and France which had taken place since 1906, originally without his knowledge, and which he always held to be the underlying cause of the war. He bitterly and somewhat unfairly condemned his former colleagues, 'the Old Gang, who have sold and deceived us' (Heuston, 180) -- Sir Edward Grey, Asquith, and Haldane -- for what he saw as 'a course of systematic suppression of the truth' (Heuston, 174). He reputedly attended a meeting in 1915 to bring down the Asquith government. But for his pacifism, Lloyd George would have restored him to the woolsack. He never gave up hope of compromise peace with Germany, however. In 1916 he warmly welcomed Lord Lansdowne's 'peace letter' in the 'Daily Telegraph' and endorsed it with one of his own in the 'Pall Mall Gazette'. In 1919 he published 'How the War Came', a careful but polemical analysis of British foreign policy before 1914. He abominated the treaty of Versailles and the post-war military repression in Ireland. He approved the peace policy of the Labour Party and even voted for a Labour candidate at an election. 
Loreburn was justly admired for his independence of character and expression, his moral courage, and fidelity to his Liberal principles. Indifferent to the grandeur of office, he did not stand on ceremony or talk down. On his appointment to the woolsack, a friend, Adolphus Liddell, noted 'the irony of fate that he of all men should be driven into a peerage with all its pomps and vanities!... but Reid accepts it all with dignity, which silences one's tongue inclined to mock' (Heuston, 144). His convictions, in politics and in life, went deep, and he stuck to them. In 1915 he rallied the law lords against an amendment of the 'Defence of the Realm Act' of 1914 which would have made civilians liable to trial by court martial. In 1918, when he gave up sitting as a judge in order to finish his book on the war, he remitted one half of the pension to which he was entitled. Politicians, his fellow Liberals more than his Conservative opponents, were irritated by what they saw as his 'aggressive honesty' ('The Times', 1 Dec 1923). He once referred to the hereditary whig peers as 'liars, sir and thieves' (Dangerfield, 69), and he fell out with Lord Rosebery by ascribing his resignation as Liberal leader to drink (Vincent, 499). His irascibility, exacerbated by strain and growing alienation from his colleagues, turned in later years to melancholy, embittered by disillusionment at the war and a sense of personal and political betrayal. A visitor in 1915 found that he was 'very depressed, and does not passionately love his old colleagues' (Sandhurst, 305). 'My whole life', he complained in 1919, 'has been a long struggle with men and measures alien to all I value.' (Heuston, 180) He found consolation in translating verse, classical and modern. 
In general Loreburn was fair-minded, magnanimous, and kindly. To Haldane, his old rival and successor on the woolsack, he wrote: 'the only thing that makes life worth having is, to my mind, a friendly feeling among men. I think with Sophocles that this alone imparts value to any man's life' (Heuston, 167). His love of games gave him pleasure long after he ceased to be an active sportsman. In 1907 he served as president of the Marylebone Cricket Club. In the same year he received an honorary DCL from the University of Oxford, and in 1912 he was appointed visitor of Balliol College, of which he had been an honorary fellow since 1908. In 1913 he was appointed as chairman of the royal commission on railways. He was a bencher of the Inner Temple, standing counsel to Oxford University from 1899 to 1907, and a freeman of Dumfries and Annan. He was a member of Brooks's and the National Liberal Club. His health declined and he died at Kingsdown House on 30 November 1923. He was cremated at Golders Green and his ashes were interred at the churchyard at Mouswald, in the grave of his first wife. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35720


Reid, Sir Thomas Wemyss (1842-1905), journalist and biographer, born in Elswick Row, Newcastle upon Tyne, on 29 March 1842, was the second son of Alexander Reid, Congregational minister of that town from 1830 to 1880, and his second wife, Jessy Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Wemyss (died 1845) of Darlington, a Hebrew scholar and biblical critic of distinction. After a short stay at Madras College, St Andrews, where he had brain fever, Reid was educated at Percy Street Academy, Newcastle, by John Collingwood Bruce. In 1856 he became a clerk in the Wentworth Beaumont Lead office at Newcastle. He early determined on journalism, at fifteen sending reports on local topics to the 'Northern Daily Express'. These attracted the notice of the proprietor, who had him taught shorthand. Reid did occasional reporting work at seventeen; and a local cartoon entitled 'The Press of Newcastle' showed him at the time as a boy in a short jacket perched on a stool taking down a speech. Another youthful exploit was the foundation near his father's chapel of the West End Literary Institute, which included a penny bank. 
In July 1861 Reid gave up his clerkship for a journalistic career, becoming chief reporter on the 'Newcastle Journal'. His brilliant descriptive report of the Hartley colliery accident in January 1862 was issued as a pamphlet, and raised $40 for the relief of the victims' families. In 1863 Reid varied reporting with leader writing and dramatic criticism; in June 1864 he was appointed editor of the bi-weekly 'Preston Guardian', the leading journal in north Lancashire; and in January 1866 he moved to Leeds to become head of the reporting staff of the 'Leeds Mercury', a daily paper founded and for more than a century owned by the Baines family. He maintained a connection with it for the rest of his life. On 5 September 1867 Reid married his cousin Kate, daughter of the Revd John Thornton of Stockport, a dissenting minister; she died on 4 February 1870, having borne one son. He then married, on 26 March 1873, Louisa, daughter of Benjamin Berry, merchant, of Headingley, Leeds, who bore him a son and a daughter. 
From the autumn of 1867 until the spring of 1870 Reid was London representative of the 'Leeds Mercury'. In order to gain admission to the press gallery of the House of Commons he had to become an occasional reporter for the London 'Morning Star', then edited by Justin McCarthy. He subsequently took a leading part in the movement that resulted in 1881 in the opening of the gallery to the provincial press. An acquaintance with William Edward Baxter, secretary to the Admiralty, placed at his disposal important political information which gave high interest to his articles. Reid at this time was on intimate terms with Sala, James Macdonell, W. H. Mudford, and other leading journalists. He sent descriptive articles to 'Chambers's Journal' and formed a lifelong friendship with the editor, James Payn. To the 'St James's Magazine', edited by Mrs Riddell, he sent sketches of statesmen, which were republished as 'Cabinet Portraits', his first book, in 1872. 
On 15 May 1870 Reid returned to Leeds, to act as editor of the 'Leeds Mercury'. The paper rapidly developed under his alert control; in 1873 he opened a London office, sharing it with the 'Glasgow Herald', and arranged with the 'Standard' for the supply of foreign intelligence. 
Reid was a moderate Liberal. A 'writing editor' with an extremely able pen, he was the first to establish a provincial paper as a real rival to the London press, in the quality of its news and comment, and in its access to behind-the-scenes information. His early knowledge of Gladstone's unexpected decision to dissolve parliament in 1874 was the first of many scoops. Reid upheld W. E. Forster's 'Education Bill' against the radicals, and supported, against the teetotallers, Bruce's moderate 'Licensing Bill'. In the 1880 election it was at his suggestion that Gladstone was invited to contest Leeds as well as Midlothian. Reid's relations with Forster were always close, and he vigorously championed his political action in Ireland during 1880-82. The 'Mercury' under his editorship continued to support Gladstone when he took up the cause of home rule. While at Leeds, Reid was also on friendly terms with Richard Monckton Milnes, Lord Houghton, at whose house at Fryston he was a frequent guest. 
Reid made many journeys abroad, chiefly in his journalistic capacity. In 1877 he visited Paris with letters of introduction from Lord Houghton to the comte de Paris and M. De Blowitz, and was introduced to Gambetta. A holiday trip in Germany, Hungary, and Romania in 1878 he described in the 'Fortnightly Review'. He went to Tunis as special correspondent of the 'Standard' in 1881, and narrated his experiences in 'The Land of the Bey' (1882). 
Reid's close association with the Gladstone family led to his most dramatic 'coup', for it was his letter and subsequent encouragement that led in December 1885 to H. J. Gladstone's flying of the 'Hawarden kite', the announcement of his father's 'conversion' to Irish home rule (see Gladstone, 'Diaries', 11, appx I). In 1887 Reid withdrew from the editorship of the 'Leeds Mercury', to which he continued a weekly contribution until his death, in order to become manager of the publishing firm of Cassell & Co. London was thenceforth his permanent home, and his work there was incessant. In January 1890 he added to his publishing labours the editorship of the 'Speaker', a new weekly paper which he founded and which combined literature with Liberal politics, and was a central forum for the discussion of the future of post-Gladstonian Liberalism. Reid became a strong supporter and a personal friend of Lord Rosebery, whose views he mainly sought to expound in the 'Speaker'. He was knighted -- one of the first journalistic knighthoods -- on Rosebery's recommendation in 1894 in consideration of 'services to letters and politics'. 
In September 1899 Reid ceased to be editor of the 'Speaker', which in spite of its literary merits was financially only a qualified success. Subsequently he wrote a shrewd and well-informed survey of political affairs month by month for the 'Nineteenth Century', as well as weekly contributions to the 'Leeds Mercury'. He was elected president of the Institute of Journalists for 1898-9. He had become in 1878 a member of the Reform Club on the proposition of Forster and Hugh Childers, and he soon took a prominent part in its management, long acting as chairman of committee. He was elected an honorary member of the Eighty Club in 1892, at the instance of his friend Lord Russell of Killowen. 
Reid also made a reputation in literature (he received the degree of LLD from St Andrews University in 1893). During his first residence at Leeds he had visited Haworth and interested himself in the lives of the Brontes. Ellen Nussey, Charlotte Bronte's intimate friend and schoolfellow, entrusted to him the novelist's correspondence with herself, and other material which had not been accessible to Mrs Gaskell. With such aid Reid wrote some articles in 'Macmillan's Magazine', which he expanded into his 'Charlotte Bronte: a Monograph' (1877). Reid was also, with John Morley, an important biographical historian of Victorian Liberalism. In his lives of W. E. Forster (2 vols., 1888), and Richard Monckton Milnes, first Lord Houghton (2 vols., 1890), he printed much valuable correspondence, and Gladstone helped him by reading the proofs. As Forster's papers subsequently disappeared, Reid's biography has proved of especial importance. He also published memoirs of Lyon Playfair, first Lord Playfair of St Andrews (1899); John Deakin Heaton MD of Leeds (1883); and a vivid monograph on his close friend William Black the novelist (1902). A 'Life of W. E. Gladstone', which he edited in 1899, includes much still-valuable material, and is excellently illustrated. He further enjoyed success as a novelist, 'Gladys Fane: a Story of Two Lives' (1884; 8th edn, 1902), and 'Mauleverer's Millions: a Yorkshire Romance' (1886), each selling well. He also left 'Memoirs', which included much confidential matter of a political kind; portions were edited by his brother, Dr Stuart Reid, in 1905. 
A diabetic for his last eighteen months, Reid died of pleurisy, active to the last and almost pen in hand, at his house, 26 Bramham Gardens, South Kensington, London, on 26 February 1905, and was buried in Brompton cemetery; his second wife, Louisa, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35721


Reilly, Sir Charles Herbert (1874-1948), architect and town planner, was born at 3 Manor Villas, Stoke Newington, London, on 4 March 1874, the son of Charles T. Reilly (1844-1928), architect and surveyor to the Worshipful Company of Drapers, and his wife, Annie, formerly Mee. He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School, London, and Queens' College, Cambridge. After graduating in 1895 with a first in mechanical science, Reilly worked for two years as an unpaid draughtsman in his father's office, then moved to John Belcher's office as an 'improver'. Here he came to know a number of leading young architects, including J. J. Joass, Stanley Adshead, E. A. Rickards, and H. V. Lanchester. In 1900 Reilly was appointed part-time lecturer in architectural design at King's College, London, and joined in partnership with Stanley Peach to work on the design of electricity power stations. In 1902 he entered a classical design for the Liverpool Cathedral competition, earning a commendation from the assessors, and made an unsuccessful application for the chair of architecture at University College, London. 
On 8 September 1904 Reilly married Dorothy Gladys (1884/5-1939), daughter of J. Jerram Pratt. That same year he was appointed Roscoe professor of architecture at Liverpool University. This conferred on him effective leadership of the university's young school of architecture, which he proceeded to build up with great verve. In 1906 was published the first of a series of volumes promulgating the work of the school, 'Portfolio of Measured Drawings'. A second such volume of 1908 was succeeded by 'The Liverpool Architectural Sketch Book' (1910, 1911, 1913, and 1920). Reilly's growing authority as an educator led to his becoming in 1906 the first chairman of the Royal Institute of British Architecture's board of architectural education, a position he used to elevate formal and classical standards of architectural training against those who favoured a looser, less academic approach. 
Reilly first visited America in 1909, which helped stimulate his interest in Beaux-Arts architecture and educational methods. As a result, with the backing of W. H. Lever (Lord Leverhulme), with whom he had developed a close working relationship, he helped establish at Liverpool University the department of civic design, effectively the first place in Britain where town planning and architecture were taught as integrally related subjects. With the expansion of the school Reilly persuaded Lever to fund a new building. In 1914 he produced designs, but the outbreak of war meant they were not executed and it was not until 1933 that the Leverhulme Building, designed by Reilly in collaboration with his former students Lionel Budden and J. E. Marshall, was finally opened. Earlier Reilly had built the university's students' union (1909-14). Though not primarily remembered as a designer, he could on occasion be impressive, as in the austere church of St Barnabas Shacklewell, London (1909). He also designed one of the many groups of cottages for Leverhulme's model village of Port Sunlight (1906). 
Reilly's breadth of interests involved him in 1911 in a campaign to establish the Liverpool Repertory Theatre, of which he was board member (and at one time chairman) until his retirement in 1933. Also in 1911, he was appointed a member of the faculty of architecture at the British School at Rome. 
In 1913 Reilly was appointed consulting editor to the 'Builders' Journal'. After the war his journalistic output increased and he contributed to the 'Manchester Guardian' and 'Liverpool Post', and reviewed for the 'Architects' Journal' and 'Architectural Review'. Reilly was appointed architectural editor at 'Country Life' in 1921, the year in which he published 'Some Liverpool Streets and Buildings in 1921' -- a collection of articles on the city's architectural stock. In the following year he produced a similar volume on Manchester's architecture, together with two other books, 'McKim, Mead and White' and 'Some Architectural Problems of Today'. Other books included 'Representative British Architects of the Present Day' (1931), 'The Theory and Practice of Architecture' (1932), his autobiography, 'Scaffolding in the Sky' (1938), and 'Architecture as a Communal Art' (1946). 
Reilly spent the First World War as an inspector of munitions. In 1919 he again visited America and Canada and subsequently sat as a jury member for the Canadian war memorials competition. He designed the Accrington war memorial, Lancashire (1920), and the Durham war memorial (1928), and acted as assessor for the Liverpool cenotaph competition (1926). He travelled in India with Lutyens in 1927-8. In 1923-4 Reilly was appointed co-architect with Thomas Hastings to design a large Beaux-Arts apartment block: Devonshire House, Piccadilly, London. In 1931 he was successful, with others, in his campaign for the passing of the 'Architects' Registration Act'. 
In 1933, with his health failing, Reilly retired to Brighton, but he continued to work on his journalism and acted as consultant architect with William Crabtree (a former student) on the Peter Jones store, Sloane Square, London (1935-9). The design was strikingly modern and much praised. By the late 1930s Reilly had become an enthusiastic advocate for modernism and in 1944 he was proposed as an honorary member of the Modern Architectural Research (MARS) Group, by his former student Maxwell Fry. 
In his later career Reilly was involved with town planning issues, writing numerous articles about rebuilding towns and cities. His criticism of the 'Academy Plan' for London brought him into conflict with Lutyens and other former friends. Reilly's planning theories were brought together by Lawrence Wolfe in 'The Reilly Plan: a New Way of Life'. Here a series of 'Reilly greens' is described, around which communal housing schemes were to be arranged. The idea was unsuccessful when first proposed for Woodchurch, Birkenhead; the town was eventually designed by Reilly's former student Herbert Rowse. Modified versions of the plan were implemented in Bilston, Staffordshire, and Dudley, Worcestershire. Reilly in collaboration with Naim Aslan published 'The Outline Plan for the County Borough of Birkenhead' (1947). 
In an obituary written for his former professor William (Lord) Holford described Reilly as 'an international figure, not only by reputation but by the building up of personal contacts'. His circle of friends encompassed many fields from the arts to politics. Augustus John painted his portrait in 1932, and the fashionable Liverpool photographer E. Chambre Hardman photographed Reilly with hat and ivory-topped cane -- which, Holford recalls, he used to knock on the doors of 'peers and poets and the poor'. Maxwell Fry described him as looking like 'a cherub... a laughing, naughty cherub about to direct an arrow where least expected... His fleshy childlike features... in thoughtful repose, his cupid's mouth slightly pursed... wearing a broadbrimmed black hat... from which stray a few white hairs'. Reilly was an enthusiastic joiner and member of clubs, including the Athenaeum, London, and the University and Sandon clubs, Liverpool, as well as being a sponsor of the '1917 Club', London, founded by Ramsay MacDonald to promote world peace. Indeed, Reilly's lifelong socialism informed much of his personal and professional life. Reilly was a charismatic figure and an inspirational teacher, who turned the Liverpool school of architecture into one of the most famous schools in the world during the inter-war years. 
Among Reilly's many honours were an honorary LLD from Liverpool University (1934), the royal gold medal for architecture (1943), and a knighthood (1944). He died on 2 February 1948 at the Gordon Hospital, Westminster, London, his wife having predeceased him in 1939, and he was cremated four days later at Golders Green. He had four children, of whom two -- a son and a daughter -- survived him. The son, Paul Reilly, Baron Reilly (1912-1990), was closely associated with the Design Council. 


@@@@@


doc= 35722


Reitz, Deneys (1882-1944), soldier and politician in South Africa, was born at Bloemfontein, Orange Free State, on 2 April 1882, the third of the five sons of Francis William Reitz (1844-1934), and his first wife, Blanca Thesen (1854-1887), a member of a Norwegian family that had settled in Knysna, Cape Colony. Reitz's was an old and cultured family: his grandfather was sent from Cape Town to school in Edinburgh, and according to family tradition once dined with Sir Walter Scott. His father, who was educated in Edinburgh and made lively Afrikaans renderings of Burns, served as chief justice and later president of the Orange Free State; in 1898 he became secretary of state to President Kruger and in that capacity presented the ultimatum which precipitated the South African War. After the union he became first president of the senate, retiring in 1918; his sister Frances Hester Reitz married W. P. Schreiner. At home Deneys Reitz grew to be familiar with the English classics; he saw many leading figures in South African public life, and at twelve years of age joined his father on a tour in Europe. He early learned to ride and shoot, and attended Grey College, Bloemfontein, but his formal education ended when at the age of seventeen he joined the Boer forces in the South African War. 
After serving in the fighting round Ladysmith, Reitz ranged widely for two years, especially with J. C. Smuts through Cape Colony. He later gave a full account, with characteristic charm and generosity, of 'the hairbreadth escapes, the dare-devilry' (to use the words of Smuts) in his book 'Commando' (1929), which is an invaluable document on the history of the war from the Boer side. After 'Commando' he wrote two further autobiographical volumes, 'Trekking on' (1933) and 'No Outspan' (1943), which were also marked successes. 
After the treaty of Vereeniging (1902) Reitz stood by his father in refusing the oath of allegiance and went into exile. Three years in Madagascar brought him hard work, little pay, and much fever, but during this time he produced the first draft of 'Commando'. In 1905 Mrs Smuts persuaded him to return and he arrived ill and penniless, but life in the Smuts family restored him to health, and he was able to begin law practice at Heilbron, Orange River Colony, in 1908. Reitz became politically active when he joined the South African Party of Louis Botha and Smuts with its policy of reconciliation between Afrikaans- and English-speaking South Africans, and of full autonomy for South Africa within the British empire. In 1914, in support of Botha and Smuts, he helped suppress the rising which broke out. He then served with Botha in South-West Africa against the Germans. In 1915 Reitz was the South African Party's candidate in Heilbron in the general election. After an emotional and violent campaign, he was soundly defeated by the candidate of the National Party, the political platform of Afrikaner nationalism. He promptly joined the South African forces in east Africa under Smuts. In 1917 this seasoned former enemy of Britain enlisted in the British army and went as a major to the western front where he was twice wounded and in the closing stages of the war was colonel commanding the 1st (Royal Scots) Fusiliers. 
On his return to South Africa Reitz entered politics as Smuts's protege. He was elected to parliament for the constituency of Bloemfontein South in 1920, but lost his seat in the general election of 1921. Within a few months he returned to parliament as the representative of Port Elizabeth (Central). Reitz had one guiding political faith, unswerving loyalty to Smuts. Like Smuts, he firmly believed in the sincerity of British friendship towards South Africa and in the possibilities of building a nation of Afrikaners and English speakers within the empire. He rejected the Afrikaner nationalism of the National Party as race-worshipping 'voodooism'. As a politician he was a doughty campaigner on election platforms where he was a hard hitter who neither asked nor expected any quarter. In the general election of 1929 he left his safe seat to contest Barberton, a seat held by the National Party. Despite the South African Party's crushing defeat in the election, he captured the constituency. He was, however, a poor parliamentary speaker who rarely bothered to prepare his speeches. Although he occasionally excelled in the cut and thrust of debate he was bored by parliamentary life. 
In April 1921 Reitz became the minister of lands. He was an ardent conservationist who as minister prepared the way for the inauguration of the Kruger National Park, of which he became a devoted trustee. Out of office between 1924 and 1933, he joined a legal firm in Johannesburg which provided him with the opportunity to practise some journalism and to travel widely in Africa. In the coalition ('fusion') government of 1933 he was re-appointed minister of lands in General J. B. M. Hertzog's cabinet. He subsequently became minister of agriculture in 1935, of mines in 1938, and of native affairs in 1939. Although paternalistic, he was a pragmatic and enlightened minister of native affairs. He recognized that Africans had major and legitimate grievances and during the Second World War saw the Atlantic charter as a basis for reform. This led to accusations that he was too liberal. After the collapse of 'fusion' in 1939 Reitz became in addition deputy prime minister. Although enterprising, especially with regard to advancing irrigation schemes during his tenure as minister of lands, he was not an outstanding minister. He had a cavalier attitude towards ministerial tasks and despised the drudgery of desk work. But the post did provide him with the opportunity to travel widely. In 1920 Reitz had married Leila Agnes Buissinne (1887-1959), daughter of Dr Claude Wright, of Wynberg, near Cape Town. His wife was a history lecturer at the University of Cape Town, and was the first woman in South Africa to be elected an MP. They had two sons, who both served in the South African forces during the Second World War. 
In 1943, troubled by ill health and exhaustion, Reitz was appointed high commissioner in London, South Africa's most important diplomatic posting. Although socially successful and popular, his bad health, wanderlust, and lack of interest in his duties meant that he was not an effective high commissioner. After suffering a stroke he died in the Charing Cross Hospital, London, on 19 October 1944. He was cremated on 25 October. 
Although he was incurably indolent, Reitz's physical and moral courage, his forthrightness, tolerance, humour, and talent as a raconteur made him a notable personality and an endearing and popular one. It was sheer force of personality that carried him through a turbulent political career. Reitz's life was a triumph of character. 


@@@@@


doc= 35723


Relf, Ernest Frederick (1888-1970), aerodynamicist, was born in Beckenham, Kent, on 2 October 1888, the younger child and only son of Thomas Joseph Relf, businessman, and his wife, Marion Weeks. Relf's early education was frequently interrupted by family removals. However, his father, a linguist and very versatile musician, himself took a hand in his son's education. Relf could read music before he could read print, and schooling in the three Rs was matched by musical instruction, both amateur and professional. In 1903 his family home was in Portsmouth; Relf sat the dockyard entrance examination, won first place, and in January 1904 entered the dockyard as an apprentice shipwright: this involved part-time attendance at the Royal Dockyard School. Soon afterwards, at sixteen, he was appointed organist at one of Portsmouth's largest churches, and two years later was nearly persuaded to make music his career. But his record at the Royal Dockyard School was outstanding and in 1909 he won a royal scholarship to the Royal College of Science. Here he read mathematics and physics as principal subjects, won the Tyndall prize, and in 1912 duly obtained his associateship of the Royal College of Science (ARCS) with first-class honours. In August 1912 he was appointed a junior assistant in the aeronautics section of the engineering department of the National Physical Laboratory (NPL) at Teddington; he thus came under the influence of Leonard Bairstow, then head of the section. When Bairstow left in 1917 the section became an independent aerodynamics department; from 1917 to 1920 it was under the direction of T. E. Stanton and from 1920 to 1925 of R. V. Southwell. Relf succeeded Southwell as superintendent in 1925. 
Relf's first thirteen years at the NPL showed his brilliance and versatility as a scientist and engineer. Among his hobbies were electrical engineering and photography; he put both to good use in his aerodynamical and related research. In this period he published some forty scientific papers on a wide variety of topics: from the visualization of flow in liquids to the use of an electrical analogue to determine streamlines; from aeroplane stability to the design and manufacture of a special electrical motor, the problems of which had defeated the electrical industry and which now became standard equipment; from the determination of the virtual inertia in yaw of an airship to the 'singing' of bracing wires; these and many more. His work was regarded as of such importance that he was not called up in 1914, although he was attested and served one day in the services. In 1919 the Massachusetts Institute of Technology offered Relf its newly founded chair of aerodynamics; he declined the appointment. Later, he took part in two Oxford expeditions: in 1923 to Spitsbergen and in 1924 to Nordaustlandet, under the leadership of George Binney. Relf was physicist, surveyor, radio officer, and handyman. 
From 1925 to 1945 Relf, as head of his department, had to become an administrator. But he never lost his zest for scientific research, even though now it had to be done by others under his direction. A most human man, he ran his team on the lightest of reins, encouraging original thought by his keen and evident interest and his helpful advice, but still keeping everyone on the appropriate road; in this way he brought out the best in his staff, seven of whom were in due course to be elected FRS. Relf himself was elected FRS in 1936 and appointed CBE in 1944: he also became a fellow of the Royal Aeronautical Society (1926) and of the Institute of Aeronautical Sciences (United States) in 1933. He won the George Taylor gold medal of the Royal Aeronautical Society in 1935, and its highest honour, the society's gold medal, in 1953. 
At the end of 1945 Relf left the NPL to take up for five years the post of principal of the newly founded College of Aeronautics at Cranfield. He recruited a first-class staff, and set the college on the right lines, so that in his lifetime it became the Cranfield Institute of Technology, Britain's first postgraduate university. 
In 1951 Relf left Cranfield to devote the remaining years of his life to consultancy and music. He had already become an independent member of the Aeronautical Research Council, a body to which he gave unbroken service in various capacities for fifty years (1918-68). For four years he acted as a consultant to his former department at the NPL; he also worked with Barnes Wallis and with various research associations. As to music: from his student days, when the proximity of the royal colleges of science and of music enabled him to expand his talents and to make many friends in the musical world, music permeated and supplemented his scientific life. In addition to playing the piano and organ, he composed much chamber music and some 200 songs. Some of his music, with professional performers, has been broadcast by the BBC. 
Relf was of medium height, plump and jolly, a man who engendered a real affection in his wide circle of friends. In 1917, at Plymouth, he married Elfreda Grace, daughter of Frank Day, of the Royal Naval Ordnance Service, and his wife, Emily; they had no children. He died at his home, 28 Spinney Hill, Addlestone, on 25 February 1970. 
Roderick Collar', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35724


Rendall, Montague John (1862-1950), headmaster, the fourth son of the Revd Henry Rendall (1817-1897), and his wife, Ellen Harriette (1830-1905), daughter of Peter Davey and sister of Horace Davey, Baron Davey, was born on 6 May 1862 at the rectory in Great Rollright, Oxfordshire, where his father was rector. There were in all nine sons of the marriage, united in devotion to their parents and exceptionally influenced by the Christian faith and moral values of their early upbringing. From his preparatory school, Elstree, he won the first entrance scholarship to Harrow in 1876. During his last year at Harrow he was head of the school and first in classics and mathematics. Proceeding to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1881, he was a Bell scholar (1882) and foundation scholar (1883) and was placed in the first division of the first class in part one of the classical tripos in 1884 and in the first class of part two in 1885. During his last two years at Cambridge he represented the university at association football as goalkeeper. In 1887 he made the first of many journeys abroad to study the masterpieces of continental art, and laid the foundations of his lifelong enthusiasm for medieval and Renaissance Italian painting. In the same year he was appointed to the staff of Winchester College. 
Rendall's immediate and striking success as a teacher, especially of classical composition, to 'senior div.', and his enthusiastic and inspiring participation in the life of the school, especially of college, strongly suggested him for appointment as second master in 1899. For the next twelve years his regime in college was both original and highly successful. To his innovative lectures on Italian art he now added holiday trips to central Italy with many of his pupils. 'Scholarship and art... he made a kind of glorious adventure', as one Winchester scholar later recalled ('The Wykehamist', 18 Dec 1950, 210). In college Rendall upheld high moral standards but softened any severity by his natural sympathy for boys. He was the obvious choice to succeed H. M. Burge as headmaster of Winchester in 1911. 
Rendall was not primarily an administrator; indeed, he could be engagingly disorganized in his official habits. Nor was he a reforming headmaster, unlike his predecessor or his successor (A. T. P. Williams). He made no formal changes at Winchester to reflect his own love of art and literature; for any boy particularly interested in such subjects the school remained a somewhat alien environment. He yet impressed all those who served under him as a great headmaster. His educational ideal was a nebulous mixture of traditional Christian values (uncomplicated by any theology) and neo-medieval chivalry. This ideal he attempted to express in a triptych, still preserved at Winchester, which he commissioned in 1926 from E. Fortescue-Brickdale, showing a knight in armour with his page, their faces those of two of Rendall's last pupils. Whatever the idiosyncrasies of the painting, his vivid and dominating personality enabled him to communicate to the school his intense vision of the noblest aims in life. He also inspired considerable affection, not least on account of his distinctive mannerisms, especially of speech. 
The First World War, through which Rendall carried the school with buoyant courage, made the profoundest impression upon him. To his conception and determination the war memorial cloister at Winchester is primarily due; its details also owe much to his sensitive taste. Furthermore, he became convinced that the public schools had a duty and a mission to make their best gifts available to a wider public in the post-war world. These views were reinforced by his visit in 1919 to some leading independent schools in the United States. He gladly accepted, therefore, after his resignation of the headmastership in 1924, an invitation from the Rhodes trustees to visit many of the principal schools in the self-governing dominions; and for the same reason he played a prominent part in the Overseas League, the League of the Empire, and the Royal Empire Society, and became chairman of the public schools empire tours committee. He received the honorary degree of LLD from the University of Toronto in 1921 and was appointed CMG in 1931. 
In 1926 Rendall began what was a new life rather than a retirement. He acquired the freehold of Butley Priory, near Woodbridge, a medieval religious foundation of which only the gatehouse remained standing; this he restored with imagination and scholarly care -- but with characteristic indifference to its icy draughts. During his twenty-four years of residence in this Suffolk home he was an active and influential figure in the public life of the county. 
From 1927 until the end of 1932 Rendall was a governor of the British Broadcasting Corporation. As such he devised in 1927 the BBC's motto 'Nation shall speak peace unto nation' (a felicitous adaptation of 'Micah' 4: 3), which was set aside in the 1930s but rightfully restored after 1946. In 1931 he also composed the Latin inscription for the entrance hall of Broadcasting House. This time he used a direct biblical quotation, 'Whatsoever things are beautiful...' ('Philippians', 4: 8), but around it he wove words which are a small reminder of his mastery of the classical languages. 
Almost resolutely unmarried himself, Rendall delighted in the marriages and the children of his old pupils, and was a frequent and welcome visitor to their homes, as also to his friends in Winchester. It was only during his last year of life that his splendid vitality was first seen to be failing; he died suddenly in his sleep on 5 October 1950 at Oxenwood, California Lane, Bushey Heath, Hertfordshire, and was buried in the churchyard of Great Rollright, where were the graves also of his parents. 


@@@@@


doc= 35725


Rendel, Sir Alexander Meadows (1829-1918), civil engineer, was born at Plymouth, on 3 April 1829, the eldest son of James Meadows Rendel (1799-1856) and Catherine Jane Harris (1797-1884). He was educated at Kings School, Canterbury, and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he read divinity and mathematics. It was originally intended he should enter the church but, following his younger brother Lewis's death in 1851 while engaged upon work at Holyhead, Rendel joined his father's civil engineering firm, based in London. The following year his father was elected president of the Institution of Civil Engineers. The younger Rendel subsequently spent some time on major works at Leith docks and the Portland harbour of refuge, gaining valuable experience. In 1853 he married Eliza Hobson (1835-1915), daughter of Captain William Hobson RN, the first governor-general of New Zealand; they had nine children. They lived initially at 44 Lancaster Gate, London, and later acquired a splendid country residence, Rickettswood, near Charlwood, Surrey. 
On their father's death in 1856 it was decided that Rendel and his brother George Wightwick Rendel should carry on the business, but due to their limited experience the Admiralty appointed new consulting engineers for the great works outstanding at Holyhead, Portland, and in South Africa. In 1857, due to the intervention of their father's friend, W. G. Armstrong (1810-1900), and Robert Stephenson (1803-1859), Alexander was appointed to succeed his father as consulting engineer to the East Indian Railway. His position was further strengthened by his friendship with Sir Richard Strachey (1817-1908), formerly secretary to Lord Dalhousie, the Indian governor-general and later chairman of the East Indian Railway Company. 
In spite of the upheaval caused by the Indian mutiny in 1857, Rendel visited India in order to become acquainted with local conditions, in particular to examine the problems of crossing the Hooghly River between Calcutta and the railway terminus at Howrah. During the next twenty years he was responsible for the construction of many thousands of miles of railway and for bridging many of the great Indian rivers, notably the Upper Son Bridge of Patna, the Alexandra Bridge over the Chenab, the Lansdowne Bridge over the Indus at Sukkur, the Hardinge Bridge over the Ganges, and the Empress Bridge over the Sutlej. He was knighted in 1887. Rendel was also consulting engineer to the strategically important Uganda Railway, reaching Lake Victoria ahead of the German competition. Other notable railway projects were the Egyptian Light Delta Railway and the Mexican Railway. Docks designed by him included those at Kirkcaldy, Llanelli, Milford, and Workington. 
In 1894 Rendel's second son became a partner, but he died in 1898. He was succeeded by his youngest brother, who after two years joined his uncle George Wightwick Rendel at Armstrong's Pozzuoli works in Italy. During the same year Frederick Ewart Robertson, formerly chief engineer with the East Indian Railway, entered the partnership and the name of the firm changed to Sir Alexander M. Rendel & Co. Robertson died in 1912 and was replaced by Seymour Briscoe Tritton (1860-1937), a mechanical engineer who had been a key figure in the firm for many years. However, doubts existed in Rendel's mind as to whether a mechanical engineer would be acceptable to the East Indian Railway as his successor, and in 1913 Frederick Palmer (1862-1934), chief engineer to the Port of London Authority, joined the partnership. He had succeeded Robertson as the East Indian's chief engineer and was closely associated with the development of the Calcutta docks. The name of the firm was changed to Rendel, Palmer, and Tritton, and it was closely involved in development of the Port of London and especially construction of the King George V Dock, opened in 1921. Rendel died on 23 January 1918, at 51 Gordon Square, London. At the time of his death he was working on the design of the new Lower Sone Bridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 35726


Rendel, George Wightwick (1833-1902), civil engineer, was born on 6 February 1833 at Plymouth, the third son of James Meadows Rendel (1799-1856), civil engineer, and his wife, Catherine Jane, daughter of James Harris of Dartmouth. Named after the distinguished architect George Wightwick, his father's lifelong friend, he was educated at Harrow School, but ran away due to a perceived injustice in 1849. Initially he was sent to Grimsby, where his father was engaged in building the Great Grimsby Royal docks (1844-53). Later he joined his father and his elder brother Lewis Rendel (1830-1851) at Holyhead, where they were building the eastern breakwater and new Admiralty pier. He was then apprenticed to his father's great friend, Sir William Armstrong, at his Elswick works, Newcastle upon Tyne, living with Armstrong for a period of three years. He completed his training as an engineer in his father's London office, engaged upon the design of the superstructure of great bridges across the Ganges and Jumna at Allahabad being built for the East Indian Railway. 
Following his father's death in 1856 it was decided the business could support only one son. The eldest, Alexander Rendel (1829-1918), took over the business and, sponsored by Robert Stephenson, continued as consulting engineer to the East Indian Railway. George Rendel, Stuart Rendel (1834-1913), and Hamilton Rendel (1843-1902) all joined Armstrong, who henceforth treated them like adopted sons. 
In 1859 George Rendel became a partner and manager of Armstrong's Elswick Ordnance Company. Later, in 1860, Captain Andrew Noble was appointed joint manager with Rendel. In 1864 Rendel was a signatory to the deed merging the ordnance works and the engine works to form Sir W. G. Armstrong & Co. Stuart Rendel, a barrister and later a notable Liberal politician, whose daughter married Gladstone's son Henry Neville Gladstone, managed Armstrongs' London office until 1883. Hamilton Rendel disliked public life and remained quietly with the firm, dedicated to engineering. Probably his most notable achievement was the machinery for London's Tower Bridge. 
During his twenty-four years at Elswick, George Rendel was engaged upon the development, construction, and armament of many warships, especially the design of their gun mountings. He was responsible for the hydraulic systems of mounting and working heavy guns first tried in 1877 in HMS 'Thunderer'. Later his designs were used in the admiral class battleships, and soon his hydraulic systems were employed in all British, and some foreign, navy warships. 
He was responsible for the introduction to the world of the cruiser type of warship, designed to act as scouts and to fight in fleet actions as secondary line-of-battle ships. In 1881 he designed, for the Chilean and Chinese governments, a series of 1350 ton unarmoured cruisers, protection being offered by light steel decks and coal bunkers. These were followed by the 3000 tons displacement, 18 knots cruiser 'Esmeralda' for the Chilean navy. This was the first vessel to be fitted with a steel protective deck. 
Rendel and Alfred Yarrow were pioneers in the use of boiler-room forced-draught fans and totally enclosed stokeholds in warships, which dramatically improved their speed and performance. Rendel was responsible also for the design of the twin-screw Staunch class gunboats, and up until 1885 about twenty similar vessels were built. In 1871 Rendel was appointed a member of the British government committee on warship design. He played a major role in the 1877 design of the 11,880 tons displacement HMS 'Inflexible', which carried four 80 ton, muzzle-loading, rifled guns and armour plates 24 inches thick. 
Rendel was elected a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1863, and in 1874 contributed a paper entitled 'Gun carriages and mechanical appliances for working of heavy ordnance' ('Minutes of Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers', vol. 38, 85), for which he was awarded a Watt medal and premium. In 1871 he was awarded the Spanish order of Carlos III, and in 1876 the order of the Cross of Italy. He was elected a member of the Institution of Naval Architects in 1879, and became a vice-president in 1882. 
In 1882 Rendel was invited to become an extra-professional civil lord of the Admiralty, a new post allowing the admission of a 'practical man-of-science' to the board. Leaving Armstrongs, Rendel became greatly respected by his colleagues on the board, and it was with great regret that ill health forced his retirement in 1885. His doctors advised that he should live in a warmer climate. 
His first wife, Harriet, daughter of Joseph Simpson, British vice-consul at Kronstadt, whom he had married on 13 December 1860 and with whom he had five sons, died in 1878. In 1880 he met and married Licinia Pinelli (1846/7-1934) in Rome, while serving on an Italian ministry of marine warship design committee. They had three sons and a daughter. 
In 1885 Rendel rejoined Armstrong and, upon the latter's suggestion, agreed to establish a new ordnance factory at Pozzuoli, near Naples, in 1887, with Admiral Count Albini as joint managing director. Rendel's residence at Posilippo soon became a centre of social activity and it was here he offered hospitality to the ailing and recently widowed Empress Frederick of Germany. She was the eldest daughter of Queen Victoria, and the mother of Kaiser Wilhelm II of Germany. He established also very cordial relations with Lord Rosebery. 
Rendel retired to Sandown, Isle of Wight, in 1900 and spent the last two years of his life confined to a wheelchair. He died at his home, Broadlands, in Sandown on 9 October 1902 and, although not a Roman Catholic, was buried in accordance with his wishes at the Kensal Green Roman Catholic cemetery in London. It is said that George Rendel sometimes lacked the commercial instinct of his brother Stuart, but he undoubtedly combined lucidity of intellect and general sagacity with the engineer's exceptional fertile faculty of invention. 


@@@@@


doc= 35727


Rendle, Alfred Barton (1865-1938), botanist, was born in Lewisham, London, on 19 January 1865, the eldest child and only son of John Samuel Rendle, secretary to a London building society, and his wife, Jane Wilson, daughter of John Barton, of Rotherfield, Sussex. Both parents were of Cornish stock. 
After local schooling, a series of scholarships which Rendle then won paid almost entirely for his subsequent education. One to St Olave's Grammar School, Southwark, London, was followed by another to St John's College, Cambridge, where he took the natural sciences tripos and graduated in 1887 with first-class honours in botany. Though C. C. Babington was then still professor of botany, he was in his eighties and occupied solely in taxonomic research. This left teaching in the inspiring hands of the then reader, S. H. Vines, an arch-protagonist of the so-called 'new botany', in which taxonomy was abhorred and aspects such as physiology and morphology were emphasized instead. Rendle was captivated by these and planned to pursue postgraduate research on them. Almost at once, however, Vines moved to Oxford on appointment to the chair there, leaving Rendle to choose between a very uncertain future at Cambridge and the security of a post elsewhere. He opted for the latter, but the post he took must have seemed tantamount to deserting to the enemy: an assistantship in the department of botany of the British Museum (Natural History), which promised a lifetime career identifying and describing dried specimens in the museum's collections. However, with the conscientiousness that was always his outstanding characteristic he set about proving he was better fitted for his chosen life's work than his doubters probably suspected. 
His future secure, Rendle married Alice Maud, daughter of James Armstrong, in 1892. Two sons (one of whom died in infancy) and a daughter followed, and it was doubtless the extra financial burden that led him to take up evening teaching. Experience as a junior demonstrator at Cambridge had given him a taste for this, and on being appointed head of the botany department at the Birkbeck Institute in 1894 he was to lecture there, with long-remembered lucidity, two or three times a week for the next twelve years. This led to his producing his best-known work, 'The Classification of Flowering Plants', for many years the standard textbook on that subject; the first volume appeared in 1904 but the second, due to heavy competing calls on his time, was not published until 1925. 
After only four years of marriage Rendle's wife died, leaving him with a very young family. A second marriage in 1898, however, to Florence (died 1929), daughter of George Brown, was to bring him five further sons (one of whom, again, died in infancy) and another daughter. By a happy chance his marriage occurred just as his first major and important works were about to be published. Ever careful and thorough, he did not hurry into print and it was only after eleven years at the museum that his section on the monocotyledons and gymnosperms (his areas of general responsibility as a staff member) appeared in the department's long-outstanding 'Catalogue of the African Plants Collected by Dr. Friedrich Welwitsch in 1853-61' (1899). The previous year his monograph of the genus 'Najas' had gained him the degree of DSc from London University, and its subsequent publication in the 'Transactions of the Linnean Society' led to his being invited to write the account of the Najadaceae for Adolf Engler's titanic enterprise, 'Das Pflanzenreich' (1901). Rendle did particular service to plant taxonomy through his concern with the thorny topic of nomenclature. At the International Botanical Congress held at Vienna in 1905 he was appointed one of the four editors to revise the international code of botanical nomenclature, the publication of which proved of historic importance. He continued to act as an expert in this connection until 1935. 
In 1906, Rendle was appointed to the keepership of botany at the museum, a post with significant administrative duties that compelled deferment of much of his scientific work. However, by this time he had won recognition as one of the country's foremost taxonomists, a standing crowned by election as a fellow of the Royal Society in 1909. Further honours began piling up a few years later: botanical secretary of the Linnean Society and president of section K (botany) of the British Association for the Advancement of Science in 1916, the Victoria medal of honour of the Royal Horticultural Society in 1917, and president of the Linnean Society in 1923, in which last capacity he saw that body through a difficult period in its history. Meanwhile his meticulousness and quiet dependability made him an obvious choice as an editor. At first he succumbed in that direction only to the extent of overseeing the botanical contributions to the justly famed eleventh edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (1911), but, on the death of his colleague, James Britten, in 1924, he finally yielded to a renewed plea to take on the task of editing the 'Journal of Botany', the monthly which was the outlet for much of the museum's botanical work. He remained editor until just before his death. 
Rendle was also increasingly in demand in the world of amateur science as a president in that quarter too. In 1919 he was president of the Quekett Microscopical Club, and in 1927 and 1931 respectively of the south of England's two federations of local societies. From 1911 until his death he also acted as president of the South London Botanical Institute. In this sphere he particularly lent his voice, and the weight of his official position, to furthering the protection of the country's native wild plants, a cause which began to gather considerable momentum in the inter-war years. 
Rendle received the Royal Horticultural Society's Veitch memorial medal in 1929, the year that he was widowed for the second time. He retired from the museum in 1930, a year which coincided with a term on the council of the Royal Society. Rendle spent his retirement in a return to his long-deferred scientific work, regularly returning to the department of botany in a long-distance race to complete the comprehensive and deeply scholarly 'Flora of Jamaica', upon which, with his friend and collaborator William Fawcett (died 1926), he had embarked many years earlier. Planned in seven volumes, five had appeared by the time of Rendle's death. 
Although Rendle's health had given rise to anxiety, he accompanied a delegation from the British Association to the silver jubilee of the Indian Science Association. But a chill which he contracted on the outward voyage awakened an earlier internal complaint and compelled his premature return from Bombay. Three days after getting back, he died, on 11 January 1938, at Tallard, The Mount, Leatherhead, Surrey, which he had had built as his retirement home. 'Rendlia', a genus of African grasses, serves as his living memorial. 


@@@@@


doc= 35728


Repington, Charles A Court (1858-1925), army officer and military writer, was born on 29 January 1858, at 15 Chesham Street, London. He was the son of Charles Henry Wyndham A Court Repington (1819-1903), a staunch Anglican and Peelite, MP for Wilton, 1852-5, and of Emily, the eldest daughter of Henry Currie, banker, of West Horley Place, Surrey. The A Courts and Repingtons were wealthy country gentry, well connected with the aristocracy, with a long, distinguished history of service to the church, armed services, and parliament. Following family custom, the extra surname Repington was assumed when, in 1903, Charles succeeded to Amington Hall, near Tamworth, Staffordshire. He was educated at Eton College, where he showed no particular distinction (1871-6), and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst (1876-8), before being commissioned in the rifle brigade (1878). His active service was disrupted frequently by ill health. He campaigned in Afghanistan, Burma, Egypt, the Sudan, and South Africa, served five years in army intelligence, was twice military attache to the Low Countries, and was also a technical delegate to the first Hague peace conference of 1898. By diligent study he became an expert on military affairs, and was generally recognized as 'the most brilliant student' ('DNB') during his time at the staff college in Camberley (1887-9). When invalided home from the South African campaign he had reached the rank of lieutenant-colonel, had been mentioned in dispatches four times, and created CMG. Bold, tenacious, able, ambitious, and hard-working, he had proved himself a fine regimental, and an outstanding staff, officer. But his considerable virtues were complemented by not inconsiderable faults. He was extravagant, impetuous, and sometimes cavalier in his attitude to authority and routine. He never suffered fools gladly, whatever their rank. 
On 11 February 1882 Repington married Melloney Catherine (1860-1938), daughter of Colonel Henry Sales Scobell. They had one son who died in infancy and two daughters. The marriage eventually foundered on Repington's frequent infidelities, and they separated in 1901. While serving in Egypt Repington began a passionate affair with Mary Isabella 
('nee' North; 1868-1953)
, the wife of Sir William Edmund Garstin, a senior official in the Egyptian ministry of public works. Repington was never a discreet lover, and the liaison was soon common knowledge. In order to accept an appointment to General Buller's staff in South Africa, Repington was required by a high-ranking officer, almost certainly the commander-in-chief, Lord Roberts, to give his written promise, 'upon his honour as a soldier and a gentleman' ('The Times', 13 Dec 1901), never again to write to or meet with Mary, Lady Garstin. His parole was given to a brother officer in the rifle brigade, Henry Wilson, for safe-keeping. Subsequently, for reasons he considered adequate and of which he advised Wilson, Repington broke his parole. Garstin sued successfully for divorce. Repington was tried for breach of his parole and told to resign immediately. His treatment was undoubtedly harsh. Repington thereafter blamed Wilson for his dismissal, but he contributed to his own downfall by his careless attitude to a superior officer's command. Repington was condemned by most of society, not for the sin of adultery so much as the solecism of being 'found out'. His reputation was permanently tarnished. 
Repington turned to journalism. His first regular contributions were to J. A. Spender's 'Westminster Gazette'. But it was his account in 'The Times' of the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-5 that earned him almost instant international recognition as an outstanding military commentator. He frequently disagreed with his editors about defence policy but insisted on his independence. As he told his friend Raymond Marker: 'I take orders from no man... I say precisely what I think; when I'm asked to support some scheme in which I do not believe I shall stop writing in 'The Times'' (C. Repington to R. Marker, 17 April 1905, BL, Add. MS 52277B, fols. 17-21). Before 1914 international tensions forced changes in British foreign policy that in turn posed complex defence problems. Repington offered solutions that his civilian readers could comprehend. He advocated a general staff, and, believing in the co-ordination of military and naval planning and closer imperial ties, was an enthusiastic supporter of the infant committee of imperial defence. He opposed the dominant 'blue water' strategists, who claimed the navy alone was sufficient to secure Britain against invasion. With Lord Roberts and others he warned of a possible German invasion, a 'bolt from the blue'. He fought a long, peacetime battle for conscription, without success. He was contemptuous of almost all politicians, whatever their party loyalty, dismissing them as 'Tadpoles and Tapers shivering for their shekels... rabble seeking office and rewards' (C. Repington to L. Maxse, 11 March 1908, West Sussex TNA: PRO, MS 458, fol. 671). But he hated the radical Liberals most of all for their sentimentalism; they dubbed him 'the gorgeous Wreckington' (Repington, 'Vestigia', 256). For the most part he dismissed ministers as 'ignorant... uncaring... they know nothing of the Army', but Richard Burdon Haldane he admired as 'the best Secretary of State we have had at the War Office so far as brain and ability are concerned' (C. Repington to R. Marker, 26 Jan 1906 and 15 Aug 1906, BL, Add. MS 52277B, fols. 35-39 and 78-85), and generally supported his military reforms. Repington was long convinced that Germany was Britain's most dangerous rival, and supported alliance with France. In 1905, when the French sought to initiate military conversations with England, they chose Repington to act as intermediary, for which service he was awarded the Legion d'honneur. More clearly than most other commentators in the press, on the brink of war in 1914, he foresaw the likely unfortunate consequences of inconsistent pre-war diplomacy and strategic planning. 
In 1911, when Repington was appointed editor of the general staff quarterly, 'Army Review', many wrongly supposed he had hopelessly compromised his independence. The war confirmed Repington's ideas and some of his predictions, yet his influence waned. He supposed himself martyred for exposing the incapacities of politicians. To those he criticized he appeared too partisan to convince as objective, the willing mouthpiece of the army's high command. He was an unrepentant advocate of war by attrition; a die-hard 'westerner', scathing of 'side-shows' dreamed up by politicians whom he derided as amateur strategists who starved the army of the men and munitions it required. In 1915 his notorious disclosure of a shell shortage contributed to the government's fall. Differences with his editor became increasingly difficult to sustain as Dawson spiked or altered Repington's copy. In January 1918 Repington resigned and joined 'Taffy' Gwynne's 'Morning Post'. Given his new editor's blessing he pursued the prime minister with even greater vigour. Within two months he and Gwynne were convicted of a minor breach of the 'Defence of the Realm Act'. Unabashed he continued to censure the government for interfering in matters he judged better left to the military. Lloyd George never forgave Repington and, ten years after the military correspondent's death, unfairly accused him of 'treachery' and 'treason'. 
After the war Repington worked for the 'Daily Telegraph'. He never again achieved the eminence he had enjoyed at 'The Times'. Chronically short of money he decided to publish his war diaries (1920). Though they remain an important historical source, at the time his public recollection of private gossip further damaged his already precarious social position. Repington's wife had refused to divorce him. Nevertheless Mary Garstin, through all their vicissitudes, supported Repington: she took his name, lived with him as his wife, bore him a daughter, and forgave him his not infrequent indiscretions. The last years together in Hove were amicable and peaceful. He died on 25 May 1925 at their home, Pembroke Lodge, Hove, Sussex, penning an article at his desk. He was buried at St Barnabas's Church, Hove, on 29 May. 
As a military writer and critic Repington was not without fault. His views on tactics were conventional. He was over-fond of political intrigue although, except in the case of Henry Wilson, he never allowed personal prejudice to cloud his public judgements. But his greatest failing was his inability sufficiently to appreciate the problems that politicians faced during the war. His most important and significant work was completed before the First World War. It is unfortunate that he has been judged largely on the basis of observations by opponents he had wounded in public debate, who sought to salve their self-esteem with lies and cheap jibes, or by deliberately misleading press campaigns, such as that conducted by J. L. Garvin at the behest of Alfred Milner, falsely accusing Repington of giving pusillanimous and contradictory advice. Repington, the 'beau sabreur' and 'prince of military correspondents' (Luvaas, 303), deserves a better memorial. 


@@@@@


doc= 35729


Reynolds, (James) Emerson (1844-1920), chemist, was born on 8 January 1844 at Booterstown, co. Dublin, the only son of James Reynolds, apothecary and playwright, and his wife, a former Miss Campbell. On leaving school Reynolds became assistant to his father, and developed a strong interest in chemistry. He studied medicine, and in 1865 qualified as a licentiate of both the Royal College of Physicians and the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh. He had installed a small laboratory in his home at Booterstown, where he pursued his chemical research. His first paper, 'On the oleaginous matter formed on dissolving different kinds of iron in dilute acids', appeared in 'Chemical News' (1861), when he was only seventeen years of age. Reynolds published further articles and, after practising medicine for a short time in Dublin, devoted himself solely to chemistry. 
In March 1867 Reynolds was appointed keeper of minerals at the National Museum in Dublin, and in the following year analyst to the Royal Dublin Society. Probably his most significant contribution to chemistry was his discovery of thiourea, the sulphur analogue of urea, in 1868. The existence of this compound was indicated by theory but distinguished scientists of the time such as Liebig and Hofmann had been unable to isolate it. His account of the isolation of thiourea, published in the 'Journal of the Royal Dublin Society' and 'Journal of the Chemical Society' for 1869, attracted much attention and was promptly republished in several continental scientific periodicals. It at once established Reynolds's position as one of the most promising of the younger British chemists. 
While retaining both his other posts, Reynolds was appointed professor of chemistry at the Royal College of Surgeons, Dublin, in 1870. The following year he described the preparation of an interesting compound of propanone (acetone) and mercury (II) oxide. This was the first colloidal derivative of mercury and its formation is the basis of Reynolds's test for propanone. In 1875 he relinquished the museum and Royal Dublin Society positions when he was appointed professor of chemistry at Trinity College, Dublin, as successor to Dr James Apjohn. In the same year, on 12 February, he married Janet Elizabeth, daughter of Prebendary John Finlayson, of Christ Church, Dublin, with whom he had a son, Alfred John, and a daughter, Marion Janet Elizabeth. 
At Trinity College Reynolds acted as a public analyst and consultant and helped to produce the 'Manual of Public Health for Ireland'. He was also responsible for the analysis of the Dublin water supply. His interest in analytical chemistry included spectroscopy, a subject in its infancy at that time. Though his duties left him little time for research, he published more than a dozen scientific papers during the twenty-eight years that he remained there. 
Reynolds also made a significant contribution to silicon chemistry and to the chemistry of minerals containing silicon. He studied organo-silicon compounds including carrying out the syntheses of Si(NH.C6H5)4 and Si(N.C6H5)2. He synthesized CaSi2Al2 and the mineral anorthite as described below. 
Reynolds was impressed by the concept of periodicity. In 1886 he displayed the elements graphically according to the periodic law and, from a comparison of the specific heat capacities of silver and beryllium, was able to conclude that the relative atomic mass of the latter was nine and that it was therefore a member of the alkaline earth group in the periodic table. Reynolds took a serious interest in his role as a chemistry teacher. T. E. Thorpe, the writer of his obituary, describes how he took particular care with his lecture preparation, his demonstrations and practical work. He was one of the first to introduce quantitative work into a student's early chemical training. His book 'Experimental Chemistry for Junior Students' (1882) was favourably received and had considerable success, going through several editions. He worked also as an examiner in chemistry with W. A. Tilden and W. N. Hartley for the Department of Science and Art (1895-7). 
Reynolds was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1880, and vice-president for 1901-2. He was president of the Society of the Chemical Industry (1891), and of the chemical section of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (1893). In 1903, Reynolds resigned his chair and went to live in London. At the Davy-Faraday Laboratory he continued research, chiefly on silicon compounds, his last work (1913) being the synthesis of a felspar, anorthite, a calcium aluminum silicate, which had the properties of the naturally occurring mineral. His mental capacities were active to the end of his life, but his eyesight, never very good, gradually failed during his later years. He died on 17 February 1920, at his home, 3 Inverness Gardens, Kensington, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 35730


Reynolds, Osborne (1842-1912), engineer and physicist, was born on 23 August 1842 at Belfast, the son of the Revd Osborne Reynolds and Jane Hickman. The elder Reynolds was a wrangler in 1837, and subsequently a fellow of Queens' College, Cambridge, principal of a school in Belfast, headmaster of Dedham grammar school, Essex, and, like his own father and grandfather, rector of Debach-with-Boulge, Suffolk. The younger Reynolds was schooled at Dedham and because he had a keen interest in mechanics at the age of nineteen entered the workshop of a mechanical engineer, Edward Hayes of Stony Stratford, in order to learn the practical side of the subject. He proceeded to Queens' College, Cambridge, graduated in 1867 as seventh wrangler, and was elected a fellow of the college in the same year. After a short period in the civil engineering office of Lawson and Mansergh of London he was the following year appointed, despite his youth and inexperience, to the newly instituted professorship of engineering in the Owens College, Manchester, a post he held until his retirement, through ill health, in 1905. 
After an uncertain start the course of engineering study introduced by Reynolds succeeded in establishing the discipline at Owens, and the more capable among his students later came to occupy posts of distinction. The core of the curriculum was applied mechanics, and his goal was the application of scientific principles to engineering requirements. Reynolds was also instrumental in the foundation of the Whitworth Engineering Laboratory in 1887, in which teaching, research, and testing took place. During the long tenure of his professorship Reynolds investigated and contributed to a wide range of physics and engineering problems. From 1869 to 1873, he focused on questions of electricity and magnetism and their relation to solar and cometary phenomena. Thereafter his investigations dealt almost entirely with mechanical questions, or with physical phenomena so far as they appeared to admit of a mechanical explanation. They were highly original both in conception and in execution. 
Reynolds's acute physical insight enabled him to explain phenomena which other minds had regarded as obscure or even paradoxical. Examples of his important work include the study of lubrication, which has led to important practical inventions, especially of bearings capable of carrying high loads at high speeds; the experimental investigation of the laws of the flow of water in pipes, in which he showed that there is a 'critical velocity' (depending on the diameter of the pipe, the kinematic viscosity of the fluid and a quantity now known as the Reynolds number), at which the flow changes its character between streamline and turbulent; the investigation of 'dilatancy', as he called it, a peculiar property of granular media; the development of turbines and pumps; and studies of group-velocity of water waves where he was the first to show that group-velocity also provides the rate of transmission of energy. His most extensive piece of experimental work was a novel determination of the mechanical equivalent of heat; he directly measured the amount of heat required to raise a pound of water from the freezing to the boiling point, the result being thus independent of the thermometric properties of any particular substance, such as mercury or glass. This was an exceptionally deft determination of a physical constant. 
Reynolds's scientific papers were published in a collected form, 'Papers on Mechanical and Physical Subjects', in three volumes (1900-03). Of their originality and value there is no question, but it cannot be said that they are always easy to follow. Though Reynolds's approach was always to look for a simple explanation, rather than for one which depended on the concurrence of a number of independent causes, his involved style of exposition had a tendency to perplex all but determined students, with the result that much of his work, especially his theoretical work, was long in gaining general acceptance. The worth of his contributions was, however, early recognized. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1877, and was awarded its gold medal in 1888. He was an active and dedicated member of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society which he served as secretary for many years and as its president in 1888-9. In 1903 he was its Dalton medallist. In 1884 he received an honorary doctorate from the University of Glasgow. 
Reynolds's character was, like his writings, strongly individual. Somewhat reserved in personal matters, and occasionally combative and tenacious in matters of university politics, he was kindly and generous in all ordinary relations of life. He had a keen sense of humour and delighted in starting paradoxes. His first wife was Charlotte Chadwick, whom he married in 1868 and who died the following year; they had one son, who died in childhood. In 1881 he married Annie Charlotte, daughter of the Revd Henry Wilkinson, rector of Otley, Suffolk; they had three sons and a daughter. After his retirement in 1905 Reynolds lived at St Decuman's, Watchet, Somerset, where he died on 21 February 1912. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35731


Rhodes, Cecil John (1853-1902), imperialist, colonial politician, and mining entrepreneur, was born at Bishop's Stortford in Hertfordshire on 5 July 1853. He was the fifth son of Francis William Rhodes (1807-1878), vicar of that parish from 1849 to 1876, and his second wife, Louisa (died 1873), daughter of Anthony Taylor Peacock of South Kyme, Lincolnshire. The family consisted of nine sons, four of whom joined the army and two of whom died in infancy, and two daughters, both unmarried; one of his brothers was Francis William (Frank) Rhodes (1851-1905). 
As the son of a Church of England clergyman, the young Cecil Rhodes grew up in the reasonably comfortable country vicarage of Bishop's Stortford. For reasons that are unclear he did not follow his older brothers to Eton or Winchester colleges, but was sent in 1861 to the grammar school at Bishop's Stortford (then under the supervision of his somewhat forbidding father), where he completed his education. Wishing for a professional career, and perhaps hoping to acquire the social cachet of his public-school educated older brothers, he was determined to enter Oxford, but this ambition remained unfulfilled until he had begun to amass his African fortune. Instead, in 1871 the seventeen-year-old Rhodes, who had fallen ill in the previous year and who in any case had no vocation to become a clergyman, was dispatched, with $2000 from his aunt, to join his eldest brother, Herbert, then growing cotton in the British colony of Natal. Although it is frequently suggested that he was sent to Natal to cure his consumptive lungs, recent accounts have followed his early biographer Sir Lewis Michell, who remarks that 'his father recognized that he was unfitted for a routine life in England, and resolved to ship him to one of the Colonies' (Michell, 1.21). In later life Rhodes's ill health was occasioned by a weak heart rather than weak lungs. 
The decision to send Rhodes to Africa was fateful, if not particularly fortuitous: in 1870 southern Africa was on the eve of its mineral revolution and a period of turbulent economic and political change in which Rhodes was to play a major role. Late in 1870 diamonds, already being exploited along the river banks of the Vaal and Hartz rivers, were discovered on the four farms which were later to make up the Kimberley diamond fields. Five years after the discovery of the first alluvial diamonds in 1867 the region had become the largest producer of these gems the world had known. In 1871, in a series of moves which outraged colonial opinion, the British government first declared the diamond fields the territory of the Griqua under their chief, Nicolas Waterboer, and then annexed them in his name as the British crown colony of Griqualand West, ignoring the rival claims of the Afrikaner republics and the even more substantial claims of the region's indigenous Tswana inhabitants. This marked the beginnings of a new phase of aggressive imperial expansion in southern Africa. The British annexation of Griqualand West was based on dubious title, but the diamond fields were too tempting to allow for any wait upon legal niceties. 
For Rhodes the first harbinger of these changes was the absence of his brother Herbert when he arrived at Durban harbour: in January 1871 Herbert had joined thousands of other fortune seekers at the recently discovered Griqualand West diamond fields. Although Cecil Rhodes spent his first year attempting to grow cotton, hoping to use the proceeds to take himself to Oxford, his first crop failed and the second, while more successful, sold for a poor price. By October 1871 he too was on his way to the diamond diggings, riding across the Drakensberg on a pony, the ox-cart behind containing -- in addition to his necessary supplies -- Plutarch's 'Lives' and a Greek lexicon. Rhodes may not have had much success in growing cotton, but he left Natal exuberant at having discovered his ability to direct and control large numbers of African labourers with a shrewdly calculated self-interest. He had also acquired a set of perceptions about African labour and colonial expansion. 
Rhodes's managerial skills were to prove important at the diggings for, within two weeks of his arrival, Herbert had departed for Natal and England, leaving Cecil in charge of his claims. That he was able to make his way in the anarchic and at times dangerous social world of Kimberley in the early 1870s is a remarkable tribute to his self-sufficiency and poise, even if Herbert had ensured his entry into the circle of well-connected claim-holders, administrators, and professional men at the diggings. Rhodes set about working his brother's claims and described the diggings in a series of vivid letters to his mother. Within a remarkably short time he had established his reputation in Kimberley. As his brother Frank, who accompanied Herbert back to Kimberley in 1872, wrote to his parents, 'Cecil seems to have done wonderfully well as regards the diamonds' -- and he admitted that no one on the fields could believe that he, Frank, was the elder brother (Marlowe, 57). Rhodes was indeed doing 'wonderfully well'. Within two months he was discovering diamonds worth $100 a week and within the year his personal fortune was valued at $5000. By the summer of 1873 he had accumulated $10,000 -- enough to take him back to England to invest his earnings in land in Hampstead and an education in Oxford. 
Despite these financial successes, an illness described as a 'slight heart attack' left Rhodes with a sense of foreboding. On Herbert's return from Britain, the two set off for the Transvaal, partly so that Cecil could recuperate, partly to investigate a recently announced gold strike. Across the Vaal, Cecil purchased a 3000 acre tract of land while the ever-restless Herbert decided to relinquish his diamond claims in order to pursue fortune and adventure in central Africa. He was to die in 1879, when his hut caught fire in what is now Malawi. 
The first of Rhodes's eight wills was signed in 1872; in it he left his possessions to the British secretary of state for the colonies, for the extension of the British empire. By the early 1870s the language of imperial expansion was in the air. 'The Anglo-Saxon race', thundered the 'Natal Witness' in 1872, 'shall hold undisputed sway from Capetown to the Zambezi' (Newbury, 'Out of the pit', 27) -- and there were a number of Natal settlers intent on making this a reality, among them the renowned secretary for native affairs, Theophilus Shepstone, and his agent, Herbert's friend, Frederic Elton, both of whom had subcontinental ambitions. This was heady stuff for the young Rhodes, whose subsequent imperial vision probably owed more to the Natal and diggers' press than to John Ruskin's imperialist lectures which he is believed to have attended at Oxford (ibid.). 
On the diamond fields Rhodes soon established a small circle of slightly older male friends. By the end of 1872 he was working claims with Charles Dunnel Rudd, who was nine years his elder. Rudd came from a landowning family with experience in the engineering and machinery industry. An old Harrovian who left Trinity College, Cambridge, without a degree, Rudd was engaged in a variety of entrepreneurial activities in the 1870s and was in charge of Rhodes's claims. His natural caution balanced Rhodes's impetuosity. 
Among Rhodes's other close friends at this period was John X. Merriman, described by Basil Williams as the 'best read man and the best talker in South Africa', and already a member of the Cape legislative assembly (he was later to become its last prime minister) (Williams, 32). Merriman represented a long if ambiguous tradition of Cape constitutional liberalism which, with its belief in equality before the law and a colour-blind franchise, ran counter to the dominant social practices of the day; by the mid-1880s the tradition was increasingly under attack, not least from Rhodes himself. Close too was John Blades Currey, secretary to the recently arrived British administration in Griqualand West, whose family nursed Rhodes back to health during his first illness. Merriman and Currey introduced the young man to the world of Cape politics and administration. 
Yet Rhodes still hoped to become a barrister and, in the summer of 1873, set off for Oxford. Disappointed to be refused entry to University College (perhaps because of his poor Latin prose), he was accepted by Oriel College, from which he matriculated on 13 October. However, by the end of his first term, during which he passed responsions, his mother's death in November and his own ill health forced him to leave Oxford. Early in 1874 he returned to Kimberley and set about establishing himself on the diamond fields in earnest. 
The Kimberley to which Rhodes now turned his attention was on the eve of its crucial transformation from the era of small claims and share-workers to the era of joint stock companies and, ultimately, monopoly. With the initial influx of individual diggers, a myriad of claims had been staked out on the four 'dry' diggings that made up Kimberley. At that time each digger was limited to two claims. So long as the interests of small diggers predominated and mining was based on opencast quarrying requiring little capital outlay or technical expertise, black producers were able to compete with white, especially as they had the advantage of family labour. The success of these black diggers now formed a focus for the discontent of the many white small claim-holders, diggers, and share-workers, all of whom operated claims on behalf of owners in return for a percentage of the proceeds. Yet, in Kimberley, infinitely more dreams were shattered than fortunes made. By the time Rhodes returned from Oxford the mines were in a state of crisis. Drought in 1873 followed by floods early in 1874 had sent up food and transport costs in southern Africa, the world price of diamonds had plummeted as a result of a slump on the Austrian stock exchange, and the banks were beginning to foreclose on indebted small diggers. At the same time the mines were threatened with collapsing walls and flooding, the result of haphazard development and primitive technology. As Kimberley's initially opencast operations extended ever deeper underground, the mines demanded increasingly expensive machinery and more sophisticated techniques. When the eroded yellow ground close to the surface gave way to blue, many of the small diggers left the fields. 
In the new colony of Griqualand West economic disaster was accompanied by political turmoil as small diggers took the law into their own hands and vented their frustration on what they deemed the unfair competition and illicit diamond selling of black diggers. This culminated in the formation of a white Kimberley Defence League and Protection Association and the so-called 'black flag' revolt of April 1875. By the end of that year these events had led to the recall of Southey -- a supporter of the small claim-holders against the ambitions of larger metropolitan capital -- and his replacement as lieutenant-governor of Griqualand West. In 1876 all limitations on claim-holding were lifted, thus allowing for the formation of joint stock companies. There is little evidence that Rhodes took any part in this political and social unrest. From the first he had identified himself with the larger claim-holders and with the colonial administration. Moreover, he was well positioned to take advantage of the new situation. He recognized that, far from spelling the end of the industry, the blue deposits contained larger numbers of more valuable diamonds and that fortunes were to be made by those who could stay the course. On his return from Oxford in 1874 he and Rudd had concentrated their claims in the Vooruitzicht mines (later known as De Beers) and were able to take advantage of the departure of small diggers to consolidate their holdings, once the restrictions on claim-holdings were lifted. By the mid-1870s Rhodes and Rudd were among those advocating rationalization and amalgamation of the mines. By 1879 theirs was the largest concern in the De Beers mine. 
Rhodes and Rudd were among the first to see the importance of pumping equipment and, by mid-1874, even before he had acquired a pump, Rhodes had contracted with the De Beers mining board to extract water from the mines. If this was sharp practice, Rhodes's subsequent dealings with the mining board and the pumping contract raised greater question marks over his business probity. In mid-1875 Rhodes's pumps broke down and a temporary contract was awarded to the engineer E. Huteau, pending the arrival of Rhodes's new machines. This arrangement proved satisfactory and the board contemplated transferring the permanent contract to Huteau. When, in December, the temporary pump was sabotaged, Huteau insinuated that Rhodes was responsible. Apparently in order to prevent further public discussion Rhodes forwarded the matter to the attorney-general, a close friend, and Huteau was charged with perjury. The case was never heard in court, however. By March 1876 Rhodes had left for Oxford where he spent most of the next two years. In October 1876 he confessed, 'My character was so battered at the Diamond Fields that I like to preserve the few remnants' (Turrell, 'Capital and Labour', 86). 
If Rhodes had already made his mark in Kimberley, his career at Oxford was undistinguished. When he returned, he read for a pass degree, not for honours; this permitted a pattern of broken residence. He was remembered by his tutor as being part of a set which lived 'a good deal apart from both games and work' (Michell, 1.81). Because of his peripatetic lifestyle, Rhodes completed his pass degree only in 1881, and although he was admitted at the Inner Temple in March 1876 he never seriously pursued a career in the law. 
It is easier to see what Rhodes gave to Oxford than what he got from it. Notwithstanding many historical accounts, he was not in Oxford for John Ruskin's famous inaugural lecture, and there is little evidence that he read his works; nevertheless his Oxford years seem to have reinforced his dreams of expansion with that mix of racial pride and imperial enthusiasm which was beginning to permeate British intellectual and political circles. He seems to have been much impressed by the writings of Winwoode Reade, a social Darwinist who applied notions of the survival of the fittest to the 'races' of mankind and believed that of all the races the 'Anglo-Saxon' was manifestly the finest and fittest. Rhodes was also much taken by such classical authors as Aristotle and Marcus Aurelius as well as by Gibbon, all of whom extolled the virtues of public service. 
These many influences came together in Rhodes's 'Confession of faith', a document which, however juvenile and ungrammatical, none the less expressed the philosophy that governed the rest of his life. The 'Confession' was written on 2 June 1877, the day on which Rhodes was inducted as a life member of the Oxford University Apollo chapter of the freemasons (Rotberg, 90). In it he mused on the history of the freemasons and the Jesuits, and advocated the formation of a secret society 'with but one object the furtherance of the British Empire and the bringing of the whole uncivilised world under British rule for the recovery of the United States for the making the Anglo-Saxon race but one Empire'. For Rhodes, 'the absorption of the greater portion of the world under our rule' would mean 'the end of all wars', for he believed that the British were 'the finest race in the world, and... the more of the world we inhabit, the better it is for the human race'. 'What an alteration there would be,' he continued, if 'those parts that are present inhabited by the most despicable of human beings... were brought under Anglo-Saxon influence' (Flint, appx, 248-52). 
In September 1877 these notions were embodied in Rhodes's second, vastly ambitious, will. In this he once more appointed as one of his executors the secretary of state for the colonies, who was at that time Lord Carnarvon, whose confederation schemes for southern Africa partly inspired Rhodes's own dream of a unified subcontinent. His endowment of Oxford scholarships, in order to inspire the young elite of empire with ideas of imperial race pride and give effect to his ambitions of world domination, occurred somewhat later. Yet the will proposed the establishment of a secret society for the purposes set out in his 'Confession'. Such proposals recurred in the six wills he wrote thereafter at regular intervals until his death. In 1891, when the journalist and publisher W. T. Stead -- appointed at that time one of his executors -- wrote asking him for his views on life and politics, Rhodes responded by sending him the 'Confession of faith'. Not only was Rhodes obsessed by this grandiose project, it seems also to have fired the imagination of the coterie of devotees who surrounded him from his early years in Kimberley. 
There are doubtless many young men who dream of dominating and transforming the world. On his return from Oxford in 1878, the year in which his father died, Rhodes began to collect around him a select band with whom he could share this vision. His ability to recognize other people's talents and to draw them into his enterprises was among his most outstanding characteristics. Prominent among these were the mercurial Leander Starr Jameson, who established himself in Kimberley as a general practitioner in 1878, Alfred Beit, financial genius and devoted follower (Galbraith, 59) who helped build Rhodes's mining empire, and Neville Pickering, perhaps his most intimate companion and confidant. 
Rhodes's possibly homosexual relationship with Pickering, the first of the young male secretaries with whom he established an intense friendship, has been the subject of much speculation. What is known is that Rhodes moved from his lodgings with the group of friends dubbed the Twelve Apostles, to share a cottage with Pickering, that in 1882 he left Pickering all his 'worldly wealth', and that in 1888, when Pickering lay dying, Rhodes abandoned an exploratory visit to the newly discovered Witwatersrand goldfields to nurse him. Through the 1890s Rhodes continued to befriend and employ unattached young men, whose admiration for him fell little short of adoration. He behaved with great possessiveness when any of them married, and he undoubtedly preferred the company of men to that of women. 
There were three exceptions. The first, and probably most important, was the journalist Flora Shaw, who shared Rhodes's imperialist design and lent the support of her columns to his achieving a royal charter in central Africa. She was implicated in the Jameson raid, almost certainly acting as an intermediary between Rhodes and Chamberlain in their collusion, and in 1897 withheld important evidence of this collusion from the House of Commons select committee. There is no doubting Rhodes's admiration for her. He was also intrigued by -- and intrigued -- Olive Schreiner, who was later to write a damning indictment of his imperialism; and he showed an initial interest in Princess Radziwill, an impoverished Polish fortune-seeker who followed Rhodes to the Cape at the end of his life in the hope of attaching herself to him. When rebuffed, she attempted blackmail but, significantly, did not allege that Rhodes was homosexual. 
With his already substantial holdings in Kimberley, in the decade after 1878 Rhodes set about accumulating the wealth and political power which were to enable him to shape the destiny of a subcontinent and influence the political culture of the metropole during his lifetime and beyond. In the three years from 1878 to 1880 he and Rudd consolidated their holdings in De Beers mine and in April 1880 were able to float the De Beers Mining Company with a share capital of $200,000. In the following year, during a period of rapid joint stock company formation and 'share mania', they merged their claims with those of the neighbouring Frederic (later Sir Frederic Philipson) Stow and his partners to create the most highly capitalized mine on the fields at $665,550. 
During the depression of 1882-5 the De Beers Mining Company became the premier concern on the fields, absorbing the weaker holdings in the old De Beers mine. By 1886 Stow had established a London office in order to secure metropolitan capital for their endeavours; in 1887 Rhodes, to the same end, brought Alfred Beit onto the De Beers board of directors. The election of Beit caused Stow considerable disquiet, largely because he feared a conflict of interest between the diamond producers in Kimberley and Beit's position as the leading diamond merchant on the fields. But in the battle for the amalgamation of the diamond fields and for the final monopolizing of the diamond mines Rhodes needed the access Beit provided to the markets of Europe. Although the creation of De Beers is usually attributed to Rhodes, the contributions of Stow and Beit were at least equally important (Turrell, 'Sir Frederic Philipson Stow', 62-7). 
The story of the final contest for control of the diamond fields has frequently been told as a highly personalized encounter between Rhodes, the Oxford-educated Englishman, and Barney Barnato, the slightly shady upstart from the Mile End Road, the most influential shareholder in Kimberley Central, De Beers's main rival. Recent research suggests that this mythology obscures a highly complex story of financial manoeuvring. Once he realized that Rhodes and Stow held the upper hand, through the assistance of the Rothschilds, Barnato joined forces with De Beers at the expense of his own shareholders, and to his own very considerable advantage. Together with Rhodes, Beit, and Stow -- and despite Stow's opposition -- Barnato was appointed a life governor of the new De Beers Consolidated Company, entitled to a quarter of all profits apart from the 30 per cent reserved for general shareholders. As a result of amalgamation, De Beers Consolidated became one of the largest British companies of the time (Turrell, 'Capital and Labour', 206-27). 
The amalgamation of the mines notwithstanding, Rhodes never gained complete control either over the sale of stones or over the profits of De Beers. There were always tensions between diamond producers and diamond merchants, and between the boards of De Beers in Kimberley and London. There were also tensions between Rhodes and Barnato, which had never been over amalgamation 'per se', but over the immense geopolitical powers Rhodes wanted for the new company. In the end Rhodes's persistence won. The company's trust deed permitted it almost unparalleled power 'to acquire any asset of any kind by any means' (Rotberg, 209). It also permitted the acquisition of African territory by treaty or conquest, and the exercise of political authority over such territory. 
So extensive were the company's powers that, when they were challenged in the courts by disgruntled Kimberley Central shareholders, the judge interrupted the litany to say that it would be far quicker to relate what the company could not do than what it could. Counsel for the plaintiffs responded by observing that De Beers 'could do anything and everything, my lord' (Rotberg, 209-10). Despite the misgivings of Barnato and the other life governors, Beit and Stow, Rhodes was able to insist on the retention of these overarching powers. None the less, Rhodes had constraints placed upon his total freedom of action by the board and was not infrequently obliged to employ subterfuge in order to use the profits of De Beers for enterprises which his London board disliked. 
Amalgamation had far-reaching consequences beyond the boardroom. It involved the loss of large numbers of jobs for white and black workers. It also saw the streamlining of methods of labour control which had already been pioneered at De Beers. Thus, even before the final stages of amalgamation were reached, Rhodes and his partners in De Beers had begun to reorganize the migrant labour system and establish 'closed compounds' for black workers. These were modelled on the convict station Rhodes had earlier established at De Beers to make use of prison labour. Black workers were rigorously searched before and after being incarcerated in the compounds for the duration of their contracts. Attempts were also made similarly to strip-search and confine white workers, but these attempts failed. The nexus of laws and institutions for the control of African labour established at De Beers provided the model for twentieth-century South Africa. 
This control of African labour was made possible both by the imperial conquest and annexation of the remaining independent African kingdoms of southern Africa between 1878 and 1885, and by the increasing role played by Rhodes and his fellow Griqualand West representatives in the politics of Cape Colony. In 1880 Griqualand West was finally incorporated into the colony and Rhodes was elected as member of parliament for Barkly West, amid widespread allegations of vote buying. He rapidly became the most prominent spokesman for the diamond interest, not least because he had secretly bought the colony's leading newspaper, the 'Cape Argus'. Rhodes and the Griqualand West representatives had four major concerns in the legislative assembly: to increase their own control over labour migration routes, to improve their disciplinary powers over labour, most essentially through the compound system, to prevent the haemorrhage of diamonds through illicit smuggling, and to secure a railway from the coast to Kimberley. 
Rhodes's purpose in being in parliament became immediately evident in his chairmanship of a select committee to inquire into illicit diamond buying, a select committee which framed the 'Diamond Trade Act' of 1882. This draconian piece of legislation, aimed at curbing illicit diamond buying and selling, put the onus on the accused to prove their innocence, allowed for entrapment, and permitted police searches without warrant. Rhodes also demanded flogging for anyone handling stolen diamonds, but this was rejected by the legislative assembly. 
Rhodes exercised his influence without being a frequent speaker in parliamentary debates. His maiden speech concerned the affairs of Basutoland, at that time engaged in a costly war with Cape Colony, which had taken over the territory from the British government in 1872. His opposition to the disarmament of the Basuto, as proposed by the legislature, has often been read as showing his early sympathy with African peoples and their rights. However, here too diamond interests were not far from the surface. The war not only obstructed the construction of the Kimberley railway: Basuto migrants were attracted to Kimberley by the prospect of acquiring firearms. Mine owners feared that disarmament would drastically cut the supply of a particularly reliable source of labour. As one Kimberley man said: 'After all, we sold them the guns; they bought them with their hard-won wages, and it 'is' hard lines to make them give them up again' (Williams, 63). In addition, Basutoland served as 'the granary' of the diamond fields and was an important source of firewood. It was crucial to the mine magnates that the war be ended as soon as possible. Rhodes advocated the passage of a 'Disannexation Bill' and the retrocession of Basutoland to the imperial government, a policy that was eventually followed in 1884. 
In Basutoland, as a member of a commission to investigate the claims for compensation of 'loyal' Basuto, Rhodes met General Charles George Gordon, then engaged by the Cape government to reorganize the colonial troops who were unsuccessfully contending with the Basuto. Like Rhodes, Gordon came to believe that Cape policy was misconceived, and resigned. The two men are said to have made a profound impression on one another. Gordon invited Rhodes to join him on his ill-fated expedition to the Sudan, and Rhodes was much affected by news of Gordon's death in 1885 at the hands of the Mahdists. 
Diamond interests undoubtedly contributed to the regional perspective Rhodes had already set out so grandiosely in his 1877 'Confession'. In his speech on the 'Disannexation Bill' he looked forward to a 'United States of Africa' under the British flag, although, after the debacle of Lord Carnarvon's confederation schemes for South Africa in the 1870s, he believed Cape Colony should take the lead. By the early 1880s Rhodes was turning his attention to the increasingly anarchic conditions in Bechuanaland on the western flank of Griqualand West. The new market at Kimberley had intensified the struggle between the local Tswana people and Afrikaners for the region's limited arable land and water resources. This conflict was exacerbated when the British withdrew from the Transvaal (which had been annexed in 1877 and then surrendered after the British defeat at Majuba in 1881) and warring Tswana chiefs invited in Transvaal and Cape mercenaries to assist in their internecine battles. 
From 1878 Tswana chiefs and their missionary allies appealed for British protection but were ignored. Despite the interest of Cape merchants in the road to the north which ran through Bechuanaland, the colonial legislature was equally reluctant to take any action that would necessitate expenditure. Early in 1882, at the invitation of the contending local chiefs, Afrikaner mercenaries established the little republics of Stellaland and Goshen to the north of Griqualand West, straddling the missionary route to the interior. These freebooters were backed by land speculators in the South African Republic and supported by its recently restored government, which saw the possibilities for using the conflict to test the resolve of the British government and gain additional land. 
Rhodes urged action. All his interests were at stake. As in Basutoland, Bechuanaland represented a source of labour and firewood for Kimberley, and the new republics threatened the supply routes to the west of the Transvaal. Moreover, since he and his fellow diamond merchants were anxious to control any new source of diamonds, it was in Rhodes's interest to argue for the annexation of the territory. This was an objective to which the eastern Cape merchants lent support, since for them the presence in the territory of freebooter Afrikaners threatened to undermine their commercial prospects in the interior. While most of Rhodes's biographers have perceived this episode as indicative of Rhodes's imperial vision, his actions in this case had more to do with immediate and material local imperatives. 
By 1883 Rhodes had been dispatched to the region as the Cape's trouble-shooter. The most powerful local chief, Mankurwane, agreed to place his territory under Cape rule, and the Stellalanders were induced to accept Cape incorporation, although the settlers at Goshen proved more intractable. Urged by Rhodes, the British government, after some hesitation, was persuaded by the British high commissioner and Cape governor, Sir Hercules Robinson, to secure the trade route and pacify the region. The resulting London convention of 1884 gave the South African Republic more territory, but left open the vital corridor to the north. John Mackenzie, a missionary, was appointed deputy commissioner, but failed to restore order and was replaced by Rhodes. Initially Rhodes was no more successful in resolving the rival territorial claims, and was forced to withdraw from Goshen in August 1884 when a republican commando invaded the territory and the Transvaal president, S. J. P. Kruger, proclaimed its sovereignty. 
By this time, however, the colonial situation had been transformed by the fall of the inert Scanlen ministry and its replacement by one which shared Rhodes's expansionist ideas. Moreover, the geopolitical situation had also been altered by the intervention of Germany in the region: at the end of April 1884 Bismarck had declared a protectorate over the German trading post at Angra Pequena, and by the end of August had annexed the whole of what became South-West Africa from the Orange River to the as yet unspecified borders of the Portuguese colony of Angola. Despite the efforts of the new Cape ministry, prompted by Rhodes and Merriman, to secure colonial interests in an area long regarded as its commercial hinterland, Germany had acquired its first colony in Africa. Its presence along the Atlantic coast led to fears that the German colony and the South African Republic would act jointly to block the road to the north. 
Bechuanaland was now seen as a key imperial interest, and any attempt by the Transvaal to annex the republic of Goshen became unthinkable. At the end of 1884 the imperial government re-entered the region, forced Kruger to withdraw, and sent a military expedition to Bechuanaland under Major-General Sir Charles Warren. He was accompanied by Rhodes and Mackenzie. The triumvirate was doomed to disagreement from the start, divided as they were on matters of principle. Warren and Mackenzie were determined to defend the land and political rights of local African chiefs; Rhodes was equally determined to reconcile the Stellalanders to British rule and secure the region for white settlement. In February 1885, when Warren repudiated the land titles he had granted the Stellaland settlers, Rhodes resigned. 
Despite his resignation, Rhodes nevertheless gained much of what he wanted. Warren re-established order, placed southern Bechuanaland under crown rule, and proclaimed northern Bechuanaland a British protectorate. Transvaal expansion was blocked; the road northwards remained open; and the movement of labour was unimpeded. Moreover Rhodes had been able to prevent Warren's attempt to limit land claims in the new colony to persons of British descent and so had furthered his nascent alliance with the Cape Afrikaners. 
In many ways 1885 was a watershed year for Rhodes, now one of the wealthiest men in South Africa and still only thirty-two years old. The first phase of the amalgamation of the diamond fields and the creation of the De Beers Company had been completed. His Oxford dreams accomplished, he had increasingly identified himself with the subcontinent. In 1883 he had served very briefly as treasurer-general in the Scanlen ministry and had emerged as a leading Cape politician. Majuba and the British withdrawal from the Transvaal, together with imperial indecisiveness over Bechuanaland, had convinced him that for further expansion he needed a local power base, and the increasing hold of the recently formed Afrikaner Bond as the political party of Cape Afrikaners made it clear that this would depend on an alliance with them. The Bechuanaland experience was an object lesson in the importance of local sub-imperialism. 
The discovery of gold on the Witwatersrand in the South African Republic in 1886 opened a new phase in the history of the subcontinent -- and in Rhodes's life. In the next decade the remaining independent African polities south of the Limpopo were conquered and annexed, and both within and without the frontiers of the colonial states, land, labour, and mineral concessionaires were spurred by prospects of further discoveries and the availability of speculative capital. The Limpopo River constituted no barrier to the flood of fortune-seekers, and between 1889 and 1895 all of the African territories as far north as the Congo were annexed in 'a gigantic speculation in mineral futures' (Robinson, Gallagher, and Denny, 250). In central Africa the British competed with the South African Republic, Portugal, Germany, and Belgium. In east-central Africa, to the west and south of Lake Nyasa, the thrust from the south encountered an anti-slavery, missionary, and trading frontier from the east. In this last phase of the scramble for southern African territories, Rhodes played a leading role. 
Paradoxically, however, Rhodes was at first somewhat dismissive of the stories of untold wealth on the Rand; he had burnt his fingers on the short-lived Barberton goldfields a couple of years before, and De Beers's American mining engineer in Kimberley was sceptical of the claims being made for the Witwatersrand. During Rhodes's absence prospecting in the Transvaal, Pickering had fallen ill and Rhodes had returned to Kimberley to nurse his dying friend. Always less assured in his appreciation of the goldfields, Rhodes's early investments were haphazard and injudicious. Although he and his partners launched Gold Fields Company Ltd early in 1887 with a share capital of $250,000, initially at least they made more money by manipulating the share market than through the value of their investments. By 1888 it was clear that on the Rand Rhodes had 'cornered the dregs' (Rotberg, 499) ['see 'Randlords]. 
Failure on the Rand was an additional spur for Rhodes to move north of the Limpopo, where he believed he would find a 'second Rand', pre-empt rival explorations for diamonds, and outflank an increasingly confident South African Republic. From the 1860s it had been known that there were 'ancient gold workings' between the Limpopo and Zambezi rivers, and by the mid-1880s Lobengula, king of the most powerful people in that region, the Ndebele (Matabele), was surrounded by concession hunters, including Rhodes's agents. When, at the end of 1887, news came of possible Transvaal expansion across the Limpopo, Rhodes put pressure on Sir Hercules Robinson to act. At Rhodes's insistence, Robinson now authorized J. S. Moffat, son of the famous missionary Robert Moffat, to secure a treaty of amity between Lobengula and the British government, which in effect declared ultimate imperial sovereignty over the Ndebele kingdom (February 1888). 
This gave Rhodes his opportunity in Matabeleland, and he set about converting concession into control. In 1888 Rudd, T. Rochefort Maguire (a friend of his Oxford days), and F. R. Thompson, who had established the closed compounds at De Beers, were sent to secure exclusive mining rights in Lobengula's kingdom. Through a mixture of bribery and guile, on 30 October 1888 they secured the king's signature to the Rudd concession permitting the exploitation of minerals in his domains in which were included the lands of his reluctant Shona tributaries. Although the king soon regretted his concession, it strengthened Rhodes immeasurably against his rival concessionaires whom he was now able to buy out. 
On 29 October 1889 the British government granted the British South Africa Company (BSAC) a royal charter to exploit and extend its administrative control over a vast, if ill-defined, area of southern and central Africa. Nowhere was Rhodes's conviction that everyone had his price better illustrated than in his dealings to gain and protect the chartered company. An amalgamation of London financial interests and potential competitors, bedecked by an array of aristocratic directors, including the dukes of Abercorn and Fife, the BSAC not only represented a somewhat dubious business enterprise, it also consistently misled the investing public with inspired but false accounts of its new Eldorado. Potential competitors and critics in Britain and the Cape were bought out with substantial shareholdings. Contrary to the impression given at the time, the concession did not include land rights, which the BSAC bought from Edouard Lippert in 1891. Nor, contrary to what the British government and investing public had been misled into assuming, did the company actually own the Rudd concession. This too had to be acquired by BSAC shareholders for $1 million from the United Concessions Company (formerly the Central Search Company, and in which Gold Fields had a controlling interest), to the great personal profit of Rhodes and his partners. 
For the British government the BSAC's great advantage was its promise to people central Africa with white immigrants who would make British occupation effective against contending European powers and bring the necessary capitalist development to the interior at minimum cost. In 1890 a 'pioneer column', consisting of 200 white settlers and 150 black, backed by 500 paramilitary police, occupied Mashonaland, without incident. The 'pioneers' soon scattered over the country in search of gold. 
Even before his charter was ratified, Rhodes had sent his agents across the Zambezi, where the British government was anxious to pre-empt its European rivals. Among these agents was the British consul in Mozambique, Harry (later Sir Harry) Johnson, from whom Rhodes probably acquired his slogan of a 'Cape to Cairo' railway and the idea of a telegraph link. In 1888-9, in a flurry of treaty-making, the whole of present-day Malawi and Zambia was staked out for crown and company. The object was to reach the copper deposits of Katanga, but Rhodes's representatives were foiled by the emissaries of the Belgian king, Leopold II, ruler of the Congo Free State. Despite the dubious legality of the treaties, they secured mineral and sometimes land concessions for the BSAC, while the chiefs agreed to accept British jurisdiction over non-Africans in their domains and over external relations. In the European chancelleries, where the frontiers of Africa were then being decided, these treaties provided the British government with useful bargaining counters and helped to establish over the following decade the frontiers of the states which were afterwards to become Angola, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Tanzania, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. 
Since events, in South Africa itself and in what was to become Rhodesia, absorbed most of Rhodes's energies and financial capacity, the fact that south-central Africa was now entirely under alien rule meant little north of the Zambezi until the late 1890s. Nor was Rhodes able to gain all the territory he wanted. In 1890-91 the British and Portuguese governments delimited the frontiers of their African territories. Despite the machinations of Rhodes and Jameson, who took command of the new colony of Mashonaland at the end of 1890, and a considerable display of force by company agents, most of Barotseland, Gazaland, and Manicaland remained in Portuguese hands. For the Foreign Office, European diplomacy took precedence over African expansion. Nevertheless, the final Anglo-Portuguese treaty in 1891 left the healthy highlands in the hands of the company and guaranteed freedom of passage between Mashonaland and the sea. Without a railway, however, the pioneers had little future. 
In Mashonaland the settlers were also disappointed in their hopes of instant wealth. It was soon clear that any 'second Rand' north of the Limpopo must lie in Matabeleland. Making use of an Ndebele raid on their Shona tributaries around Fort Victoria, Jameson deliberately provoked war against the Ndebele in 1893, and using Maxim machine-guns defeated them. This resulted in the destruction of the Ndebele kingdom, BSAC occupation of Matabeleland, and white settlement there. The war was followed, as Jameson anticipated, by a boom in BSAC shares and huge mining speculation. Nevertheless, by the end of 1894 it was evident to Rhodes's mining engineers that the unviable outcrop mines in Matabeleland could not compete with the deep-level gold of the Witwatersrand. Rhodes's policies towards the South African Republic hardened perceptibly. 
Up to this point Rhodes's expansionist schemes were enthusiastically supported within Cape Colony. He had been careful to court the leadership of the Afrikaner Bond through the judicious distribution of BSAC shares, while the rank and file were enticed with promises of cheap land and labour in his new colony. But Bond support for Rhodes had been long in the making and went well beyond mere bribery. On 17 July 1890 he became prime minister of the Cape with the backing of both the Afrikaner Bond and the liberal members of the legislative assembly. On the face of it, both sources of support were surprising and full of contradiction. The Cape liberals differed fundamentally with Rhodes over the place of Africans in Cape society, and had more fastidious standards of public life. Despite their misgivings, however, the three most prominent liberal parliamentarians agreed to join Rhodes's 1890 ministry in order to get rid of the financially irresponsible Sprigg government. In 1892 they were also persuaded to accept the 'Franchise and Ballot Act'. This was passed at the behest of the Bond and raised the property qualifications for voters, but also introduced an elementary literacy test and a secret ballot which they advocated. Nevertheless, they were increasingly disaffected, and when in 1893 Rhodes failed to expel from his cabinet a minister whom they accused of corruption, the liberals, having on 22 June 1893 formally questioned the propriety of his holding the dual position of premier of the Cape and head of the British South Africa Company, resigned. In spite of this, Rhodes easily won the 1894 general election and he re-formed his cabinet with increased Bond representation. 
For Rhodes, the alliance with the Bond, which controlled just under half the seats in parliament, was far more important than his association with the liberals, and he had nurtured it since the mid-1880s. His concern to improve colonial agriculture through replacing Cape vines destroyed by phylloxera, encouraging fruit farms, and stamping out scab disease in sheep had endeared him to the more commercially-minded Afrikaner farmers even before he became premier. His interest in controlling African labour was also shared by this wider constituency. In 1886-7 he had given earlier Bond proposals to change the Cape franchise his whole-hearted support, while in 1890, in the hope of gaining Bond favour, he supported a 'Masters and Servants Amendment Bill' which permitted the flogging of black servants. In the event the bill was defeated, with even some Bondsmen voting against it. In his second ministry Rhodes took on the portfolio of native affairs in addition to the premiership. In 1894 he annexed Pondoland, the remaining independent African territory between the Cape and Natal, where civil strife and the rival claims of Natal provided the pretext for intervention. 
More wide-ranging was Rhodes's 'Glen Grey Act' of 1895. This allowed Africans to acquire land under individual tenure on strictly controlled terms, provided for local councils, and imposed a labour tax intended to propel Africans into working for white employers. Widely hailed as 'a bill for Africa', the act was an astute way of satisfying Rhodes's disparate constituencies. Individual tenure and local self-government were long-held liberal demands, while the labour tax and the exclusion of 'Glen Grey' property-holders from the parliamentary franchise were much to the liking of the Bond -- even if, in the event, the labour tax soon fell into disuse. The control over the liquor trade, also embodied in the act, appealed to all but western Cape wine farmers. 
If Rhodes was mindful of Bond predilections in framing his 'native policy', initially he was also careful to avoid antagonizing their pro-Transvaal sensibilities. This was made easier for him as by the late 1880s the competing interests of Cape and Transvaal farmers, expressed in conflicting tariff policies, had made Bondsmen veer away from uncritical support for the northern republic. Moreover, after the Bechuanaland debacle, Rhodes came to advocate a Cape sub-imperialism in which Bond Afrikaners were equal partners. His visions for a united South Africa gave the leading role to colonial forces, and had much in common with those of Jan Hofmeyr, the leading Bondsman. Until the mid-1890s he was also prepared to allow the Transvaal to fulfil some of its territorial ambitions in the annexation of Swaziland, and he envisaged the peaceful achievement of South African unification through gradual economic integration. 
Rhodes's success in 1892 in constructing a railway between the Cape and the Transvaal was also popular with Bondsmen, who hoped to sell their agricultural products on the burgeoning Rand market. Yet this policy brought him into direct confrontation with Kruger, who was anxious to retain the republic's autonomy and protect its farmers by building a railway to Delagoa Bay and by raising tariffs on Cape produce. In 1894-5 this blew up into a major crisis when, with the imminent completion of its railway to Delagoa Bay, the republic raised tariffs on the Transvaal section of the Cape line. In response, the colonists transported their goods across the Vaal River by ox-wagon. When Kruger closed the fords over the river in an endeavour to exclude Cape produce, war between the two states seemed imminent. It was only averted when Kruger backed down in the face of an imperial ultimatum in November 1895. Through all this Rhodes continued to enjoy the support of Cape Afrikaners. 
From being in his youth a 'rabid jingo', Rhodes was now a leading exponent of an autonomous South African nationalism, albeit within the British empire. And this form of nationalism was shared by Cape Afrikaners. To this end he began to foster a local South African identity, by extending his patronage to the preservation of Cape Dutch architecture and furniture, cultivating a sense of colonial history and heritage. The statue of Van Riebeeck, the founder of the Dutch settlement at the Cape, which now stands at the foot of Cape Town's main thoroughfare, was paid for by Rhodes. Groote Schuur, his house on the slopes of Table Mountain, which he left in his will as the residence of a future South Africa's prime ministers, was restored in the local idiom at Rhodes's expense by Herbert Baker, then a young architect, later the architect of Rhodes House in Oxford. Amid the Matabele uprising Rhodes found time to extol the virtues of the colonial historian George McCauley Theal. 
So identified was Rhodes with the Cape colonists that in the late 1880s his pro-imperial credentials were in doubt, and he was widely referred to as the 'young Burger'. This was to oversimplify his position: Rhodes's overarching ambition remained imperial expansion and consolidation, as his many wills and his continued support for imperial federation reveal. In 1888, for example, he gave $10,000 to Parnell to support Irish home rule, provided the Irish members of parliament remained at Westminster in the event of home rule. This donation had the added benefit of encouraging, if not ensuring, the support of the Irish parliamentarians for Rhodes's as yet vague schemes of northward expansion. In 1891 he made a secret donation of $5000 to the Liberal Party in the hope of its also supporting his expansionism, and because he had begun to see it as a bulwark against the rise of socialism in Britain (Michell, 2.48). He sat between Gladstone and John Morley at dinner, Gladstone finding him 'A notable man' and Morley observing, 'The African has a fine head; a Gold full eye, and a strong chin' (Gladstone, 'Diaries', 19 Feb 1891). By that time Rhodes was being lionized by liberals in London, while early in 1892 the University of Oxford had decided to grant him an honorary degree. 
Rhodes's respectability in Britain reached its zenith when on 2 February 1895 he was sworn of the privy council on the nomination of Lord Rosebery. By 1899, however, when Rhodes finally came to have the Oxford degree conferred, it had become a matter of some contention. By then his reputation had been tarnished by his identification with the Jameson raid and an increasingly jingoistic pro-war faction in South Africa. It was for these reasons that, although he was elected a member of London's Athenaeum in 1895, he was blackballed by the Travellers' Club. In the 1890s the increasing economic power of the South African Republic had begun to transform the political geography of South Africa. At the same time, by the mid-1890s Rhodes found his hopes of gold in Matabeleland disappointed, and the development of Rhodesia and his deep-level mines on the Witwatersrand were a heavy drain on his capital. The South African Republic's inability to create the conditions necessary for recruiting a docile and coerced labour force, along with its liquor, railway, and dynamite policies, were all irksome to deep-level mine owners like Rhodes with their huge demand for labour, their tight working costs, and their great need for explosives. 
Making use of the largely fomented clamour of unfranchised British immigrants known as Uitlanders ('aliens', that is non-Boers), over their lack of voting rights and other grievances, Rhodes began to plot with leading members of the mining community for the armed overthrow of the republic. He was secretly backed by Joseph Chamberlain, the British colonial secretary, who was anxious to retain control over the political outcome, and by the compromised Sir Hercules Robinson, whose re-selection as British high commissioner at the Cape Rhodes had secured for a second time in 1895. 
At the end of 1895 Jameson on his own initiative invaded the Transvaal with some 600 BSAC armed police and volunteers, hoping to be assisted by the planned uprising of Uitlanders in Johannesburg mobilized by Rhodes's brother Frank and members of the Reform Committee. Aware of the lack of support in Johannesburg, Rhodes attempted to postpone the invasion, but was unable to stop Jameson, whose confidence had been greatly enhanced by his success in Matabeleland. Ill-conceived and poorly organized, the Jameson raid, as it became known, was a complete fiasco. There was no Uitlander uprising and the raiders were soon arrested. The leading members of the Reform Committee were sentenced to death, although their sentences were soon commuted to life imprisonment. They were released when Rhodes paid $25,000 per head to the Transvaal treasury. 
More significantly Rhodes's unwillingness to repudiate Jameson forced his resignation in January 1896 from the premiership of Cape Colony. The alliance Rhodes had carefully constructed between English-speakers and Afrikaners was finally destroyed when a Cape parliamentary select committee of inquiry showed his collusion in the raid. Previously loyal to the empire, most Cape Afrikaners, now feeling deeply betrayed, began to draw closer to the republic against the British, as did the Afrikaners of the Orange Free State. The Cape electorate was increasingly polarized on ethnic lines. 
The raid also threatened Rhodes's charter. Within weeks he was in London negotiating with Chamberlain. Unable to prevent a House of Commons inquiry into the raid or the call for Rhodes's resignation as managing director of the BSAC, the colonial secretary nevertheless agreed to defend the charter in exchange for Rhodes's silence over the 'missing telegrams' which revealed his own complicity in the attempted coup. Rhodes treated the select committee, by which he was questioned, with swaggering contempt. However, its long duration -- it reported only in July 1897 -- and the changed political situation in South Africa also defused the attack on Rhodes, as did his role in settling the Ndebele uprising in Southern Rhodesia in 1896. He was not stripped of his privy councillorship, as many had expected. 
In Southern Rhodesia the absence of the British South Africa police, as a result of the Jameson raid, precipitated an uprising by the Ndebele in March 1896. On top of their defeat in 1893, they had been goaded beyond endurance by the rapaciousness of the settlers, who looted their cattle, ravished their women, and stole their land, and who were uncontrolled by the ramshackle government Rhodes had established. The outbreak of the catastrophic cattle disease rinderpest proved the last straw. Rhodes arrived in Salisbury just as the crisis broke, and rapidly took charge, joining in the relief of Bulawayo. For a time the small white colony seemed doomed. 
By June, to the amazement of the settlers, who regarded them as abject 'slaves' of the Ndebele, many of the Shona people rose as well. British military assistance became essential to crushing the uprising, although Rhodes was determined to prevent any imperial annexation of a colony he regarded as his own. After the battle of Taba zi ka Mambo on 5 July, he realized that the only hope of saving his charter lay with initiating peace overtures with the Ndebele, which he did secretly, and in the face of virulent settler and military opposition. For many contemporaries, as well as for subsequent historians, Rhodes's physical and moral courage in entering negotiations with the Ndebele in the Matopos made this his finest moment. 
By mid-October the Ndebele, exhausted by war, rinderpest, and famine, had accepted his terms, which included a recognition of African communal tenure and his personal purchase of considerable land between Bulawayo and the Matopos on which they could be resettled. Now Rhodes had to 'square' his own side, many of whom were furious at the settlement: by the end of 1897 he had spent more than $10,000 in an attempt to pacify the colonists, and had accepted the idea of settler representation in a proposed legislative council. He also had to end the uprising among the intransigent Shona, which spluttered on for another year. Although this never threatened white settlement in the same way, the continued resistance of the Shona held up white settlement in Rhodesia's eastern province until 1898. 
Peace with the Ndebele saved the charter, even if amid the uprisings Rhodes had to resign as managing director of the BSAC. At the same time, the chimurenga, as the uprisings were called by Africans, led for the first time to direct British government intervention in BSAC affairs, with the appointment of a British resident commissioner in Bulawayo responsible to the imperial high commissioner in Cape Town, and the establishment of a legislative council in October 1898. 'Native administration' was put on a more systematic footing and stripped of its more immediately coercive aspects. The age of adventurism was over; the era of settler domination was about to begin. 
By 1898 Rhodes had recovered his position to a remarkable extent. Not only had he rejoined the board of the chartered company but, contrary to those historians who believe he was a spent force after the Jameson raid, he had also regained a surprising degree of political influence at the Cape, although the political context was changed. In 1896 the Loyal Colonial League had been founded in the Cape, to promote British supremacy in South Africa, and spread as the South African League in the Transvaal and Natal under Rhodes's presidency and patronage. The league engaged in an unscrupulous propaganda campaign against the supposed brutality of the Kruger government directed at the Uitlanders in the Transvaal. In this they were aided by the newspapers, which were largely controlled by Rhodes and his fellow mine magnates. Picked up and reproduced in the British press, these reports contributed powerfully to the creation of pro-war public opinion in the metropole. In South Africa the arrival in 1897 of the ardent imperialist Sir Alfred Milner as the British high commissioner magnified their influence. 
In addition, Rhodes became the informal leader of a new grouping of Progressives in the Cape parliament, and spearheaded their efforts in the closely fought general election of 1898, by contributing to party funds and morale. It was in this campaign that he also acquired the reputation for being a liberal supporter of the Cape franchise but this erroneous impression arose out of a typical example of Rhodes's opportunism. In 1897, before the campaign began, he had, with an eye on the Uitlanders in the Transvaal, announced that he favoured 'equal rights for all white men'. This brought an outcry from coloured and African voters but Rhodes took over a year to respond to them and only when it appeared that he might lose their support in the forthcoming election did he reformulate his slogan as 'equal rights for all civilized men south of the Zambezi' ('Diamond Fields Advertiser', 23 July 1898; 'Cape Times', 10 Aug 1898). Moreover the exigencies of the Cape's non-racial franchise led him to fund the African newspaper 'Izwi la Bantu', which provided an alternative voice to the pro-Bond 'Imvo Zabantusundu'. 
For all Rhodes's efforts, the Bond-supported W. P. Schreiner became premier in 1898, and this left little scope for Rhodes in Cape politics. Over the next year he travelled restlessly, to Oxford to receive his honorary degree, to Europe, where he met the Kaiser, to inspect Southern Rhodesia, and back to the Cape. He also helped to extend the railway from Vryburg to Bulawayo (4 November 1897), began to arrange for its extension as far as Cairo, and, on 21 April 1898, was re-elected director of the BSAC. 
It was at this time that Rhodes wrote his eighth and final will; he signed it on 1 July 1899. Increasingly suffering from his heart, he sensed mortality and was concerned to leave a 'monument to posterity'. His sixth and seventh wills, in 1892 and 1893, had begun to focus on the need to inculcate the value of empire in young colonials. This was fully formulated in his last will. Rhodes's estate, when finally settled in 1907, left, after family benefactions, $3,340,000 for the Rhodes Trust (whose assets by 1995-6 were valued at $145,638,000). The will provided for fifty-two scholarships each year to Oxford for young men (women were explicitly excluded) from Canada, Australia, South Africa, Rhodesia, New Zealand, Newfoundland, Bermuda, Jamaica, and the United States (which he still hoped would be restored to the British empire), but not for India. In a codicil to the will in 1901 six scholarships were also set aside for Germans, partly because of Rhodes's liking for the Kaiser, and also because of a vague notion of Teutonic race unity. The young men were to be chosen for their scholarly achievements, athletic abilities, and leadership qualities. Oriel College was to receive $100,000, and land in Rhodesia was left to provide for a university there. 
Behind the provisions lurked Rhodes's old ambition of creating a 'band of brothers' who would strengthen the ties of empire. He also left money for more explicitly political purposes: the creation of a pro-imperial political party or interest groups within the existing parties. This fund was to be used in the twentieth century to support a variety of imperial causes, including the closer union movement in South Africa, the pro-imperial Round Table, chairs in imperial history in Oxford and London, and the Royal Institute of International Affairs at Chatham House. The first trustees included his close associates Beit, Jameson, and Earl Grey, as well as the Liberal Lord Rosebery and Milner. 
The outbreak of the South African War in October 1899 found Rhodes in Kimberley, and he remained there for the four months of the siege (14 October 1899 to 15 February 1900), to ensure its rapid lifting and perhaps hoping by his presence to raise morale. During the siege he quarrelled with, threatened, and once tried to punch the military commander, Lieutenant-Colonel Robert Kekewich. On Rhodes's return to Cape Town he was to find, to his annoyance, that Princess Radziwill, who had followed him to the Cape in 1899, was intriguing to have him restored as premier. He spent considerable time over the next two years fending off her unwelcome attentions. Ultimately, the desperate princess attempted to blackmail him with correspondence she claimed to have in her possession, showing Chamberlain's complicity in the Jameson raid. When she forged Rhodes's signature on promissory notes Rhodes instituted criminal proceedings against her. The final proceedings were heard at Groote Schuur during his last illness, and the verdict -- which found her guilty and sentenced her to two years' imprisonment -- was rendered after his death. 
Rhodes's sojourns in Cape Town in the two years before his death were brief. The war meant that he was no longer at the centre of affairs, and his health was deteriorating. During 1900 he travelled to London to defend himself against the attacks of his former associate W. T. Stead over the raid, and undertook a five-month journey through Rhodesia in an effort both to restore his health and systematically to survey the progress of 'his' colony. The summer of 1901 was spent in Britain and Europe before he returned once more to confront the princess. He died on 26 March 1902 in his cottage in Muizenberg, just outside Cape Town, surrounded by some of his closest associates, and a younger brother. At his own request, he was buried amid the grandeur of the Matopos in Southern Rhodesia on 10 April. 
Cecil John Rhodes has always been the subject of intense controversy. Even in his lifetime he was revered by his intimates, who regarded him as a towering colossus, and reviled by those who saw him as an unprincipled and unscrupulous adventurer. In an age of expanding empire and speculative mining capital, Rhodes was able to give effect to a vast ambition to acquire wealth and power, and to justify this ambition in terms of a vision of Anglo-Saxon world domination. For many of his early biographers, though not all of his countrymen, his life expressed the patriotic aspirations of an imperial age. Later biographers and historians who have not shared his imperialism have been more critical of his methods. They have shown how, for most of the peoples of southern Africa, his ventures hastened the pace of colonialism, capitalist development, and political reconstruction and were accompanied by brutal conquest, ruthless exploitation, sharp business practice, and the insidious corruption of public life. Nevertheless, in his lifetime Rhodes's use of power was often tempered by his ability to engage imaginatively with those who were subject to his control and to bestow largess upon them, whether fellow mining magnates, Cape Afrikaners, or even, on occasion, African notables and their subjects. 
There are numerous portraits, busts, statues, and photographs of Rhodes and he gave much time to sitting for a variety of portrait painters, sculptors, and photographers. Very few of the portraits have aesthetic merit although Rhodes seems to have been better served by sculptors. He was strongly impelled to bestow his likeness upon posterity and, after his death, a considerable number of portraits and statues were displayed in southern Africa and in Oxford and London. Portraits, busts, and statues were commissioned for, or presented to, government buildings, gardens, and squares, as well as to schools, the new South African universities, and gentlemen's clubs. These are to be found in Cape Town, Grahamstown, Kimberley, Johannesburg, and Bulawayo. In 1911, an elaborate memorial, consisting of a columned Doric portico approached by a long flight of steps flanked by Egyptian lions, was raised to him in the grounds of the Groote Schuur on the slopes of Table Mountain. Among the many portraits in Britain, especially striking are those by Edward Roworth in Rhodes House (brilliantly capturing the power of Rhodes's brooding, slightly sleazy character; this is a copy of the original in the University of Cape Town), A. Tennyson-Cole in Oriel College, Oxford, and G. F. Watts in the National Portrait Gallery. 
Rhodes was especially commemorated in Rhodes House, Oxford, built by the Rhodes trustees in 1928 to Sir Herbert Baker's plans with sculptures by Charles Wheeler and carvings by Laurence Turner. In this distinctive building -- part memorial, part office, part library -- imperial, art and craft, and Cape styles are brilliantly juxtaposed. Rhodes University at Grahamstown was founded in his memory in 1904. 
In the years after Rhodes's death a large number of memoirs and biographies of variable quality were published, but it was not until the 1970s, with the publication of John Flint's biography, that a disinterested scholarly work appeared. This was followed by the works of Robert Rotberg and Apollon Davidson (respectively American and Russian historians), and the Israeli political scientist Mordechai Tamarkin. Economic and business histories by Newbury and Turrell have added much to our understanding of Rhodes's financial affairs. His career was portrayed in the 1936 British film 'Rhodes of Africa' and, more critically, in a 1997 British television series. 


@@@@@


doc= 35732


Rhodes, Francis William (1851-1905), army officer, was the second son of Francis William Rhodes (1806-1878), a Church of England clergyman, and his second wife, Louisa, 'nee' Peacock (died 1873); Cecil John Rhodes was his younger brother. He was born on 9 April 1851 at Thorleybourne, Bishop's Stortford. After attending Goodman's High School in Bishop's Stortford, in 1865 he entered Eton College, where he was in the army class and in the cricket elevens of 1869 and 1870. After passing through Sandhurst he was gazetted lieutenant of the 1st (Royal) Dragoons in April 1873. He saw service in the Sudan as a member of the staff in 1884, and was present at the battles of al-Teb and Tamai. He was mentioned in dispatches, received the medal with clasp and bronze star, and was promoted captain in October 1884. He accompanied the Nile expedition in 1884-5 for the relief of Khartoum as aide-de-camp to General Herbert Stewart, and distinguished himself at the battles of Abu Klea and al-Gubba, where his horse was shot under him. He was mentioned in dispatches and received two clasps and the brevet of major and lieutenant-colonel (September 1885). Stewart described him as the best aide-de-camp a general could have. 
Rhodes next served in the Sudan expedition of 1888, and was present at the action of Gamaiza (Jummaiza) (20 December); he was again mentioned in dispatches, and received the clasp and the order of the Mejidiye (3rd class). He was made colonel in September 1889. From 1890 to 1893 he was military secretary to his old schoolfellow Lord Harris, governor of Bombay; he received the DSO in 1891, and in 1893, as a result of his brother Cecil's importunity, was chief of staff to Sir Gerald Herbert Portal's mission to Uganda. There he nearly succumbed to blackwater fever. 
After his recovery Rhodes went out in 1894 to the recently conquered Matabeleland in Southern Rhodesia which had come under the control of Cecil's British South Africa Company over the previous five years. There he joined Dr L. S. Jameson's military council of four which was responsible for expropriating Ndebele (Matabele) land and cattle on a vast scale, a major factor in the Ndebele uprising of 1896. In the following year he went to Johannesburg, ostensibly as representative of the Consolidated Goldfields, of which his brother was a director but in fact to mobilize the Uitlanders against the South African Republic. In September 1895 he was at Ramoutsa negotiating on behalf of his brother for the cession of Tswana territory close to the Transvaal border, which soon came under the jurisdiction of the British South Africa Company and was used as the jumping-off point for Jameson's ill-fated raid against the republic at the end of 1895. As a leading member of the Johannesburg reform movement agitating for Uitlander rights he was one of the five signatories of the undated letter (November 1895) to Jameson which ostensibly led to the invasion of the Transvaal. On the failure of the raid he was arrested by the republican government, tried for high treason, and sentenced to death (April 1896). The sentence was soon commuted to fifteen years' imprisonment. After being in prison in Pretoria until June, Rhodes and his companions were released, on payment by Cecil of a fine of $25,000 each and on their promising to abstain from politics for fifteen years. Of all the ringleaders, Rhodes was the only one to refuse to accept this condition, and he was banished from the Transvaal. For his encouragement of the raid, Rhodes was placed on the army retired list. Early in July he joined Cecil in putting down the Ndebele uprising in Southern Rhodesia. 
In 1898 Rhodes went, as war correspondent for 'The Times', with General Kitchener's Nile expedition; he was wounded at the battle of Omdurman. For his services in that campaign his name was restored to the active list (September 1898). 
When war broke out in South Africa in 1899 Rhodes went back and served in the early battles in Natal. He was besieged in Ladysmith. In the fight on Wagon Hill (5-6 January 1900) he showed great courage, and took Lord Ava, who was mortally wounded, out of fire into cover (Amery, 3.194). In the next May he served as an intelligence officer with the flying column under Brigadier-General Bryan Thomas Mahon which hurried to the relief of Mafeking (4-17 May 1900) (ibid., 4.222). For his services in the war he was created a military CB. In January 1903 he was Lord Kitchener's guest at the durbar at Delhi. In the same year he retired from the army, and was, until his death, managing director of the African Transcontinental Telegraph Company. 
Rhodes assisted Winston Churchill in preparing his 'River War on the Sudan' (1899; new edn by Rhodes, 1902). Churchill found him 'very kind and amiable' (Churchill, 407) and 'a brave and gallant man' (ibid., 415). Rhodes also contributed an introduction and photographs to 'From the Cape to the Zambesi' (1905) by G. T. Hutchinson, whom he accompanied in that year to the Zambezi. The strain of this journey is said to have brought on the illness of which he died, unmarried, at his brother's residence, Groote Schuur, Rondebosch, near Cape Town, on 21 September 1905. His body was brought to England to be buried at Dalham, near Newmarket, Suffolk. A memorial tablet was placed by his friends in Eton College chapel in October 1906, and prizes for geography were founded at Eton in his memory. Said to have been a man of charm and a gallant soldier by his contemporaries, he was overshadowed in his lifetime and in the annals of history by his more famous younger brother. 


@@@@@


doc= 35733


Rhys, Ernest Percival (1859-1946), writer and literary editor, was born in Islington, London, on 17 July 1859, second of the five children of John Rhys ('b'. 1839?), and his wife, Emma, daughter of Robert Percival, a breeder and doctor of horses, of Hockerill, Hertfordshire. John Rhys had been a divinity student who gave up his studies when he married at the age of eighteen, and he was working in a bookshop in London at the time of his son's birth; he later became a wine merchant. Ernest Rhys spent most of his childhood in Carmarthen and in Newcastle upon Tyne. After a home education and two years at Bishop's Stortford, 1866-8, he went to a private school in Newcastle. But he refused to go to Oxford, 'tempted by the open-air life and the chance of horses to ride' offered by mining engineering. He passed his examinations, but in January 1886 he returned to London to earn his living as a writer. 
Establishing his base as the British Museum Reading Room, Rhys soon became a familiar figure in literary London. Although he never enjoyed popular success, and was too painstaking and slow a writer to earn a substantial income as a journalist, editors were always glad to have his reviews. He became close friends with W. B. Yeats, who shared his passion for eastern mysticism, Madame Blavatsky, and Celtic gossip. In February 1890 they founded the Rhymers' Club, a group of young poets, including Richard Le Gallienne, Lionel Johnson, Arthur Symons, and Ernest Dowson, who met in an upper room at the Cheshire Cheese, in Fleet Street, 'where long clay pipes lay in slim heaps on the wooden tables between tankards of ale', to recite their verses. The Rhymers published two collections of poetry (1892, 1894); Rhys contributed to both. His first solo volume, 'A London Rose and other Poems' (1896), won the admiration of Robert Louis Stevenson, who wrote from Samoa urging him to 'cultivate your native potato'. 'The Leaf Burners', written during the First World War, has been included in several anthologies; but his best poem is generally agreed to be the quatrain 'An Autobiography', with its opening line 'Wales England wed, so I was bred'. 
Writers are, however, often remembered by posterity for work by which they themselves set little store, and Rhys is remembered less as a poet than as the editor of 'Everyman's Library'. Sponsored financially by J. M. Dent, this library was planned, in Rhys's words, as 'a collection of the great literatures, beginning with the English, so co-ordinated that if its readers began with one creative book, they would want another and another till the great public had the world literature within its grasp'. Its title was taken from the medieval mystery play, and the quotation: '
Everyman, I will go with thee, and be thy guide, 

In thy most need to go by thy side 

' appears on every title-page. Beginning in 1906 with Boswell's life of Johnson, 153 volumes were published in the first twelve months; and when Rhys died, 983 volumes had appeared. In editing this library in face of many difficulties, some of which he has described in his autobiography 'Everyman Remembers' (1931), Rhys performed a genuine service to literature. But he regarded this task as the necessary hack work which would buy him leisure in which to write poems and essays. 
On 5 January 1891 Rhys married Grace (died 1929), youngest daughter of a country squire, Bennett Little JP, of co. Roscommon, whom he met at a garden party given by Yeats. A lady of great charm and culture, Grace published, among other works, three volumes of 'belles-lettres'. The couple worked and lived together as a team, and when Grace died on Rhys's lecture tour in 1929 in Washington, DC, he was devastated. They had one son and two daughters, and 'Sunday afternoon at the Rhys's' was for many years an opportunity for poets, novelists, and critics to meet and discuss their problems. As his autobiography shows, Rhys was well acquainted with practically every important literary figure in his lifetime -- from Robert Browning to Dylan Thomas -- but was never too busy to provide kindness, encouragement, and help to the young and struggling. He was a much loved man. He died in a nursing home at 82 Inverness Terrace, Bayswater, London, on 25 May 1946, and was cremated at Golders Green. 


@@@@@


doc= 35734


Rhys, Sir John (1840-1915), Celtic scholar, was born John Rees at Aberceiro-fach, Ponterwyd, Cardiganshire, on 21 June 1840, the eldest son of Hugh Rees (died 1886), a farmer and lead miner, and his wife, Jane Mason (died 1863). Rees received his early education at Bryn-chwyth, Pantyffynnon, and Ponterwyd, moving in 1855 to the newly opened British School at Penllwyn, near Aberystwyth, where he was a pupil teacher. After a course of study at the Bangor Normal College (1860-61), he was appointed headmaster of the British School at Rhos-y-bol, Anglesey, in January 1861. In 1865 he was introduced by Chancellor James Williams, of Llanfair-yng-Nghornwy, Anglesey, to Dr Charles Williams, principal of Jesus College, Oxford. After a brief oral examination, Rees was offered a place at Jesus College and entered in October 1865. He took a second class in classical moderations in 1867, and a first class in 'literae humaniores' in 1869. Towards the end of 1869 he was elected fellow at Merton College. During his time at Oxford he spent his summer vacations studying abroad and visited Paris, Heidelberg, Leipzig, and Gottingen; he matriculated at Leipzig in 1871. While at Leipzig, Rhys attended the lectures of, among others, Georg Curtius and August Leskien, and his interest in philology and linguistics was fired. 
In 1871 Rhys, who adopted the Welsh spelling of his name in early adulthood, returned to Wales as HM inspector of schools for the counties of Flint and Denbigh and made his home at Rhyl. During this time he began publishing articles on Celtic grammar and contributed important articles on the glosses in the Luxembourg manuscript to the first three volumes of the 'Revue Celtique' (1870). A course of lectures delivered at Aberystwyth in 1874, published later under the title 'Lectures on Welsh Philology' (1877), established his reputation as a Celtic scholar of the first rank; and when the Jesus professorship of Celtic was founded at Oxford in 1877 he was elected first professor. At the same time he was made an honorary fellow of Jesus College, and in 1881 he became official fellow and bursar. He was bursar until 1895, when he was elected principal of the college, succeeding Dr Hugo Harper. 
Rhys was first and foremost a scholar, and, although he served as member of the hebdomadal council from 1906 to 1911, the administrative side of academic life had little attraction for him. However, for forty years he worked tirelessly in the cause of educational and social progress. He served on Lord Aberdare's departmental committee on Welsh education (1881), and was secretary to Sir John Bridge's commission on the tithe agitation in Wales (1887) and to the royal commission on Sunday closing in Wales (1889). He was also a member of the royal commission on land tenure in Wales (1893), of the royal commission on university education in Ireland (1901), of Sir Thomas Raleigh's commission on the Welsh university and its constituent colleges (1907), and of Chief Baron Palles's commission for a national university of Ireland (1908). At the time of his death (1915) he was chairman of the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Wales and Monmouthshire. From its formation in May 1886, Rhys served as president of the Dafydd ap Gwilym Society at Oxford. He was also chairman of the council of the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion, and was awarded the society medal in 1912. In recognition of his public services Rhys was knighted in 1907, and in 1911 was sworn of the privy council. He received the honorary degree of LLD from the University of Edinburgh in 1893, and that of DLitt from the University of Wales in 1902. 
As a scholar, Rhys combined with industry and learning a singularly active, reconstructive imagination. Although his principal interest was in Celtic and Welsh philology, his researches took him into many fields. Beginning as a grammarian, he resumed and continued his linguistic and epigraphic investigations in 'The Outlines of the Phonology of Manx Gaelic' (1894), and in a series of papers read to the British Academy. He made a substantial contribution to the history of the Celts in Britain and travelled widely across western Europe, studying Celtic inscriptions, particularly the Ogam inscriptions of Wales and Ireland. His historical works included 'Celtic Britain' (1879), 'Studies in early Irish history' in the 'Proceedings of the British Academy' (1903), 'The Welsh People' (with D. Brynmor-Jones, 1900), and 'Celtae and Galli' in 'Proceedings of the British Academy' (1905). To the literature of the history of religion, archaeology, ethnology, and folklore he contributed his Hibbert lectures, published as 'On the Origin and Growth of Religion, as Illustrated by Celtic Heathendom' (1888), his presidential address to the anthropological section of the British Association (1900), his Rhind lectures at Edinburgh entitled 'The Early Ethnology of the British Isles' (1889), 'Studies on the Arthurian Legend' (1891), 'Celtic Folklore: Welsh and Manx' (1901), and numerous articles in the publications of the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion. Almost his only excursion into the field of literary research is represented by 'The englyn: the origin of the Welsh englyn and the kindred metres' (vol. 18 of the 'Cymmrodor', 1905). He also collaborated with J. Gwenogvryn Evans in the preparation of three volumes of texts of early Welsh manuscripts, 'The Text of the Mabinogion' ('Red Book of Hergest') (1887); 'The Text of the Bruts' ('Red Book of Hergest') (1890); 'The Text of the Book of Llan Dav' (Gwysaney MS) (1893). 
Rhys married Elspeth Hughes-Davies (died 1911) of Llanberis on 6 August 1872; they had two daughters, Myfanwy and Olwen. He died at The Lodgings, Jesus College, Oxford, on 17 December 1915, and was buried on 23 December at Holywell cemetery, Oxford. The British Academy, of which he became fellow in 1903, founded the Sir John Rhys Memorial Lecture to be delivered annually in his memory; the first lecture, delivered by his disciple John Morris Jones, gave a full bibliography of his works. The breadth of knowledge and scholarship exhibited in his numerous publications in the fields of philology, archaeology, folklore, and ethnology serve as testimony of Rhys's great contribution to Celtic learning. In these fields he was foremost among the scholars of his time, and his pioneering studies provided a firm foundation for future Celtic scholarship and research for many decades. 


@@@@@


doc= 35735


Richards, Francis John (1901-1965), agriculturist, was born on 1 October 1901 at Newton Road, Burton upon Trent, the third child of Robert Richards, a retail butcher, and his wife, Mary Ann Mayger. Frank Richards was educated at Burton grammar school where he was an outstanding pupil and where an early interest in biology, fostered at home, was developed by an enthusiastic schoolmaster. He also showed an early talent for mathematics. He was awarded a major borough scholarship and in 1921 he went to the University of Birmingham, whence he graduated BSc in 1924 with first-class honours in botany. After eighteen months as a demonstrator he obtained his MSc; he was later awarded the DSc for published work. 
In 1926 Richards joined the Research Institute of Plant Physiology at Imperial College, London, under the general direction of Professor V. H. Blackman, to assist F. G. Gregory, later director of the institute, in investigations of the mineral nutrition of barley. After six months in London he moved to Harpenden, where field facilities were provided at Rothamsted Experimental Station. He remained in Harpenden for thirty-five years. When responsibility for the institute passed from the Ministry of Agriculture to the Agricultural Research Council he became a principal scientific officer, subsequently, by two special merit promotions, becoming senior principal scientific officer and deputy chief scientific officer (1963). In 1928 Richards married Lilian Kingsley Mason, daughter of a Burton timber merchant. They had two daughters and led a quiet domestic life in Harpenden. 
At Harpenden, Richards gradually took over from Gregory responsibility for the nutritional aspects of the institute's research and for training research students in plant physiology, in which he himself continued to work throughout his career. On Gregory's retirement in December 1958 the institute was disbanded. To provide for the continuation of Richards's work a research unit was set up, with Richards himself as director. The unit was based at Wye College, Kent (University of London), and Richards moved there in 1961, accompanied by his senior colleague, W. W. Schwabe. 
In 1929 Richards published (with Gregory) in the 'Annals of Botany' the first of a series of papers on the mineral nutrition of barley which indirectly contributed much to modern fertilizer practice. Making meticulous measurements and exploiting R. A. Fisher's new techniques for statistical interpretation, he established the effects of nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium deficiencies on assimilation and respiration rates of barley leaves. Subsequent studies examined the roles of phosphorus and potassium in protein synthesis and in the general nitrogen metabolism of plants. He demonstrated that the amine putrescine, itself toxic, was produced as the ionic substitute for a lack of potassium. 
Richards took an interest, which possibly arose from his mathematical inclination, in the problem of the patterns of leaf arrangements in plants -- phyllotaxis. His studies led to a new understanding of the relations between the growth of the shoot tip and organ formation. He devised a means of defining the patterns -- the 'Phyllotaxis Index' for plane projection and the 'Equivalent Phyllotaxis Index' for a conical surface. As a result it became possible to describe phyllotactic systems in terms of radial distances from the centre of the growing point and the angular divergence between primordia which was free from implied hypotheses about the origin of the system. While Richards did not proceed to prove formally the necessity of the Fibonacci angle being the limiting divergence, his contributions, published in several papers, stimulated renewed interest in this, perhaps the oldest, problem of plant morphogenesis. Richards was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1954. 
While still a student Richards had joined a volunteer party to assist Professor R. H. Yapp in a study of the salt marshes of the Dovey estuary of which an important aspect was the vertical accretion of the sward association. After Yapp's death Richards completed the project and published the results in 1934. His use of statistical methods in the analysis of the data was pioneering in ecological studies. 
Richards was a modest man with a diffident manner which concealed remarkable talents and a wide range of general as well as biological knowledge. His reluctance to express his views restricted his influence, but his colleagues had deep respect for his shrewd analytical mind and clarity of thought. Richards had a number of hobbies. As examples, he assembled and mounted a superb collection of Lepidoptera and made a collection of palaeolithic artefacts from the classical fields of Rothamsted; he also made a reflecting telescope, grinding the parabolic mirror himself. Soon after the move to Wye Richards's health began to deteriorate and he died there, at his home, Orchard Bank, Oxenturn Road, on 2 January 1965. 


@@@@@


doc= 35736


Richards, Sir Frederick William (1833-1912), naval officer, was born at Ballyhally, co. Wexford, on 30 November 1833, the second son of Captain Edwin Richards RN, of Solsboro, co. Wexford, and his wife, Mary Anne, daughter of the Revd Walter Blake Kirwan, dean of Killala. After the Royal Naval School, New Cross, he became a naval cadet in 1848. He served several years on the Australian station and was promoted acting mate, HM sloop 'Fantome', on the same station in January 1854. He was promoted lieutenant in October 1855, and on returning home in 1856 went on half pay for a year, after which he was appointed to the 'Ganges', flagship on the Pacific station. The commander-in-chief, Rear-Admiral R. L. Baynes, appointed him flag-lieutenant in April 1859, and in February 1860 he was promoted commander in command of the paddle-sloop 'Vixen' on the China station. He brought home and paid off this vessel in 1861. From March 1862 to January 1866 he commanded the 'Dart', a gunboat, on the west coast of Africa, and on his return was promoted captain in February 1866. Later that year he married Lucy, daughter of Fitzherbert Brooke, of Horton Court, Gloucestershire. They had no children, and she died in 1880. 
After four and a half years on half pay Richards commanded the Indian troopship 'Jumna' until June 1873, and was then selected to command the 'Devastation', the first steam turret battleship designed without any sail power. This command was of great importance, as the loss in 1870 of the turret ship 'Captain' had caused great anxiety as to the stability of such vessels. Richards's conduct of the exhaustive steam trials and his able reports on them completely satisfied the authorities and allayed public anxiety. This was the key to his later career. It established him as a man of energy and resolve. 
In 1874 Richards took the 'Devastation' to the Mediterranean and remained her captain until June 1877. The following January he became captain of the steam reserve, and in October 1878 he was appointed commodore and senior officer on the west coast of Africa, HMS 'Boadicea'. When he arrived at the Cape the disaster at Isandlwana in the Anglo-Zulu War had just occurred (22 January 1879), and he promptly went up the east coast outside the limits of his station, and landed in March 1879 with a small naval brigade and commanded it at the battle of Gingindlovu (2 April) and in the relief of Echowe (3 April). For these services he was gazetted and made a CB (1879). He remained as commodore in South Africa until June 1882, having taken part in the defeat at Laing's Nek (28 January 1881) in the Anglo-Transvaal War, and having been promoted KCB that year. 
After promotion to flag rank in June 1882 Richards was appointed junior naval lord at the Admiralty under the second earl of Northbrook. In May 1885 he received the command of the East India station with his flag in HMS 'Bacchante'. In the course of this three years' command he organized and equipped the naval brigade in the Third Anglo-Burmese War and was thanked by the government of India. After his return to Britain in 1888 he was appointed, with admirals Sir William Montagu Dowell and Sir Richard Vesey Hamilton, to report on the lessons of the naval manoeuvres of that year. Their report, most of which was acknowledged to be by Richards, presented a most convincing discussion of the conditions of modern warfare and a clear statement of the vital importance of sea power to the existence of the British empire, and set forth what became known as the two-power standard as the principle on which the British naval construction programme should be based. It re-established the strategic principles of previous generations as the basis for naval planning. This able report, though challenged at first by official naval opinion, made a great impression, and was one of the causes of Lord George Hamilton's 1889 'Naval Defence Act', which overhauled the Royal Navy. Richards was also the naval representative on the royal commission on naval and military administration (1890), in the proceedings of which and in the drafting of its conclusions he bore a leading part. 
Richards was promoted vice-admiral in 1888, and in 1890 went as commander-in-chief to the China station until June 1892, when he rejoined the Board of Admiralty under Lord George Hamilton as second naval lord. He was promoted admiral in September 1893, and in November of that year was selected by the fifth Earl Spencer to succeed Sir Anthony Hiley Hoskins as first naval lord, a position which he retained for nearly six years. His career as first naval lord was of great importance in the history of naval administration. Richards had a clear understanding of the needs of the navy, and he had the confidence of his political chiefs, Lord Spencer and Mr Goschen. This period was marked by a great development of the shipbuilding programme begun under the 'Naval Defence Act' of 1889, and, at Richards's particular instigation, by a series of large naval works carried out under the 'Naval Works Acts' of 1895 and subsequent years. The result was that the naval ports and dockyards at home and abroad were renovated and brought up to date to meet the requirements of the modern navy. Under this scheme naval harbours were constructed at Portland, Dover, Gibraltar, and Simon's Bay, and great extensions of the dockyards at Portsmouth, Devonport, Malta, Gibraltar, Hong Kong, and Simon's Bay. In carrying his naval programme against the opposition from Sir William Harcourt and Gladstone, Lord Spencer was supported by the foreign secretary, Lord Rosebery, and could rely on the unwavering determination of Richards and his colleagues on the board. The cabinet's acceptance of the naval 'Spencer' programme was in large measure responsible for Gladstone's final decision to resign from office in 1894. 
In June 1895 Richards was promoted GCB on the resignation of the Rosebery ministry. Mr Goschen, who then again became first lord after an interval of over twenty-one years, wisely decided to follow the precedent set by Lord Spencer and to retain the naval advisers of the outgoing government. He and Richards worked together with remarkable unity of purpose during the next four years. This was particularly obvious in the field of coercive diplomacy, where the 1893 programme provided a powerful political instrument. Sending the fleet to the Dardanelles in 1895 put pressure on the Turkish government over the Armenian massacres; the 1896 flying squadron warned the Kaiser of the possible consequence of his telegram to President Kruger; in 1897 and 1898 the British fleet at length restored order in Crete; while the vigorous handling of the naval situation in the Fashoda crisis in 1898 was the chief preventive of war with France over that incident; and, finally, the firm attitude of the government based on the readiness of the fleet stopped any interference by European powers in the Spanish-American War. There was thus a widespread and well-founded feeling in the naval service that its interests were safe in the hands of Richards. 
In November 1898 Richards would have been retired for age, but Goschen obtained a special order in council promoting him to be admiral of the fleet in order that he might remain on the active list until the age of seventy. The following August Goschen decided that it was time that Richards should give place to a younger officer as first naval lord, though Richards was much disappointed at being superseded after the special promotion to keep him on the active list. He was succeeded by Lord Walter Kerr, who agreed with Admiralty policy during Richards's term of office. 
Richards was one of the leading administrators in the history of the navy. He quickly won the confidence of his superiors, and was selected for successive important duties, performing them successfully until he became chief naval adviser to the government at a time when a firm and clear restatement of the essentials of maritime policy was invaluable. Richards was a man of prudent foresight, clear, if limited, vision, and firm determination. His powerful intellect was somewhat slow in operation; but, though taciturn and not ready in council, he could and did express his views in admirable, if sometimes monosyllabic, English which left no doubt of his intention or of the strength of will that lay behind it. His official minutes were models of vigorous style and well-chosen language. As a sea officer it was not his fortune to command a battle fleet or to win the renown of such peace-time fleet commanders as Sir Geoffrey Thomas Phipps Hornby and Sir Arthur Knyvet Wilson. His natural qualities of a clear brain and indomitable will, combined with a gift for organization, found their best opportunity in his work at Whitehall. Though he was of a retiring disposition, avoiding publicity and loathing controversy, his character was so transparently honest and just and his devotion to his service and country so marked that he was regarded throughout the naval service with confidence and trust. In private life he was a constant friend and, though a ruler among men and of a stern exterior, he also had sympathy, humour, and kindness. 
After his retirement Richards maintained his interest in naval affairs, and although he was not in sympathy with many of the changes carried out by Sir John Fisher's administration, he seldom expressed his mind in public and took no share in controversy. In 1904, shortly after the election of Lord Goschen as chancellor of Oxford University, Richards was given the honorary degree of DCL. He died at his residence, Horton Court, Chipping Sodbury, Gloucestershire, on 28 September 1912. 
After the successful struggle over the naval programme in the cabinet of 1893-4, the officers of the fleet had Richards's portrait painted by Arthur Cope RA, and presented it 'from the navy to the nation'. It was hung in the Painted Hall at Greenwich. In November 1912 a Sir Frederick Richards memorial fund was established by a large representative meeting of admirals, friends, and admirers, the trustees of which make charitable grants to naval and marine officers and their dependants. A memorial tablet is in the crypt of St Paul's Cathedral. A formidable champion of naval preparedness, and legendarily taciturn, Richards's reputation rests largely on his defeat of Gladstone's last campaign. 


@@@@@


doc= 35737


Richardson, Sir Albert Edward (1880-1964), architect, was born on 19 May 1880 at 33D Middleton Road, Hackney, London, the eldest of the three children of Albert Edmund Richardson, printer, and his wife, Mary Ann, daughter of Thomas Richardson (not related), of Highgate. He was educated at the Boys British School, Highgate, where he already showed pleasure in buildings and a talent for drawing. In 1895 he was articled to an architect named Thomas Page, in Gray's Inn Road, and he subsequently served in the offices of Evelyn Hellicar (1898-1902), Leonard Stokes (1902-3), and Frank T. Verity (1903-6). On 31 May 1904 he married Elizabeth (1882/3-1958), daughter of John Byers, a warehouseman from Newry, co. Down; they had one daughter. As Verity's leading assistant he designed 'mansion flats' in Cleveland Row, St James's, and in Bayswater Road (both 1906), the middle section of 169-201 Regent Street (1908-9), and the facade of the Regent Street Polytechnic; the latter was executed after he had severed his connection with Verity and set up in practice with another of Verity's assistants, Charles Lovett Gill. The contemporary French influence seen in the work for Verity is reflected again in the early works of the partnership, notably flats in Berkeley Street (nos. 10 and 19) executed between 1910 and 1916. A developing taste for an earlier and more distinguished type of neo-classicism is shown in the New Theatre (now the Opera House), Manchester, built in association with Horace Farquharson in 1911-13. The most substantial commission, however, obtained by the partnership before the First World War was Moorgate Hall, Finsbury Pavement, London (1913-17), a thoughtful solution to the problem of combining office fenestration with shop windows. This led to a series of similar commissions which formed the backbone of the practice for twenty-five years. 
With the exigencies of practice, Richardson combined an enthusiastic devotion to the architecture of the past, especially the then neglected history of English domestic classicism from the seventeenth century to the nineteenth. With the encouragement of Harry Batsford he wrote, in collaboration with C. Lovett Gill, his first book, 'London Houses from 1660 to 1820' (1911), a pioneering appreciation of the simple elegance of Georgian streets and squares. This was followed by 'Monumental Classic Architecture in Great Britain and Ireland in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries' (1914), a superbly illustrated folio work demonstrating the progress of the classical tradition from the Palladian movement to the mid-Victorian period. This offered a new perspective of stylistic continuity and became a landmark in British architectural historiography. 
Between 1916 and 1918 Richardson served as a lieutenant in the Royal Flying Corps, working at the school of military aeronautics at Reading. In 1919 his combination of practical experience and historical learning made him eligible for the chair of architecture at the Bartlett school of architecture, University College, London, where he succeeded F. M. Simpson. This chair he held for twenty-seven years, before retiring as professor emeritus in 1946. At University College he effectively exploited his personal qualities as a teacher. Not by temperament an academic, nor indeed a scholar of the more disciplined kind, his history lectures were rhetorical improvisations made wonderfully vivid by a rare talent for impromptu graphic demonstration. In the studios the same ready pencil, accompanied by an enthusiastic flow of talk and the random play of ideas, endeared him to a whole generation of students. Richardson's personal interests and distaste for modern art and architecture ensured that classical and Renaissance architecture was studied at the Bartlett School virtually to the exclusion of anything else. Yet even this was tolerated by his students as an aspect of his ebullient eccentricity, as were his perpetual haste and the general waspishness which increased as he grew older. 
Meanwhile the practice of Richardson and Gill developed remuneratively through the 1920s and 1930s with offices in the City, flats in the West End, and a few churches and country houses. In the City, 47-57 Gresham Street (1924) show a departure from classical compromise towards direct statement and this became more manifest in the premises built for Sir Arthur Sanderson & Sons in Wells Street (1930-32), which was awarded the London architecture medal at the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1932. But although Richardson was sympathetic to the modern tendency towards simplification, he rejected contemptuously the intellectual premises of the continental Modern Movement as expounded in the teaching of Walter Gropius and the publications of Le Corbusier. 'The Art of Architecture' (1938), which he wrote in collaboration with his colleague H. O. Corfiato, was an attempt to defend traditional architectural principles, but its influence was negligible and in the late 1930s Richardson found himself increasingly alienated from the younger generation of architects. 
During the Second World War the Bartlett School was transferred to Cambridge, where Richardson spent happy years in a privileged environment which appealed to his sense of tradition. In the post-war world he emerged as a stalwart reactionary, a lively castigator of bureaucracy, and a champion of the preservationist movements then gathering strength. Elected ARA in 1936, he became a full academician in 1944 and president of the Royal Academy ten years later. In this high office he was at once recognized as an agreeably controversial public figure who could be relied upon to say something original, paradoxical, and quite possibly irresponsible, on any subject to which his attention was directed. As a member of the Royal Fine Arts Commission from 1939 to 1956 his insights were often valuable and his criticism unsparing. In 1947 he was awarded the gold medal for architecture of the Royal Institute of British Architects and in 1956 he was appointed KCVO. He was also an FSA, an honorary member of the Royal Society of Painters in Water Colours, an honorary MA of Cambridge, an honorary LittD of Dublin, and an honorary fellow of St Catharine's College, Cambridge. 
The partnership with Gill having terminated in 1939, Richardson found, in 1945, a new partner in his son-in-law, Eric Alfred Scholefield Houfe, and together they produced an admirable sequence of designs during this final phase of his career. Their works included in and around London the Chancery Lane safe deposit (1945-9), the 'Financial Times' building, Cannon Street (1955-8), the AEI building, Grosvenor Place (1958), and the chapel and library, St Mary's College, Twickenham (1961). Restoration and alteration work featured prominently during this period and included the repair of war-damaged buildings such as Merchant Taylors' Hall (1953), Trinity House, Tower Hill (with an important extension, 1956), and the churches of St Alfege, Greenwich (1959), and St James, Piccadilly (1947-54). In 1950 Richardson and Houfe also undertook alterations to Woburn Abbey, Bedfordshire, and in 1954 they restored the assembly rooms in Bath. Written work of this period includes his notice of the architect Sir (Thomas) Edwin Cooper for the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. 
In appearance Richardson was of medium height, inclining to stoutness in middle age; his face was somewhat fleshy with dark hair brushed back, an aquiline nose, and fine grey eyes, heavy-lidded. In deportment and gesture he had something of the air of an old-fashioned actor. Richardson died on 3 February 1964 at Avenue House, Ampthill, a beautiful late eighteenth-century house which he had acquired in 1919 and where he brought together a remarkable collection of furniture and works of art, including architectural drawings. He was buried in the churchyard at Millbrook, Bedfordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 35738


Richardson, Ethel Florence Lindesay (1870-1946), novelist, was born on 3 January 1870 at 1 Blanche Terrace, Fitzroy, Melbourne, Australia. She was the elder daughter of Walter Lindesay Richardson (1825-1879) and Mary Bailey (1835-1896). Her father came from a Dublin protestant family, trained as a doctor in Edinburgh, and went out to the Australian goldfields in Victoria in 1852. Gold-digging and being a squatters' storekeeper proved unsatisfactory, and by 1856 he had established a medical practice in Ballarat. Mary Richardson, an energetic and resourceful woman, had emigrated to Australia from Leicester as a teenager; she and Walter Richardson were married in Ballarat in 1855. Although the future novelist was not born until her parents had been married for fourteen years, their married life, and particularly the career and later devastating illness and death of her father when she was nine years old, provided the material for perhaps her greatest novel, and certainly the one by which she is best known, 'The Fortunes of Richard Mahony'. This novel was originally published as a trilogy: 'Australia felix' (1917), 'The Way Home' (1925), and 'Ultima Thule' (1929). 
As a child Ethel Richardson lived in several small towns, where her mother worked as a postmistress. When she was thirteen she was sent to the Presbyterian Ladies' College in Melbourne. She proved to be a good scholar and an exceptional musician; consequently, in 1888 her mother was persuaded to take her and her younger sister, Lilian, to Europe, so that she could continue her musical studies. Except for a very brief visit in 1912 to check details for 'Richard Mahony', she never saw Australia again. 
In 1889 Richardson entered the Leipzig conservatory, where she studied for three years, with the intention of becoming a concert pianist. However, her engagement to John George Robertson (1867-1933), a brilliant Scottish student of European languages, and her own distaste for public performances brought her studies to an end in 1892. Under Robertson's guidance she read widely in European literature and translated two novels (published under her married name): 'Siren Voices: Niels Lyhne', after 'Niels Lyhne', by the Danish writer J. P. Jacobsen; and 'The Fisher Lass', after 'Fiskerjenten', by the Norwegian Bjornstjerne Bjornsen. 
Richardson and J. G. Robertson were married in Dublin on 30 December 1895. The early years of their marriage were spent in Strasbourg. Richardson's husband was appointed to a university lectureship and she began, rather hesitantly, to write a novel. They walked, read, listened to endless concerts, and enjoyed European intellectual life. This satisfying pattern came to an end in 1904 when J. G. Robertson, who had published 'A History of German Literature' in 1902, was invited to become the first professor of German at London University. For Richardson, England and London proved much less congenial than Germany and Strasbourg. She turned inwards, concentrated on writing, and for the rest of her life restricted her company to her husband and a few close friends. 
Her first novel, 'Maurice Guest' (1908), for which she adopted the pseudonym Henry Handel Richardson, is set among music students in Leipzig. Nobody questioned that she was a male writer, and she was thereafter widely known as HHR or even Henry. Her second novel, 'The Getting of Wisdom' (1910; filmed by Bruce Beresford in 1977), is based on her schooldays in Melbourne. She began work on 'The Fortunes of Richard Mahony' in 1912, but the First World War delayed publication of the first volume; she eventually achieved fame with the publication of the final volume in 1929. In that year she was awarded the Australian Literary Society's gold medal for 'Ultima Thule', and in 1932 was nominated for the Nobel prize for literature. 
After her husband's death in 1933 Richardson struggled to continue writing, but her collection of short stories and the late novel 'The Young Cosima' (1939) did not match her earlier work. She had moved to a house at Fairlight, near Hastings, in 1934, and here, during the Second World War, she worked on an autobiographical memoir. It was unfinished at the time of her death and published as 'Myself when Young' in 1948. She died, childless, of cancer of the colon on 20 March 1946, and was cremated at the Golders Green crematorium on 25 March. 
Richardson was Australian by birth and British by residence (for the last forty-two years of her life), but her great achievement is to have written two major novels which are rooted in continental European realism. They owe little to English traditions. She was influenced by German philosophy and by Russian, Scandinavian, and French fiction, most notably in 'Maurice Guest', a novel which is remarkable for its unblinking treatment of sexual obsession and for its depiction of male homosexuality which is neither effete nor coy. The same sympathetic but intransigent realism is applied to her examination of her restless and obsessive hero in 'The Fortunes of Richard Mahony'. Even the short novel 'The Getting of Wisdom' avoids adolescent whimsy; it is witty and caustic about a difficult child. 
As a writer Richardson was not linguistically inventive and she lacked the modernist sensibility of many of her contemporaries. But her respect for her characters, her brilliant evocation of their social environments (including her lengthy study of colonial Australia), and her unwavering depiction of the conflict between the hard facts of circumstance and the human yearning for freedom turned her, despite her limitations, into a major novelist. 
Richardson was a pale, dark-haired, slightly built woman, who combined energetic enthusiasm for music, tennis, swimming, and walking with a lifelong tendency to withdraw into ill health. Her own view of herself was of a square peg failing to fit into a round hole, but this was a failure that she explored without self-pity. The effect on other people could be daunting, especially since she combined her objectivity with personal shyness. The transition from Germany to England was particularly difficult, since she had no small talk, and ditherers or chatterers would find themselves facing scrutinizing intelligent eyes and silence. However, given the opportunity to explore the unorthodox, she flourished. She had a lifelong sceptic's interest in spiritualism; she loved fast cars; and, as a researching novelist, she enjoyed investigating boxing booths and opium dens. 


@@@@@


doc= 35739


Richardson, Lewis Fry (1881-1953), mathematician and pacifist, was born on 11 October 1881 at The Gables, Elswick Road, Newcastle upon Tyne, the youngest of the seven children of David Richardson (1835-1913) and his wife, Catherine (1838-1919), daughter of Robert and Jane Fry of Wellington, Somerset. His father was trained as a chemist and became a successful director of the family leather manufacturing business, developing improved methods of tanning to produce high quality leather. Both the parents were active members of the Society of Friends and they brought their children up in the best Quaker traditions. 
After six years at local schools in Newcastle Richardson followed in the footsteps of his father and of three of his brothers by being sent to Bootham School in York, where he received every encouragement to pursue his interest in natural history. He continued his studies at the Durham College of Science in Newcastle (now Newcastle University) from where he gained a scholarship to King's College, Cambridge, in 1900. In the following ten years Richardson took a series of research and teaching posts, twice at the National Physical Laboratory, twice in industry, and twice in university physics departments. Of greatest significance for his future career was a spell with National Peat Industries from 1906 to 1907. Here he was asked to calculate how best to design drains in a peat moss, taking into account the annual rainfall. As the mathematical equations involved were not formally soluble, he was led to study approximate methods of solution, first graphical and then numerical. This resulted in the publication in 1910 of his first important paper 'The approximate solution by finite differences of physical problems involving differential equations'. 
In 1909 Richardson married Dorothy (1885-1956), daughter of William Garnett (after whom the Garnett College of Technology in Roehampton is named). Due to an incompatibility in their blood types, they were unable to have children of their own, but they adopted two boys and a girl between 1920 and 1927. Unlike her husband, who was shy and loved solitude, Dorothy was extrovert and gregarious. Under his influence she left the Church of England to become an enthusiastic member of the Society of Friends. Throughout their happy marriage she was supportive of Lewis's pacifist views and helped him in his research work, for example by relieving him of some of the tedious arithmetic calculations. 
Richardson realized that his method for obtaining approximate solutions to differential equations could have many practical applications, including weather prediction. His appointment in 1913 as the superintendent of Eskdalemuir observatory in Dumfriesshire and the encouragement of the director of the Meteorological Office, Sir Napier Shaw, at last gave him the opportunity to develop his ideas. By 1916, when he resigned from the Meteorological Office to join the Friends' Ambulance Unit, he had practically completed the first draft of his book 'Weather Prediction by Numerical Process'. All that remained was to compute a weather forecast to demonstrate how his method would work. He made the necessary calculations while serving as an ambulance driver in France. His war experiences and Quaker beliefs led him at the same time to turn his thoughts to the causes of war and how to prevent them. He felt that it might be useful to tackle this problem by an objective scientific approach. His first paper on this subject, 'Mathematical Psychology of War', was published at his own expense in 1919. In it he postulated that the rate of increase of the warlike activity of one nation depended on the current activity of the opposing nation. 
On returning to England in 1919 Richardson was reappointed by Shaw, this time to work at Benson Observatory with W. H. Dines on topics relating to numerical weather prediction. He experimented on measuring the vertical distribution of temperature and wind, atmospheric turbulence, and radiation. He derived a criterion, the 'Richardson number', for determining whether turbulence will increase or decrease. 
In 1920 Richardson resigned again from the Meteorological Office because he felt unable to work directly for the armed services -- the office had become part of the Air Ministry. From then until his retirement he worked in the education world, as lecturer in physics and mathematics at Westminster Training College until 1929 and then as principal of Paisley Technical College. 
Richardson's book on weather prediction was finally published in 1922. Although the pioneering nature of his method was widely recognized, the book had no practical impact: existing observing and computing facilities were very inadequate and his computed forecast was grossly in error. His ideas were taken more seriously in the 1950s thanks to the availability of better observations and much faster computers, and within a few years numerical methods had been introduced all over the world. In his early years at Westminster, Richardson continued his meteorological researches, especially on atmospheric diffusion. From his experiments he deduced a new law for the rate of diffusion; some twenty years later the same law was obtained independently on theoretical grounds. 
While still a student at Cambridge, Richardson had decided to spend the first half of his life under the strict discipline of physics and then to apply this training to researches on living things. The change came in 1926 when he abandoned meteorology for psychology, immediately after being elected a fellow of the Royal Society. By 1929 he had already published the first of a series of papers on the quantitative estimation of perception, including brightness, colour, loudness, and pain. The accepted view at that time was that such measurements were meaningless but twenty years later his methods were being used widely by psychologists. 
Another break came in 1935 when, after the failure of the disarmament conference in Geneva, Richardson decided to re-examine his earlier work on the causes of war. By using expenditure on arms as a measure of warlike activity, he showed that his simple mathematical model of an arms race corresponded roughly to what had happened in the run-up to both world wars. He next analysed statistically data on past wars and other deadly quarrels from a card catalogue which he himself had compiled, and found a number of significant relationships which he then tried to explain. As he was unable to find a publisher for the books containing all his findings, he published them himself on microfilm. Edited versions were published posthumously in 1960 under the titles 'Arms and Insecurity' and 'Statistics of Deadly Quarrels'. Another posthumous publication, 'The Problem of Contiguity', was influential in the development of fractals and of chaos theory. 
In 1943 Richardson left Paisley for Hillside House, Kilmun, on the Firth of Clyde, where he died in his sleep of a heart attack on 30 September 1953. His cremation at Maryhill, Glasgow, on 5 October was followed the same day by a memorial service of the Society of Friends in Glasgow. 


@@@@@


doc= 35740


Richardson, Sir Owen Willans (1879-1959), physicist, was born on 26 April 1879 in Blenheim Terrace, Dewsbury, Yorkshire, the eldest of the three children of Joshua Henry Richardson, woollen manufacturer, and his wife, Charlotte Maria Willans. From St John's Church day school, Dewsbury, Richardson won a scholarship to Batley grammar school in 1891. In 1897 he won another scholarship, to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he gained a first class in part one of the natural sciences tripos (with distinction in physics, chemistry, and botany, 1899) and proceeded in physics and chemistry to a first in part two in 1900. He was elected a fellow of Trinity in 1902, became Clerk Maxwell scholar in 1904, and was awarded the London DSc degree in the same year. 
On graduating in 1900 Richardson began research at the Cavendish Laboratory under the supervision of J. J. Thomson, who suggested that he search for electrons blown out of a wire by a high-frequency alternating current. The results were negative and Richardson decided that: 'before starting another problem I would think over the whole field of opportunity and make my own decision as to what was the best thing for me to do and the best way to set about it, without asking anybody's advice. (Richardson to Rayleigh, 4 Dec 1940, Richardson MSS)' He began thinking about what the electrons were likely to be doing inside a metal and why they did not get out more easily. As in much of his later work, he drew, for his theory, on classical thermodynamics and the kinetic theory of gases.Richardson formulated a general theory of the process wherein electrons in the metal, responsible for its electrical conductivity, were regarded as evaporating through a potential barrier at its surface. 'It seemed to me that the real things to go for were the highest possible temperatures under the best attainable vacuum conditions', he wrote to Rayleigh, and he was encouraged by finding that McClelland, also at the Cavendish, had found the type of effect he expected using platinum. Richardson's detailed measurements on platinum, described in 'The electrical conductivity imparted to a vacuum by hot conductors' ('PTRS', 201, 1903), fitted his formula '
'i'='A'1'T' 1/2 e- 'greekLetterphi/kT'
' where 'A'1 is a constant, 'k' is Boltzmann's constant, greekLetterphi (the 'work function') is the energy needed to get the electrons over the barrier, 'i' is the current, and 'T' the temperature. However, difficulties in other fields of physics led to reconsideration of the theory from less specific thermodynamical approaches. As later described in his book 'The Emission of Electricity from Hot Bodies' (1916), Richardson, Harold Albert Wilson, and several others at the Cavendish gradually improved the derivation of the emission formula obtaining '
'i'='A'2'T' 2 e- 'greekLetterphi/kT'
' which became known as Richardson's law, and which formed the basis for progress in radiotechnology. 'A'2 is a constant different from 'A'1. Experimentally the formulae are difficult to distinguish because of the overwhelming control by the exponential term. The second formula has withstood the test of experiment and time, being unaffected by changing views of the nature of the electron gas. The basic, evaporation-potential barrier, idea is retained. Richardson was able to use his theory to create a link with electrical and thermal conductivity in metals, and also with photoelectricity. His contribution in this field was recognized by the award of the Nobel prize in physics in 1928. He coined the word thermion, hence thermionics referring to the emission of electricity -- negative or positive -- by hot bodies, in 1909. 
The difficulties encountered raised other questions. Mathematical studies of ionic recombination contributed to understanding of what was going on in the imperfect vacuum outside the emitting surface. Experimental and theoretical investigations of diffusion problems -- such as hydrogen through palladium and platinum -- contributed to ideas on what was going on inside metals. These seem to have been guiding principles for Richardson's further Cambridge researches in physics, but an element of indecision regarding his future course is evident from other investigations in physical chemistry and from a record of an application for a chair of physical chemistry at Liverpool. 
In 1906 Richardson was appointed to the chair of physics at Princeton, and in the same year, on 12 June, married Lilian Maud (1875/6-1945), daughter of Albert William Wilson, goods manager to the North Eastern Railway Company at Darlington, and sister of his friend H. A. Wilson. The Richardsons had two sons and a daughter. At Princeton, Richardson built up a strong school of physics, A. H. Compton being his best-known pupil. His colleagues C. J. Davisson and O. Veblen married Richardson's two sisters. He continued to work on thermionic emission, looking at cooling and heating effects accompanying thermionic emission and absorption, reflection of slow electrons from metallic surfaces, theory of contact e.m.f. and thermo-electricity, and the emission of positive ions from heated salts. With F. C. Brown he verified that thermionic electrons have a Maxwellian velocity distribution. About the end of 1911 Richardson developed a theory of the photoelectric effect (in which electrons are emitted from a metal upon which ultraviolet light is falling). He again based his theory on the thermodynamics of the electrons, obtaining an emission law which was identical to Einstein's, but which did not require Einstein's assumption of the existence of light quanta -- particles of light ('Philosophical Magazine', 24, 1912). Concurrently he and his former student, K. T. Compton, in the most accurate experiments to date, verified the law predicted by both himself and Einstein ('Philosophical Magazine', 24, 1912, and 26, 1913). 
In broader fields of electron physics Richardson speculated on the possibility of explaining gravitation in terms of electron theory, and in 1908 predicted a rotational reaction on magnetization of iron. He failed to detect this effect, but it was observed by Einstein and De Haas in 1919 and has been called the Richardson-Einstein-De Haas effect. The converse phenomenon, observed by S. J. Barnett (1914), has been termed the Richardson-Barnett effect. These 'gyromagnetic' and 'magneto-mechanical' phenomena were more fully explained after the electron 'spin' concept had been introduced by Uhlenbeck and Goudsmit in 1925. 
In 1913 Richardson was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, and the following year, after much deliberation, he returned to England to the Wheatstone chair of physics at King's College, London. His book 'The Electron Theory of Matter' (1914), based on his Princeton lectures, provided the most comprehensive survey then available of electron theory and gave an even-handed treatment of both classical and modern theories. At King's, under the impact of the quantum theory and the stimulus of Bohr's explanation of the hydrogen spectrum, he began a protracted series of spectroscopic researches largely undertaken with C. B. Bazzoni, although thermionics, the photoelectric effect, metallic conduction, reflection of slow electrons from metals, emission of electrons in chemical reactions, and problems of theoretical physics continued to occupy him. 
In 1924 Richardson was appointed Yarrow research professor of the Royal Society, being thereby relieved of teaching duties. He continued research, largely with T. Tanaka and later P. M. Davidson, primarily on the spectrum of molecular hydrogen, for which he had already published high resolution data. His book 'Molecular Hydrogen and its Spectrum' (1934) is based on his Silliman memorial lectures at Yale in 1932. He acquired a magnificent reflection echelon with which he tested what have proved keystones of physics: theories of the spectra of atomic hydrogen and its isotopes. In 1940 he, with J. W. Drinkwater and W. E. Williams, published 'Determination of Rydberg constants, e/m, and fine structure of HgreekLetteralpha and DgreekLetteralpha with a reflexion echelon' ('PRS', 174A, 164-88 and 175A, 345), which gave by far the most accurate wave number measurements of hydrogen spectrum lines hitherto made. These experiments were intended as a test of Dirac's theory but a flaw in the analysis of the fine structure components (probably occasioned by disruption of work due to the imminence of war) most regrettably obscured a vital feature only cleared up in 1947 by Lamb and Retherford. Richardson's greatest project, to use the echelon for measurements on the Lyman greekLetteralpha-line, was abandoned because of the war, but before the evacuation of King's College in 1940 and the destruction of his laboratory by enemy action some measurements were obtained on fine structures in the molecular hydrogen spectrum which confirmed his previous work. With F. C. Chalklin and F. S. Robertson he studied the soft X-ray spectra of a number of metals, and in 1944 studied the reflection of very slow electrons by copper, with I. Gimpel. He continued scientific work long after retiring from his Yarrow professorship in 1944 and between 1901 and 1953 published, with his collaborators, more than 130 scientific papers. 
Richardson received honorary degrees from Leeds, St Andrews, and London, and was a fellow of King's College, London (1925), and an honorary fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge (1941). From the Royal Society he received the Hughes medal (1920) and a royal medal (1930). He was knighted in 1939. He was president of the Physical Society in 1926-8 and its honorary foreign secretary from 1928 to 1945. 
Richardson was short, wiry, and sharp-featured. In his younger days he was fond of fell and mountain walking, sometimes alone, and could cover 40 miles in one day. He had been known to take a sleeper to Fort William, climb Ben Nevis, and return by the next sleeper. On returning to England in 1914 the Richardsons had settled in Hampstead, first in Cannon Place, and then at 45 Haverstock Hill. They had a home of extraordinary beauty containing the finest English period furniture and a wonderful collection of paintings by Dutch and other old masters. They kept a large and beautiful garden. They also maintained a country cottage in Sussex. Richardson had a fund of humorous after-dinner stories, sometimes told in the West Riding dialect, which he could speak perfectly. He had a hesitant but precise manner of speech. He kept a good table and a well-stocked cellar (wherein whisky was drawn from the wood). He rose late but seldom retired before 3 a.m.; this, he said, left it too late for burglars to start operations and he could work well in the early hours of the morning. He was a kindly man with much sympathy for refugees from totalitarian countries, whose misdirection of science he detested. He once remarked that he held practically no absolute conviction about anything except that science should be free. His work had practical applications in radio and other fields but he declined himself to be sidetracked from fundamental investigations. 
In 1939 Richardson moved from Hampstead to Chandos Lodge, Alton, Hampshire. Partly as a war effort he bought a large farm at Medstead, nearby, which he supervised closely for several years. In 1945 his wife died and on 19 January 1948 he married Henrietta Maria Rupp ('b'. 1896/7), a physicist who was an early observer of electron diffraction. The divorced wife of E. Rupp, and daughter of an industrialist, J. Grunhut, she had been a family friend for many years. Richardson was president of the North-East Hampshire Agricultural Association in 1948-9. He died at home in Alton of a cerebral thrombosis on 15 February 1959; his wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35741


Richey, James Ernest (1886-1968), geologist, was born on 24 April 1886 at Ballymully, co. Tyrone, the son of the Revd John Richey, priest in the Church of Ireland and rector of Desertcreat, and his wife, Susana Best. Educated at St Columba's College, Rathfarnham, and at Trinity College, Dublin, he graduated BA in natural sciences in 1908 (with the award of a senior moderatorship and a gold medal) and BAI (bachelor of engineering) in 1909. His published work gained him the degree of ScD of Trinity in 1934. 
After a period as demonstrator at Oxford (1910-11) under W. J. Sollas, Richey joined the geological survey in 1911 and was assigned as a geologist to the Scotland office in Edinburgh. Richey went into the field under C. T. Clough (and later Edward Battersby Bailey) in Mull. It fell to Richey to complete the mapping of a broad dyke crossing Loch Ba; his meticulous work showed its annular, outward-dipping shape and provided the key to the principal structural element in the complex, a ring-fracture which had permitted the subsidence of a plug of rock more than 1 kilometre wide into the magma chamber below. It now began to emerge that a series of such ring-subsidences had taken place during the eruptive episode, and that a considerable variety of different rock-types had been emplaced in the fractures. The ring-dyke concept thus enabled successive foci to be defined, and the stages in the evolution of the magmas to be determined. Bailey had previously recognized what he called cauldron subsidence in the much older intrusive complex at Glencoe on the mainland. Now the way was open for the elucidation of the history of the Tertiary volcanoes, the interiors of which had been exposed by erosion over the past 55 million years. A large share of this work fell to Richey, and he became the leading figure in a subject that influenced work on volcanoes, ancient and modern, worldwide. 
In the First World War, Richey was commissioned in the Royal Engineers in 1914, serving with the guards division in France, reaching the rank of captain, and gaining the MC. After the war, he began an investigation of the Ardnamurchan peninsula, where the ring form of the intrusions is beautifully reflected in the topography, and by 1924 he had completed an extremely detailed 6 inch survey. In the same year Richey married Henrietta Lily McNally from his own home county, and with his charm and Irish wit, sometimes mordant, they made an ideal couple. They later had three daughters. 
The publication of Richey's Ardnamurchan map and descriptive memoir in 1930 was a landmark in the subject. However by then, although not entirely part of his official duties, he had begun to look at other volcanic centres on an axis which ran through Skye, Mull, and Arran, in order to reinterpret Harker's mapping in Skye and that of the geological survey of Ireland in Slieve Gullion and the Mourne Mountains. In an outstanding presidential address to the Geological Society of Glasgow in 1932 he was able to give a new conspectus of Tertiary vulcanicity in the British Isles, and he was later able to show that quiet upwelling of magnesian magmas alternated with violent periods of explosion when the magma became silica-rich. 
Richey's geological interests were very wide. From 1925, when he became district geologist, he was actively engaged in the metamorphic areas of Morar, Moidart, and Morvern, and the granitic complex of Strontian. His collaborators in this study included W. Q. Kennedy, J. B. Simpson, and A. G. MacGregor. He contributed substantially to geological knowledge of Renfrewshire and Ayrshire, and later to the eastern midland valley of coalfield surveys in Scotland. After his retirement from the geological survey at the age of sixty, he set up as a consulting geologist and also gave lectures at Queen's College, Dundee. He wrote a number of papers, and also penned the foreword to the first issue of the 'Quarterly Journal of Engineering Geology' (1967). 
Richey's work achieved wide recognition. He received the Lyell medal of the Geological Society of London in 1933 and was elected FRS in 1938. The Geological Society of Edinburgh gave him their Clough medal in 1964, and the Royal Society of Edinburgh, of which he was a fellow (1927), general secretary (1946-56), and a vice-president (1956-9), awarded him its Neill prize in 1965. He became an honorary member of the Royal Irish Academy in 1967, and was an honorary fellow of the Geological Society of America (1948). The Society of Engineers awarded him its first Baker medal in 1954. His influential work on ancient volcanoes led to his election to the vice-presidency (1936-48) of the International Association of Volcanologists, a constituent body of the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics. From 1950 to 1959 he was chairman of the Royal Society's committee on vulcanology. His presidencies included the geological societies of Glasgow and Edinburgh, and section C of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Richey was visited at his homes in Edinburgh and Monifieth, Angus, by geologists from all over the world. He was generous with his time and liked to encourage younger men to criticize and re-examine his work. Among his leisure interests, gardening was one of the chief. He had the charming custom of attaching names of friends he wished to remember to his rhododendron bushes. Richey died at Coleshill, Warwickshire, on 19 June 1968, survived by his wife. 
Kingsley Dunham', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35742


Richmond, Sir Bruce Lyttelton (1871-1964), journal editor, was born at Stafford Terrace, Kensington, London, on 12 January 1871, the only child of Douglas Close Richmond, who became secretary of the Charity Commission and comptroller in the Exchequer and Audit Office (1900-04) and his first wife, Margaret Cecilia, eldest daughter of Henry Austin Bruce, first Baron Aberdare. He went to Radcliffe's preparatory school in Fonthill, near East Grinstead, Sussex, and at the age of thirteen headed the scholarship roll at Winchester College, where he rose to become prefect of hall, a member of Lord's eleven, and winner of the prize for Greek prose. A scholar of New College, Oxford, he gained a first class in classical moderations in 1892. His second in Greats (1894) perhaps owed something to his having spent less effort on 'literae humaniores' than on organizing chamber concerts and playing cricket for the university, though without achieving a blue. Called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1897, Richmond made a mark by devilling for the editor of a legal textbook which attracted the notice of George Earle Buckle, editor of 'The Times', and led to Richmond's being engaged in 1899 as an assistant editor. In the autumn of 1902 he took over the editorship of the 'Times Literary Supplement', then only a few months old, from James Thursfield. Under his aegis in the next thirty-five years the 'Lit. Sup.' -- he never became reconciled to its later sobriquet, the 'TLS' -- achieved, in the words of George Gordon, a 'position of undisputed and ungrudged authority'. His task was not made easier by the threat, under which he worked daily and loyally for some years, of the sudden, arbitrary extinction of the 'Supplement' by Lord Northcliffe. In 1913 Richmond married Elena Elizabeth (1878-1964), daughter of William Gair Rathbone, of the Liverpool merchant family, and his wife, Blanche Marie Luling of New York. They were childless. 

'The Times''s tradition of anonymity perfectly suited the confident but unassuming character of a man whose entry in 'Who's Who', to the day of his death, did not so much as mention his editorship of the 'Supplement'. Apart from an occasional 'letter to the editor', signed Templar, on some point of scholarship, he never himself wrote in the 'Supplement' and he enjoined strict secrecy on his reviewers, as much in their interest as in its own. These reviewers included many men and women already distinguished as divines or dons, in the services, in politics, and in literature. But his particular flair was for discovering, and encouraging, new talent. He gave Virginia Woolf and T. S. Eliot their first opportunities for serious critical work. If they both confessed to having fretted in the strait-jacket of ''The Times''s style', Eliot was later to pay an impressive tribute to the mentor who had taught him 'the discipline of anonymity'. The anonymous writer, Eliot recognized, 'must subdue himself to his editor -- but the editor must be a man to whom the writer can subdue himself and preserve his self-respect.... Good literary criticism requires good editors as well as good critics. And Bruce Richmond was a great editor. ('TLS', 1961)' In a period before the proliferation of academic literary journals the 'Supplement' under Richmond also enjoyed pre-eminence as a forum for the discussion, in signed articles and letters, of problems of literary history and textual criticism. He was not averse from allowing unsolicited contributors to expose their weaknesses. John Dover Wilson wrote to another regular writer on Shakespearian topics: 'What I admire about the 'Lit. Sup.' is its intense impartiality. People growl to me, Why does the 'Lit. Sup.' print letters from that ass -- ? But I think it is splendid of Richmond to do so, and 'so' wise.' 
Richmond contributed to the 'Dictionary of National Biography' the notices of his editor, Buckle, and his friend John Fuller-Maitland, the music critic. His only separate publications were the brief anonymous guide to Bodiam Castle, in Sussex, and 'The Pattern of Freedom' (1940), a prose and verse anthology inspired by the faith that a liberal spirit would outlast the war. Characteristically the anthology, which ranged from Homer, Ecclesiasticus, and Petronius to Henry James, Robert Bridges, and others of Richmond's 'Supplement' contributor-friends, contained no editorial introduction or other overt justification of purpose. 
In private life, besides authors, Richmond numbered among his friends many musicians, both professional and amateur. After literature, classical and modern, in both of which he was widely read, music was his chief abiding passion: he was a member of the executive committee of the Royal College of Music, as well as a vice-president of the Royal Literary Fund. He lived in simple elegance in South Kensington and also leased a small house outside Robertsbridge, in Sussex, where his male guests were inducted in all weathers, with a Henry Jamesian gesture of welcome, into the mystery of the earth closet some distance down the garden. 
Richmond had a predilection, conservative almost to the point of prejudice, for Shakespearian acting as exemplified in Sir Henry Irving and Sir P. B. Ben Greet. Until after his ninetieth birthday he was still a familiar figure, with two sticks, and not always approving, at the theatre at Stratford upon Avon, where he seldom missed a new production of Shakespeare. He travelled little abroad until late in life, when his distaste for hotels was mitigated by the hospitality of friends, literary or diplomatic, in Italy, Greece, and Egypt. 
Richmond received honorary doctorates of letters from the University of Leeds (1922) and from Oxford (1930). He was knighted in 1935, and on the last day of 1937 retired from 'The Times' to live first in Netherhampton, in Wiltshire, and later at the Old Rectory, Islip, near Oxford, where he died on 1 October 1964. He was survived for only six days by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35743


Richmond, Sir Herbert William (1871-1946), naval officer and college head, was born at Beavor Lodge, Hammersmith, London, on 15 September 1871, the third child and second son of the artist Sir William Blake Richmond (1842-1921) and his second wife, Clara Jane (died 1916), daughter of William Richards of Cardiff. Herbert had first developed an interest in joining the navy when, at the age of ten, he had visited Portsmouth. He attended St Mark's School, near Windsor, and his brother wrote later that: 'He was not happy there. The complexities of Greek, Latin and mathematics worried him and confirmed him in his desire to go to sea' (Trevelyan, 326). 
He entered the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth, in 1885; two years later he went to sea as a midshipman in the 'Nelson', flagship of the commander-in-chief on the Australia station. In 1892 he joined the hydrographic branch but lack of prospects there encouraged him to transfer to the torpedo branch in 1894. As a torpedo officer he served in several battleships, including two years in the 'Majestic', flagship of the channel squadron. In 1903 he was promoted commander and appointed to the naval ordnance department at the Admiralty in recognition of his technical expertise. 
After a year in that department Richmond became executive officer of the 'Crescent', flagship of the commander-in-chief on the Cape of Good Hope station, for nearly three years before returning to the Admiralty where he became naval assistant to the second sea lord. On 8 July 1907 he married Florence Elsa (died 1971), second daughter of Sir (Thomas) Hugh Bell, second baronet, of Rounton Grange, Yorkshire. They had one son and four daughters. Around this time Richmond's diary writings began to show the severely critical, and often arrogant, attitude he would adopt towards policies and individuals with whom he disagreed. In 1907 he characterized Admiralty organization as 'beneath contempt' and increasingly showed 'the intolerance he had for less gifted contemporaries -- a certain prickliness of character that coloured most of his personal relationships' (Hunt, 2, 20). 
Richmond was promoted captain in 1908 and in 1909 appointed to the command, for nearly two years, of the most famous ship in the navy of that day, the 'Dreadnought', then flagship of Sir William May, commander-in-chief of the Home Fleet. But by then his arrogance and intolerance had begun to cause him to be 'regarded as an unsettling gadfly, increasingly isolated and mistrusted by superiors' (Hunt, 25). He was consequently relegated to command only second-class cruisers for eighteen months from March 1911. 
Despite his earlier dislike of school, Richmond had become increasingly intellectual in his interests and approach. During these commands he edited the Navy Records Society's volume on 'The Loss of the Minorca' (1913), delivered a series of lectures on naval history at the Royal Naval War College, and completed a book, begun in 1907, entitled 'The Navy in the War of 1739-48', which, however, was not published until 1920. At the War College he developed among the students the group of naval reformers later known as the Young Turks who advocated a much more offensive naval policy during the war. 
In 1913 Richmond became assistant director of the operations division of the war staff at the Admiralty. In this role he was not afraid to attack bitterly the strategic plans of his superiors, including those of the first lord of the Admiralty, Winston Churchill. Arthur Marder suggests that in these circumstances 'the admiralty showed great forebearance indeed in continuing his employment' (Marder, 'Dreadnought', 1.404). But his career hardly prospered. He left the Admiralty in May 1915 to become liaison officer with the Italian naval command, a post which he held for four months before returning home to command the old battleship 'Commonwealth' in the 3rd battle squadron. In April 1917 he was appointed to command the battleship 'Conqueror' in the Grand Fleet, where he gained the support of Sir David Beatty, the commander-in-chief. By late 1917 the prime minister, Lloyd George, had become familiar with the ideas of the Young Turks. Through contacts, he and Richmond discussed naval issues and Richmond's career was revitalized. With Beatty's strong support in April 1918 he was selected as director of the newly formed training and staff duties division of the naval staff at the Admiralty. Richmond's ideas were in advance of his time, however, and practically all of his recommendations were vetoed; he was glad after a few months of frustration to return to the Grand Fleet, in command of the battleship 'Erin'. 
In 1920, after Beatty's appointment as first sea lord, Richmond was promoted to flag rank, and appointed to command the re-established Royal Naval War College to which flag officers and captains were sent to study the higher direction of war. There he was at last given the independence to promote his ideas. But when cutbacks occurred in the navy soon after, such studies were given low priority and his staff was severely reduced. He resumed work for the Navy Records Society, editing the 'Spencer Papers' (vol. 4, 1924). 
In 1923 Richmond was appointed commander-in-chief of the East India station. On his return to England at the end of 1925, he was kept from the higher level positions he would have expected by his continuing disagreement with current naval policy. In 1927, however, he was appointed commandant of the new Imperial Defence College where his views could perhaps be more safely expressed in training rather than command within the navy. His term there was brought to an end only by the standing rule which prescribed two years as its duration. 
Richmond had been promoted vice-admiral in April 1925 and admiral in October 1929. But his unpopularity within the Admiralty was reinforced when, on the eve of the naval conference of 1930, Richmond contributed two articles to 'The Times' (21 and 22 November 1929) on the subject of naval reduction, which proposed limitation in the size of ships rather than the official Admiralty plan of numerical reduction. This action, Marder suggests, 'virtually terminated his career on the active list' (Marder, 'Portrait', 29), and he was refused further employment. In April 1931, twelve months before the date on which he would have been subject to compulsory retirement under the standing regulations, he retired at his own request, and devoted himself to his work as a naval historian, which was, said George Trevelyan, his 'greatest service to this country' (Trevelyan, 332). 
In 1931 Richmond published 'The Navy in India, 1763-83', which he had researched in the archives of Ceylon and Pondicherry eight years earlier, and a work on naval limitation under the title 'Economy and Naval Security'. He also delivered a series of lectures at University College, London, and the Lees Knowles lectures at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1932, published in book form as 'Imperial Defence and Capture at Sea in War'. In 1933 he published a treatise, 'Naval Training', and the following year a more important work, 'Sea Power in the Modern World'. In that year he was elected to the Vere Harmsworth chair of imperial and naval history at Cambridge, which Trevelyan, who was part of the electing body, said was a 'marked compliment to his eminence as a historian, for owing to the age limit affecting professorships he could only hold it for two years' (Trevelyan, 334). He was also made a professorial fellow of Jesus College. He was completely successful in the academic environment. At the close of his two years' tenure of the chair, he was elected to the mastership of Downing College, which had just fallen vacant. 
On the outbreak of war in 1939 Richmond became chairman of the university joint recruiting board; he welcomed the establishment in his own college of the Cambridge naval division, and he started a series of lectures on foreign affairs and the progress of the war for the junior combination room, afterwards continued and extended as the 'Richmond lectures'. But his greatest interest remained the promotion of ideas, learnt from history, of sea power and of a British strategy based on it. In 1941 he published, in the Cambridge 'Current Problems' series, a booklet surveying British strategy from the days of Queen Elizabeth I; in 1943 he took the same theme for the Ford lectures which he delivered at Oxford, and these he afterwards expanded into his greatest work, 'Statesmen and Sea Power', published in 1946 only a few weeks before his death. A volume left in manuscript was edited by E. A. Hughes and published in 1953 as 'The Navy as an Instrument of Policy, 1558-1727'. 
Richmond was appointed CB in 1921 and promoted KCB in 1926. He was elected FBA in 1937 and was a fellow of the Royal Historical Society. On the establishment in 1934 of the National Maritime Museum at Greenwich he was appointed one of the trustees. He received the honorary degree of DCL from Oxford in 1939. He was forced by illness to give up all strenuous physical activity after 1940. He died of a heart attack at his home, the master's lodge, Downing College, on 15 December 1946, and was cremated at Cambridge on 18 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 35744


Richmond, Sir Ian Archibald (1902-1965), archaeologist, was born on 10 May 1902 at Rochdale, Lancashire, the elder twin son of Daniel Richmond, medical practitioner, and his wife, Helen Harper. He was educated at Ruthin School and Corpus Christi College, Oxford (1920-24); his first publications appeared while he was still an undergraduate. They included a study of Ptolemy's 'Geographia' on northern Britain. It was therefore no surprise that, despite a third in honour moderations (1922) and a second in 'literae humaniores' (1924), he was awarded the Gilchrist scholarship to the British School at Rome, the Craven fellowship, and a Goldsmiths' senior studentship. His two years in Rome (1924-6), under the benevolent eye of Thomas Ashby, developed that interest in Roman military architecture and the operations of the Roman army in the field which became his major research interest, although the range of his active work in archaeology would be wider than that of most of his contemporaries. As a young excavator he served his apprenticeship, first under Mortimer Wheeler, at Segontium (Caernarfon) and then in alliance with F. G. Simpson on the Roman works at Cawthorn, Yorkshire. 
Richmond's first major work was an outstanding monograph, 'The City Wall of Imperial Rome' (1930), illustrated by his own original plans and isometric drawings, a book which was the principal issue of his residence in Rome in 1924-6 and which is still a standard work. In 1926 he was appointed lecturer in classical archaeology and ancient history at the Queen's University, Belfast, a post which allowed him to spend half of each year on the continent or in Britain. Much of his summers he devoted to work on Hadrian's Wall, in conjunction with F. G. Simpson, R. G. Collingwood, and E. B. Birley. In 1930 he was the obvious choice to return to Rome as director of the British School, but two years later ill health caused him to resign. For nearly three years he was without a post, but he put his convalescence to good use, completing and seeing through the press the great work 'The Aqueducts of Ancient Rome' (1935), which Thomas Ashby's premature death had left unfinished, and contributing a series of important papers on the western sector of Hadrian's Wall to the 'Transactions' of the Cumberland and Westmorland Society. 
In January 1935 Richmond was appointed to a lectureship in Romano-British history and archaeology at Armstrong College in Newcastle, part of the University of Durham. In 1938 he married Isabel Little, daughter of John Arthur Little, a woollen merchant in Newcastle upon Tyne; they had one son and one daughter. He remained in Newcastle, with a brief break for war service, until 1956. He was awarded a readership in 1943 and a personal chair in 1950, served a biennium as dean of the faculty of arts, and for several years was public orator. During his twenty-one years at Newcastle, Richmond directed a notable series of excavations, on Hadrian's Wall, at Corbridge, and at Fendoch, Newstead, and Inchtuthil in Scotland. His work at Inchtuthil, in partnership with J. K. St Joseph, continued until 1965, alongside his examination of the Roman fort at Hod Hill (Dorset) until 1958. 
In 1956 Richmond had moved to Oxford as the first holder of the chair of the archaeology of the Roman empire with a fellowship at All Souls College. During his time there he trained and inspired many archaeologists who later achieved distinction and held major posts in the subject. In his last years he turned his attention to the Roman siege works at Masada in Israel and at Numantia in Spain. Had time allowed, he planned more work in Spain in the months before his death, though his work and advice for organizations and individuals continued unabated until the end. 
Richmond would doubtless have written more, and more substantial, books but for his readiness to accept the countless calls upon his time. He accepted invitations from societies great and small; as he never drove a car, his travels could be protracted. When he visited one local society in the west country, he was met at a rural halt and driven to his destination by a pony and trap -- this in 1960. He was a very dignified and eloquent public speaker, his addresses being notable for the elevation of their style, spoken deliberately as though he was seeking the exact word to match his meaning -- even when the text had already been written out. But he could also lecture without notes and hold audiences in a spell. In private he would relax, full of fun and with a twinkle in his eye; there could be no greater contrast between his public and private images. A devout Anglican, he frequently attended chapel in All Souls. 
Richmond's major books included 'Roman Britain' (1947) and the first volume of the 'Pelican History of England' on the same subject (1955), reissued in 1963. He edited three successive editions of John Collingwood Bruce's 'Handbook to the Roman Wall' (1947, 1957, and 1966). At the time of his death he had completed a revised second edition of 'The Archaeology of Roman Britain' by R. G. Collingwood, seen through the press by D. R. Wilson and published in 1969. His excavations at Hod Hill were published in 1968, those at Inchtuthil in 1985. But the great bulk of his original writings appeared in the publications of archaeological societies, particularly in 'Archaeologia Aeliana' (Society of the Antiquaries of Newcastle upon Tyne) and the 'Transactions' of the Cumberland and Westmorland Antiquarian and Archaeological Society, the 'Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland', and the 'Journal of Roman Studies'. His major public lecture series included the Rhind lectures in Edinburgh (1933), the Riddell memorial lectures in Newcastle (1948), the Ford lectures in Oxford (1951), and the Gray lectures in Cambridge (1952). The Riddell lectures were published in the stimulating monograph 'Archaeology and the after-Life in Pagan and Christian Imagery' (1950). The Ford lectures, on Britain in the third and fourth centuries, and the Gray lectures, on the Romano-British countryside, were edited by Professor Peter Salway and published in 1969. 
Richmond gave unstinting service to many national and local organizations. From 1944 he served on the royal commissions on historical monuments, England and Scotland, contributing massively to their reports on Roman sites, notably in the English commission's volumes on Essex and York and the Scottish volumes on the county of Roxburgh. Elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1931, he served as director of the society in 1959-64 and president from April 1964 until his death. No fellow had the interests of the society closer to his heart. He was also a pillar of the Society for the Promotion of Roman Studies, of which he was president in 1958-61. He was elected FBA in 1947 and received honorary doctorates from Edinburgh, Belfast, Leeds, Newcastle, Manchester, and Cambridge, and was a member of the German Archaeological Institute. He also served as president of the Society of Antiquaries of Newcastle and of the Bristol and Gloucestershire Archaeological Society. He was appointed CBE in 1958 and knighted in 1964. 
Ian Richmond was the most accomplished Roman archaeologist of his time and was recognized as such wherever the subject is pursued. He was as adept in reassessing earlier discoveries as in prosecuting new research aims. As an excavator he had the precious gift of visualizing how the Roman army would lay out its structures on a given site, so that his excavations could be carried out with unmatched economy of effort. His knowledge of Roman architecture and of the sculpted reliefs on the columns of Trajan and Marcus Aurelius, and on the triumphal monument at Adamklissi (Romania), added to his close familiarity with the literary sources, often caused his hearers to wonder whether he had not personally witnessed the Roman army at work. His writings were as notable as those of Francis Haverfield, his predecessor in the mastery of Romano-British archaeology, for their elegant style and for the care with which they were composed. He died at his home, 18 Farndon Road, Oxford, on 5 October 1965; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35745


Richmond, Sir William Blake (1842-1921), painter, was born at 10 York Street, London, on 29 November 1842, the second son of the painter George Richmond (1809-1896) and his wife, Julia (1811-1881), daughter of Charles Heathcote Tatham (1772-1842), architect. His second name and the choice of Samuel Palmer as his godfather shows that George Richmond destined this son from birth to follow in his artistic footsteps. The family home was a gathering-place for leading figures in the artistic community, including John Ruskin and J. E. Millais. Due to ill health William was educated at home, where he enjoyed the personal tutelage of Ruskin and the organist Edmund Kynvett. He developed a precocious artistic talent and a lifelong love of music. However, the handsome and wilful boy suffered under the harsh discipline of his father, and in the winter of 1857 he ran away from home with the equally unhappy More Palmer, Samuel's eldest son. The boys were caught by police, who had been alerted by their fathers, and were dragged home in ignominy. Richmond was thereafter prevented from seeing More, until, four years later, his friend lay dead. Gradually he forgave Samuel Palmer for his harshness, and both Palmer and Edward Calvert schooled the young artist in the idyllism prevalent in the early work of the Ancients, the brotherhood of artists who had flourished at Shoreham in Kent in the 1820s. 
In 1858 Richmond entered the Royal Academy Schools where he won two silver medals, exhibiting his first portrait, of his brothers Walter and John (priv. coll.), at the Royal Academy show of 1861; it was there, and at the British Institution, that he exhibited various Pre-Raphaelite portraits, often of children, culminating in his outstanding conversation piece of Alice Liddell and her two sisters, 'The Sisters' (exh. British Institution, 1865; priv. coll.). This has remained his masterpiece in portraiture. In 1866 his career shifted to Rome, where, for three years, he studied the old masters. His journey abroad was partly due to a domestic tragedy: on 21 October 1864 he had married Charlotte Foster (1841-1865), niece of the musician John Hullah, but she died from consumption on 13 December of the following year, having infected her husband with the disease and leaving him broken-hearted. The warmth and artistic inspiration of Rome contributed to Richmond's partial recovery. Under the influence of the landscape painter Giovanni Costa, and Frederic Leighton, the Royal Academy's budding classicist, he soon directed his artistic allegiance away from Pre-Raphaelitism to a form of classicism tempered, initially, by the mysticism of the Ancients and later by the aestheticism of Albert Moore, his fellow pupil at the Royal Academy Schools. 
In 1869 Richmond exhibited again at the Royal Academy, showing 'The Procession of Bacchus at the Time of the Vintage' (priv. coll.), a large classical processional scene influenced by Leighton but marked by the intensity of the Deutsch-Romer, a group of German artists working in Rome. Paintings similar to theirs, such as 'The Bowlers' (exh. RA, 1871; Downing College, Cambridge) and 'The Lament of Ariadne' (exh. RA, 1872; Wigan metropolitan borough council), were severely criticized by traditional critics as un-English, having been inspired by continental classical friends. A relapse in health drove Richmond, in 1870, to Algeria. Here, thanks to the care of his second wife, Clara Richards (died 1916), daughter of William Richards of Cardiff, whom he had met in Rome and married on 30 November 1867, he achieved a complete recovery. 
On their return to England, accompanied now by their two children, it was evident that the young family would need accommodation outside York Street. Richmond purchased Beavor Lodge in the green riverside pastures of Hammersmith, where he remained for the rest of his life. The cost of rebuilding and adding a studio forced him back into portrait painting. Introductions made in Italy led to commissions for society portraits, such as the successfully aesthetic image of Lady Frederick Cavendish (exh. RA, 1871; Holker Hall, Lancashire), and his unappreciated likeness of the princess of Wales (exh. RA, 1873; Royal Collection). This earned Queen Victoria's disapproval, probably contributing to Richmond's failure to be elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1876, the same year in which he exhibited his intensely atmospheric landscape 'Near Via Reggio where Shelley's Body was Found' (exh. RA, 1876; Manchester City Galleries). Fortunately the Grosvenor Gallery, an exhibition venue more sympathetic to the aesthetic movement, opened in London in 1877. Richmond discontinued exhibiting at the Royal Academy until 1887, when his associateship of that body was assured for 1888. 
At the Grosvenor Gallery further monumental mythological paintings were shown: the classically severe 'Electra at the Tomb of Agamemnon' (exh. 1877; Art Gallery of Ontario, Toronto); 'Sarpedon' (exh. 1879; Vancouver Art Gallery, British Columbia); and 'An Audience in Athens' (exh. 1885; City of Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery), painted after Richmond's two extensive tours of Greece in 1882 and 1883. In 1880 at the same venue he showed 'The Song of Miriam' (priv. coll., Australia), painted in the aesthetic manner using a lighter colour scheme. Various portraits and 'The Bath of Venus' (exh. New Gallery, London, 1891; Aberdeen Art Gallery) were conspicuous for their abandonment of his traditional darker colours. In 1885, 1886, and 1887 he exhibited three mythological studies of the male nude, a daring subject in the 1880s: 'Orpheus Returning from the Shades' (diploma work, Royal Academy of Arts), 'Hermes' (exh. Grosvenor Gallery, London, 1886; priv. coll.), and 'Icarus' (exh. Grosvenor Gallery, 1887; priv. coll.). They were not to everyone's taste: Mrs Douglas Freshfield, a sitter for one of Richmond's aesthetic portraits, described 'Icarus' as 'most vile' (Reynolds, 'William Blake Richmond', 195). His masterpiece, the magnificent 'Venus and Anchises' (Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool), depicting Venus's progress through the wintry wilderness turning winter into spring, was shown at the New Gallery in 1899. In 1879 and 1889 two life-sized sculptures were exhibited: 'An Athlete' (exh. Grosvenor Gallery, 1879; St Peter's Square, Hammersmith, London) and 'The Arcadian Shepherd' (des.); these and his 'Memorial to Gladstone' of 1906 (Hawarden church, Flintshire) show no mean talent as a sculptor. 
However, Richmond's success during his lifetime rested largely upon his portraiture. He first depicted pampered Victorian children, then glamorous, languid, and sensuous hostesses -- the goddesses of society -- such as Lady Mary Carr-Glyn (exh. Grosvenor Gallery, 1882; priv. coll.), the Countess Grosvenor (1888; priv. coll.), Viscountess Hood (exh. RA, 1888; priv. coll.), Mrs Ernest Moon (exh. RA, 1888; Tate collection), and Miss Muriel Wilson (exh. RA, 1899; Ferens Art Gallery, Hull). Like John Singer Sargent after him, he excelled as the portraitist to the 'Souls' for whom he could also paint Byronic male likenesses such as the portraits of George, thirteenth earl of Pembroke (exh. Grosvenor Gallery, 1887; Wilton House, Wiltshire), and Charles, fifth Lord Lyttelton (exh. Grosvenor Gallery, 1880; Hagley Hall, Worcestershire). He also depicted eminent statesmen, ecclesiastics, scientists, and artists, attributing to each the due solemnity, grandeur, vision, or artistic panache which might be appropriate to that sitter. He became a good friend of W. E. Gladstone, visited the monastery of Montecassino in Italy with him, and stayed at Hawarden Castle in Wales; he drew a memorial sketch of Gladstone's face just after his death. Richmond's portrait of Prince von Bismarck (exh. RA, 1888), which was instrumental to his participating in international exhibitions in Germany, is lost, but two likenesses of Gladstone (1867; exh. Grosvenor Gallery, 1881-2) exist at Hawarden Castle (though his portrait of Gladstone for Christ Church, Oxford, was turned down by the college); Charles Darwin's portrait (exh. Grosvenor Gallery, 1880) is in the department of zoology at the University of Cambridge; Andrew Lang's (exh. Grosvenor Gallery, 1884) is at the Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh; and a likeness of William Morris (1882), two of William Holman Hunt (exh. Grosvenor Gallery, 1880 and 1900), and one of Robert Louis Stevenson (1886) are in the collections of the National Portrait Gallery, London. Richmond's portrait of Robert Browning (exh. Grosvenor Gallery, 1882) is at Waco, Texas, while that of Arthur Evans (exh. RA, 1907) is in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. 
Richmond was also a master of the small oil landscape, painted directly from nature; many scenes are of Italy, where he travelled during most summers of his adult life. They earned him a little money in his later life when exhibited at the Fine Art Society in 1912 and 1914. He also designed two major sets of stained-glass windows, at Holy Trinity, Sloane Street, London (1908-10), and St Mary's Church, Stretton, Derbyshire (1896-7), while his only extant fresco design (1893-4) is that for Christ Church, Cheltenham, Gloucestershire. Other executed frescoes, along with his stained-glass windows in St Paul's Cathedral in London, have been destroyed. 
Richmond's charm and erudition helped him towards achieving academic rewards: he held the Slade professorship at Oxford (1879-83) when Ruskin fell ill, and he was later awarded the honorary degrees of DCL at Oxford in 1896 and LLD at Cambridge. He became a Royal Academician in 1895 and was created KCB in 1897. During his later years he lectured widely on the somewhat divergent topics of art and of coal pollution and wrote three books: 'Assisi: Impressions of Half a Century' (1919), illustrated with reproductions of his landscape paintings; 'The Silver Chain' (1916), a novel; and 'Democracy -- False or True?' (1921). However, the crowning achievement which distinguishes him from the other polymaths of the Victorian Olympian tradition is his monumental decorative scheme in mosaic executed in St Paul's Cathedral. 
The history of the decoration of St Paul's is one of English indecision: the high church attempted to enrich the cavernous interior while the low church tried to frustrate such efforts. In 1891 George Frederick Bodley, who had constructed the now demolished altar and reredos, invited Richmond to prepare cartoons for mosaic decoration of the apse and choir. These were accepted and Richmond duly commissioned to undertake the work. He chose the firm of Messrs James Powell of Whitefriars to produce the tesserae and, with a team of English workmen, to execute his designs in line with the production methods which had been used in the Byzantine churches he had visited in tours of Ravenna, Rome, and Palermo. Initially he attempted, unsuccessfully, to erect mosaic sections in his own studio at Hammersmith; having mastered the production techniques himself, he realized that future work had to be done 'in situ'. The subject matter chosen was Christ in majesty, the creation, and related scenes from the 'Old Testament'. 
By 1895 much of the commissioned decoration, in a mixture between Byzantine and aesthetic styles, was in place and Richmond, voted further funds through the parliamentary intervention of W. E. Gladstone, set about decorating the aisles and eventually under the quarter-domes. By 1899 much of it was completed, but the recently knighted academician suddenly found himself exposed to a vicious attack in the newspapers criticizing the style and workmanship of the new mosaics. The low church combined with a powerful political lobby, architectural purists, and progressive art students such as Augustus John to spearhead their objections to the 'Romanizing' of Christopher Wren's classical masterpiece. With the South African War looming, funds dried up, and any prospect of extending decorative work into the nave was cancelled. The zenith of Richmond's creative career thus ended in ignominy. 
In an attempt to reassert his threatened position in the art world, in 1900-01 Richmond mounted a vast one-man exhibition at the New Gallery, but popular taste, rejecting Victorian academia, had moved on to post-impressionism. Richmond, a large, bearded, ebullient man, fought a fierce rearguard battle against these new trends, earning himself the reputation of a political and artistic reactionary which, to this day, has hampered the overdue rehabilitation of his reputation. A damaged hand weakened his later paintings and, after the accidental death of his wife Clara in 1916, he retired into obscurity at Beavor Lodge. Towards the end of his life -- influenced by his friend Sir Hubert Parry -- he began to compose music, an occupation which, along with writing, was less strenuous to his weakening heart than was painting. Richmond died at Beavor Lodge on 11 February 1921 and was buried alongside his wife at Chiswick, in the parish churchyard, on 16 February. He left four sons, including Herbert William Richmond, and a daughter (one son having predeceased him in 1896), who soon sold the family home for demolition to make way for the construction of the A4. 


@@@@@


doc= 35746


Ricketts, Charles de Sousy (1866-1931), artist and art collector, was born on 2 October 1866 at Maison Turretine, Grand Quai, Geneva, Switzerland, the only son of Charles Robert Ricketts (1838-1883), a retired English naval officer, and Helene Cornelie de Soucy (1833/4-1880), daughter of Louis, marquis de Soucy. His mother was musical; his father, a painter of marine subjects. Ricketts spent his infancy in Lausanne and London, and his youth at Boulogne and Amiens in France, and was educated by governesses, except for a year at a French boarding-school near Tours. After his mother's death at Genoa in 1880, Ricketts, hardly able to speak English, returned to London with his father and his younger sister Blanche (1868-1903). Too delicate to attend school, he spent the next two years reading voraciously and 'basking' ('DNB') in museums; he thus escaped being moulded along conventional lines. In 1882 he entered the City and Guilds Art School in Kennington, London, where he was apprenticed to Charles Roberts, a prominent wood-engraver. A year later his father died, and Ricketts lived on a quarterly allowance of $25 from his grandfather, Edmund Woodville Ricketts (1808-1895). On his sixteenth birthday he met his lifelong partner, the painter and lithographer Charles Haslewood Shannon (1863-1937). 
Ricketts and Shannon founded an occasional art journal, 'The Dial' (1889-1897), which promoted a blend of English Pre-Raphaelitism and French symbolism, reflecting Ricketts's origins. The two artists also began designing and illustrating books, including 'Daphnis and Chloe' (1893) and 'Hero and Leander' (1894), which were unique in that the designs were cut by the artists who drew them, rather than by a professional engraver. Ricketts also worked for commercial publishers, designing books in an art nouveau style: his most famous were John Gray's 'Silverpoints' (1893) and Oscar Wilde's 'The Sphinx' (1895). 
Meeting a wealthy barrister, Llewellyn Hacon, enabled Ricketts to realize his dream of being a publisher and he set up the Vale Press in 1894. An inheritance of $500 from his grandfather in 1895 was invested in it. For over eighty volumes, mostly reprints of English poetic classics, he designed three fonts and numerous decorations and illustrations. Although influenced by the aesthetic movement and by William Morris, whom he admired, his books are more classical than medieval in style. After a fire destroyed his stock and decorative material in 1899, he lost interest in publishing and closed the press with his 'Bibliography of the Vale Press' (1904). Afterwards he designed books for friends such as Katherine Harris and Emma Cooper (who collaborated under the pseudonym Michael Field), and Gordon Bottomley. 
Ricketts had already taken up painting and sculpture. Thomas Lowinsky points out how 'his books expressed in their pre-Raphaelitism the English side of his character, whilst his pictures, with their debt to Delacroix and Gustave Moreau, the French' ('DNB'). In the Symbolist tradition, his themes are tragic and romantic, and they focused on key moments in the destiny of his subjects, such as Salome, Cleopatra, Don Juan, Montezuma, and (though Ricketts was a non-believer) Christ, figures he admired for the way they courageously met their fates. Among his best paintings are 'The Betrayal of Christ' (1904, Carlisle Museum and Art Gallery), 'Don Juan and the Statue' (1905), 'The Death of Don Juan' (1911, Tate collection), 'Bacchus in India' ('c'.1913, Atkinson Art Gallery, Southport, Cheshire), 'The Wise and Foolish Virgins' ('c'.1913, priv. coll.), 'The Death of Montezuma' ('c'.1915, priv. coll.), 'The Return of Judith' (1919), and 'Jepthah's Daughter' (1924, Ashmolean Museum, Oxford). His great scholarship often inhibited his painting, before which he was often hesitant, and some paintings are overworked. His twenty or so sculptures, one of which, 'Silence', was a memorial to Oscar Wilde, are indebted to Rodin's smaller works. Bronzes such as 'Orpheus and Eurydice' (Tate collection) and 'Paolo and Francesca' (Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge) are powerful interpretations of their themes. In 1922 he was elected ARA and in 1928 RA. 
In his lifetime Ricketts was probably best-known for his theatre designs. Here, his spontaneity, his sense of design and colour, and his understanding of the theatre united in harmony. His gift for linear arabesque, evident in his book illustrations, is also shown in the finished watercolours he drew from his designs. Among his most important productions were the first English production of Wilde's 'Salome' (1906), which was boycotted by the press; Shakespeare's 'King Lear' (1909); W. B. Yeats's 'The King's Threshold' (1914); Bernard Shaw's 'Don Juan in Hell' (1907) and 'Dark Lady of the Sonnets' (1909); John Masefield's 'Philip the King' (1914) and 'The Coming of Christ' (1928), the success of which initiated the Canterbury festival plays; the D'Oyly Carte Company's production of 'The Mikado' (1926); the first production of Shaw's 'Saint Joan' (1924), probably his greatest achievement; and Shakespeare's 'Henry VIII' (1925). He did theatre work with gusto, often staying up all night to do the designs. The largest public collection of his designs is in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 
Ricketts's great connoisseurship led to his being offered the directorship of the National Gallery in London, which he refused (and regretted later), to his acting as art adviser to the National Gallery of Canada in Ottawa (1924-31), and to his forming with Shannon a fine collection of French, English, and old master drawings and paintings, Greek and Egyptian antiquities, Persian miniatures, and Japanese prints and drawings. Never well off, they had in the early days made sacrifices to build their collection, which was left to museums, mainly the Fitzwilliam in Cambridge. Ricketts wrote 'The Prado and its Masterpieces' (1903) and 'Titian' (1910) which, though superseded by modern scholarship, remain among the most evocative books on art in English, and 'Pages on Art' (1913), a selection of his articles. He also wrote and designed two collections of short stories, 'Beyond the Threshold' (1928) and 'Unrecorded Histories' (1933), as well as 'Recollections of Oscar Wilde' (1932), his memoir of the man he considered the most remarkable he had met. 
Ricketts's last years were overshadowed by the illness and hostility of Shannon, whose brain was damaged in a fall in 1929. For once, his aesthetic values took second place, and to pay for Shannon's care he sold the Persian drawings for $4000. The strain of the situation and of overwork to escape it contributed to his death from angina pectoris at his home, Townshend House, Albert Road, Regent's Park, London, on 7 October 1931, six years before his partner. A memorial service was held at St James's, Piccadilly, on 12 October, after which he was cremated; his ashes were scattered in Richmond Park, London, and the remainder buried at Arolo, Lake Maggiore, Italy. His estate was valued for probate at $36,283. 
Small in stature, Ricketts was 'a man of masterful personality' ('DNB') and loved to influence people. He could be touchy and belligerent, and was implacably opposed to 'modern art' and especially to the influence of Cezanne. He was witty and a brilliant conversationalist. Although his quick mind and vivacity seemed more French than English, he resided in London. He lived entirely for art, not only for creating, collecting, or writing about it, but also for music and literature, which he read in five languages. When he travelled in Italy, Spain, Greece, Egypt, Tunisia, the USA, Canada, and other countries, it was to study or promote art. Shaw described him as 'the noble and generous Ricketts, who always dealt 'en grand seigneur', a natural aristocrat as well as a loyal and devoted artist' (ibid.). 
There is a drawing (1899) and an oil painting (1898) of Ricketts by Shannon in the National Portrait Gallery, London, as well as a head ('c'.1920s) by Laura Anning Bell. A bust (1902) by Reginald Wells is a good likeness. In 1979 his work was exhibited in 'Charles Ricketts and Charles Shannon: an Aesthetic Partnership' at the Orleans House Gallery, Twickenham, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 35747


Riddell, Charles James Buchanan (1817-1903), army officer and geophysicist, born at Lilliesleaf, Roxburghshire, on 19 November 1817, was the third son of Sir John Buchanan Riddell, ninth baronet, and his wife, Lady Frances Marsham, eldest daughter of Charles Marsham, first earl of Romney. With the exception of a year at Eton College, Riddell was educated at private schools. In 1832 he entered the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, passing thence (1834) into the Royal Artillery as second lieutenant. The following year he was transferred to Quebec, and in 1837 received promotion as first lieutenant. After returning to England, he was ordered to Jamaica, but was invalided back a year later. 
In 1839 Riddell began his scientific research. The Royal Society undertook to organize the British contribution to the worldwide survey of terrestrial magnetism initiated by Gauss; Riddell was chosen to superintend a magnetical and meteorological observatory at Toronto -- a temporary station nearest to the magnetic north pole -- under Edward Sabine. At the end of a year Riddell was invalided home, but he had done excellent service. Soon after, at Sabine's instance, he was appointed assistant superintendent of ordnance magnetic observatories at the Royal Military Repository, Woolwich. During his four years' tenure of this post he assisted Sabine in the reduction of magnetic data and the issue of results of observations made by the directors of the affiliated observatories. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 13 January 1842. In 1844 the Admiralty issued Riddell's 'Magnetical instructions for the use of portable instruments adapted for magnetical surveys and portable observatories, and for the use of a set of small instruments for a fixed magnetic observatory'. 
Riddell was placed on the staff at Woolwich and during the Crimean War he was an efficient deputy assistant quartermaster-general. He served in the Indian mutiny in 1857-8, commanding the siege artillery of Outram's force at the siege and capture of Lucknow, and the artillery of Lugard's column at the engagement of the Tigree; he was three times mentioned in dispatches, was made a CB, and received the medal with clasps. He retired in 1866 with the rank of major-general. Afterwards he lived quietly at Oaklands, Chudleigh, Devon, where he owned and managed a farm, and undertook parochial and educational work. Riddell married, on 11 February 1847, Mary (died 1900), daughter of Sir Hew Dalrymple Ross; they had one daughter. He died at his home on 25 January 1903, and was buried at Chudleigh. 


@@@@@


doc= 35748


Riddell, Charlotte Eliza Lawson (1832-1906), novelist, born on 30 September 1832 at The Barn (or Barn Cottage), Carrickfergus, co. Antrim, was the daughter of James Cowan (died 1851), flax and cotton spinner of Carrickfergus, and his second wife, Ellen Kilshaw (died 1856). She had one full brother, and a half-brother and six half-sisters from her father's first marriage. From her childhood her father was an invalid. On his death much of his property went, by her marriage settlement, to the family of his first wife; his widow had an annuity of $100 p.a. with which she and her daughter went to live on a small jointure at Dundonald, co. Down, the setting for Charlotte's novel 'Berna Boyle' (1884). In 1855 they moved to London, where they knew no one, and Charlotte tried to earn money for herself and her dying mother by writing, an experience she described in 'A Struggle for Fame' (1883). Her first book, written as R. V. Sparling, was 'Zuriel's Grandchild' (1856). Its publisher, to whom she long remained grateful, was Thomas Cautley Newby, better known, and often reviled, as the publisher of the first novels of Emily Bronte and Anthony Trollope. Her mother died on 16 December 1856 and did not profit from her daughter's first modest successes. As Rainey Hawthorne she published 'The Ruling Passion' (1857), and as F. G. Trafford seven novels between 1858 and 1866. Of these the most successful, and indeed the most popular of all her many works, was 'George Geith of Fen Court' (1864), a story of an unwittingly bigamous accountant -- one of the sensation novels then in vogue, for which William Tinsley paid her $800, probably the best price she ever received. It went into several editions and was dramatized in 1883. Like many of her books, it is much preoccupied with the social status of the businessman. After 1866 all her novels appeared under the name Mrs J. H. Riddell, though many of her stories appeared anonymously in magazines. 
On 24 September 1857 Charlotte Cowan married, at St Paul's, Covent Garden, London, Joseph Hadley Riddell (died 20 March 1881), described in the register as a patent agent; he (or possibly his father and namesake) applied for several patents between 1856 and 1869, mostly for improvements to boilers and hot-water pipes, calling himself variously 'civil engineer', 'hot water engineer', 'boiler manufacturer', and 'American stove merchant'. The business was at 155 Cheapside, and it had collapsed by September 1871, when he petitioned the bankruptcy court for liquidation. The episode was acknowledged by his wife to have provided the background for her novel 'Mortomley's Estate' (1874); it also left her with a husband (soon an invalid) to support and a burden of debt to discharge. The Riddells' financial problems may have antedated the actual bankruptcy. Charlotte Riddell's rate of production was high even in the 1860s, and she also edited for some time the 'Home Magazine' (which ran from 1856 to 1866) and, from 1867, 'St James's Magazine', of which she was co-proprietor and in which her novel 'A Life's Assize' ran from 1868 to 1870. But Harry Furniss recalled that she told him in 1873 that 'there is not a magazine in London paying, the libraries destroy the sale'. 
In Charlotte Riddell's day she was known best as a novelist of commercial life, and she told an interviewer that 'all the pathos of the City, the pathos in the lives of struggling men, entered into my soul, and I felt I must write, strongly as my publisher objected to my subject'. However, her modern reputation rests on the revival of interest in her ghost stories (published in 'Weird Stories', 1882), largely owing to the work of E. F. Bleiler, who in 1977 collected and edited them as 'Collected Ghost Stories'. The particular flavour of Riddell's writing comes from her atmospheric settings; the places she lived in -- Ireland and various parts of London, especially the City in which she spent her early married life -- are strongly evoked in various books. Further details are given by S. M. Ellis, who also records her many moves after 1870 around London's still semi-rural suburbs. 
Much of Charlotte Riddell's work bears signs of hasty composition, for she was dogged by poverty. She was a friend of Dr George Harley (to whom she dedicated 'The Nun's Curse', 1888), whose daughter, the writer Ethel Tweedie, exerted herself to help Riddell in old age, obtaining grants for her from the Royal Literary Fund and the civil list, which, with some private donations, made up a pension fund administered by the Society of Authors; she was paid $60 p.a. from 1901, the society's first pensioner. She died, childless, at her home, 12 Lampton Road, Hounslow, London, on 24 September 1906, of breast cancer which had been diagnosed in 1892, and she was buried in Heston churchyard, near Osterley, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 35749


Riddell, George Allardice, Baron Riddell (1865-1934), newspaper proprietor, was born at 2 Stanhope Place, Loughborough Road, Brixton Heath, London, on 25 May 1865, the only son of James Riddell, photographer, and his wife, Isabel Young. Educated privately, he was first employed as a clerk by a Bloomsbury solicitor who, impressed by Riddell's ability and promise, gave him his articles. In his final examinations he was placed first in all England and was admitted a solicitor in 1888. He became obsessively absorbed in his legal work. Later he developed a similar, all-consuming interest in the newspaper business. He told a friend that he had suddenly realized he was a slave to his work and was missing out on much life had to offer. He determined never to return to his office. Soon afterwards, the friend observed he devoted himself instead to the 'News of the World'. 
Riddell's association with the 'News of the World' dated from 1891, when he had been the legal consultant to the consortium that purchased the ailing Sunday newspaper. He had already acquired a holding in the 'Western Mail'. Shrewdly and constantly Riddell enhanced his shareholding in the 'News of the World' and by 1903 was the managing director. In 1910 he secured the controlling interest in the failing publishing firm of George Newnes, and in quick succession added the publications 'Country Life' and 'John O'London's Weekly'. Before the First World War he secured most of the capital in C. Arthur Pearson Ltd, and in 1921 combined this firm with Newnes to which he later added London Opinion Ltd in 1924, and in 1929 Leach's Publications Ltd. But it was the 'News of the World' that was the cornerstone of Riddell's fortune and influence. It was his ingenuity and enterprise, particularly his appointment of agents to sell the paper directly throughout the country, that gave the first boost to sales. The paper's invariable priority was the 'solid, careful, objective presentation of police court reports of rape, seduction, violence and marital infidelity' (Williams, 235). Despite Riddell's support of the 'Judicial Proceedings (Regulation of Reports) Bill' in 1926, designed to restrict the reporting of divorce case details, circulation continued to boom, from 30,000 copies when the newspaper was first acquired to more than 7 million. 
Riddell's contribution to the paper's success was widely recognized by informed critics, as one acknowledged in 1933: 'The paper is uncommonly well managed with as perfect an organisation as can be made' (Blumenfeld, 161). Yet Riddell never readily acknowledged his connection with a newspaper that emphasized the sensational and the salacious. If, when he reached the gates of Heaven, St Peter frowned upon his association with the 'News of the World', he told Hamilton Fyfe, 'I will urge in extenuation my connection with 'John O'London's Weekly' and 'Country Life'' (Fyfe, 107-8). 
In 1909 Herbert Asquith, advised that the support of the 'News of the World' was a valuable asset to the Liberals, gave Riddell the knighthood he had been seeking. Among those who pressed the prime minister to reward Riddell was David Lloyd George. The politician and the newspaper proprietor were close friends for twenty years. Both men acknowledged, though no bargain was ever struck, the mutual advantage in working together. Riddell made himself indispensable to Lloyd George. He kept him well informed of all press gossip; he provided hospitality, holidays, a car, a house, the free tenancy of two country mansions, a golfing partner, and not least, constant, shrewd support in his newspaper. Lloyd George availed himself of his friend's consummate skills as a negotiator. In 1912 Riddell drafted the memorandum that settled the miners' strike and was the basis for the 'Miners' Minimum Wage Act'. During the First World War, Riddell liaised between government and press, frequently chairing the press committee. At the peace conference he continued his work, establishing smooth relations between the British delegation and the press at various European locations in 1919, at Washington in 1921, and in 1927 at Geneva. For his public and private services Riddell was decorated by the French and Italian governments, and in 1918 made a baronet. 
On 13 December 1888 Riddell had married Grace Edith Williams. They were divorced on 29 October 1900. Riddell never publicly acknowledged his first marriage. On 2 November 1900 he married his cousin, Annie Molison Allardice. In 1915, during the course of a heated newspaper exchange, Sir Hedley Le Bas made public Riddell's first marriage. Subsequently, George V rejected Riddell's nomination as a peer because he had been the guilty party in a divorce action. Lloyd George insisted upon his friend's elevation, and the king's reservations were finally overcome by letters from other press lords protesting Riddell's virtues as chairman of the Newspaper Proprietors' Association. He received a barony in 1920. So Riddell became the first divorced peer to enter the Lords, breaking a social and constitutional convention that, until then, had bound both houses of parliament. 
After the Paris peace conference a rift began to develop between Lloyd George, who became bitterly anti-French, and Riddell, who was pro-French and disapproved of the government's Near Eastern policy. There is some dispute as to the cause of the final breach (R. Blake, 'The Unknown Prime Minister: the Life and Times of Andrew Bonar Law, 1858-1923', 1955), but the friendship was never repaired. Lloyd George resented Riddell's support for Andrew Bonar Law, and was persuaded, unfairly, that his erstwhile friend had no use for him once he had ceased to be prime minister (A. J. P. Taylor, ed., 'Lloyd George: a Diary', 1971). 
No longer so engaged in the fortunes of high politics, Riddell concentrated his energies more upon his business interests, charitable activities, and least successfully upon writing. For someone who had, for years, contributed a regular newspaper column that was frequently lively and always informed, his books are surprisingly pedestrian, often as banal and jejune as their titles suggest, as in 'Some Things that Matter' (1922) and 'More Things that Matter' (1925). He churned out biography, company history, and a monograph on medical ethics. Altogether different in kind, style, and quality are the diaries he kept from 1908 to 1923, and published shortly before the end of his life in three volumes: 'Lord Riddell's War Diary' (1933), 'Lord Riddell's Intimate Diary of the Peace Conference and After' (1933), and 'More Pages from my Diary, 1908-1914' (1934). They afford a most valuable guide to the politics of the period generally and to the career of Lloyd George in particular. The detailed retailing of conversations, while not always appreciated by Riddell's interlocutors, has provided rich and entertaining pickings for historians. 
Riddell's work for charity and his munificence were legion. He served as president, chairman, or treasurer on the boards of a score of disparate charitable boards. He had a particular concern for medical charities, and provided handsome endowments for the Royal Free Hospital, London, and the Eastman Dental Clinic. He was a generous and caring patron of the printing industry and a founder of the London School of Printing. Golf was his great recreation, and he wished that others might have the opportunity to share his passion for the game. With Sir Emsley Carr he founded the Artisans' Golf Association. He was closely associated with the golf course at Walton Heath, Surrey, and much preferred an austere room in the club house to any in his palatial mansion that overlooked St James's Park. 
Riddell died at his home, Walton Heath House, Walton on the Hill, Banstead, Surrey, on 5 December 1934. Employees and friends alike remembered with affection the strange contradictions of Riddell's character. He was masterful yet extraordinarily considerate; sure of his own judgement yet always open to persuasion. Few rich men had so few wants. He was keenly interested in making money, but not in spending it upon himself. His clothes were shabby, he drank little, was indifferent to food, but smoked incessantly. A man of amazing industry, he had an insatiable curiosity, made manifest by cross-examining everyone with whom he came into contact. An editor noted that Riddell 'had an infinite capacity for asking never answering questions' (Dark, 18). He was consistently appreciative of service and good work by his employees. To his friends he was kindly, shrewd, invariably understanding, and helpful. 


@@@@@


doc= 35750


Ridding, George (1828-1904), headmaster and bishop of Southwell, was born on 16 March 1828 in Winchester College, third son of Charles Henry Ridding (died 1871), afterwards vicar of Andover, and his wife, Charlotte Stonhouse (died 1832), daughter of Timothy Stonhouse-Vigor, archdeacon of Gloucester, and granddaughter of Sir James Stonhouse, eleventh baronet. George Isaac Huntingford, bishop of Gloucester and Hereford and warden of Winchester, was his great-great-uncle and godfather. The death of his mother and his experience of religious conversion as a boy were crucial early influences. From 1840 to 1846 he was a scholar of Winchester (where his father had been second master), rising to be head of the school, while his three brothers won equal distinction as cricketers. In default of a vacancy at New College, Oxford, he matriculated as a commoner at Balliol, where he rowed in the college boat and gained the Craven scholarship, a first class in classics and a second in mathematics, and a mathematical fellowship at Exeter College (all in 1851). He won the Latin essay prize and proceeded MA in 1853; and took the degree of DD in 1869. From 1853 to 1863 he was tutor of Exeter, where he played a significant part in developing the modern tutorial system and in cultivating closer relations between undergraduates and dons. He was identified as on the liberal side of contemporary university controversies. His 1864 Oxford sermon on 'Liberty of teaching' stated his belief in free discussion and the open pursuit of truth. On 20 July 1858 he married Mary Louisa, third child of George Moberly, headmaster of Winchester, and was one of the first married dons at Oxford. Devastated by his wife's early death, on the first anniversary of their marriage, he checked his grief by strength of will, which was already tested by a continual struggle against poor eyesight. To many he seemed a shy, austere character. 
On 14 January 1863 Ridding was elected second master of Winchester; and on 27 September 1866 when Moberly, his father-in-law, resigned the headmastership, he was at once elected to succeed him. The Clarendon commission of inquiry into public schools had reported in 1864, and the time was ripe for reform. Carrying on the tradition initiated by Moberly, he established six additional boarding-houses. New classrooms were added, playing fields were acquired, and the chapel was rearranged. These additions to the facilities were personally financed by Ridding to the extent of $20,000, of which only about half was eventually repaid to him. Pupil numbers rose from about 250 to over 400, and might have grown further but for his conviction that a school should not exceed the number with which a headmaster could keep in personal touch. 
Described as the 'second founder of Winchester', Ridding was one of the most prominent members of the generation of headmasters who created the public school system in its familiar form at the end of the nineteenth century. He attended the second meeting of the Headmasters' Conference, held at Sherborne in 1870, and was chairman of its standing committee until 1874. He was one of the founders in 1873 of the Oxford and Cambridge schools examination board, whose inspections and certificates averted the threat of state-controlled school examinations. Although he was a classicist, Ridding widened the curriculum at Winchester without relegating new subjects, such as history, modern languages, and natural science, to a separate 'modern side'. Following the example of Uppingham, he established a school mission, first in 1876 at Bromley in east London, and subsequently in 1882 at Landport in Portsmouth. 
At Winchester, Ridding succeeded in carrying with him in a course of drastic reforms the co-operation and devotion of his assistant masters, whose numbers he doubled during his period of office. He often faced opposition from the fellows, who before 1871 constituted the governing body of the college, and was strenuously criticized by Wykehamists in general. His position as a Liberal did not stand easily with the Conservative predilections of both old boys and current pupils alike. A public controversy in November and December 1872, the so-called 'tunding row', tested his commitment to boy government. A fifth-former, William Charles Macpherson (1855-1936), later an Indian civil servant, was 'tunded' with a ground-ash wielded by a prefect for refusing to submit to a customary ritual. The extent of the injuries sustained by 'tunded Macpherson' was unclear, but the ensuing press outcry led to an inquiry by the school governors. Although the inquiry vindicated Ridding, the chairman of the governors, the fifteenth earl of Derby, and Stafford Northcote resigned in protest against the powers allowed to prefects. Ridding had originally attempted to allow the boys more freedom, but his anxiety about sexual vice among them, an issue on which he was particularly severe, led him to impose a more closely supervised regime after 1880. 
Ridding married again on 26 October 1876; his second wife was Lady Laura Elizabeth Palmer ['see 'Ridding, Lady Laura Elizabeth (1849-1939)], eldest daughter of Roundell Palmer, first earl of Selborne. Lady Laura Ridding, whose diaries are preserved in the Hampshire Record Office, later wrote the biography of her husband, and published editions of his writings and visitation charges. 
In 1884 Ridding was appointed the first bishop of Southwell, on the nomination of Gladstone whose inquiries had established Ridding to be 'one of those large minded men who will work on the one hand with great devotion and energy, on the other hand with a liberal and just regard to the various shades of sentiment and practice united in the communion of the Church' (Gladstone, 'Diaries', 11.113). He was consecrated on 1 May. Southwell was a new diocese, formed by separating the counties of Derby and Nottingham from the dioceses of Lichfield and Lincoln respectively. The cathedral town was so inaccessible that Ridding firmly declined to live in it, and rented Thurgarton Priory in Nottinghamshire as his residence in place of the ruined episcopal palace. In population the diocese was the fifth in England, but it had no chapter, no diocesan funds, no common organization; the two counties had diverse traditions, and much of the patronage remained in the hands of external bishops and chapters. Ridding's work was to bring unity and a corporate spirit out of diversity and jealousy, to create all kinds of diocesan organizations, to raise the intellectual standard of the clergy, and to stimulate spiritual life in neglected districts. As at Winchester, he was not understood at first, and encountered some opposition; but his sincerity, genuineness, and generosity (the whole of his official income was spent on the diocese) ultimately gained the affection and loyalty of both clergy and laity. Although he spoke, in 1888, of reunion between the Anglican church and dissent, he was emphatic in upholding the national church, and very definite in his advocacy of church principles. His independence and originality of thought made him a valued adviser of two successive archbishops of Canterbury; with Frederick Temple in particular he was united by cordial friendship, based on considerable resemblances of character. This same independence, on the other hand, often separated him from the main parties of church thought, and despite many similarities of outlook he was not formally identified with the broad-church party. During the controversy of 1902 on religious education, he was not in accord with either the government or the opposition of the day, but strenuously advocated a universal system of state schools, accompanied by universal liberty of religious teaching. 
With the exception of a long holiday (necessitated by overwork) in Egypt and Greece from December 1888 to April 1889, Ridding's work in his diocese was unbroken. In 1891 he refused translation to Lichfield. In 1893, during the great strike in the coal trade, his efforts to restore peace were unceasing. In 1897 he presided at the Nottingham church congress, and in the same year became president of Nottinghamshire County Cricket Club. In July 1904, following repeated attacks of ill health, he tendered his resignation; but before it had taken effect an acute crisis supervened, and on 30 August he died at Thurgarton. He was buried just outside Southwell Minster. 
Ridding published one volume of sermons, 'The Revel and the Battle' (1897). His style, whether in writing or in speaking, was peculiar: full of thought, tersely and trenchantly expressed, but often difficult to follow from lack of connecting links and phrases. Contemporaries considered that this fault prevented him from exerting a wider influence (Headlam, 242). A former pupil recalled a 'keen, alert man, with handsome, mobile features, the curling black hair, the piercing eye, the eyeglass -- now dropped, now fixed again, each time with queer but not inexpressive grimaces' (Bird, 733). 


@@@@@


doc= 35751


Ridgeway, Sir Joseph West (1844-1930), army officer, the second son of the Revd Joseph Ridgeway, rector of High Roothing, Essex, and his wife, Eliza Letitia Chambers, was born at High Roothing on 16 May 1844. Charles John Ridgeway (1841-1927), bishop of Chichester, and Frederick Edward Ridgeway (1848-1921), bishop of Salisbury, were his brothers. Educated at St Paul's School, London, he obtained a commission in the Bengal infantry at the age of sixteen. In 1869 the viceroy, Lord Mayo, selected him for civil employment in the central India and Rajputana agencies, and in 1873 he became an attache in the Indian foreign department. He returned to Rajputana in 1875, serving as assistant agent to the governor-general and later as political agent of the eastern states. Late in 1879 he succeeded Henry Mortimer Durand as political secretary to Major-General F. S. Roberts, and accompanied him to Kandahar in August 1880. Ridgeway was mentioned in dispatches, promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel, and appointed under-secretary to the foreign department, government of India. He married in 1881 Carolina Ellen 
(known as Lina; died 1907)
, younger daughter of Robert Calverley Bewicke of Coulby Manor, Middlesbrough, Yorkshire. 
In 1884, owing to the Russian occupation of Merv in March and the continuous Russian advance towards Herat, a serious situation arose, and Britain and Russia agreed to send commissions to determine the ill-defined northern boundary of Afghanistan. Ridgeway commanded the Indian section of the commission, a force of about 1000 men. He successfully marched them from near Quetta, across difficult and dangerous territory, to join the chief commissioner, Sir Peter Stark Lumsden, at Kuhsan, north-west of Herat, in November. 
Lumsden and Ridgeway had been told to expect a Russian boundary commission with a small military escort: they found, instead, a large military force hastening to occupy the territory in dispute. Consequently the work of the commission was held up, and Ridgeway remained for the winter with a small escort to keep the Turkoman population quiet and to give moral support to an Afghan force which was occupying the district of Panjdeh, south of Merv. By diplomacy and firmness he made friends with the Turkomans and held the Russians back throughout the winter; but on 29 March 1885, while he was in Herat reporting to Lumsden, the Russians under General Komarov attacked and defeated the Afghans at Panjdeh, which brought England and Russia close to war. 
The work of the commission was resumed in November, Ridgeway succeeding Lumsden as chief commissioner. By June 1886 the boundary had been settled as far as Dukchi, 30 miles from the Oxus, but the line to the Oxus could not be agreed upon. In August the commission was recalled, and the British and Russian cabinets decided to determine for themselves the remaining frontier line. Ridgeway was made KCSI in November 1886. In April 1887 he was sent to St Petersburg to resume negotiations. He found the military party hostile, and on returning home to report progress was shocked to find that Lord Salisbury and his cabinet were apparently unconcerned, and it was only with the assistance of Sir Edward Bradford and the under-secretary at the Foreign Office, Sir Philip Currie, that he induced the government to continue negotiations. Nicholas II was in favour of a settlement, and a final agreement was reached in July 1887, defining the north-western frontier of Afghanistan between the Hari Rud and Oxus rivers. The treaty contented the amir Abdur Rahman and pleased the tribesmen by securing them their northern pasturelands. In 1887 Ridgeway was promoted colonel for distinguished service. 
In the same year Ridgeway was appointed under-secretary for Ireland, and in 1889 was sworn of the Irish privy council. He held office under Balfour and his successor, Lord Allerton, and assisted in framing Balfour's 'Land Purchase Act' of 1891. He was created KCB in 1891. Although Ridgeway's office was non-political, when the Liberals returned to power in 1892 he was removed, because he was so closely associated with Balfour's policy. His violent unionism and personal intransigence posed a considerable difficulty for W. E. Gladstone, the prime minister, who devoted much correspondence to the question of Ridgeway's future. After a special mission to the sultan of Morocco (1892-3) he was appointed governor of the Isle of Man from 1893 to 1895, and of Ceylon from 1896 to 1903. In Ceylon he reorganized the civil service, and by the waste lands ordinance protected crown lands from encroachment and crown forests from uncontrolled felling. In 1900 he was made GCMG. 
Back in England, Ridgeway, a free-trader, the was unsuccessful Liberal candidate for the City of London in January 1906 and for London University in 1910. In March 1906 the Liberal government appointed him chairman of a committee of inquiry to go to South Africa and investigate the constitutions to be given to the Transvaal and Orange River Colony. Lord Selborne, the high commissioner, at first opposed granting responsible government, but Ridgeway was conciliatory; the home government supported him, and he and Selborne reached agreement. The commission gained the confidence of General Botha and other Boer leaders, and the committee reported in favour of immediate responsible government for both colonies, with white male franchises: non-whites continued to be excluded. The resulting Transvaal and Orange River Colony constitutions prepared the way for the Union of South Africa. In November 1906 Ridgeway was promoted GCB. 
In 1910 Ridgeway became president of the British North Borneo Company. After inducing Sir Richard Dane to visit Borneo and make a report, he initiated changes in the civil service and the railway management there. Ridgeway was an honorary LLD of Cambridge and Edinburgh Universities and a vice-president of the Royal Geographical Society. He died suddenly at the Grosvenor Hotel, Victoria, London, on 16 April 1930, leaving one daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 35752


Ridgeway, Sir William (1858-1926), classical scholar, was born on 6 August 1858, the youngest son of the Revd John Henry Ridgeway of Ballydermot, King's county, and Marianna, only daughter of Samuel Ridgeway of Aghanvilla, King's county. Ridgeway's forebears were from Devon, but settled in Ulster under James I. There they intermarried with Cromwellian settlers in King's county -- 'all first-class fighting men' in Ridgeway's words -- and with Huguenot families round Portarlington. He belonged, therefore, to 'the pale', and believed that he had 'not a drop of Gaelic blood in his veins'. But from his earliest years he was surrounded by those who had plenty, and they contributed much to his personality and outlook. He was educated at Portarlington School and at Trinity College, Dublin, where he won all the chief classical prizes, studied Sanskrit, and graduated as senior moderator in both classics and modern literature. From Dublin he proceeded in 1876 to Peterhouse, Cambridge, migrating from there in 1878 to Gonville and Caius College, where he was subsequently elected a scholar. He was bracketed fifth in the classical tripos of 1880, and was elected a fellow of his college in the same year. That year he also married Lucy, eldest daughter of Arthur Samuels of Kingstown and sister of Arthur Warren Samuels, judge of the High Court of Justice in Ireland; they had one daughter. In 1881 a vacancy occurred on the classical staff of the college, but Ridgeway was not chosen. His disappointment was severe, and the partisan feeling then engendered delayed the recognition of his originality. 
In 1883 Ridgeway was appointed to the chair of Greek at University College, Cork. This left him free to spend five months of every year in Cambridge. He published essays on the historical interpretation of Aristotle, on the size of the Homeric horse, and on the origin of the mathematical element in the teaching of Pythagoras. He was among the first British scholars to recognize the new scientific school of comparative philology in Germany, in marked contrast with the attitude prevailing at Cambridge as late as 1890. But he was deeply indebted to the Cambridge Philological Society and to the encouragement of Dr Henry Jackson. His discoveries, fiercely resisted, passed quickly into currency, and his fearless enquiry emancipated classical study in England from an unintelligent orthodoxy. 
The turning point of Ridgeway's career was his appointment in 1892, after the publication of his first substantial book, to the Disney chair of archaeology at Cambridge and his re-election to a fellowship at his own college. Although the Disney chair was then poorly endowed, he resigned his chair at Cork, in which he had rendered important services to Irish education. But his appointment in 1907 to the Brereton readership in classics established his position in Cambridge. The university was then passing through a period of dissension, and Ridgeway's affection for the Anglican church and for the traditions of Cambridge scholarship limited his enthusiasm for reform. The bitter struggle about women's degrees separated him from some of his oldest friends. In the controversy on compulsory Greek he was again one of the opponents of change, but after the end of the First World War he was clear-sighted enough to discourage further resistance. 
Ridgeway's first book, 'The Origin of Metallic Currency and Weight Standards' (1892), attacked current theories of the purely religious origin of Greek coin types, and threw a flood of light on the early life of the Mediterranean lands: it identified the tuna fish, plant silphium, and ox (on early Athenian issues) not as objects of some unknown worship, but as recognized tokens of local commerce. In the first volume of his 'Early Age of Greece' (1901) he drew a fundamental distinction between the Myceneans, associated by contemporary authors with bronze weapons, figure-of-eight shields, and southern ways of life, and the Achaeans of Homer, whom he proposed to identify with warrior immigrants of the early Iron Age who brought with them the round shields and long iron swords of central Europe and the sterner morals of the north. This work was never completed; of the second volume, parts already in type at his death (dealing with kinship and ancestor-worship in early Europe, and with Ireland in the heroic age) were published by friends in 1931, with an introduction exhibiting later developments of Ridgeway's doctrine. This book is Ridgeway's chief contribution to history. Its main doctrine secured wide acceptance, even among those who attacked it in detail. But the bitterness of the controversy took a tragic colour in Ridgeway's memory, and he retained the conviction that in certain quarters he would never be fairly treated. 
In strict logic Ridgeway was weak. In support of a theory, of the truth of which he was convinced, he would use all kinds of evidence, strong and weak alike. Nor did he always give enough consideration to difficulties. But, to quote his pupil Professor D. S. Robertson: 'his mind's eye surveyed so vast a range of facts that he saw in a flash the great lines of their connexion, and his lively knowledge of human nature kept him always within the limits of reasonableness and good sense... His words had a rough splendour that stamped them imperishably on his listeners' minds. He did not like formal lecturing; but round a table, with half a dozen students, he was incomparable. His vivid imagination, his width of view, his unbroken contact with reality kept one spellbound, as gems, coins, axeheads, totem-spoons tumbled on to the table from his inexhaustible pockets. He must always have had sensitive fingers, and as his sight failed he depended more and more upon touch. And he knew at once from the way in which new pupils handled and spoke of the stuff which he passed round the table, whether or no they had the makings of real archaeologists. (Quoted in 'DNB')' In 'The Origin and Influence of the Thoroughbred Horse' (1905) Ridgeway showed the development of the horse from its small Homeric ancestor through admixture of zebraic blood by the horse-breeding Greeks of north Africa and their Muslim successors. This conclusion he reached almost simultaneously with, and independently of, the zoologists J. C. Ewart and H. F. Osborn, completing their zoological results by his historical study. His British Academy paper, 'Who were the Romans?' (1907), revived by fresh evidence Schwegler's view of the racial distinction between the Sabine or patrician element in Rome, and the Latin or plebeian (cf. 'Cambridge Ancient History', 4, 1926, chap. 13). In 'The Origin of Tragedy, with Special Reference to Greek Tragedians' (1910) Ridgeway argued that tragedy arose from the commemoration of local heroes at their tombs, the representations being later drawn into the ritual of Dionysus and combined with the satyric plays. In 'Dramas and Dramatic Dances of Non-European Races' (1915) he confirmed his theory by comprehensive induction from China to Bolivia and Japan, from Australia and central Africa to Alaska. Other interests of his were represented by his studies of 'Cuchulain' (1905 and 1907), and unpublished papers on the (Danish) origin of the Scots and on the origin of ballads in the praises of popular heroes (lecture delivered in 1926). 
In later years Ridgeway was a frequent and valued correspondent of 'The Times', remarkable both for range of subject and vigour of style. To the last his enthusiasm for the great social ends of classical study remained unabated, and none of the honours that fell to him gave him more pleasure than his election as president of the Classical Association for 1914. The establishment of the Cambridge school of anthropology was a monument to another side of his influence. The general recognition of his work was marked on his sixtieth birthday (1913) by the presentation of a volume of 'Essays and Studies' in his honour. Ridgeway was elected FBA in 1904, was president of the Royal Anthropological Institute from 1908 to 1910, and received honorary doctorates from the universities of Dublin (1902), Manchester (1906), Aberdeen (1908), and Edinburgh (1921). He was knighted in 1919. 
No picture of Ridgeway's life would be complete which did not indicate the extraordinary stimulus which he exerted upon others, and his untiring interest in the research and the prospects of younger men. His home at Fen Ditton, about 4 miles from Cambridge, with its pleasant garden, was the constant resort of scholars engaged in many kinds of research, not merely in classical or antiquarian learning. Such intercourse was only a part of his cordial acquaintance with all sorts and conditions of men. 
The last months of Ridgeway's life were darkened by the sudden death of his wife in May 1926. His companion almost since his boyhood, she shared his ideals and was hardly less interested than he was in his work. His own death occurred suddenly at Fen Ditton on 12 August 1926, not quite three months after that of his wife. 
Later developments in Ridgeway's two main fields, anthropology and the classics, have shown him to have been a less central figure than his contemporaries thought. He was, especially in his later work, too idiosyncratic and too much a prisoner of his time with his recurrent appeals to the image of 'tall, fair-haired men', to make seminal and lasting contributions. Reading with hindsight his exchanges with such figures as Malinowski, one is continually struck by the originality and learning behind his individual insights, yet uncomfortably aware of being in the presence of an isolated stream of thought. 


@@@@@


doc= 35753


Ridley, Henry Nicholas (1855-1956), economic botanist, was born on 10 December 1855 at West Harling Hall, Norfolk, the third child of the Revd Oliver Matthew Ridley and his wife, Louisa Pole, daughter of William Stuart, of Aldenham Abbey. He was a direct descendant of John Stuart, third earl of Bute (1713-1792), who also achieved botanical distinction and acted as scientific adviser to Princess Augusta when she was initiating the botanical gardens at Kew. 
Ridley was educated at Haileybury College and at Exeter College, Oxford, where he obtained a second-class degree in natural science in 1878. In 1880 he was awarded the Burdett-Coutts scholarship in geology. However, the necessity of obtaining paid employment led him, in the same year, to take a position in the botanical department of the British Museum at South Kensington. There he began to develop an interest in the geographical distribution of plants. Seven years later he accompanied the Edinburgh zoologist G. A. Ramage on a Royal Society sponsored expedition to Brazil. 
This tropical experience led to Ridley's selection, in 1888, as director of the botanical gardens at Singapore, where his responsibilities included the making of a preliminary forest survey. The survey, combined with his extensive exploration of the adjacent territories, provided much of the material and information which led to his 'Flora of the Malay Peninsula' (5 vols., 1922-5). In addition to his travels within the Malay peninsula Ridley also visited Borneo and Sumatra (1897) and the Christmas and Keeling islands (1890-91). He was in Sarawak four times between 1903 and 1915. In 1911 he was in southern Siam. He retired from the Singapore gardens in the same year, but his botanical travels continued. In 1912 he was in Burma, India, and Egypt, in 1915 in Java, and a year later in Jamaica. From all these areas he took back material which enriched the collections at Kew and one genus, 'Ranalisma', is known only from the specimens which Ridley collected. 
On his appointment to Singapore, Ridley found there seedlings of the Para rubber tree which had been sent from Kew. Ridley's faith in the value of the Para rubber as a plantation crop in Malaya led him to persuade planters to experiment with the new crop and to overcome a number of early difficulties. His services in establishing the rubber plantation industry were recognized by the award of the gold medal of the Rubber Planters' Association in 1914 and fourteen years later by the award of the American Frank Meyer medal. 
Ridley's active interest in the applied aspects of botany was further demonstrated by his initiation of the 'Agricultural Bulletin of the Malay States' (for which he wrote many papers) and by his book, 'Spices' (1912). He was also keenly interested in problems of plant dispersal, especially by animals and wind. This finally found expression in his book, 'The Dispersal of Plants throughout the World' (1930), which he wrote in the years following his retirement. In 1941 he married his housekeeper, Lily Eliza, daughter of the late Charles Doran, builder. 
Ridley was a versatile and entertaining conversationalist who, almost to the end of his days, enjoyed imparting his reminiscences to others. He was elected FRS in 1907, appointed CMG in 1911, and awarded the gold medal of the Linnean Society in 1950. On his hundredth birthday he received numerous tributes from home and overseas, among which was an appreciation from the president and council of the Royal Society. He was a prolific writer. On botanical subjects alone he wrote some 270 papers, and more than fifty others dealt with zoological topics; about ninety more were on agricultural and applied botanical subjects and a further forty on a variety of topics, geological, medical, ethnological, and biographical. Until he became bedridden he was a never-failing observer of the birds in Kew Gardens. 
Ridley was short in stature and in later years distinctly rotund, but his appearance was not undistinguished because of the keen observant eyes. He died at his home, 7 Cumberland Road, Kew, on 24 October 1956, less than two months before his 101st birthday. He was the last surviving founder member of the Society for Psychical Research. 
E. J. Salisbury', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35754


Ridley, Matthew White, first Viscount Ridley (1842-1904), politician, born at 10 Carlton House Terrace, London, on 25 July 1842, was the elder son in a family of two sons and one daughter of Sir Matthew White Ridley, fourth baronet (1807-1877), of Blagdon, Northumberland, tory MP for North Northumberland. His mother was Cecilia Anne, eldest daughter of James Parke, Baron Wensleydale. Ridley's mother died of tuberculosis in 1845 and his childhood at Blagdon was lonely and severe. At Harrow (1856-61) he was in the football and shooting elevens and became captain of the school. In 1860 he gained a classical scholarship at Balliol College, Oxford, and he matriculated on 12 October 1861. After taking a first class in classical moderations in 1863 and in the final classical school in 1865, he was elected a fellow of All Souls; he was admitted to the Inner Temple in 1864. His cousin Louisa Knightley described him in 1866 as 'rather handsome and exceedingly clever... [with] the extremely decided opinions of a very young, clever man who has lived in an intellectual set at Oxford and not yet learned to say 'I don't know'' ('Journals of Lady Knightley', 112). Ridley vacated his fellowship in 1874, after his marriage on 10 December 1873 to the Hon. Mary Georgiana (died 1899), eldest daughter of Dudley Coutts Marjoribanks, first Baron Tweedmouth, with whom he had two sons and two daughters. 
Destined for a political career, Ridley in 1868 succeeded his father as Conservative MP for North Northumberland, a seat he held until 1885. On his father's death in 1877 he succeeded as fifth baronet and owner of the family estates of over 10,000 acres. He was under-secretary to the Home Office from 1878 to 1880 in Beaconsfield's administration. From September 1885 to January 1886 he was financial secretary to the Treasury under Lord Salisbury. Meanwhile the 'Reform and Redistribution Acts' of 1884 and 1885 changed the Northumberland constituencies, enfranchising nonconformist farmers and coal-miners; at the general elections in November 1885 and July 1886 he unsuccessfully stood for Hexham and Newcastle upon Tyne respectively. In August 1886 a by-election at Blackpool gave him an opening; he won, and retained the seat until he was raised to the peerage in 1900. Ridley did not receive office in the Salisbury government of 1886-92. He chaired the royal commission on civil establishments (1886-89), the so-called 'Ridley commission' which inquired into the work and organization of the Home Office. He was considered for the office of postmaster-general in the minor reshuffle of 1891, but he was not offered the job: Salisbury may have been dissuaded from promoting him by A. J. Balfour. A loyal party man, Ridley was on the squirearchical side of the party and he did not belong to the inner circle of Cecils and Souls. He was sworn of the privy council in 1892. 
Although Ridley took little part in the debates of the house, he won its respect, and on 10 April 1895 he was put forward as the Conservative candidate for the speakership. On a division the Liberal candidate W. C. Gully was elected by 285 votes against 274 for Ridley. When Salisbury returned to office on 25 June 1895 Ridley became home secretary in the new government, holding the post until the dissolution of 1900. Ridley's administration of the Home Office was thoroughly safe and consequently attracted little attention. In 1897, when he released from prison some men convicted of dynamite outrages, he defended himself effectively against an attack from his own side, led by Henry Howorth and James Lowther. His most illustrious charge was Oscar Wilde, who was a prisoner in 1895-7; Ridley agreed to Wilde's requests for books, but he refused him early release. The appointment of his brother as a High Court judge in 1897 was unfortunate; Edward Ridley was a poor judge and his appointment exposed the home secretary to the charge of jobbery. Ridley was one of the two ministers to leave office when Salisbury reconstituted his government after the 1900 election (the other was Henry Chaplin). Ridley's dismissal was sometimes attributed to the malign influence of Balfour, but it seems likely that the decision was Salisbury's alone. On leaving office Ridley received a viscountcy. His last years were mainly spent at Blagdon. 
True to his family tradition, Ridley was always active in the administration of his property. Known as an extremely capable man of business, he was long a director of the North Eastern Railway, and on the resignation of Sir Joseph Pease in 1902 he became chairman. He especially devoted himself to the development of the town of Blyth, which, originally part of the estates of the Radcliffe family but forfeited to the crown after the rising of 1715, had descended to Ridley with the other estates of Matthew White. After succeeding to the baronetcy in 1877, he carried a bill through parliament for the creation of a board of commissioners with powers to develop Blyth; as chairman of this board Ridley soon transformed the harbour and dock, from which (being principal proprietor) Ridley benefited largely, reviving his family fortunes at a time of agricultural depression. He contrived, however, that the inhabitants should share in the prosperity: he gave an open space for public recreation, which in 1904 he opened as the Ridley Park; he gave sites for a mechanics' institute, a church, and a hospital; and he was occupied until his death on a large scheme of planting trees in convenient places. Ridley was chairman of the Northumberland quarter sessions from 1873, and of the county council from 1889; but he resigned both offices in 1895 when he became home secretary. He joined the Royal Agricultural Society in 1869 and was its president in 1888, when the meeting was at Nottingham. He was also president of the National Union of Conservative Associations. He served as deputy lieutenant and JP for Northumberland and provincial grand master of freemasons for Northumberland (1885-1900), and he commanded the Northumberland yeomanry from 1886 to 1895. He was ecclesiastical commissioner for England in 1895-1904. 
Ridley died at Blagdon on 28 November 1904, and was buried there. He was succeeded as viscount by his elder son, Matthew (1874-1916), Conservative MP for Stalybridge (1900-04) and chairman of the Tariff Reform League. His second son, Jaspar, became chairman of Coutts's Bank. 
Ridley is remembered as being 'fairly stuffy and a huge eater', but his portly country gentleman's exterior masked disappointed ambition. It is to his credit that he advanced the standing and fortunes of his family at a time of aristocratic decline, leaving the Ridleys as second only to the Percys in Northumberland; but his political career failed to fulfil the promise of his youthful academic brilliance. 


@@@@@


doc= 35755


Rieu, Charles Pierre Henri (1820-1902), orientalist, born at Geneva on 8 June 1820, was the son of Jean Louis Rieu, first syndic of Geneva, whose memoirs he edited in 1870. His mother was Marie Lasserre. On leaving school, in November 1835 Rieu entered the Academie de Geneve, where he studied philosophy and science. At Geneva he first took up oriental languages and became the pupil of Jean Humbert, who had studied under the French orientalist Sylvestre de Sacy. In 1840 Rieu proceeded to the University of Bonn, where he was inscribed in the philosophical faculty. There he read Sanskrit and Arabic, and at the same time acquired a thorough knowledge of German. On the completion of his studies in 1843 he received the degree of PhD and published his thesis, entitled 'De Abul-Alae poetae arabici vita et carminibus secundum codices Leidanos et Parisiensem commentatio'. After a visit to Paris, where he was elected a member of the Societe Asiatique on 8 November 1844, he moved to St Petersburg; there, with Otto Boehtlingk, he edited with notes in German the text of 'Hemakandra's Abhidhanakintamani' or Sanskrit dictionary (1847). During this work he visited Oxford for the purpose of transcribing a unique manuscript in the Bodleian Library. 
In 1847 Rieu settled in London and was appointed supernumerary assistant in the department of manuscripts at the British Museum, where in 1867 he became first holder of the office of keeper of oriental manuscripts. He was responsible for the second part of the 'Catalogus codicum manuscriptorum orientalium' (1871), of which the first part (1846) had been compiled by William Cureton. These were followed by the 'Catalogue of Persian Manuscripts' (3 vols., 1879-83; suppl., 1895), the 'Catalogue of Turkish Manuscripts' (1888), and the Arabic supplement (1894). These seven volumes were seen as a monumental achievement which confirmed Rieu's position as an orientalist of the first rank, his reputation based on his distinction as a scholar no less than on his helpfulness as a curator. 
In 1871 Rieu married Agnes Hisgen, the daughter of Julius Heinrich Hisgen; they had five sons and two daughters, the translator Emile Victor Rieu (1887-1972) being their youngest child. Rieu was also for many years professor of Arabic and Persian at University College, London. On the jubilee of his doctorate, 6 September 1893, he received a congratulatory address from the University of Bonn. In 1894, notwithstanding his advanced age, he was elected by invitation to Sir Thomas Adam's professorship of Arabic at Cambridge, in succession to William Robertson Smith. He resigned his post at the museum in 1895, and died at his home, 28 Woburn Square, London, on 19 March 1902, after a brief illness. 


@@@@@


doc= 35756


Rigby, Sir John (1834-1903), judge, was born at Runcorn, Cheshire, on 4 January 1834, the second son of Thomas Rigby of Runcorn and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Joseph Kendall of Liverpool. Sent first to the collegiate institution in Liverpool (which afterwards became Liverpool College), he was admitted on 20 February 1852 to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was elected to an open scholarship in 1854. In 1856 he graduated as second wrangler and second Smith's prizeman, taking a second class in the classical tripos. He was a fellow of his college for about ten years from 1856, and took his MA in 1859. 
Rigby entered as a student at Lincoln's Inn on 17 October 1855, and was called on 26 January 1860. Starting as 'devil' (junior counsel) in the chambers of Richard Baggallay QC, one of the leaders of the Chancery bar, he rapidly acquired a large practice both in chambers and in court, and in 1875 Sir Richard Baggallay, then attorney-general, made him junior equity counsel to the Treasury, a regular stepping-stone to the judicial bench. Rigby, however, was not content to wait; he took silk in 1880 and attached himself to the court of Mr Justice Kay, where he obtained a complete ascendancy both over his rivals and over the judge himself, who was susceptible to his brand of quasi-preacherly rhetoric. Within a few years he was able to confine his practice to the appeal courts, only appearing at first instance for a special fee. His fees in general were none the less reckoned moderate in view of his eminence. He was especially in demand for property and patent cases, where his chief rivals were Horace Davey, Edward Macnaghten, and Montague Cookson. He owed his success to his mastery of equity, to his ingenuity and pertinacity, and to an impressive personality which lent force to a style 'in which his fervid utterance seemed to contend with an almost pedantic desire to measure his words and give weight to every syllable.' He was 'an incomparable advocate in a bad case' ('The Times', 27 July 1903). He was on the bar committee from 1883 and in May 1884 he was made a bencher of his inn. 
In December 1885 Rigby entered parliament as a Liberal for the Wisbech division of Cambridgeshire, but, following Gladstone when the party split over the 'Home Rule Bill' (he made a powerful speech on the second reading), he lost his seat at the general election of 1886. He did not return to the House of Commons until July 1892, when he was elected for Forfarshire, presumably to enable him to be made solicitor-general, as he was by Gladstone on 20 August 1892; he was knighted on 26 November. He gave invaluable assistance to Sir William Harcourt with the intricate details of the 'Finance Act' of 1893 but was not a success in parliament. His unconventional ways, apparent lack of humour, and somewhat uncouth exterior at first provoked the ridicule of opponents, and though he gradually won some popularity, his courtroom style was ill-suited to the Commons. Moreover, his utter inexperience in criminal trials exposed him to a humiliating failure when he conducted the unsuccessful prosecution of the directors of the Hansard Union in 1893. After a brief term as attorney-general from 3 May 1894 in succession to Sir Charles Russell, he was appointed on 19 October 1894 to the Court of Appeal on the promotion of Davey, and made a privy councillor. 
On the bench Rigby did not justify the high expectations his admirers had of him. He displayed his accustomed skill and ingenuity in unravelling complicated and contradictory statutes; he showed characteristic independence and individuality in reaching his conclusions, and his dissenting judgments were sometimes found persuasive by the House of Lords. But his intellect, which was massive rather than flexible, failed to adapt itself to new demands. Near the end of the century his powers showed a perceptible decline, believed to be the effect of a severe fall. He at length resigned on 2 November 1901 and died at his London home, Carlyle House, Chelsea, on 26 July 1903. He was buried at Marylebone cemetery, Finchley. He was unmarried. A son of his cousin, Rigby Swift, became a High Court judge. 


@@@@@


doc= 35757


Rigg, James Harrison (1821-1909), Wesleyan Methodist minister and educationist, was born at Newcastle upon Tyne on 16 January 1821, the second son and third child of John Rigg (1786-1857), a Wesleyan Methodist minister there, and his second wife, Anne ('b'. 1797), daughter of James McMullen, Irish Methodist missionary at Gibraltar. Brought up in straitened circumstances, the boy was for five years (1830-35) a pupil and for four years (1835-9) a junior teacher at the Kingswood School for preachers' sons near Bristol. In 1839 he became assistant in the Revd Mr Firth's academy, Hartstead Moor, near Leeds, and having made an unsuccessful effort to conduct a school of his own in Islington, London, he became in 1843 classical and mathematical master at John Conquest's school at Biggleswade. In July 1845 he entered the Wesleyan Methodist ministry as probationer and, being ordained on 1 August 1849, served in Wesleyan circuits until 1868. 
From an early date Rigg read widely and wrote much on religious and theological themes. A vigorous and clear style gave his writings influence in his denomination. He was a chief contributor to the 'Biblical Review' (1846-9), and frequently wrote in the Wesleyan newspaper 'The Watchman'. Having contributed to the first number of the 'London Quarterly Review', a Wesleyan Methodist periodical, in September 1853, he soon joined its editorial staff (1868), was co-editor with Dr William Burt Pope (1883-6), and ultimately sole editor (1886-98). Rigg explained his theological position in three volumes: 'Principles of Wesleyan Methodism' (1850; 2nd edn, 1851), 'Wesleyan Methodism and Congregationalism Contrasted' (1852), and 'Modern Anglican Theology' (1857; 3rd edn, 1880). In the last he ably criticized the broad-church teaching of Maurice, Kingsley, and Jowett as being pervaded with a non-Christian Neoplatonism, but his differences with Kingsley were so considerately expressed that Kingsley sought his acquaintance. In 1866 he republished many periodical articles as 'Essays for the Times on Ecclesiastical and Social Subjects'. His literary work was early valued in America. He acted as English correspondent of the 'New Orleans Christian Advocate' (1851) and of the 'New York Christian Advocate' (1857-76). In 1865 he received the degree of DD from Dickinson College, USA, and in 1877 from Edinburgh. 
In 1868 Rigg was appointed principal of the Westminster (Wesleyan) Training College for day-school teachers, and he held that post until 1903. In matters of education he acquired an expert knowledge and was an active controversialist. When the first 'Elementary Education Act' was passed in 1870 Rigg took the traditional Wesleyan view, opposing secularism and favouring denominational schools, although without sympathy for sectarian exclusiveness. He was opposed by William Arthur and Hugh Price Hughes, who supported the transfer of Wesleyan schools to the school boards created in 1870. He pressed his views, in correspondence, on the attention of Gladstone and W. E. Forster, and the Wesleyan conference supported him. From 1870 to 1876 he served as a member for Westminster on the first London school board. With the help of Professor Thomas Huxley and W. H. Smith MP he secured the provision of a syllabus of religious instruction. He advocated a broad curriculum open to girls as well as boys. He was a member of the royal commission on elementary education (1886-8), known as the Cross commission, which reported in favour of the school board management as against the voluntary system. 
In the general administration of Wesleyan affairs Rigg was recognized to be a statesman-like leader of liberal-conservative temper. He was successively chairman of the Kent and second London districts (1865, 1877), and in 1878 and 1892 was president of the Wesleyan conference. From 1881 to 1909 he was treasurer of the Wesleyan Missionary Society. In controversies concerning the internal organization of the Wesleyan church Rigg took a middle course. He accepted the addition of a representative lay session of conference, but in 1890 successfully advocated its insertion between two sessions restricted to ministers, so that the pastoral element should predominate. Rigg's proposal of 1894, supported by the 'progressive' party under Hugh Price to exempt chairmen of districts from circuit duties and leave them free to exercise supervision over the district, was rejected by the conference from a suspicion that Rigg's 'separated chairmen' had a colour of episcopacy. With Hughes and the progressive party Rigg's relations were often strained. Writing privately to Cardinal Manning, a colleague on the education commission, on the education question on 17 December 1888, he described Hughes as 'your intemperate temperance coadjutor, our methodist firebrand' (Smith, 212). The unauthorized publication of the letter in Purcell's 'Life' of the cardinal (1895) led to reprisals by Hughes, who wrote in the 'Methodist Times' an article entitled 'The self-revelation of Dr Rigg' (described by a friend of Rigg as 'unscrupulous' and 'mendacious'; Methodist Archives, MAM PLP 89-39-2). At Rigg's request the letter was withdrawn from later editions of Purcell's book, and Hughes and he were reconciled. 
Rigg never abated his literary energies amid his varied activities. For many years he was a member of the committee of the London Library. To an earlier study entitled 'The Churchmanship of John Wesley' (1869, 1879) he added 'The Living Wesley' (1875; reissued as 'The Centennial Life of Wesley' in 1891). The former played down Wesley's high-church characteristics in the light of current Wesleyan suspicions of Anglo-Catholicism. The latter attempted a fuller account of Wesley's private life. Rigg's 'Oxford High Anglicanism and its Chief Leaders' (1895; 2nd edn, 1899) is apparently the only attempt made by a nonconformist to write a history of the Oxford Movement. Rigg was a severe critic of Newman, but especially emphasized the influence of Pusey on the development of Anglo-Catholicism. There followed 'Reminiscences Sixty Years Ago' (1904), covering only his early life; a sympathetic biography of Jabez Bunting (1905); and the article 'Methodism' in the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (9th edn). 
Rigg married, on 17 June 1851, Caroline Smith (died 17 Dec 1889), the daughter of John Smith, alderman of Worcester. They had two schoolmistress daughters (the elder, Caroline Edith Rigg, became a renowned headmistress and the younger married Rigg's biographer, John Telford) and a barrister son, James McMullen Rigg, who contributed many articles to the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. Short, rotund, and bearded, Rigg was aggressive and self-confident, especially in controversy (some compared him to Dr Johnson). Yet he was also an able compromiser in negotiation. He was kindly to individuals and devoted to his wife, who was often in poor health. 
For many years Rigg dominated Wesleyan educational policy, which was directed at developing denominational middle-class as well as elementary education. A major influence on policy, however, was fear of Roman and Anglo-Catholic advance (and 'infidelity'). This can be seen in Rigg's advocacy of Wesleyan schools, his writings on Anglicanism, and his interpretations of John Wesley. These fears weakened Rigg's inherited conservative Wesleyan sympathies with Anglicanism, and strengthened his assertion of the superiority of Wesleyan doctrine and polity, though he disliked aggressive nonconformity. Both he and Hughes wished to protect Wesleyan children from Roman and Anglo-Catholic 'perversion', though they differed on the best policy for achieving this: the mixed 'denominational and secular' system secured in 1870 (Rigg) or a purely 'secular' one (Hughes). Both insisted that the secular schools must include non-denominational religious instruction. In Rigg's last years Hughes's more nonconformist policies were clearly gaining ground in Wesleyanism. Rigg died on 17 April 1909 at 79 Brixton Hill, London, and was buried in the city's Norwood cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 35758


Rigg, James McMullen (1855-1926), biographer and historian, the son of James Harrison Rigg (1821-1909), principal of the Wesleyan college, Westminster, and his wife, Caroline (died 1889), daughter of John Smith, alderman of Worcester, was born at Brentford on 28 September 1855. He was educated at the City of London School under Dr E. A. Abbott and at St John's College, Oxford, of which he was a scholar. He obtained a second class in classical moderations in 1876 and a third class in 'literae humaniores' in 1878. He entered Lincoln's Inn in 1880, and was called to the bar in November 1881. He soon abandoned law entirely, and devoted the rest of his life to literary work. 
In 1885 Rigg began to write articles for the 'Dictionary of National Biography', to which he contributed more than 600 entries, mainly on the judiciary. Some of his assessments of recent judges were regarded as being rather bold. Besides editing Sir Thomas More's translation of the Latin life of Pico della Mirandola (1890) and writing 'a study of St Anselm as thinker and writer' (1896) he published valuable editions of the plea rolls of the exchequer of the Jews, covering the thirteenth century, first for the Selden Society (1902) and then for the Jewish Historical Society (1905, 1910). In 1909 Rigg was appointed by the deputy keeper of the records to research in the Vatican archives, and spent nine months of each of the years 1909 to 1915 in Rome. His two volumes of 'A Calendar of State Papers... Rome' (vol. 1, 1558-71; vol. 2, 1572-8) were published in 1916 and 1926. All Rigg's editorial work was distinguished by accurate scholarship. He also published a translation of Boccaccio's 'Decameron' (1903). 
In appearance Rigg was spare and ascetic, in manner shy and reserved. He usually spoke abruptly and emphatically, yet in friendly surroundings he was an excellent talker. His greatest interest in life was the history and philosophy of religion. In spite of his Wesleyan origins he seemed to be pleased when anybody mistook him for a Roman Catholic. He died at his home, 79 Brixton Hill, London, on 14 April 1926. He was unmarried, and lived with the elder of his two sisters, Caroline Edith Rigg, headmistress for forty-one years of the Mary Datchelor School, Camberwell. 


@@@@@


doc= 35759


Ringer, Sydney (1835-1910), physician and physiologist, was born in Norwich, the second of three sons of John Manstripp Ringer, a Norwich tradesman, and his wife, Harriet. His elder brother, John Melancthon, and younger brother, Frederick, were successful merchants in Shanghai and Japan. Ringer was educated at private schools, and after a brief apprenticeship to a doctor in Norwich he entered University College, London, in 1854, to study medicine; he became MB (1860) and MD (1863), and MRCP (1863) and FRCP (1870). At University College Hospital, Ringer became, successively, resident medical officer (1861), assistant physician (1863), physician (1866), and consulting physician (on his retirement in 1900). He was also assistant physician at Great Ormond Street Children's Hospital from 1864 until 1869. At University College, Ringer was professor of materia medica, pharmacology, and therapeutics (1862-78), professor of the principles and practice of medicine (1878-87), and Holme professor of clinical medicine (1887-1900). He became a member of the Physiological Society in 1884 and was elected FRS in 1885; and he was an honorary member of the New York Medical Society and a corresponding member of the Academy of Medicine in Paris. 
Ringer was the author of 'A Handbook of Therapeutics' (1869), and 'On the Temperature of the Body as a Means of Diagnosis of Phthisis, Measles and Tuberculosis' (1865), and he contributed articles to J. R. Reynolds's 'System of Medicine' (vol. 1, 1886) and to medical and scientific journals. Although a poor lecturer Ringer was an excellent bedside physician and teacher, bringing his knowledge to bear in a systematic and lucid way on the cases presented to him. However, he is best remembered for his research, which was carried out in the physiological laboratory of University College, his love of research probably being first stimulated by William Sharpey, professor of anatomy and physiology at University College, and then by Michael Foster. Ringer studied the effects of drugs and poisons on the tissues of the body; he also studied the clotting of blood, the function of peripheral nerves, and the contraction of muscle. His most important observations were on the effects of a number of ions, including sodium, potassium, and calcium ions, on the contraction of the heart. In particular, he described a solution containing these ions which can sustain living tissues removed from the body. The term 'Ringer's solution' is still used widely for such solutions. He also showed the vital role of calcium ions for the contraction of the heart. This work anticipated modern understanding of the physiological importance of these ions, and it was published in a series of papers in the 'Journal of Physiology' between 1875 and 1895. 
Ringer's character was the product of a severe nonconformist upbringing. He was noted for his punctuality, his kindness -- which was frequently practical and anonymous -- and his love of music. Although physically and mentally vigorous, he was shy, nervous, and socially retiring, and led a simple life. His eminence and outstanding achievements in clinical practice and research were consequences of his ability for rapid thought and the energy he devoted to a life dedicated to his work. His morning hospital visit would conclude with a visit to the physiological laboratory which, to the laboratory assistant, 'came not unlike electric shocks, from which he would scarcely have recovered before he would find that it was all over... a tracing taken, various suggestions made, and off he was again [to the morning's consulting work]' ('BMJ', 1384-6). The afternoon would be filled with clinical work, followed, whenever possible, by another visit to the laboratory. 
Ringer married Ann (1833-1897), daughter of Henry Brewster Darley (died 1860), of Aldby Park, in York on 8 August 1867. They had two daughters: Annie (1868-1875), in whose memory they restored the St Mary's Church at Lastingham in the North Riding of Yorkshire, and Hilda. Sydney Ringer died as a result of a stroke on 14 October 1910 at Lastingham, where he was buried with his wife, alongside their daughter Annie, in St Mary's churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 35760


Risley, Sir Herbert Hope (1851-1911), administrator in India and anthropologist, was born on 4 January 1851 at Akeley, Buckinghamshire, where his father, John Holford Risley, was rector. His mother was Frances, daughter of John Hope, at one time residency surgeon of Gwalior. On 13 July 1863 he was elected a scholar of Winchester College, a privilege which his ancestors had for many generations enjoyed as founder's kin. He won there the Goddard scholarship and the Queen's gold medal for the Latin essay, and in 1869 obtained a scholarship at New College, Oxford. He passed on 29 April 1871 the competitive examination for the Indian Civil Service, but he graduated BA in 1872 with a second class in law and modern history before he joined the service on 3 June 1873 ['see 'competition wallahs]. 
Posted to Midnapore as assistant collector, Risley at once became interested in district life, and until his death, despite service in the secretariat, he cultivated an intimate knowledge of the peoples of India. In 1910 he asserted that a knowledge of facts concerning the religions and habits of the peoples of India equipped a civil servant with a passport to popular regard. His zeal for work and his literary power early attracted the attention of the government, and Sir William Wilson Hunter, then engaged on the compilation of the 'Gazetteer of Bengal' as director-general of statistics, made Risley on 15 February 1875 one of his five assistants, entrusting him with the accounts of Hazaribagh and Lohardaga. He rapidly rose to the rank of assistant secretary, and in 1879 was promoted to the imperial secretariat as under-secretary to the government of India in the home department. On 17 June 1879 he married, at Simla, Elsie Julie, daughter of Friedrich Oppermann of Hanover; they had a son and a daughter. 
Despite his unusually rapid promotion, Risley's heart was still in the districts, and by his own wish he reverted to them, going to Govindpur in 1880, Hazaribagh, and then in 1884 to Manbhum, where he superintended the survey of the 'ghatwali' and other forms of land tenure. In January 1885 he was employed on the congenial task of compiling information on the castes and occupations of the people of Bengal. He thus acquired a wide acquaintance with scientific authorities in Europe, including Paul Topinard, whose system of anthropological research Risley applied to India. His four-volume work entitled 'The Tribes and Castes of Bengal' (1891-2) was well received by the public as well as the government, and he was made an 'officier' of the Academie Francaise in 1891. Next year he was created CIE. Continuing to work in the secretariat, in 1898 he was acting financial secretary to the government of India. In 1899 he was appointed census commissioner, and his monumental contribution to the census report of 1901 was epitomized in volume 1 of the new edition of the 'Imperial Gazetteer of India' (1907). From the date of his report a new chapter was opened in Indian official literature, and the census volumes, until then regarded as dull, were at once read and reviewed in every country. His categorization of Indian castes and occupations had an enduring social and political effect. 
In 1901 he became director of ethnography for India, and next year home secretary in Lord Curzon's administration, acting for a short time as member of council. He had served as member and secretary to the police commission in 1890, and his special knowledge was of great value to Lord Curzon in many administrative matters, including the partition of Bengal. When the administrative reforms suggested by Lord Morley came under the consideration of Lord Minto in 1908-9, Risley proved an admirable instrument for the work in hand, and he was retained for two years beyond normal retiring age. With clear judgement and rare facility of expression Risley excavated from an enormous mass of official documents the main issues on reform, enlarged councils, and administrative changes, and he submitted the necessary points to Minto's council. Although every provincial government held different views, Risley directed the members of council to conclusions and compromises, and finally put their orders into resolutions, regulations, and laws. He was created CSI in 1904 and KCIE in 1907. In 1910 he returned to England to fill the post of permanent secretary in the judicial and public department at the India Office. 
Despite the pressure of his secretarial labours, Risley continued to pursue his study of ethnography and anthropometry. He was more than once president of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, and became president of the Royal Anthropological Institute in January 1910. On the processes by which non-Aryan tribes are admitted into Hinduism he was recognized to be the greatest living authority, and he argued on anthropometric grounds that the Kolarians south of Bengal are not to be distinguished from their Dravidian neighbours. He strongly advocated the addition of ethnology to the necessary training of civilians for work in India. His chief contributions to literature, besides those already cited, were the 'Gazetteer of Sikhim: Introductory Chapter' (1894) and 'The People of India' (1908; 2nd edn 1915). His work completely revolutionized the native Indian view of ethnological inquiry. A contemporary recorded: 'Twenty years ago, in his own province of Bengal, inquiries into the origin of caste and custom by men of alien creed were often... resented. Ethnology is now one of the recognised objects of investigation of the Vangiya Sahitya Parisat. (Anderson)' Risley died at his home, South View, Hill Side, Wimbledon, Surrey, on 30 September 1911, pursuing almost to the last his favourite studies despite distressing illness. He was buried in Wimbledon cemetery. His widow married Sir Fenton John Aylmer, bt, in 1913 and died in 1934. 


@@@@@


doc= 35761


Ritchie, Anne Isabella, Lady Ritchie (1837-1919), writer, was born on 9 June 1837 at 18 Albion Street, north of Hyde Park, London, the elder surviving daughter of William Makepeace Thackeray (1811-1863) and his wife, Isabella Gethin Creagh Shawe (1816-1893). The circumstances of her birth entered family legend: the homeopathic doctor recommended by her grandmother proved incompetent, and her father was forced to dash out in search of a replacement. 
The Thackerays, recently returned from France, were then leading a somewhat hand-to-mouth existence. Hard up and still uncertain that a literary career was desirable, Thackeray had only just begun to take his first steps in the world of journalism. A much darker cloud hanging over the young Annie's early life was the growing ill health of her mother. After the birth of her third child, Harriet Marian (known as Minnie) ['see 'Stephen, Harriet Marian], in the summer of 1840, Isabella sank into depression. On holiday in Margate she tried to drown her elder daughter in the sea, thought better of it, and pulled her out. Deeply traumatized by the incident, Annie did not tell her father about it until many years later. 'En route' for Ireland a month later, Isabella made an unsuccessful suicide attempt. She never regained her reason. 
Together with the girls' faithful nurse Jessie Brodie, the Thackerays decamped to Paris to stay with the children's paternal stepgrandfather and grandmother, Major and Mrs Henry Carmichael-Smyth. The combination of family poverty and Isabella's insanity left an indelible impression on the three-year-old's mind. In a later memoir Annie recalled Brodie asking Thackeray to change his last $5 note, with the children playing in one room and 'Mamma raving in the other' (Ritchie, 130). With Isabella lodged in a variety of continental sanitoria -- she was eventually placed with a private keeper in Camberwell -- Annie and Minnie remained with their grandparents for the next six years, affectionately treated but exposed to Mrs Carmichael-Smyth's immensely gloomy brand of evangelical Christianity. Late in 1846 their father, who had by this stage established his literary career, bought a house in Young Street, Kensington, where he installed his daughters under the care of a succession of governesses. 
Thackeray was devoted to his daughters, who eagerly reciprocated this affection. Annie's memoirs draw a lively picture of life at Young Street and its distinguished visitors, among whom Tennyson and the Carlyles remained lasting friends. As they grew older the girls accompanied their father on several foreign trips, notably to Italy in the winter of 1853-4, while Annie frequently doubled up as his amanuensis: much of the manuscript of 'The Newcomes' (1853-5), for example, is in her hand. Though he frequently commented on his elder daughter's supposed plainness, often addressing her as 'My dearest fat', Thackeray esteemed her intellect, and even more, perhaps, her moral qualities. As editor of the 'Cornhill Magazine', he shepherded her first piece of journalism, 'Little scholars', into print. After his resignation the magazine serialized her first novel, 'The Story of Elizabeth' (1863). 
Inevitably, Annie was deeply affected by her father's death later in the same year. The two volumes of her private journals, composed in 1864 and 1878, are oddly masochistic in their assumption of past unworthiness. Thackeray left over $20,000. With this the girls, at first accompanied by Mrs Carmichael-Smyth, who died late in 1864, established themselves in a small house at Brompton. On Minnie's marriage to the literary journalist Leslie Stephen in 1867, the three of them lived together at Onslow Gardens. Helped by her father's connections (her books continued to be serialized in the 'Cornhill') and the success of novels such as 'The Village on the Cliff' (1867) and 'Old Kensington' (1873), Annie's literary reputation was by now firmly established. Annie's fiction dates exclusively from a twenty-five-year period ending in the mid-1880s. Though making use of a number of fashionable genres, for example the governess melodrama ('The Village on the Cliff') and the social panorama ('Old Kensington'), its strongest roots are autobiographical. 'The Story of Elizabeth' draws on her early years in Paris under the somewhat strict supervision of her paternal grandmother, while 'Mrs Dymond', set in the Lake District and Paris at the time of the Franco-Prussian War, incorporates her own memories of the commune in 1871. Her other fiction includes 'Miss Angel' (1875), based on the life of the artist Angelica Kauffman (1741-1807), and a volume of stories, 'Bluebeard's Keys and other Stories' (1874). Minnie died of pre-eclampsia in 1875 and critics have noted the energizing influence on Annie's work of Minnie's death and her own subsequent engagement: the novella 'From the Island' (1877), set in Julia Cameron's house at Freshwater and containing thinly disguised portraits of several friends, marks a considerable advance in her technique. Though highly regarded in their time, her novels never quite reach the top rank of mid-Victorian fiction. None the less they are full of interest and drama. One of their most welcome characteristics is a refusal to settle for the stock situations of the time. In 'The Story of Elizabeth', for instance, it is hinted that the heroine, Elizabeth Gilmour, is competing with her widowed mother for the attentions of family friend Sir John Dampier (an implication that annoyed contemporary reviewers). Catherine George in 'The Village on the Cliff' ends up refusing handsome Dick Butler, using her late husband's legacy to bring up her younger sisters and urging Dick to marry the true object of his affection. 
Subsequently Annie surprised everybody -- not least Leslie Stephen, who found the couple canoodling on the sofa -- by marrying, on 2 August 1877, her cousin Richmond Thackeray Willoughby Ritchie (1854-1912), seventeen years her junior and at this point still a Cambridge undergraduate. George Eliot feelingly described the match as 'one of several instances that I know of lately, showing that young men of even brilliant advantages will often choose as their life's companion a woman whose attractions are wholly of the spiritual order' (Ritchie, 171). Despite the difference in years, and Richmond's intermittently roving eye -- Annie wrote enigmatically that she loved him 'not well enough to refuse him' (Gerin, 174) -- the marriage was a success, and produced two children, Hester and Billy. After the publication of 'Mrs Dymond' (1885) Annie confined herself to reminiscences, 'belles lettres', and the editing of her father's works. Richmond enjoyed a distinguished career as a civil servant at the India Office, and was awarded a KCB in 1907 and a permanent under-secretaryship before dying prematurely of pneumonia in 1912. His wife had by this stage become one of the great ornaments of early twentieth-century literary life. She was the friend of Henry James. Stevenson had written her a poem. George Eliot had declared that with the partial exception of Trollope she was the only modern novelist she cared to read. A portrait by Sargent, to which a troop of admirers subscribed, shows a serene and grey-haired old lady with distinct traces of her father's physiognomy. 
Having survived the First World War, when the windows of her house in Chelsea were blown in by an enemy bomb, Annie died on 20 February 1919 at her home, The Porch, Freshwater, Isle of Wight. She was buried in Hampstead on 4 March 1919. Among her obituaries, one of the most evocative is that contributed to the 'Times Literary Supplement' by her stepniece Virginia Woolf (who also drew her as Mrs Hilbery in 'Night and Day'.) Although her novels are largely forgotten, posterity will remember her both as the diligent custodian of her father's memory (her biographical prefaces to the 1911 'Centenary Edition' of his works, collected as 'The Two Thackerays', 1988, are of lasting value) and as a vivid memorialist -- roles which frequently, as in the autobiographical 'Chapters from some Memoirs' (1894), overlap. A mass of surviving correspondence, much of it unpublished, confirms her centrality to the late-Victorian literary scene. 


@@@@@


doc= 35762


Ritchie, Charles Thomson, first Baron Ritchie of Dundee (1838-1906), politician, was born on 19 November 1838 at Hawkhill, Dundee, the third of the three sons of William Ritchie (1798-1867), landowner and jute merchant, and his first wife, Elizabeth, daughter of James Thomson. William Ritchie, of Rockhill, Broughty Ferry, Forfarshire, was head of the firm of William Ritchie & Son of London and Dundee, East India merchants, jute spinners, and manufacturers; the family had been connected with the burgh of Dundee for two centuries. James Ritchie, the eldest son, was lord mayor of London in 1903-4. Charles Ritchie was educated for a business career. He attended the City of London School (1849-53), and in 1853 he joined the London office of his father's firm. On 7 December 1858, a few days after his twentieth birthday, he married Margaret, daughter of Thomas Ower of Perth. They had three sons and seven daughters. Until 1874, Ritchie worked as a partner in the east London offices of the family business. 
In 1874 Ritchie was returned at the head of the poll as tory MP for the immense two-member working-class constituency of Tower Hamlets. A tory untainted by aristocratic connections, Ritchie benefited from the reaction against Gladstone's first government; he may also have benefited from the mismanagement of the Liberal member for Tower Hamlets, A. S. Ayrton. Tories dubbed him a 'radical' when, after his first session, he reported on his work in the House of Commons in a speech to his constituents. In the 1875 session he secured a bill extending the 1871 'Bank Holiday Act' to dockyard and customs workers, increasing his popularity with the east London working class. Ritchie's constituency contained several large sugar refineries, and during the Disraeli government of 1874-80 he became involved in the campaign against the European bounties paid for the export of sugar beet which adversely affected both English sugar refiners and West Indian sugar planters. In 1879 he moved for the appointment of a select committee on sugar to investigate the foreign bounties and report on remedial measures; Ritchie himself proposed a 'countervailing duty' equivalent to the bounty. Though he claimed that the duty would restore the principle of free trade, infringed by sugar bounties, Ritchie was in fact pressing for retaliation. After the Conservative election defeat of 1880, he became a leading member of the fair-trade movement. He led a deputation of sugar workers to call upon the prime minister, Gladstone, and in 1881 he introduced a motion proposing countervailing duties on sugar. He was opposed by Joseph Chamberlain, president of the Board of Trade, a parliamentary encounter which, the latter recalled (in a speech on 21 October 1903), began his conversion from free trade to protectionism -- a curious reversal of roles, as Ritchie was later to emerge as Chamberlain's leading free trade opponent. Ritchie's vigorous criticism of the 1880-85 Gladstone government earned him a reputation for business ability. Having been returned for Tower Hamlets again in 1880 (at this election he came second to the Liberal James Bryce) Ritchie took the seat of St George-in-the-East when Tower Hamlets was divided into seven seats at the 1885 redistribution. He was returned for St George's at the elections of 1885 and 1886. 
In Salisbury's caretaker administration of 1885-6, Ritchie was appointed financial secretary to the Admiralty under Lord George Hamilton. Hamilton found him a first-class administrator but a poor speaker with an ungracious, curt manner. At the Admiralty Ritchie chaired a departmental committee investigating the management of dockyards and especially the slow production of warships. The committee succeeded in accelerating the construction of ironclads (from seven to under three years), and reducing the cost. 
In August 1886 Salisbury formed his second ministry, and Ritchie was appointed president of the Local Government Board, initially without a seat in the cabinet; Henry Chaplin had refused the office on the grounds of his exclusion from cabinet. Balfour recognized Ritchie's ability but described him as a 'roughish diamond [who] will never rise as an orator in the House of Commons beyond the stage of a vigorous speaker on matters of business' (Williams, 156). Ritchie was the minister charged with the reform of local government, a measure central to the strategy of the Salisbury government. Not only was a democratic reform of the archaic system of county government the corollary of the extension of household suffrage to the counties in 1884; but devolution to local authorities was the Unionists' alternative to the Liberals' home rule. Ritchie initially proposed a limited bill along lines proposed by Hicks Beach -- 'if the landowners are to have half the taxation they should have half the representation too'. By November Ritchie had abandoned this plan in favour of a wider scheme, possibly at the instance of Walter Long, his parliamentary under-secretary. Ritchie proposed to sweep away highway and sanitary boards, boards of guardians, and the administrative side of quarter sessions, and establish county and district councils elected by household suffrage. The transfer of the poor law to county councils elected by labourers was strenuously opposed by Salisbury, who objected on the grounds that it was 'rather like leaving the cat in charge of the cream jug'. But Salisbury's proposal to leave the board of guardians out of the bill was vigorously resisted by Lord Randolph Churchill. Ritchie played little part in the involved cabinet disputes over local government, which pivoted on Salisbury's attempt to manoeuvre Churchill into an isolated and indefensible position. In spite of Churchill's support for his wider proposals, Ritchie did not identify himself too closely with Churchill; as W. H. Smith told Salisbury, Ritchie 'is a little wild, but he is manageable'. 
Churchill resigned at Christmas time 1886, G. J. Goschen became chancellor of the exchequer, and the cabinet agreed a local government scheme in January 1887. The existing system of municipal government (household suffrage plus 'ex officio' aldermen) was to be introduced in the counties, thus meeting conditions set by Chamberlain. But, at Salisbury's prompting, poor-law and district councils were excluded from the scheme. 
Ritchie was promoted to the cabinet in May 1887. Preparation of the 'Local Government Bill' occupied him for nearly a year. He introduced the bill in March 1888; it was a voluminous and complex measure, and Ritchie piloted it successfully through parliament, displaying, as the parliamentary journalist Henry Lucy wrote, 'an ability, an energy and a tact which quickly won for him a high position in the House'. An agreement between Chamberlain and Ritchie to support each other against critics in their own parties smoothed the bill's passage. Ritchie's main difficulty occurred over the licensing clauses of the bill. Though these reduced the number of licences, the clauses offended the temperance lobby by providing financial compensation for holders of cancelled licences, and they were withdrawn to save the bill. The 'Local Government Bill' passed in August 1888. Perhaps its biggest weakness concerned London, which received separate treatment under the bill. Ritchie had proposed to create a county council for London, balanced by strong district councils, but in cabinet Goschen, who was anxious to protect the traditional privileges of the City, insisted on dropping district councils. The result was an over-mighty and over-centralized London county council. Ritchie advised that the 1889 LCC elections should be fought on non-party lines, but the Liberals or Progressives defied his advice, achieving a runaway victory; Ritchie was accused of permanently damaging Conservative interests in London. 
In addition to the 'Local Government Act', Ritchie was responsible for acts on allotments (1887, 1890), infectious diseases notification (1889), housing of the working classes (1890), and public health for London (1891). A second attempt to deal with the licensing question, in the 'Local Taxation Bill' of 1890, was defeated. Largely thanks to Ritchie, the Salisbury government of 1886-92 achieved a significant output of social reform. As Beatrice Webb wrote in her diary in 1890, 'Ritchie, the least known, is carrying out with painstaking industry the instructions left at the Local Government Board by his radical predecessor, Sir Charles Dilke -- and relieving the government of the reproach of being reactionary' ('Diary', 349). Along with W. H. Smith and Goschen, Ritchie represented the new style of Conservative businessmen politicians -- efficient, managerial, more interested in legislation and administration than rhetoric, the middle-class heirs to Disraeli's legacy of social reform. Ritchie's legislation helped make the Unionist alliance acceptable to Chamberlain; but Ritchie was acutely unpopular with his own party. The 'right wing' of country gentlemen MPs grumbled at the county councils, and Salisbury attributed the loss of the 1892 election partly to the 'Local Government Act' which, he maintained, alienated Conservative supporters in the counties. (In fact, elective county councils brought economic benefit to landowners; Goschen relieved rates by assigning national taxes to local authorities, and between 1887 and 1892 Treasury support for local government increased from $4 million to $8 million.) 
Ritchie was defeated at St George-in-the-East at the 1892 election by John Benn, the Progressive whip on the LCC, affording a 'half-malicious satisfaction' to some Conservatives. In 1894-5 he sat as an alderman on the LCC. He unsuccessfully contested Walsall in February 1893. Ritchie was returned for the safe middle-class seat of Croydon at a by-election in May 1895, and he continued to represent the seat until his retirement from the House of Commons in 1905. 
Ritchie was appointed president of the Board of Trade in Salisbury's third government. He was largely responsible for the legislative output of the 1895-1900 government, but his measures were unspectacular, as was the government's domestic record. He introduced the 'Conciliation Act' (1896), establishing conciliation boards for the settlement of labour disputes. The 'Light Railways Act' (1896) empowered local authorities compulsorily to purchase land for light railways. Ritchie initiated the establishment of a commercial intelligence branch at the Board of Trade (1899), responsible for providing information for manufacturers on empire markets. In 1898 his 'Merchant Shipping (Mercantile Marine Fund) Act' boosted the numbers of British merchant seamen by making an allowance to shipowners to carry boys for enrolment in the Royal Naval Reserve. The 'Railway Employment (Prevention of Accidents) Act' of 1900 improved railway employees' safety. 
After the 1900 election, Ritchie was promoted to home secretary, in spite of the fact that, as Balfour sarcastically remarked to Salisbury, he was 'the only member of the Cabinet so far who has put forward a personal claim!' (Young, 192). At the Home Office, he passed a large and complex measure consolidating and amending the 'Factories and Workshops Act' (1901). His 'Youthful Offenders Act' permitted young offenders on remand to be committed to the charge of a responsible person, rather than a prison or workhouse. Ritchie's chief legislative measure for 1902 was a licensing bill, which left out the question of compensation and dealt mainly with the suppression of drunkenness; it was well received by his own supporters. 
In July 1902 Balfour succeeded Salisbury as prime minister and Hicks Beach resigned as chancellor of the exchequer. Austen Chamberlain and George Hamilton were named as possible chancellors, but the appointment went to Ritchie. Edward Hamilton, the snobbish Treasury secretary, complained in his diary that Ritchie was 'much too second-class. The first qualifications of a Chancellor of the Exchequer are 'character' and being a 'gentleman'' ('Diary of Sir E. W. Hamilton', 390). However, he found Ritchie pleasant and easy to get on with, though without a mind of his own, 'and being somewhat lazily inclined I expect he will be keen to be led and to concur' (ibid., 423). Ritchie, who was now sixty-four, had no illusions about the post. He was reluctant to move from the Home Office, and he was already apprehensive about Chamberlain's fiscal plans. Yet it was as chancellor of the exchequer that Ritchie achieved distinction as a statesman, rather than a competent official politician. 
The registration duty of 3died on imported corn had been revived by Hicks Beach in the budget of 1902, and in October of that year Joseph Chamberlain suggested remitting the corn duty in favour of Canada as a preliminary to imperial preference. Ritchie objected strongly, and he circulated the cabinet with a memorandum (15 November 1902) calling for postponement of the issue until the budget. Ritchie's memorandum, which was largely drafted by Hamilton, stated the Treasury view that preference involved charging the British taxpayer in order to benefit the colonies; it also warned of the electoral danger of the expensive bread issue. On 19 November the cabinet provisionally decided to retain the corn duty for the time being and to make a preferential remission towards the colonies. Ritchie was the leading dissentient. In November Chamberlain departed on a winter tour of South Africa and, in his absence, Ritchie's attitude hardened. He was accused at the time and subsequently of deliberately misleading Balfour and the cabinet by remaining silent over the corn duty during the winter of 1902-3. 'The hardening of Ritchie's Cobdenite orthodoxy proceeded throughout the winter in the recesses of the Treasury, without the Prime Minister being aware of what was going on', wrote Blanche Dugdale, Balfour's biographer. In a speech to his constituents (18 November 1903) Ritchie denied this charge, claiming that he spoke repeatedly to Balfour over the winter. As Edward Hamilton's diary shows, Ritchie endeavoured to enlist Balfour's support for the Treasury view. At the end of February 1903 he summoned up courage and warned Balfour that he would resign if preference was given on corn. 
Rather than accept Ritchie's resignation, Balfour delayed a decision until Chamberlain's return; he sent the news of Ritchie's ultimatum out to Chamberlain in Madeira. After Chamberlain's return, the cabinet agreed (31 March 1903) to Ritchie's proposal to drop the corn duty in his budget. When Chamberlain urged retention of the corn duty and preferential remission in favour of Canada, Ritchie once more threatened resignation. Chamberlain replied that if the duty was not to be used for preferential purposes, it might as well be dropped. Almost single-handed, Ritchie had succeeded in wrecking Chamberlain's plan for preferential remission of the corn duty, and this, as Balfour wrote, after Chamberlain 'had just reason to suppose that in November the Cabinet as a whole were in his favour' (Chamberlain to duke of Devonshire, 27 Aug 1903, Sandars MSS, 740). Ritchie introduced his first and only budget on 23 April 1903. Budgeting for a post-South African War surplus of $10,816 million on the basis of existing taxation, Ritchie cut 4died from the income tax and abolished the corn duty. His budget speech, which was drafted almost entirely by Hamilton, proclaimed the government's support for free trade; it angered Balfour, because it transgressed his policy of neutrality, and it infuriated Chamberlain and the protectionists. 
Chamberlain responded to his defeat in cabinet by making his famous Birmingham speech (15 May 1903), launching the policy of imperial preference, followed by a speech in the house (21 May), linking old age pensions to fiscal reform, in defiance of his undertaking to Balfour to remain silent. This annoyed Balfour and enraged Ritchie. Ritchie was fortified by Hamilton and Mowatt at the Treasury, who dissuaded him from resigning. 'If you were to resign [Chamberlain] would have succeeded', wrote Mowatt, 'but if you remain, and the Cabinet does not desert you, your victory becomes more established every day, and with it your power to resist a policy which I know you regard as disastrous' (23 May 1903, Ritchie MSS, BL, Add. MS 53780). Ritchie drew closer to the duke of Devonshire and the free trade ministers. After agreeing a form of words with Devonshire and Lansdowne and consulting Balfour, Ritchie made a speech on 9 June declaring his support for free trade: 'I cannot be party to a policy which, in my opinion, would be detrimental to both the country and the colonies', he told the house. He spoke, Balfour commented to Lady Elcho, 'quite extraordinarily badly, without force or charm or dexterity or logic' (Ridley and Percy, 200). 
During the summer recess, Balfour conducted his independent inquiry into the fiscal question. He bypassed the Treasury and communicated directly with customs officials, causing Ritchie to complain that the prime minister was using the civil service to undermine him. In August Balfour circulated two cabinet papers: 'Economic Notes on Insular Free Trade', a general essay on retaliation which was later published, and a confidential Blue Paper proposing colonial preference. The cabinet met on 13 August, and Ritchie, along with the duke of Devonshire, Lord Balfour of Burleigh, and Lord George Hamilton, objected strongly to the Blue Paper, though no decision was reached. During the month which intervened before the cabinet's next meeting, Balfour endeavoured to dissuade Devonshire from resigning, offering if necessary to drop the Blue Paper policy of preference on food. On 9 September Chamberlain wrote offering his resignation. Before the cabinet met on 14 September, Ritchie and Balfour of Burleigh circulated memoranda, protesting strongly against the Blue Paper and imperial preference. At the meeting, Balfour gave notice to Ritchie and Balfour of Burleigh because of their opposition to imperial preference. Ritchie later claimed that he had been dismissed on false pretences. As he wrote in an address to his constituents: 'We were told nothing about the communications which had passed between the prime minister and Mr Chamberlain. We therefore knew nothing about his proposed resignation and the consequent dropping of the preferential part of the scheme' (Ritchie MSS, BL, Add. MS 53780). 
On 15 September Ritchie met the free trade ministers, Balfour of Burleigh, George Hamilton, and Devonshire; they agreed that they should all submit their resignations that evening. On 16 September, after Balfour had received the resignation letters of Ritchie, Hamilton, and Balfour of Burleigh, he saw Devonshire and told him of Chamberlain's decision to resign. The following day the duke withdrew his resignation, and on 18 September Chamberlain's letter of resignation was published. Ritchie now led the attack on the duke, persuading him to change his mind once more. He wrote to Devonshire (28 September), charging him with breaking an understanding that the free trade ministers should all act together, and that Ritchie, Hamilton, and Balfour of Burleigh should be given an opportunity to reconsider their position if the duke decided to stay. By appealing to his sense of honour, Ritchie made the duke acutely uncomfortable, and on 2 October he resigned. 
Ritchie has been described by the historian A. M. Gollin as 'the forgotten man' of the controversy (Gollin, 29). He was instrumental not only in dropping the corn duty but also in persuading the duke of Devonshire to resign. Ritchie displayed a courage and determination during the controversy which owed not a little to his recognition that his cabinet career was nearing an end. As so often in cabinet disputes, issues of principle were overlaid by personal feeling. Ritchie was driven by distrust of Chamberlain. He probably resented Chamberlain's popularity and success and, as Balfour's secretary J. S. Sandars suggested, the fact that Chamberlain 'who, though he only became a member of a Unionist administration in 1895, had passed him in a stride'. After Salisbury's retirement, Ritchie complained to Edward Hamilton that Chamberlain not Balfour dominated the cabinet; and it was Chamberlain's ascendancy that he determined to block. Ritchie was incapable of hiding his hatred of Chamberlain: Almeric Fitzroy observed him with the outgoing ministers at the council at Buckingham Palace, lurking behind a pillar, 'whence in melodramatic gloom he glared fixedly at the villain of the piece [Chamberlain], who was quite undisturbed by the demonstration' (Fitzroy, 1.158). Ritchie moreover was excessively under the influence of the Treasury officials, especially Edward Hamilton, a dependence which emerges clearly from the account of the crisis in Hamilton's diary. None the less, Ritchie was largely responsible for blocking Chamberlain's policy of imperial preference; but whether this was a good thing, or whether Ritchie envisaged any coherent alternative to the problems which Chamberlain's proposal was designed to address, is by no means clear. 
Ritchie played a small part in the Unionist free-trade movement after his resignation. He was devastated by the death of his wife on 10 February 1905. In the same year, on his retirement as MP, he was created Baron Ritchie of Dundee (not a viscount, as he had a right to expect). In 1906 he was unofficially invited to become chairman of the poor-law royal commission, a 'stupendous job', as he remarked -- the fitting conclusion to the career of a statesman consistently sympathetic towards the welfare of the poor. Ritchie died suddenly in Biarritz on 9 January 1906 before he could take up the appointment. He was buried in Kensal Green. He was succeeded by his second son, Charles (1866-1948); his eldest son, William, had died young in 1879. 
Ritchie was a big, dark, swarthy man. According to Sandars, he was given to 'heavy and affected pleasantry... His abilities were of the second class, but he was a hard-working minister of pedestrian methods' (Young, 199). This was unfair. In a party of aristocrats and social climbers, Ritchie's virtues were at a discount. His business skill, his industry, and persistence were essential to the legislative output of the Salisbury governments; and though he may have lacked judgement during the crisis of 1902-3, he certainly displayed courage and strength of character. 


@@@@@


doc= 35763


Ritchie, David George (1853-1903), philosopher, was born on 26 October 1853 at the manse in Jedburgh, Roxburghshire, the first of three children of Elizabeth Bradfute Dudgeon and her husband, the Revd Dr George Ritchie, Presbyterian minister and moderator of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland. His was a family long linked to scholarly pursuits; he numbered among his relatives Sir William Hamilton's predecessor in the chair of logic at the University of Edinburgh, Dr David Ritchie, who was noted both for his sweeping exclusion of metaphysics from his teaching and for being 'more illustrious on the curling pond than in the professorial chair' (A. Grant, 'The Story of the University of Edinburgh', 1884). Another family member, the Revd David Aitken, travelled to Germany in 1826 to visit Schleiermacher, Hegel, Neander, and Schlegel, and recorded his impressions in a diary which D. G. Ritchie subsequently published. The family was also connected to the Carlyles. 
Ritchie was a frail and bookish child. Discouraged from associating with the town's children, he was nurtured in the quiet of the manse. Fishing and reading were his primary pastimes. He began study at the Jedburgh Academy, where he quickly showed proofs of his scholarly inclination, and proceeded to Edinburgh University, where he read psychology, logic, and metaphysics with Campbell Fraser, moral philosophy (including Kant) with Henry Calderwood, and Greek with J. S. Blackie. It was here that he was introduced to philosophers who were to influence the direction of his own philosophical thought, most notably Plato, Aristotle, Kant, Hegel, Sir William Hamilton, and J. S. Mill. As an active member of the university philosophical society, Ritchie presented and discussed papers on such philosophical problems as the intuitionist theory of moral conduct, Hamilton's theory of causation, and Kantian objectivity. Ritchie enjoyed an illustrious undergraduate career, during which he won medals in Latin, Greek, logic, metaphysics, and moral philosophy. He graduated MA in 1875 with first-class honours, and was awarded the Scottish universities' classical scholarship. This was awarded for the first time in 1875 to the head man of the four Scottish universities; Ritchie was easily judged the most worthy candidate. 
Like other promising Scottish students, Ritchie went to Balliol College, Oxford, where he held an exhibition. The college provided a vibrant and dynamic environment for the young scholar, characterized as it was by Jowett's cultivation of Platonic studies and public service, and by T. H. Green's development of idealist philosophy. Tutored by Benjamin Jowett, Green, R. L. Nettleship, and A. C. Bradley, Ritchie not only earned a first in classical moderations (1875) and in the final school of Greats (1878), but more importantly, he developed two abiding interests: philosophical idealism and social reform. 
By the end of his studies, Ritchie had become sceptical of religious doctrines, and felt unable to take holy orders as his family had long planned. Instead he read for the English bar, thinking that he could there pursue his interest in political philosophy. But though elements of legal theory interested him, he had no desire to practise as a barrister and accepted the offer of a tutorship at Jesus College, Oxford, where he was elected to a fellowship in 1878, convinced that students and teachers of politics were better equipped than constitutional lawyers to inquire into political thought. Despite heavy teaching obligations as a tutor at Jesus, as a temporary tutor at both Balliol and Trinity colleges, and as a lecturer for the summer extension programme and the combined college lectures in 'literae humaniores', Ritchie produced most of his published work during this time. 
While at Oxford, Ritchie did not live a cloistered life. He was actively engaged in a variety of reform causes and he rapidly earned a reputation for his progressive political sympathies. An early friend, F. C. Montague, recalled: 'He was a zealous democrat, although his mode of thought seemed to have little affinity with that of the common mind. He was a socialist, and had the strongest belief in state action whenever possible' (Ritchie, 7). In 1879 Arnold Toynbee invited him, along with Alfred Milner and several others, to join a society of 'people of radical sympathies' which met to discuss contemporary social issues and to formulate principles for political and social action. Ritchie's attention to reform was also reflected by his activities in the Co-operative Society of Oxford and such other organizations as the Society for the Study of Social Questions, the Social Science Club, the Oxford branch of the Guild of St Matthew, and the ethical societies. Elected to the Fabian Society in 1889, Ritchie addressed meetings on social evolution, natural rights, and the ethics of party politics. He was planning a series of essays to be published under the aegis of the Fabian Society when he broke from the society in November 1893 over indications that the Fabian policy of permeating the Liberal Party might be abandoned in favour of the creation of an independent political party. This, he considered, would play into tory hands, undermine the reforms already secured by the Liberal government, and inaugurate a period of political instability. While he promoted socialist tenets, most notably in his attack on individualism and a minimalist state, Ritchie did not hold to any one socialist programme, and was even uncomfortable with several doctrines advanced by his fellow Fabians. 
In 1882 Ritchie married Flora Lindsay, daughter of Colonel A. A. Macdonell of Lochgarry and sister of Arthur Macdonnell, later Boden professor of Sanskrit at Oxford. As secretary of the Oxford women's Liberal association, Flora Macdonnell addressed local meetings on reform issues and campaigned for the crematorium movement. This activity, however, was curtailed by a long illness which troubled her following the birth of twin daughters, only one of whom survived. Flora Ritchie died on 24 July 1888; she was cremated in the Woking crematorium (hers was among the earliest official cremations in the United Kingdom), and her ashes were interred at Holywell cemetery, Oxford. The following year, Ritchie married Ellen Sara Haycraft, a novelist and Fabian, the sister of John Berry Haycraft, professor of physiology at University College, Cardiff; a son, Arthur, was born to them. The independent intellectual and political interests of both Flora Macdonnell and Ellen Haycraft (who lectured for the Fabian Society and who remained an active member after her husband's resignation) contributed in part to Ritchie's strong advocacy of transforming the position of women. A persistent critic of the restrictions circumscribing women's public roles, Ritchie considered a radical reorganization of the national economy to be an indispensable condition for the real, rather than the nominal, advancement of women. 
In 1894 Ritchie was appointed to the chair of logic and metaphysics in St Andrews University. In addition to serving as dean of the faculty of arts and as a representative of the senatus at the university court, he delivered a large number of lectures in logic, psychology, metaphysics, and the history of philosophy. Among his students Ritchie was known, and indeed by some idealized, for his inexhaustible patience and his quiet, scholarly lectures, which were characterized by their precision and exactitude. St Andrews had good reason to appreciate his diplomacy in the long-standing dispute about its union with University College, Dundee; he enlivened difficult meetings by writing satiric verse and prose skits on the principal protagonists. In one area only did contemporaries at St Andrews find him wanting: 'It is with pain', observed the university newspaper, 'that one has to record that Professor Ritchie is of no use on the golf course, either inside or outside a bunker' ('College Echoes', 13 Dec 1901). Contemporaries, however, frequently expressed admiration for the breadth and versatility of his knowledge, his charm, and his humour. He appreciated poetry, art, and local history, and from his days as an undergraduate in Edinburgh had a keen interest in botany. His wide circle of friends and colleagues included R. B. Haldane, Alfred Milner, Samuel Alexander, and Gilbert Murray. His significant contributions to the study and teaching of philosophy were recognized in 1898 by the conferral of the honorary degree of LLD by his alma mater. 
Ritchie adhered to the idealist school of philosophy which, under the aegis of T. H. Green, Edward Caird, and F. H. Bradley, dominated British philosophical debate from the 1870s to the end of the century ['see 'British idealists]. While he wrote on logic and metaphysics, Ritchie was most interested in developing a political and social philosophy from idealist foundations. It was in his analysis of the application of evolutionary theories to social thought that he struck positions of the most originality and exerted the greatest influence. From the early 1880s he made a close study of Darwin and Lamarck. Dismayed by the 'laissez-faire' conclusions that Herbert Spencer had drawn from evolutionary principles, he argued vigorously in 'Darwinism and Politics' (1889; 3rd edn, 1895) and in 'Principles of State Interference' (1891; 4th edn, 1902) that 'the theory of natural selection lends no support to the political dogma of laissez faire'; rather, evolutionary science pointed to the need for increased state intervention. He challenged the antithesis between the individual and the state that had been established by nineteenth-century Liberals and which continued to underscore opposition to enlarging the role of the state. Arguing that this antithesis was founded on an aggregative view of individuals, Ritchie affirmed that individuals are indivisible from their membership in a society. In response to Mill, he denied that society was merely a collection of autonomous, self-governing individuals, or that state intervention curtailed individual freedom. Criticizing theorists such as Spencer who defined liberty in a negative sense, Ritchie argued that true individual freedom lies not in distinction and separation from others but in community with them. Echoing the classical legacy that was so formative for Ritchie and for his fellow idealists, he regarded the best life to be formed in community with others. 
Breaking down the polarization of the individual and the state led Ritchie, further, to describe the state as a moral entity. 'The state has', he explained, 'as its end, the realisation of the best life by the individual'. The state secured the best life of the individual by providing conditions in which the common good was enhanced. Ritchie accordingly defended compulsory education, factory legislation, and numerous other interventions. He consistently favoured 'intelligent and scientific state action' above piecemeal philanthropic reforms. Reflecting the Fabian faith in specialist planning, Ritchie held that the laws of social evolution, properly examined, could equip the social reformer to guide society in the direction of progress. Vigorously opposed to intuitionism, with its consequent creed of political Conservatism, Ritchie remained a spirited advocate of uncompromising political reform. He ranged himself alongside progressive Liberals or socialists on most contemporary issues: he supported home rule for Ireland; he considered the South African War to be a just conflict; he advocated sweeping reform of property tenure; and he demonstrated a strong belief in world federation. 
A commitment to reform underscored by his view of the organic character of social life prompted Ritchie's authoritative modification of utilitarianism. Much influenced by Green's critique of J. S. Mill, and by his own unique attempt to synthesize Hegel and Darwin, he argued that the moral good is the deliberate adoption of those feelings, acts, and habits which are advantageous, not to the individual, but to the welfare of the community as a whole. By reframing the atomistic basis of utilitarian ethics to incorporate a clearer sense of public interest and a collective good, Ritchie affirmed that idealism and utilitarianism were wholly consistent. This reinterpretation of utilitarianism was characteristic of Ritchie's desire to draw parallels between idealism and other schools of thought. Similarly, in his assiduous study of social evolution, he demonstrated that idealism was not opposed to natural science, as some critics had argued. 
Ritchie's study of social organicism moved him to develop a critique of natural rights theory ('Natural Rights', 1895). He objected to the expectation that individuals possess rights independently from their political or social context, and affirmed instead that rights are acquired only by membership in a society, and that they thereby confer the duties of citizenship. While sympathetic with Ritchie's insistence that rights are sensible only in the context of a society, other liberals such as L. T. Hobhouse and J. A. Hobson expressed concern that Ritchie had too sharply minimized the importance of individual rights to a just and democratic society. None the less, Ritchie was a passionate democrat. He condemned the inequity of class difference, noting too the destructiveness of the inequalities between men and women. While other idealists were vulnerable to the charge of demonstrating a naive optimism in social harmony and co-operation, Ritchie had little faith that any innate sense of sympathy or common feeling could overcome the 'ceaseless struggle and competition' of the evolutionary process. Persuaded by Darwinian theories of natural selection and the struggle for existence, he was struck by the ubiquity of conflict and competition in and among societies. 
Ritchie owed much to Kant and Hegel, and even more to classical philosophy. These influences were mixed with British sources, including Hume, Mill, and Darwin. In 'Darwin and Hegel' (1893) he explored the parallels between the two thinkers. In his 'Philosophical Studies' (1905) Ritchie was particularly concerned to resolve confusion between fact and value, and between origin and validity. Avoiding the more recondite style of other idealists, Ritchie's writing was plain, accessible, and polemical. His insistence that evolutionary theory lent no support for 'laissez-faire' but rather was an argument for increased state intervention was followed by progressive political reformers, such as Sidney Webb and the new Liberals. His vision of a moral state, persuasively outlined in accessible articles and speeches, enjoyed a similar impact. Indeed, more than Green, Ritchie has been credited with establishing the basis for the new Liberal defence of an enlarged state. His communitarian interpretation of the relationship between the individual and the state in a just and progressive society also resonates in contemporary communitarian political theory. 
Ritchie had never been physically robust. As a young man teaching at Oxford, he often succumbed to the strains of a heavy teaching load; for example, after examining 147 men for Greats in 1886, he was prescribed a voyage to New York to recover. None the less, his death on 3 February 1903 at his home, Kennedy House, St Andrews, following a slight bout of rheumatics, was sudden and unexpected. Heart failure was cited as the immediate cause of death. A religious service was held at the college church on 6 February. After cremation in Glasgow, the ashes were interred at the new cemetery, St Andrews. 


@@@@@


doc= 35764


Ritchie, Sir Richmond Thackeray Willoughby (1854-1912), civil servant, was born on 6 August 1854 in Calcutta, the third son of William Ritchie (died 1861), advocate-general of Bengal, and also legal member of the governor-general's council and vice-chancellor of Calcutta University, and his wife, Augusta, daughter of Captain Thomas Trimmer RN. Ritchie was a brilliant student and scholar, as well as an excellent sportsman. In July 1863, at the age of only nine, he gained an Eton College scholarship. At Eton he was a king's scholar, won the prince consort's French prize, and was a Newcastle medallist in his last year. He also achieved membership of the sixth form and Eton Society (Pop) -- a much coveted double accolade for Etonians -- and he was president of the Eton Literary Society. Ritchie's sporting prowess was illustrated by his inclusion in the teams of the Mixed Wall, College Wall, and College Field, and he was also an accomplished player at fives. He received a scholarship to read for the classical tripos at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1874, where he was again active in extra-curricular activities, such as debating, becoming a member of the Magpie and Stump debating society. 
While his father had gone to India in 1853, Ritchie's association with the subcontinent was to be at the India Office in London, which he entered through open competition, and where he served in various capacities for thirty-five years, beginning as a junior clerk while still an undergraduate in 1877. Within a few years he became private secretary to a succession of parliamentary under-secretaries of state from 1883 to 1892, including Sir John Gorst and George Nathaniel Curzon. The India Office gave Ritchie valuable experience of the intricacies of the administrative machinery of Indian administration, as well as a deeper understanding of imperial policies and problems. His efficiency and sagacity impressed the various under-secretaries with whom he worked, while his tact, good manners, and calm temperament made him a good manager of men, inspiring the affection and respect of his colleagues. On 2 August 1877 Ritchie married Anne Isabella Thackeray (1837-1919) ['see 'Ritchie, Anne Isabella], the eldest daughter of his father's first cousin, William Makepeace Thackeray, and seventeen years his senior. The substantial age difference did not impede a happy and successful marriage and they had two children, a son and a daughter. Lady Ritchie wrote a number of novels, memoirs, and essays and was the literary executor of her father. 
From October 1892 to February 1894 Ritchie was private secretary to Sir Arthur Godley (afterwards Lord Kilbracken), and in May 1894 he was appointed secretary to the royal commission on Indian expenditure, a post he held for a few weeks only, before becoming private secretary to the secretary of state for India, Lord George Hamilton. In 1898 Queen Victoria conferred on him the companionship in the Order of the Bath in recognition of his services. Hamilton wrote to Mrs Ritchie in appreciation: 'If the recognition is unusual the work recognised is exceptional. He has been my right hand man since I have been here, and I could not have got through the troubles of the past if I had not been able to rely upon his exceptional powers of work and observation, and the invariably high quality of the work he does. (19 May 1898, Leigh-Smith, 13)' In 1902 Ritchie became secretary to the political and secret department, one of the most influential departments of the India Office. He was created KCB in June 1907, 'an honour', wrote Morley, 'to a public servant who so well deserves honour... Everyone who knows your value in the most difficult post in this office... will recognise the entire justice in what the Prime Minister has done' (J. Morley to R. T. W. Ritchie, 24 June 1907, BL OIOC, Ritchie MSS, MS Eur. C 342). The pinnacle of his career came with the retirement of Godley in 1909, when Ritchie succeeded him as the permanent under-secretary of state, the first member of the India Office staff to be so promoted. He was appointed a companion in the Imperial Service Order in 1912. 
During his long tenure Ritchie worked with several secretaries of state and viceroys varying in temperament and politics, and was associated with a number of significant developments in the Indian empire, including the mission of Sir Francis Younghusband to Lhasa, Tibet, in 1903-4, when Lord Curzon (whom he had known since his Eton days) was viceroy. The negotiations leading to the Anglo-Russian convention of 1907 saw Ritchie working in close collaboration with Lord Morley, the secretary of state for India. The discussions and formulations which resulted in the 1909 constitutional reforms for India saw him similarly working constructively with Morley. The revocation of the partition of Bengal in 1911, in which Ritchie took a close interest, followed months of secret planning and discussion with lords Crewe and Hardinge. He also personally and enthusiastically pressed the case for Edwin Lutyens to be the major architect and planning consultant for the founding of New Delhi as the new capital of British India, which was announced that same year. Ritchie's long tenure at the India Office gave him an unrivalled knowledge and experience that was invaluable for formulators of imperial policy. He was the epitome of the hard-working, perceptive, and diplomatic civil servant who rendered invaluable service in maintaining the administrative structure of the British raj. 
However, unremitting hard work took its toll on Ritchie's health over several years. He fell ill during the summer of 1912, and in September was admitted to a nursing home at 109 St George's Square, Middlesex, where he died on Saturday 12 October of heart failure following upon toxaemia and septic pneumonia. The funeral took place at Hampstead Old Church on Tuesday 15 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 35765


Rivaz, Sir Charles Montgomery (1845-1926), administrator in India, the second son of John Theophilus Rivaz of the Indian Civil Service, of Watford Hall, Watford, and his wife, Mary, daughter of William Lambert, was born at Tirlings Park, Essex, on 11 March 1845. After a successful career at Blackheath proprietary school, he entered the Indian Civil Service in 1864, and was almost immediately appointed to the Punjab. Later three of his brothers were also serving in various capacities in the same province, a circumstance which went far to justify the local witticism which alluded to the family as 'the five Rivaz of the Punjab' (echoing the name of the province, 'the land of the five rivers'). 
After six years of district work Rivaz spent 1871-6 in the provincial secretariat, and was then appointed to be superintendent of Kapurthala state during the minority of the ruling chief. He conducted the affairs of this important state with much success from 1876 to 1885. In 1885 he was created a CSI, and after two years (1885-7) in the Kangra district was made commissioner of Lahore (1887-92), and subsequently promoted to be financial commissioner of the Punjab, a post which he held from 1892 to 1897. 
In October 1897 Rivaz was appointed to the executive council of the governor-general to serve as member in charge of the home department and of the revenue and agricultural departments. With the arrival of Lord Curzon as viceroy in December 1898 the work in these and in the other departments of the government of India became very strenuous, and Rivaz entered a period of heavy and responsible duty. He was not by nature an initiator of large reforms, but he responded readily to all reasonable suggestions for administrative progress and gave them his vigorous support. In one direction, indeed, he might be considered an initiator, namely in the treatment of landed indebtedness in the Punjab. The alarming expropriation of the peasants by the commercial classes had long engaged the attention of the Punjab officials, but many of them hesitated to advocate restricting land alienation by law. With the support of Lord Curzon, however, and the assistance of Denzil Ibbetson, the secretary of the revenue department, Rivaz prepared a measure to this end, and took the extraordinary course of passing it through the Indian legislature (the 'Punjab Land Alienation Act', 1900) in opposition to the wishes of the lieutenant-governor, Mackworth Young. The measure not only halted the expropriation of the 'zamindars' by urban moneylenders, but set the stage for 'agriculturalist' domination of Punjab politics. 
Rivaz was promoted KCSI in 1901, and early in the following year left the governor-general's council in order to become lieutenant-governor of the Punjab. He held the post until March 1907. He travelled throughout the province during this period. He also encouraged the modernization of amenities in its capital, Lahore. During his term of office the province developed steadily. There were some recurrences of plague, and a terrible earthquake at Kangra on 4 April 1905, but assistance and relief were energetically organized by the lieutenant-governor. Large irrigation schemes were being carried through at this time; and the bold experiment of colonizing the newly irrigated wastes of the province proved eminently successful. Despite these achievements, his tenure of the lieutenant-governorship ended under the cloud of the 1907 rural disturbances. These were rooted in his inopportune enhancement of the Bari Doab Canal water-rate while also pushing ahead with the unpopular 'Punjab Colonization of Land Bill'. 
As an Indian administrator Rivaz in fact represented the characteristics of the official class of his own period. He had little experience of, nor did he attempt to solve, problems connected with Indian nationalism. His interest lay rather in ensuring for the population, and more especially for the agricultural population, a just and efficient official rule, adapted to the needs and ideals of the people themselves, and in this he largely succeeded. Probably no Anglo-Indian official has ever exercised such effective control of affairs with so little recourse to writing; among the voluminous records connected with the passing of the 'Punjab Land Alienation Act' in 1900, for instance, there are probably few pages where more than five consecutive lines could be found in Rivaz's handwriting, and yet he was the controlling spirit of the measure, fully cognizant throughout not only of the principles but also of the details under discussion. 
Rivaz was a man of spare build with an upright carriage, a penetrating eye, and a quick, slightly nervous temperament, coupled with great modesty and restraint; scornful of all pretence and yet contemptuously tolerant of much that would offend others. 
Rivaz married in 1874 Emily McGarel, daughter of Major-General Agnew of the Bengal staff corps; they had three sons. After completing his service in India he settled in London and lived a retired life, refraining from public connection with Indian questions. He died in London on 7 October 1926, and was buried at Walton on the Hill, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 35766


Riviere, Briton (1840-1920), painter, the youngest child of William Riviere (1806-1876) and his wife, Ann, daughter of Joseph Jarvis of Atherstone, Warwickshire, was born in London on 14 August 1840. His father and grandfather and many of the Riviere family, who claimed Huguenot descent, were artists. William Riviere became drawing-master at Cheltenham College, Gloucestershire, where Riviere himself was educated from 1851 to 1859. The move in 1851 from London to the Cotswolds interrupted his habit of sketching animals at London Zoo, but by 1851 and 1852 he was exhibiting oil paintings of kittens at the British Institution. 
In 1859 -- the second year in which Riviere had exhibited at the Royal Academy -- the family moved to Oxford, where his father established an art college. Riviere took a BA degree at St Mary Hall in 1866; he received an MA in 1873 and was awarded the honorary degree of DCL in 1891. His academic results were achieved through private tuition rather than by attending university lectures, which were inclined to disturb his artistic studies. While at Oxford he came under the influence of Clarence Dobell, whose sister Mary Alice (the daughter of John Dobell, wine merchant) he was to marry on 6 August 1867. Dobell introduced Riviere into the outer circles of the Pre-Raphaelites, and in the early 1860s he switched his style of painting to emulate that of John Everett Millais. His 'Romeo and Juliet' was accepted in 1864 by the Royal Academy, but 'Hamlet and Ophelia' and others in this style were not. He turned his hand to sculpture but, by the late 1860s, having failed to earn a living, he was forced to do decorative initials for 'Punch' and book illustrations for magazines such as 'Good Words'. 
After his marriage Riviere moved to Kent and reverted to his previous practice of animal painting, which remained his leading preoccupation for the rest of his life. Under the influence of the Scottish landscape painters, his treatment of colour improved rapidly. As an animal painter he was heir to the tradition of Sir Edwin Landseer, though he generally eschewed Landseer's tendency to heavy anthropomorphism. A sequence of animal paintings exhibited at the Royal Academy assured his growing fame: in 1871 he exhibited 'Circe', in 1872 'Daniel' (of which a second version of 1890 is in Manchester City Galleries), and in 1878 'Persepolis', magnificently depicted in its lion-infested isolation. He was not averse to a touch of bathos in some pictures of children and dogs: modern viewers may find such paintings as 'Sympathy' (exh. RA, 1878; Royal Holloway College; a preparatory version, Tate collection) overly sentimental but such works touched the hearts and loosened the purse strings of Victorian collectors. Sometimes, in such paintings as 'His Only Friend' (exh. RA, 1871; Manchester City Galleries), he achieved genuine pathos. 
In 1878 Riviere was elected an associate of the Royal Academy, an honour well deserved by such 'tours de force' as 'Apollo' (exh. RA, 1874; Art Gallery and Museum, Bury) and 'In Manus Tuas, Domina' (exh. RA, 1879; Manchester City Galleries). These paintings were followed by his diploma painting, 'The King Drinks' (exh. RA, 1880; Royal Academy of Arts), and full membership in that year. Outstanding biblical and classical works, featuring animals prominently, followed: 'The Miracle of the Gadarene Swine' (exh. RA, 1883; Tate collection), 'Actaeon' (exh. RA, 1884), 'An Old World Wanderer' (exh. RA, 1887), 'Prometheus' (exh. RA, 1889; Ashmolean Museum, Oxford), 'Phoebus Apollo' (exh. RA, 1895; Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool), 'The Temptation in the Wilderness' (Guildhall Art Gallery, London), and 'Aphrodite' (exh. RA, 1902). His use of strong, simple composition, combined with good draughtsmanship and choice of colour, produced striking works. 
Riviere perceived a similitude between the lithe figures of wild animals and those of the young male nude, and in some paintings he combined both, with great success. 'Endymion' (exh. RA, 1880) and 'Dead Hector' (exh. RA, 1892; Manchester City Galleries) were exhibited at the academy but he showed 'Adonis's Farewell' (1888; Bradfield College, Reading) in the more broadminded environment of the Grosvenor Gallery in London; a notably sensuous image in this vein is 'Adonis Wounded' (exh. RA, 1887; Sutton Place Foundation). 
In 1896 -- after the death of Millais -- Riviere narrowly missed being elected president of the Royal Academy, an honour which would not have suited his retiring disposition and, later, his failing eyesight. His subject matter now extended to landscapes of solitary magnificence, such as 'Beyond Man's Footsteps' (exh. RA, 1894; Tate collection), and portraits, with or without attending domestic animals. Financial considerations forced him to turn to portraiture: the waning popularity of academic canvases left him -- the father of five sons and two daughters -- with a declining income. 
In 1891 Sir William Armstrong published a monograph on Riviere in the 'Art Annual', an honour accorded only to pre-eminent academicians. Hubert von Herkomer painted his portrait (1893, Royal Academy of Arts), and Onslow Ford made a bust of him for Oriel College, Oxford, which institution gave him an honorary fellowship in 1910. Over the years he moved his studio a number of times, settling finally at Flaxley, 82 Finchley Road, Hampstead, London, which he had had rebuilt for his use. Respected for his natural distinction, courtesy, and culture, Riviere died on 20 April 1920 at 82 Finchley Road and was cremated at Golders Green, Middlesex, on 23 April; he was survived by his wife. His eldest son, Hugh Goldwin Riviere (1869-1956), was a well-known portraitist. 


@@@@@


doc= 35767


Roberts, Alexander (1826-1901), biblical scholar, was born at Marykirk, Kincardineshire, on 12 May 1826, the only son of Alexander Roberts, a flax spinner, and Helen Stuart. He was educated at the Old Mains of Fasque public school in Aberdeen, then from 1843 at King's College, Aberdeen, being the top bursar (scholar) in his year. He was awarded the Simpson prize in Greek, took firsts in classics and philosophy, and graduated with an MA in 1847. He then trained at New College, Edinburgh, for the ministry of the Free Church, and was elected minister of Stonehaven Free Church in 1852. Between 1857 and 1871 he served as minister for the presbyterian church at Carlton Hill, St John's Wood, London. On 2 December 1852 he married Mary Anne Speid (died 1911), a librettist, who died on 18 January 1911, aged seventy-seven. They had fourteen children, of whom four sons and eight daughters survived him. 
On 28 October 1871 Roberts succeeded John Campbell Shairp as professor of humanity at St Andrews University, having been made DD of Edinburgh in 1864 on the strength of his 'Inquiry into the Original Language of St Matthew's Gospel' (1859) and 'Discussions on the Gospels' (1862). Between 1870 and 1884 he was a member of the committee of revisers of the Authorized Version of the 'New Testament', the edition subsequently known as the Revised Version, and he published several textual critical works in relation to this: 'The Words of the New Testament', in conjunction with William Milligan, another reviser (1873); 'Companion to the Revised Version of the English New Testament' (1881); and 'Old Testament Revision' (1883). 
Roberts co-operated with Sir James Donaldson as editor and part translator of the English versions of ecclesiastical writers published as the 'Ante-Nicene Christian Library' (24 vols., 1867-72). He also translated 'The Works of Sulpitius Severus' in the 'Select Library of Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers' (vol. 2, 1895). He published several works in which he maintained that Greek, not Aramaic, was the language in which Jesus taught, a theory which he believed supported the divine inspiration of the gospels: 'Inquiry into the Original Language of St Matthew's Gospel' (1859); 'The Bible of Christ and his Apostles' (1879); 'Greek the Language of Christ and his Apostles' (1888); and 'A Short Proof that Greek was the Language of Christ' (1893). Other published works were 'The Threefold Life' (1858); 'The Life and Work of St Paul Practically Considered' (1867); and 'Hints to Beginners in Latin Composition' (1873). 
Roberts was made emeritus professor in 1899, having resigned from his chair in September. In the spring he had suffered a fall, after which he became arthritic and almost immobile. He died at his home, St Andrews, Mitcham Park, Surrey, on 8 March 1901, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35768


Roberts, Frederick Sleigh, first Earl Roberts (1832-1914), army officer, was born on 30 September 1832 at Cawnpore, India, the younger son of Sir Abraham Roberts (1784-1873), commanding the East India Company's Bengal European regiment, and his second wife, Isabella (died 1882), widow of Major Hamilton Maxwell and daughter of Abraham Bunbury, of Kilfeacle, co. Tipperary; Roberts's family were Anglo-Irish on both sides. He was christened Sleigh after the garrison commander at Cawnpore (Major-General William Sleigh). 
Abraham Roberts brought his family home to England in 1834 and, before returning to India, settled them at Clifton, the family home for the next forty years. Frederick went to Eton College in 1845 but stayed only a year before going to the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, in January 1847. He wanted to join the British army but his father, largely on grounds of expense, preferred him to enter the East India Company's service and after two years at Sandhurst he entered the company's military college at Addiscombe, Croydon, in February 1850. He passed out ninth of his class in November 1851, and was commissioned into the Bengal artillery on 12 December 1851. He landed at Calcutta on 1 April 1852, and was posted to a battery at Peshawar, where his father commanded the Peshawar division. Until Abraham Roberts went home at the end of 1853, Fred, as he was known in the family, served also as his aide-de-camp. He received the coveted Bengal horse artillery 'jacket' in 1854 and transferred to a horse artillery troop at Peshawar, his only unit command. In 1856 he was appointed to the quartermaster-general (India)'s department as acting deputy assistant quartermaster-general at Peshawar. 
When news reached Peshawar of the mutinies at Meerut and Delhi on 10 and 11 May 1857 Roberts was appointed to the staff of the mobile column formed under Neville Bowles Chamberlain. In June 1857 he volunteered for the siege of Delhi. He served as a staff, as well as a battery, officer, and was incapacitated for a month by a spent bullet which hit his spine -- the only wound of his career. When the city fell at the end of September 1857 he joined the staff of the force under the new commander-in-chief, Sir Colin Campbell, assembled for the second relief of Lucknow. At Khudaganj in January 1858 he won the Victoria Cross for saving the life of a loyal sepoy and capturing a rebel standard. He was present at the capture of Lucknow in March 1858, but his health was breaking down and in April 1858 he handed over his staff appointment to Garnet Wolseley and returned to England on leave. He had gained a reputation as a gallant and efficient officer. 
During his leave Roberts met Nora Henrietta Bews (1838-1920), daughter of Captain John Bews, late of the 73rd regiment. They were married on 17 May 1859; their marriage was happy and supportive; they had six children, of whom three died in infancy. His wife was taller than Roberts, and a forceful woman. In later years when he held high command she apparently enjoyed power and influence over him. In India it was believed that officers could gain advancement through her, and Roberts and she were nicknamed Sir Bobs and Lady Jobs (Beckett, 478). The queen wrote in 1895 that Roberts was 'ruled by his wife who is a terrible jobber... her notorious favouritism' (ibid.). When in the South African War she accompanied Roberts at his headquarters despite the queen's objection, there was talk of 'petticoat government'. Presumably the 1954 destruction by David James, Roberts's 'official' biographer, of the correspondence between Roberts and his wife was to conceal her role: letters from her surviving elsewhere contain detailed discussion of military matters. Wolseley, Roberts's rival, wrote in 1895 that she was 'the commonest and most vulgar looking old thing... I have never seen a more hideous animal' (ibid.). In July 1859 they returned to India, where Roberts had chosen to join the quartermaster-general's department: a shrewd career move, suggested by his father, because that department was in effect the general staff of the army, responsible for operations, planning, and intelligence. There he was in contact with the leading civil and military figures in India. He was promoted to captain and given a brevet majority in 1860, and in 1863 saw active service briefly on the north-west frontier in the Ambela campaign, under Neville Chamberlain. In 1868 he went as acting quartermaster-general to the Bengal brigade, which formed part of the force commanded by Sir Robert Napier in Abyssinia. He saw no fighting but, as a mark of distinction, was chosen to carry Napier's dispatches to England, and received a brevet lieutenant-colonelcy. 
As a result of the post-mutiny absorption of the Bengal artillery into the British army in 1861 Roberts was now a British army officer, but he refused command of a Royal Horse Artillery battery at Aldershot to stay on in the quartermaster-general's department. In 1871 he organized the logistics of an expedition against the Lushai people of Assam, where he had his first experience of commanding troops in action; he was then created CB. Recognized as the most promising officer in the department, in 1873 and 1874 he was acting quartermaster-general. On 1 January 1875 he was promoted to substantive colonel and became quartermaster-general India, with the temporary rank of major-general. 
The arrival in 1876 of Lord Lytton as viceroy marked a turning point in Roberts's career. The Disraeli government, with Salisbury as secretary of state for India, was concerned about Russian expansion in central Asia and its effect on the amir of Afghanistan, Sher Ali, whom they suspected, mistakenly, of becoming a Russian ally. Lytton came to India charged with reaching a satisfactory agreement with Sher Ali, including the establishment of a British envoy in Afghanistan. That policy was opposed by many leading officials in India, who believed in non-interference in Afghanistan, relying on warning Russia (and the amir) that direct Russian interference would result in war: the policy of 'masterly inactivity'. Roberts and others had long believed in a 'forward policy' which would control the border peoples and the main passes. That policy fitted Lytton's, and Roberts quickly became his close friend and adviser. Lytton proposed to reorganize the frontier administration and to make Roberts one of two chief commissioners. Pending approval of this reorganization, Lytton appointed Roberts to command the Punjab frontier force in April 1878. After a tour of inspection Roberts returned to spend the summer at Simla to discuss the proposed reorganization. He was thus on hand when the crisis with Sher Ali erupted. Following the unwelcome arrival of a Russian mission in Kabul, Sher Ali refused to accept a British mission, which was forcibly turned back in the Khyber Pass. The British declared war in November 1878. 
Three columns were organized to invade Afghanistan: the first, under Donald Stewart, a close friend of Roberts, to occupy Kandahar, the second, under Sir Sam Browne to threaten Kabul via the Khyber Pass, and the third to occupy the Kurram valley and threaten Kabul. Roberts, on Lytton's insistence and despite the opposition of the commander-in-chief India (Sir Frederick Haines), was appointed to command the Kurram column. When war was declared on 21 November 1878 he quickly occupied the Kurram valley and on 2 December, by a daring night march, defeated the Afghan force holding the Peiwar Kotal, the northern exit from the valley. A subsequent expedition into Khost was unsuccessful, and in June 1879 the first phase of the war ended with the treaty of Gandamak. Roberts's friend and ally Sir Louis Cavagnari was sent as envoy to Kabul, and Roberts returned to Simla to join a commission on the organization and financing of the Indian armies. For his war services he was made KCB. 
Roberts had expressed misgivings about the safety of Cavagnari's mission, which was massacred in Kabul on 3 September. Of the three original columns only the Kurram column was available to advance on Kabul to avenge Cavagnari's death. It was the major turning point of Roberts's career. In just over a month he had occupied Kabul, defeating 'en route' a large Afghan force on the Charasia heights outside the city. He chose wisely not to base his force on the Bala Hissar fortress inside the city but to occupy an unfinished cantonment at Sherpur, north of the city. A military commission was set up to try those responsible for Cavagnari's death. The executions which followed caused a political storm in England, led by Liberals and by humanitarians including John Morley, Lord Ripon, Samuel Wilberforce, C. H. Spurgeon, and J. A. Froude. Even Lytton was uneasy, although Roberts was acting on his orders. Afghan opposition coalesced quickly and early in December 1879, after unsuccessful actions, Roberts was besieged in Sherpur. On 23 December he repulsed a huge assault and reoccupied the city. 
Doubts had been raised after the executions about Roberts's political judgement, and in the spring of 1880 Stewart marched from Kandahar to Kabul to assume the chief command, to Roberts's chagrin. Negotiations had already begun to recognize Sher Ali's nephew, Abdur Rahman, as amir and to evacuate the troops when news reached Kabul of the defeat of a British brigade at Maiwand, west of Kandahar, on 27 July 1880, by another claimant to the amirate, Ayub Khan. Roberts pressed immediately for a force to go from Kabul to relieve the garrison of Kandahar and, government having approved, he left Kabul with a picked force of 10,000 on 8 August. He reached Kandahar on 31 August after a march of 313 miles and on the following day decisively defeated Ayub Khan. Roberts was made GCB and was appointed commander-in-chief of the Madras army. The drama of the march to Kandahar and the crushing victory caught the public's imagination and turned Roberts into a public hero and a rival to Wolseley. But, as he himself recognized, the march was not as great a military feat as his advance on Kabul a year earlier, and it was by no means the smooth operation of legend. Nevertheless, he had emerged as a field commander of the first rank. 
Roberts came home on leave to regain his health in the autumn of 1880 and quickly found himself in public dispute with Wolseley, then adjutant-general, on short versus long service. In March 1881 he was sent at short notice to South Africa after the defeat at Majuba, but on arriving he found that a treaty had already been signed. He came straight back to England, where he received a baronetcy and a grant of $12,500 in the Second Anglo-Afghan War honours list. Proposals to make him quartermaster-general of the British army having come to nothing, he left for India in November 1881 to take up the Madras command. 
The Madras command confirmed Roberts in his view that only the 'martial races' of northern India provided suitable fighting material. He wrote papers on the Russian threat and Indian defence, and on British army recruitment. Increasingly he was seen as a counterbalance to Wolseley by those who distrusted the latter and his 'ring' of officers, since Roberts was technically eligible for the highest posts of the British army. Then and later he carefully cultivated close relations with politicians including Lord Randolph Churchill, Salisbury, and Lansdowne, and with editors and journalists -- including William Blackwood, and C. F. Moberly Bell of 'The Times' -- and military writers, notably, later, Spenser Wilkinson. His succession as commander-in-chief in India, although widely expected, was not assured and it took a carefully timed retirement by Donald Stewart and Roberts's contact with Lord Randolph Churchill, then secretary of state for India, to secure the post in July 1885. From the 1880s there was rivalry between Roberts and Wolseley, who loathed him, and between networks of officers, Wolseley's ring and Roberts's Indians. Wolseley and ring members, among themselves, accused Roberts of self-advertisement, snobbery, and jobbery. The duke of Cambridge also distrusted Roberts, perceiving him as an intriguing, unscrupulous opportunist. 
Roberts was commander-in-chief for an unprecedented eight years, and was thus able to shape the Indian armies' organization, training, and operational planning. He was moreover involved with the Third Anglo-Burmese War, exercising direct command there between November 1886 and February 1887. But his primary concern remained defence against a Russian attack from the north and north-west. His strategic plan involved the speedy occupation of the Kandahar-Kabul line, and a major programme of fortification and improvements to communications along the frontier was carried out; a series of military expeditions extended control over the trans-border tribes. Improvements in training, especially in musketry, and re-equipment with new weapons, including machine guns, were also undertaken. Perhaps the most significant achievement long term was in altering the ethnic composition of the Indian army in favour of the 'martial races' of the north. He also improved conditions of the British soldiers, and encouraged temperance among the other ranks. 
His earlier conviction that the short-service system did not meet imperial needs came gradually to be tempered by realization that a long-service system was incapable of producing the massive reinforcements for a war with Russia. Much of the apparent difference between him and Wolseley on this issue was due to Indian strategy requiring instantly available, trained reinforcements, with quality rather than numbers, whereas Wolseley envisaged fighting Russia in Europe where the emphasis would be on numbers. 
Roberts was created Baron Roberts of Kandahar in January 1892 and, resisting efforts to prolong his tenure, left India in April 1893. No suitable appointment was immediately available, and he compiled his memoirs. 'Forty-one Years in India' (1897) was a stirring story, not unbiased, which became a popular success and remains a useful historical source. This was an uneasy time for Roberts, despite his public honours. When he sought further employment Campbell-Bannerman, the secretary of state for the army, told W. E. Gladstone: 'Roberts... is a good soldier... but he is an arrant jobber, and intriguer, and self-advertiser and altogether wrong in his political opinions, both British and 'Indian'' (Gladstone, 'Diaries', 13.259n). 
In May 1895 Roberts was promoted field marshal, and in the October succeeded Wolseley in the undemanding Irish command. By early 1899 he was approaching final retirement but still hankered for a command in the field. In August 1899, with war in South Africa looming, he invited Lord Kitchener to Ireland to make his acquaintance. Though very different they got on well, and Kitchener made it clear that if Roberts were offered a field command he would be willing to serve as his chief of staff. 
When war with the Boers broke out in October 1899 Sir Redvers Buller was sent to South Africa in overall command. Roberts was unimpressed by Buller, a member of Wolseley's ring, and by his strategy, and at the beginning of December 1899, through his friend Lansdowne, offered his services to the government. On 16 December, following the defeats at Colenso, Stormberg, and Magersfontein ('black week'), the government bowed to pressure and appointed Roberts to succeed Buller, with Kitchener as chief of staff. Roberts arrived in London the following day to be greeted with the news of the death of his only son. Lieutenant Frederick Roberts ('b'. 1872), King's Royal Rifle Corps, died from wounds suffered at Colenso when trying to rescue the guns: he was awarded a posthumous Victoria Cross. 
Roberts and Kitchener reached Cape Town on 10 January 1900 to face a difficult situation. In Natal a large British force under Sir George White, a protege of Roberts, was besieged in Ladysmith, which Buller was trying to relieve. In the centre Sir William Gatacre had been defeated at Stormberg, and Boer forces were poised to invade Cape Colony. In the west Lord Methuen had been defeated at Magersfontein, where Piet Cronje's main Orange Free State army also threatened Cape Colony. Moreover, the British troops had proved inferior to the Boers in mobility, shooting, and tactics: defects which Roberts could not remedy quickly. The pressing need was to seize the initiative and relieve the pressure in Natal and on Cape Colony. 
Roberts had considered a plan of campaign for South Africa as early as 1897, and developed this on the voyage out. His plan was essentially simple but characteristically bold: Buller was to stand on the defensive in Natal while Roberts concentrated all available forces behind Methuen on the line of the westernmost railway, from Cape Town to Kimberley, where a force was besieged. The cavalry, under Sir John French, was to ride round the left flank of Cronje's force on the Modder River, to seize Kimberley, while the infantry pinned down the Boer army. With Kimberley secured Roberts planned to move eastwards to seize Bloemfontein and then move northwards along the railway line to seize Johannesburg and Pretoria. He hoped thus to force the Boers onto the defensive and to bring their main forces to battle. To implement this plan he needed to increase his mobile forces, so he raised two new mounted regiments of local volunteers and 3000 mounted infantry from the regular infantry. 
Exactly four weeks after landing at Cape Town, Roberts had concentrated a force of 37,000 men, including a cavalry division of 5000, at Ramdam, on the railway line some 20 miles south of the Modder River. In concentrating this force Roberts and Kitchener had broken up the system of regimental and brigade transport and centralized all transport: a controversial decision. The forthcoming campaign was hampered by the inadequacy of the supply system. On 11 February 1900 French and the cavalry set out on the long ride past Cronje to Kimberley, followed by most of the infantry. On 15 February French entered Kimberley. Apart from losing a substantial proportion of the army's supplies, the operation had gone as planned. Cronje, retreating eastward towards Bloemfontein, was trapped on the Modder River at Paardeburg. Kitchener, in temporary command because Roberts was ill, launched a costly and unsuccessful assault. Roberts, on reassuming direct command, used siege tactics, and Cronje, with more than 4000 men, surrendered on 27 February. 
Supply problems prevented an immediate advance on Bloemfontein, and when Roberts finally moved forward he found the remaining free state forces occupying an extended position at Poplar Grove covering the capital. The Boer forces, numbering some 14,000, were accompanied by their presidents, Kruger and Steyn. Roberts's plan was to send the cavalry round the Boers' southern flank to cut their line of retreat while the infantry attacked frontally. The cavalry advance on 7 March was sluggish, partly from shortage of supplies and poor horsemastership, and the Boers evaded the trap. It was probably the last opportunity for the war to have been quickly ended. Bloemfontein was occupied on 13 March. This marked a decisive reversal in the strategic situation. Ladysmith had finally been relieved on 28 February, and Buller was now in a position to clear Natal and co-operate in an advance on Pretoria. In the centre, Gatacre and Clements had crossed the Orange River and linked up with Roberts's troops south of Bloemfontein on 16 March. The strategic initiative had passed to the British, nine weeks after Roberts had arrived and four weeks after the start of his offensive. 
Roberts was detained at Bloemfontein for six weeks by a combination of supply problems, a typhoid (enteric) epidemic, and the breakdown of medical services -- which arguably he could have done more to rectify -- the need to repair the railway, and the daring attacks by de Wet east and south-east of the capital. Roberts renewed his advance on 3 May. Moving on a broad front and manoeuvring the Boers out of successive positions, he advanced through the Orange Free State into Transvaal. He occupied Johannesburg on 31 May but by a serious error of judgement allowed the Boer forces under Louis Botha to evacuate the town with guns and supplies. Pretoria was occupied on 5 June and the main Boer force under Botha defeated at Diamond Hill, east of Pretoria, on 12 June. Kruger and his government had already fled towards Portuguese East Africa. Machadodorp was occupied on 28 July, by which time Buller had at last linked up with Roberts. Koomati Port was occupied on 24 September, and no important town remained in Boer hands. Kruger fled to Europe. 
The formal annexation of the Transvaal on 25 October 1900, following that of the Orange Free State on 28 May, appeared to mark the end of the war, even though significant bodies of Boers, under such leaders as Steyn, de Wet, and De La Rey, were still at large and had begun guerrilla operations. To counter the guerrillas Roberts ordered the selective destruction of Boer farms, as reprisals and for resource denial. 
Roberts's operations since landing in January had been dramatically successful; in some nine months he had advanced about 500 miles, defeated the main enemy armies, and occupied their capitals. Although the war dragged on another two years, its issue was no longer in doubt. But the operations had not been an unqualified success. Apart from Cronje's surrender Roberts had failed to trap any large part of the Boer forces or to inflict a major defeat in the field. Opportunities had been lost, as at Poplar Grove, partly from a logistics failure, for which he was ultimately responsible. Above all he underestimated the Boers: an error of judgement shared by virtually every other politician and general. Probably no other contemporary British general could have bettered or even equalled Roberts's achievement, at the age of sixty-seven. 
On 29 September 1900 Roberts had been offered the post of commander-in-chief of the British army in succession to Wolseley, and on 29 November he handed over command in South Africa to Kitchener, and sailed on 11 December. On reaching England he received the Order of the Garter, an earldom, and a grant of $100,000. However, his tenure was to prove disappointing, overshadowed by controversy about the role of the commander-in-chief and the organization of the War Office. Nevertheless, much useful reform was achieved, utilizing his experience from India and South Africa. A new rifle -- the magazine Lee-Enfield -- was introduced for all units, including the cavalry, for whom it was intended to be the primary weapon, the lance being abolished. On the controversial issue of the cavalry 'arme blanche' Roberts wanted its minimal use. New ordnance, improved vehicles, and khaki service dress were introduced, and training was improved under a new department of military training and education. 
The achievements of Roberts's tenure as commander-in-chief were, however, overshadowed by the long-standing problem of the role of the commander-in-chief and the need for a general staff. In 1891 the Hartington commission had recommended the abolition of the post of commander-in-chief and its replacement by that of a chief of staff. Roberts believed that the commander-in-chief should be solely responsible to the secretary of state for the efficiency of the army, and that the adjutant-general and the quartermaster-general should be responsible directly to him; the last should revert to intelligence and operational planning, his logistic functions being taken over by a director-general of supply and transport, thus effectively creating a general staff, which he had long favoured. The report of the royal commission on the war in South Africa showed that the existing organization had to be changed, and in the autumn of 1903 Lord Esher chaired a new commission on War Office organization. Its report in February 1904 recommended the abolition of the post of commander-in-chief and the creation of an army board. These proposals were not alien to Roberts's own thinking, but they provided no place for him. A blunder resulted in his post as commander-in-chief being abolished without his being informed, and he left the War Office in February 1904. 
Roberts initially accepted a seat on the new committee of imperial defence but soon disagreed with Balfour's government over compulsory military training. His espousal of it owed something to his South African experience and perhaps more initially to the insufficient forces available to defend India against Russia. The Russian threat diminished after 1905, and was replaced by the apparent threat of German invasion of Britain. Failing to convince the government on compulsion, Roberts resigned from the committee in November 1905. 
Roberts was one of the most famous men of his era, immensely admired, a popular imperial hero -- celebrated in biographies, verse, pottery, and picture postcards, and featured in early news films -- and much honoured with British and foreign orders and honorary degrees, colonelcies, and civic distinctions. In November 1905 Roberts became president of the National Service League, the organization founded by the duke of Wellington, George F. Shee, and others in 1902, which campaigned for compulsory military training. Until August 1914 Roberts devoted himself to the league, which he helped to revive and change from a little-known pressure group to a significant force in British public life, and whose figurehead and leading spokesman he became. He participated in the controversy on sea power and invasion. He travelled the country addressing mass meetings, advocating national service, and warning against the German threat, and he supported compulsion bills in the House of Lords. Perhaps unwisely, he assisted William Le Queux with the sensational anti-German fiction 'The invasion of 1910', published in Northcliffe's 'Daily Mail' in 1906. The league met strong opposition, including from the Liberal government and its war minister, R. B. Haldane. In 1910 Ian Hamilton, then adjutant-general, in co-operation with Haldane, published 'Compulsory Service', attacking Roberts's views: a personal blow to Roberts, as Hamilton had long been his protege and friend. Roberts, with L. S. Amery and Professor J. A. Cramb (who largely wrote Roberts's National Service League speeches), replied with 'Fallacies and Facts' (1911). 
Although Roberts tried to keep the league above party politics most of its members were Unionists, and Roberts was tory and a 'die-hard' in opposing the 'Parliament Bill' in 1911. Himself Anglo-Irish, he opposed Irish home rule and actively supported the Ulster Unionists. He chose the commander of the Ulster Volunteer Force and, opposing the use of the army to coerce Ulster, was involved in the Curragh incident of March 1914. 
On the outbreak of war in 1914 Roberts attended the council of war on the destination of the British expeditionary force. Appointed colonel-in-chief of the empire ('overseas') troops in France, while visiting Indian troops there he died of pneumonia at 52 rue Carnot, St Omer, on 14 November 1914. He was buried in St Paul's Cathedral on 19 November. Lady Roberts died in 1920, and at the death of their daughter Edwina, Countess Roberts, in 1955, the title became extinct. 
Small, wiry, and an excellent horseman, Roberts possessed that invaluable quality of generalship, good physical health, as well as great personal charm and kindliness. Fluent and persuasive on paper, he was not quick in debate, and he was not basically an original thinker, preferring to move forward on the basis of previous experience. The popular image of the little, simple, upright soldier, the 'chevalier sans peur et sans reproche', owed more to Rudyard Kipling's hero-worship (as in his poem 'Bobs') than to reality. His surviving papers reveal a more complex character -- ambitious, manipulative, on occasions devious, and with a strong political awareness. 
Roberts was perhaps the ablest field commander since Wellington -- quick to grasp a situation, bold and decisive in his solutions, and calm and confident in the face of difficulties. But he was prone to underestimate his opponents and to take risks, particularly with logistics. His performance in South Africa at the age of sixty-seven suggests that he had the potential to be one of the great commanders, but it was never tested in a European theatre. About his stature as a commander there will continue to be debate. 


@@@@@


doc= 35769


Roberts, George Henry (1868-1928), trade unionist and politician, was born at Chedgrave, near Loddon, Norfolk, on 27 July 1868, the only one of the nine children of George Henry Roberts and his wife, Ann Larkman, to survive beyond infancy. His father was the village shoemaker. When he was five, the family moved to Norwich, where Roberts attended St Stephen's national school. At the age of eleven he held a position of paid monitor in the school, but left at thirteen to be apprenticed to the printing trade, continuing his education at evening classes in the higher grade and technical schools in the city. He completed his apprenticeship in 1889. 
As a journeyman printer Roberts worked for a few years in London and joined the London Society of Compositors. He returned to Norwich in 1894 and worked as a compositor then as a foreman printer on a local weekly journal, and was active in trade union affairs. He was president, then secretary (1899-1904), of the Norwich branch of the Typographical Association, and also president, for several years, of the Norwich Trades Council. In November 1895 Roberts married Anna, daughter of Horace Marshall, of Norwich; they had three sons and one daughter. 
Previously a member of Liberal clubs, in the mid-1890s Roberts became active in the Independent Labour Party (ILP). He was the first Labour member to be elected (in 1899) to the Norwich school board. He fought, unsuccessfully, his first contest as a parliamentary Labour candidate at a by-election in Norwich in 1904. His decision to stand against a Liberal candidate who also had the support of the Labour Representation Committee (LRC) caused great tension and debate within the LRC. In 1904 he also became an organizer for his union and was strongly backed by it in his successful bid for the Norwich seat in the general election of 1906. He retained his post and salary as organizer after the election. Roberts was already highly regarded within the labour movement as an active, able, and well-informed politician; his standing in the ILP was illustrated by his immediate election as one of its whips in the House of Commons. He was a member of the party's executive committee and an influential leader in the general Labour political movement in the pre-war years. 
Roberts was an outspoken critic of what he saw as extremist tendencies in socialist policy, and he moved steadily towards the right wing of Labour politics. He left the ILP in 1914, and entered the Asquith coalition ministry in 1915 as a lord commissioner of the Treasury. In the second coalition ministry, formed by Lloyd George in December 1916, he became parliamentary secretary to the Board of Trade; and in the summer of 1917 he was given the post of minister of labour with a seat in the cabinet. But in June 1918 the Labour Party withdrew its support of the coalition government and terminated the political truce which had been observed by all parties during the war. Roberts refused, with two or three other Labour ministers, to withdraw from the coalition, in obedience to the party's decision, emphasizing his defiance by accepting in January 1919 the office of food controller vacated by his colleague J. R. Clynes. He held this office until February 1920, when he resigned from the government. 
These actions brought to a head the antagonism that had been developing between Roberts and the Labour Party. His relations with the local party organization had already been strained for some years, and in 1917 the Norwich Labour Party opposed him in the by-election caused by his acceptance of office in the government. In the general election of 1918 Roberts stood as a 'coalition labour' candidate and retained his seat at Norwich against the challenge of a local Labour opponent. He successfully held the seat again, as an independent, in the general election of 1922. The following year he moved further to the right of the political spectrum and joined the Conservative Party, but lost his seat in the general election of December 1923. Following this defeat he withdrew from politics and turned his attention to business, becoming a director of several companies and taking an active interest in the development of the English beet sugar industry. 
Roberts's political evolution was directed to some extent by his temperament, which made him sensitive to rivalry within or criticism by the party organization at Norwich. But he was also genuinely opposed to what he saw as tendencies towards revolutionary doctrine with the Labour Party. What drove him finally into Conservatism was his belief that the trade union movement had also become overly influenced by policies of direct action and social rebellion, as a result of the socialist propaganda of the ILP. Roberts became a privy councillor on his acceptance of a position in the first coalition ministry (1915), and in 1918 received the freedom of Norwich, where he resided for nearly the whole of his life. He died of heart failure at a hotel, Edenhurst, in Sevenoaks, Kent, on 25 April 1928, while on a business trip. He was buried in Norwich on 30 April after a service at St Thomas's Church. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35770


Roberts, Isaac (1829-1904), geologist and astronomer, was born on 27 January 1829 at Groes, near Denbigh, north Wales, the son of William Roberts, a farmer. When he was only six the family moved to Liverpool, where his father became a bookkeeper. He received a Sunday school education from the local Welsh Calvinist Methodist church and retained a knowledge of the Welsh language throughout his life. In 1844 he was apprenticed for seven years to the Liverpool builders John Johnson & Son, later Johnson and Robinson. After the death of Robinson in 1855, Roberts was made manager, but with the demise the following year of the surviving partner he wound up the concern. In 1859 Roberts went into business for himself as a builder in Liverpool, and in 1862 he was joined by J. J. Robinson, the son of his former employer. The firm traded for a quarter of a century as Roberts and Robinson, undertaking many large and important contracts in and around Liverpool. These included the construction of the Birkenhead waterworks and the Lime Street Hotel, Liverpool. Roberts married his first wife, Ellen Anne, the daughter of Anthony Cartmel, in 1875. 
While still a businessman, Roberts attended the Liverpool Mechanics' Institute, where he began taking a serious interest in geology. He became a fellow of the Geological Society in 1870, and gave his first paper, on the filtration of water through Triassic sandstone, at the British Association meeting of 1878. Between 1882 and 1889 he undertook complex experiments on the influence of air pressure and lunar attractions on the movement of underground water. His findings, published in the 'Proceedings of the Royal Society' for 31 January 1884, embodied the results of these experiments, providing valuable data for the design and building of storehouses. 
Meanwhile Roberts's attention was turning to practical astronomy. In 1878 he had erected a 7 inch refracting telescope by Cooke & Sons of York at his fashionable home at Rock Ferry, Birkenhead, which he used for visual observation. A few years later he devoted himself enthusiastically to the rapidly changing discipline of astronomical photography. To find clearer skies, he moved in 1883 to Kennessee, Maghull, near Liverpool, where he started photographing stars, using ordinary portrait cameras with lenses varying in aperture between 3/8 of an inch and 5 inches. Encouraged by the results in comparisons with photographs of the nebula in Orion taken by Andrew Ainslie Common, he decided to acquire a large reflecting telescope with a silver-on-glass mirror. Roberts initially used an 18 inch telescope by Howard Grubb of Dublin, an instrument which was later presented to the Dunsink observatory, near Dublin. He then ordered from Grubb a 20 inch reflector of 100 inches focal length. His 7 inch refractor was used as a guide telescope, being mounted as a counterpoise on the declination axis of the German-type equatorial mounting. 
Roberts first presented his astronomical photographs at the January meeting of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1886, when he was president of the Liverpool Astronomical Society. He reported on 200 photographs of stars, along with those of the Orion nebula, the Andromeda galaxy, and the Pleiades star cluster. At the November meeting that year he showed a photograph of the Pleiades, of three hours' exposure, taken with his 20 inch reflector. The stars Alcyone, Maia, Merope, and Electra were seen surrounded by nebulosity, a structure never before seen or suspected. 
At the meeting in December 1888 Roberts showed a photograph of the great Andromeda nebula which suggested a spiral structure. It evoked considerable interest as it supported the visual observations of nebulae by the third earl of Rosse in Ireland. Photographs of the Orion nebula, presented a few months later, were equally well received. These successes supported Roberts's claim for the superiority of the reflector over the refracting telescope. During this period Roberts designed an instrument to transfer mechanically the images on a photographic negative to a copper plate. Known as the Pantograva, the device was first made by the firm of Hilger. 
Following the work of the Henry brothers at the Paris observatory, Roberts attended a photographic congress at Paris in 1887. The international gathering of astronomers agreed to a photographic survey of the heavens, but Roberts wisely declined an invitation to join the Carte du Ciel project, which was shared between national observatories with uniform instruments. In order to continue his work on the nebulae and star clusters, Roberts was again driven to search for a clearer atmosphere than that of Liverpool, and finally settled in 1890 at Crowborough Hill, Sussex, in a house appropriately named Starfield. He now supervised the work, which was undertaken by W. S. Franks, an astronomer and skilful photographer who became his working assistant. Each month for several years he exhibited splendid photographs at the Royal Astronomical Society, and in 1893 and 1899 he issued two volumes of his photographs of stars, star clusters, and nebulae, 125 reproductions in all. 
Following the example of the American Professor Barnard of Lick and later Yerkes Observatory, Roberts undertook in 1896 a programme of wide photography using various portrait lenses in his cameras. He went on to compare these photographic results with those of the reflecting telescope, which resulted in a discussion between Roberts and Barnard on the relative efficiency of the two methods. To resolve the issue Roberts prepared photographs of fifty-two regions of the sky reported by Sir William Herschel to contain nebulae, using his reflector and with a portrait lens of 5 inches aperture made by Cooke & Sons. Roberts's work, which showed no nebulosity for forty-eight of these areas, was published in 1902 by the Royal Astronomical Society. His findings were disputed by Dr Max-Wolf of Heidelberg, who examined some of the evidence. From 1896 Roberts corresponded with Sir Norman Lockyer on evidence for rotation in those spiral nebulae which he photographed. 
Roberts joined the Royal Astronomical Society in 1882. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1890, and two years later the honorary degree of DSc was conferred on him by Trinity College, Dublin. The award no doubt reflected his generosity to the college's Dunsink observatory. In 1895 the Royal Astronomical Society awarded Roberts the gold medal for his photographs of star clusters and nebulae. The presentation address was delivered by Captain William Abney, a leading authority on photography. 
While sailing on the 'Norse King', on his way to Vadso, Norway, to observe the total solar eclipse of 9 August 1896, Roberts met 
Roberts was apolitical but held strong liberal views. Like his friend Lockyer, he was concerned with education. He made bequests for the foundation of scholarships in the University of Liverpool and in the university colleges of Wales, Bangor, and Cardiff, where he was a governor. He died suddenly of a heart attack at his home on 17 July 1904. On 21 July 1908 his cremated remains were interred in a granite monument at Flaybrick cemetery, Birkenhead. Decorated with ancient Egyptian motifs, the memorial stone had no religious symbols, but bore instead a bas-relief of the great Andromeda nebula. 
After Roberts's death Dorothea returned to France with the photographic plates taken with the 20 inch reflector. In 1929 she issued 'The Isaac Roberts Atlas of 52 Regions: a Guide to William Herschel's Fields of Nebulosity'. In 1934 she was elected a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur. About this time she returned to San Francisco, where she established prizes in astronomy and mathematics at the University of California and made other donations to encourage astronomy. She died at San Francisco on 5 October 1942. 


@@@@@


doc= 35771


Roberts, Robert Davies (1851-1911), adult educationist, was born at Aberystwyth on 5 March 1851, the eldest child of Richard Davies Roberts, a timber merchant and shipowner, and his wife, Sara Davies. His background was strictly Calvinistic Methodist. He received his early education in Aberystwyth and then at Oswestry grammar school and the Liverpool Institute. In October 1867 he went to University College, London, taking a first class BSc in geology three years later. In 1871 he entered Clare College, Cambridge, as a scholar, and obtained first class honours in natural sciences in 1874, despite having interrupted his studies to run the family business following the death of his father. He received a London DSc in 1878 (which Cambridge University refused to recognize). He was a fellow of Clare College from 1884 to 1890. 
At Cambridge, Roberts met James Stuart, who soon brought him into the university extension movement, which was to become the principal interest of his life. In the autumn of 1875 he opened the York extension centre with morning and evening classes on physical geography. His enthusiasm was such that he offered to give a third class for schoolchildren gratis. A temporary lectureship in chemistry at the recently founded University College in Aberystwyth during 1877 gave him the opportunity to promote university extension in mid-Wales. He returned to Cambridge in 1878 and became a lecturer in various centres throughout England for the local examinations and lectures syndicate. 
In March 1881 the syndicate appointed Roberts assistant secretary for lectures. The movement was weak at this time: only London and Cambridge organized courses of lectures; the syndicate secretary, G. F. Browne (who had taken over from James Stuart), had little interest in the lectures; and the first assistant secretary for lectures, William Cunningham, had been hampered by ill health. Roberts immediately began to expand the number of centres and spent much time visiting them, as Stuart had done. His enthusiasm was such that after his first year the syndicate found it necessary to publish his long reports on the lectures separately from the annual report to the university. However, Roberts found it difficult to persuade Cambridge to recognize the need for training extension lecturers (who were usually recent graduates) and for giving proper recognition to the examinations that the syndicate had initiated. 
Roberts was university lecturer in geology at Cambridge in 1883-6, and subsequently published 'Earth's History: an Introduction to Modern Geology' (1893). But he gave up his scientific career on his appointment in 1885 as secretary to the London Society for the Extension of University Teaching. He soon increased the number of centres in the Greater London area and introduced some of the reforms that he had failed to carry through at Cambridge. In 1889 he also became secretary of the Gilchrist Trust, which provided the funds for short courses of three lectures, and which he used to encourage the formation of new extension centres throughout the country. Roberts resigned his Cambridge appointment in 1890 and concentrated his energies on London, which he hoped to make a teaching university and so provide diplomas and degrees for extension students. He wrote and spoke extensively on the subject, and brought together a large quantity of information about the movement in different countries (later in the Cambridge University archives). In 1888 he married Mary, eldest daughter of Philip S. King of Brighton; they had no children. 
In 1894 Roberts returned to Cambridge as secretary to the extension syndicate, whose early work he had described in 'Eighteen Years of University Extension' (1891). This was a time of considerable expansion, when county and borough councils received powers to provide adult education, and Roberts encouraged them to use the university's services. However, the reorganized University of London appointed him registrar of the university extension board in 1902 and he left Cambridge for the last time. He was by now a leading figure in the movement and advised other universities, including the University of Wales, on the subject. He was junior deputy chancellor (1903-5) and chairman (1910-11) of the executive committee of the court of the new federal University of Wales. The Congress of the Universities of the Empire, held in London in 1912 was planned and organized by him but he died suddenly at his home, 55 Bedford Gardens, Kensington, London, on 14 November 1911, before the congress met. 
Roberts spent his life promoting the idea that a university education should be available to everyone. In his official positions, and as editor of the 'University Extension Journal' and its successors, he took every opportunity to forward his plans and opposed attempts to water down his ideal. On these grounds he objected to Oxford University's short courses of six lectures which departed from Stuart's plan of 'a peripatetic university', and felt that the proposal of Albert Mansbridge to limit working men to non-graduate university courses was a retrograde step. These opinions, and his deafness, led some to object to him as an autocrat and a pedant, but his vision of an open university was achieved long after his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 35772


Austen, Sir William Chandler Roberts- (1843-1902), metallurgist, was born at Kennington, Surrey, on 3 March 1843, the eldest son of George Roberts, of Welsh descent, who worked for the Hudson's Bay Company, and his wife, Maria Louisa, daughter of William Chandler MD of Canterbury, of an old Kentish family which had intermarried with the Hulses and Austens. He assumed the name of Austen by royal licence in 1885 at the request of his uncle, Major Nathaniel Lawrence Austen of Haffenden and Camborne, in Kent. 
After education at private schools, where he developed an interest in science, Roberts entered the Royal School of Mines in 1861, with the intention of becoming a mining engineer. He obtained the associateship in metallurgy in 1865, and then spent four years (1865-9) as private assistant to Thomas Graham, master of the Royal Mint; his research interests and methods were strongly influenced by Graham. In 1870 he was appointed to the new post of chemist of the mint and became also the second resident assayer. In 1882 he was given responsibility for all the assay work at the mint, with the title of chemist and assayer. At the time of his death he was acting deputy master of the mint. As assayer he became a worldwide authority on all scientific and technical aspects of coinage; while Sir Charles Fremantle was deputy master (1868-94), his influence extended beyond the assay department. From 1880 to 1902 he was also professor of metallurgy at the Royal School of Mines, having succeeded Dr John Percy. He was known as a kindly and stimulating teacher. In 1876 he married Florence Maude, youngest daughter of Richard William Alldridge, of Old Charlton, Kent; they had no children. 
Roberts-Austen freely placed his special knowledge at the public disposal, taking part in numerous official scientific inquiries. In 1896 he was appointed to a Board of Trade committee which considered the wear of steel rails, and in the following year he served on the Treasury committee which created the National Physical Laboratory. In 1899 he became an original member of the War Office and Admiralty committee on explosives and ordnance. 
Roberts-Austen's researches, conducted in his laboratory at the mint, dealt mainly with alloys. He delivered five series of Cantor lectures at the Society of Arts (1884-90) on investigations in alloys, which were published in its 'Journal'. In 1891 he exhibited at the Royal Society a new alloy of gold and aluminium which he had discovered; it was remarkable for its intense purple colour. As the outcome of research on the effects of admixture of impurities on the mechanical properties of pure metals, the alloys research committee of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers was established (1889), Roberts-Austen becoming 'reporter' to the committee and supplying five reports (1891-9); a sixth was under revision at his death. In the first he described his automatic recording pyrometer, which provided an exact record of temperature changes in furnaces or masses of metal, and proved useful in metallurgical works. The research on alloys that he initiated was continued at the National Physical Laboratory. The practical value of his work led the council of the institution to make him an honorary life member. 
Roberts-Austen's principal publication was 'An Introduction to Metallurgy' (1891; 6th edn, 1910), a work indispensable to researchers in metallurgy. He contributed the article 'Metallography' to the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', tenth edition, and published nearly 100 articles and reports (1868-1902), a few jointly with other authors. They deal mainly with the absorption of hydrogen by electrodeposited iron, the analysis of alloys by means of the spectroscope (with Sir Norman Lockyer), the action of projectiles and explosives on the tubes of steel guns, and the physical properties of metals and alloys. 
Roberts-Austen, who was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 3 June 1875, served on the council (1890-92), and was Bakerian lecturer for 1896, his subject being the diffusion of metals. A founder member of the Physical Society in 1874, he was its first secretary, and he acted also as honorary general secretary of the British Association in 1897-1902. He was president of the Iron and Steel Institute (1899-1901), was elected in 1901 an honorary member of the Institution of Civil Engineers (where he gave the Forrest lecture on 23 April 1902), was a vice-president of the Chemical Society (1895-8) and of the Society of Arts (1900-02), and member of various foreign societies. The University of Durham conferred the honorary degree of DCL in 1897, and Victoria University, Manchester, that of DSc in 1901. In 1889 he was created a chevalier of the French Legion d'honneur, and he was made CB in 1890 and KCB in 1899. 
At the Royal Institution, the British Association meetings, and at the Chemical and other societies, Roberts-Austen was highly regarded as a lecturer and demonstrator. His considerate and religious nature, keen sense of humour, and skills as a mimic, ventriloquist, and actor made him socially popular. He was a close friend of Ruskin, whose works influenced him greatly in early life. He died after several months of illness at the mint on 22 November 1902, and was buried at Canterbury five days later. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35773


Robertson, Alexander (1896-1970), organic chemist and farmer, was born on 12 February 1896 on a farm at Charlesfield, Auchterless (on the Hatton estate), Aberdeenshire, the son of Andrew Robertson, farmer, and his wife, Jane Cantlay. Robertson was the eldest of three children; his twin sisters predeceased him. He was educated at the Auchterless School and Turriff higher grade school, leaving both as dux. He entered the University of Aberdeen in 1914 and, like most Scottish students of that time, took the MA course. He presented botany, chemistry, geology, Latin, mathematics, physics, political economy, and zoology at the preliminary level, and in 1915-16 was placed first in chemistry. He enlisted in the special brigade, Royal Engineers, in March 1916, and in March 1917 was commissioned in the 2nd Seaforth Highlanders. He was discharged from the service in 1918 with the rank of lieutenant after being badly gassed in France. 
After resumption of his studies at Aberdeen Robertson obtained his MA in 1919 and went on with a scholarship to study for a degree in science at the University of Glasgow. In the final examination (BSc, 1922) he received special distinction in advanced inorganic, physical, organic, and general technical chemistry. Robertson then obtained a Carnegie research fellowship for two years for research at Glasgow, under Professor G. G. Henderson's supervision, and gained his PhD in 1924. In the same year Robertson was also awarded a Ramsay memorial fellowship, but he resigned this almost immediately in order to accept a Rockefeller international science fellowship to work for two years with Professor Robert Robinson at the University of Manchester. Robertson spent six months of this fellowship at the University of Graz, Austria, studying the new and revolutionary technique of microanalysis with Professor Fritz Pregl. 
In 1926, Robertson was appointed assistant lecturer in chemistry at the University of Manchester, and continued his work with Robinson during a period when organic chemistry at Manchester was blossoming. Under Robinson and Arthur Lapworth staff conducted research into the chemistry of the anthocyanins, the alkaloids of the morphine and strychnine groups, and the development of the electronic theory of organic reaction mechanisms. On 9 September 1925, Robertson married Margaret Mitchell (died 1960), daughter of Alexander Chapman, a farmer and wood merchant of Forglen, Banffshire. She had graduated in medicine from Aberdeen in 1919. It was said to be a happy marriage. 
In 1928 Robertson became reader in chemistry at the East London (later Queen Mary) College in the University of London, moving in 1930 to the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine where he was appointed reader in biochemistry. The influence of Harold Raistrick, who was the head of the department, undoubtedly stimulated Robertson's own later researches on fungal metabolites. From London, Robertson moved to Liverpool in 1933, to succeed Ian M. Heilbron as holder of the Heath Harrison chair of organic chemistry. He occupied this chair with outstanding distinction until he retired in 1957 to devote himself to his second profession -- farming. In Liverpool Robertson designed a new building for organic chemistry, which was completed in 1939. In addition to being head of a large and flourishing department, he was pro-vice-chancellor in 1949-54. He also served, for varying periods, as chairman of the departmental grants committee and of the ICI fellowships committee, and was president of the University Club (1951-4). He was elected to fellowship of the Royal Society in 1941, and was awarded the society's Davy medal in 1952. He received an honorary LLD of the University of Aberdeen in 1958, was for a time a member of the advisory council of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, and of the University Grants Committee (1955-9). After his retirement, Robertson acted as adviser in chemistry to the Carnegie Trust for the Universities of Scotland (1960-69), and was in great demand as a consultant to various agricultural research institutes and organizations. He was a member of the Agricultural Research Council from 1960 to 1965. 
Robertson made significant contributions to the chemistry of natural oxygen heterocycles such as anthocyanins (with Robinson), to the rotenoids, and to the lichen substances -- especially usnic acid -- to fungal metabolites such as citrinin, citromycetin, and the sclerotiorin pigments, and to natural pigments such as dracorubin and rottlerin. He also made major contributions to the chemistry of naturally occurring bitter principles, and to nitrogen heterocycles, especially the bacterial metabolite, violascein, and, with H. G. Khorana (later a Nobel prize winner), to indoles and their hydroperoxides. 
During his academic life Robertson always maintained close links with active farming, disappearing from Liverpool each summer to supervise the harvest on the farm in Aberdeenshire which he rented from 1939. On his retirement he commenced full-time farming, first in Aberdeenshire and later on a 2000 acre estate at Roxholm Grange, Sleaford, Lincolnshire, in partnership with his only child, Euan. Shortly after the move to Roxholm his wife died; Robertson never really recovered from the loss. 
Robertson was a man of imposing stature, possessed of a natural shyness and dislike for publicity which caused him to refuse many social engagements. This shyness was disguised by a brusque exterior which was frequently misunderstood by contemporaries, but to those who knew him sufficiently well he was a different person. It was typical of his character not to leave a record or a photograph with the Royal Society, and to refuse all invitations to sit for a portrait. Robertson died in Grantham Hospital on 9 February 1970. 
W. B. Whalley', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35774


Robertson, Archibald (1853-1931), bishop of Exeter, was the eldest son of George Samuel Robertson (1825-1874) and his wife, Helen, daughter of William Charles Kerr junior, physician, of Northampton, and grandson of Archibald Robertson, physician, of Northampton. He was born on 29 June 1853 at Sywell, Northamptonshire, where his father was curate. He was educated at Bradfield School and at Trinity College, Oxford, of which he was in turn scholar (first class, 'literae humaniores', 1876), fellow (1876-86), and, after ordination (1878, 1882), dean (1879-83), until his appointment as principal of Bishop Hatfield Hall, Durham (1883-97). In 1897 he became principal of King's College, London, and he was vice-chancellor of London University in 1902-3. From 1900 to 1902 he was Boyle lecturer. In 1903 he became bishop of Exeter, but was compelled to resign owing to ill health in 1916. 
In 1885 Robertson married Julia Eleanor Louisa (died 1925), daughter of Charles Noel Mann, rector of St Mawgan in Meneage and vicar of St Issey, Cornwall; they had three sons. Robertson received the honorary degree of DD from Durham University (1893) and of LLD from Glasgow University (1901). He was elected a fellow of King's College, London, in 1899 and an honorary fellow of Trinity College, Oxford, in 1903. He retired to Oxford in 1916, where he lived at 7 Canterbury Road. He died at home on 29 January 1931. 
In academic life Robertson gained some reputation as a careful, fair-minded, and patient teacher and administrator, whose austerity of manner was underlaid by real kindliness, and one who, if rather a hard taskmaster of others, was no less unsparing of himself. Nor was it otherwise in a difficult diocese where he followed another head of a college (H. E. Ryle), also without parochial experience apart from early home associations, but where he had the aid of a much loved suffragan, Robert Edward Trefusis, bishop of Crediton (1897-1930). His own attitude in ecclesiastical matters appears in his charges 'English churchmanship, an invitation to brotherly union on the basis of the Book of Common Prayer' (1905) and 'The Church of England' (1910), no less than in his handling of difficulties at Plymouth, and he exerted himself without stint in the effort to raise funds for church extension. At the Lambeth conference of 1908 he served on the committees on Christian faith and modern thought, on marriage problems, and on reunion, and was chairman of the committee on reorganization within the Anglican communion. 
It is, however, as a contributor to patristic and historical studies that Robertson is most frequently remembered. The needs of Oxford teaching prompted the issue of a Greek text, 'St Athanasius on the Incarnation' (1882; 2nd edn, based on 'Codex Seguerianus', 1893; 4th edn, 1910), and a translation (1885 [1884]; 2nd edn, revised and enlarged, 1891). The fascination of Athanasian studies led to the production while he was at Durham of a large book entitled 'Select Writings and Letters of Athanasius', with prolegomena, in Henry Wace's and Philip Schaff's 'Library of Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers' (1892). If the modest preface suggests great indebtedness to the work of J. H. Newman, W. Bright, and H. M. Gwatkin, it does not conceal marked independence of judgement, and the prolegomena together with the introductions to the several books are masterly summaries of permanent value. The same features of conciseness combined with clarity of exposition are seen in his articles on 'New Testament' subjects in Smith's and Hastings's dictionaries of the 'Bible' and in a notable study of St Augustine of Hippo written in 1901 and published in Henry Wace's and William Coleman Piercy's 'Dictionary of Christian Biography' (1911). To the Durham period belongs also his 'Roman Claims to Supremacy' (1896). His appointment as Bampton lecturer (1901) afforded him an opportunity of subtle interweaving of history, political theory, and theology in a volume entitled 'Regnum Dei' (published in the same year). In 1911 he published in conjunction with Alfred Plummer a commentary on the first epistle to the 'Corinthians' in the 'International Critical Commentary' series. 


@@@@@


doc= 35775


Robertson, Sir Charles Grant (1869-1948), historian and academic administrator, was born at Naini Tal, India, on 22 June 1869, the younger son of John Grant Robertson, of the Bengal civil service, and his wife, Isabel Jane Grant, daughter of a minister in the western highlands. Educated at Highgate School and Hertford College, Oxford, of which he was a scholar and became an honorary fellow in 1921, Robertson won the Stanhope prize (1891), took first classes in 'literae humaniores' (1892) and modern history (1893), and was elected in 1893 a fellow of All Souls College, a position he retained for the rest of his life, serving as domestic bursar (1897-1920) and during the Second World War as acting domestic bursar. In 1899 he published a history of the college to which he always remained deeply attached. 
Robertson was tutor in modern history at Exeter College (1895-9) and at Magdalen College (1905-20). An expert teacher of undergraduates, he was far from being an unworldly don. In the 1890s he contributed a series of dialogues and sketches to the 'Oxford Magazine' and the 'Westminster Gazette', which poked fun at 'bookworms and hearties, bluestockings and chaperons' (Hawgood, 353), and these were collected in 'Voces academicae' (1898). Though he never married, he had a reputation for being a ladies' man. It was said that one female don, or 'VPFD' (Very Proper Female Don), as Robertson would have called her, used to admonish her charges never to visit any male don alone, but always to go in pairs, and in the case of Charles Grant Robertson, to go in threes. He acted as history tutor to Edward, prince of Wales, at Magdalen (1912-14), and for his services was appointed CVO in 1914. 
At Oxford, Robertson's lecturing was noted for its breadth and vigour, wealth of illustration, and geographical knowledge (he published with J. G. Bartholomew a 'Historical and Modern Atlas of the British Empire', 1905, and a 'Historical Atlas of Modern Europe', 1915), while his interest in the arts, not excluding the cinema, lent variety to his celebrated powers of conversation and reminiscence. Robertson's loquaciousness was well known and J. A. Hawgood, later professor of history at Birmingham, recalled that during the viva for his doctoral thesis Robertson, one of his two examiners, 'asked nearly all the questions and... answered most of them before I could get in a word' (Hawgood, 350). Junior proctor in 1905-6, and a member of the hebdomadal council (1911-20), Robertson was in close contact with university affairs. 
In 1920 Robertson succeeded Sir Oliver Lodge as principal of Birmingham University and served as its vice-chancellor from 1927 until his retirement in 1938. From this position he made himself largely responsible for organizing the (as yet) unofficial Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals, over which for a time he presided. At Birmingham he drew city and university more closely together, and left his mark as a public-spirited academic administrator. He was a leading figure in the establishment of the Barber Trust and the foundation of the Barber chair and Institute of Fine Art; and he was chairman of the executive committee which brought into existence the new Birmingham Hospitals Centre, adjoining the university buildings at Edgbaston. As a classicist and a historian Robertson came from a different intellectual background from the distinguished scientist who was his predecessor at Birmingham, and in seeking to strengthen the humanities there he encountered some opposition. He nevertheless prevailed, giving special attention to library development, and his period as principal and vice-chancellor was widely judged a success. He surveyed the growth of the modern university system in 'The British Universities', first published in 1930 and revised in 1944, and received the honorary degree of LLD from the universities of Edinburgh (1925), Glasgow (1930), Bristol (1935), and Birmingham (1939), and of LittD from Sheffield (1936). He was knighted in 1928. 
Robertson's reputation rests on his achievements as an academic administrator and as a teacher, rather than any original contribution to research. His talent as a historian lay in his ability to 'popularize without vulgarizing' the subject (Hawgood, 359) and his historical writings, notable for their sane judgement and grasp of essentials, are mainly on the political and constitutional history of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. His textbook of English history, 'England under the Hanoverians' (1911), and his book of constitutional documents, 'Select statutes, cases and documents to illustrate English constitutional history, 1660-1832' (1904; new edn, 1935), quickly became standard works; at the end of his life he returned to the period in his 'Chatham and the British Empire' (1946) and 'Bolingbroke' (1947). His particular interest in modern Germany was displayed in 'The Evolution of Prussia' (with J. A. R. Marriott, 1915; revised edn, 1946) and in his 'Bismarck' (1918), probably his best book. Later, in a number of historical pamphlets, especially 'Religion and the Totalitarian State' (1937) and 'The Edict of Nantes and Freedom in the World of Today' (1939), his liberal views were voiced against the prevailing tendencies in central Europe. He emphasized the historian's duty to the public in his Creighton lecture, 'History and Citizenship' (1928), and the same large spirit animated his presidency (1938-42 and 1945) of the Historical Association. 
Robertson died at his home, The Sheiling, Ashley, Ringwood, Hampshire, on 28 February 1948. If the austerity of his last years, when ailments increased, veiled the sprightly author of 'Voces academicae', or the romantic novelist who had written as Wymond Carey, nothing could obscure his 'wise and selfless judgement' (as a biographer put it) or his helpfulness to younger scholars and teachers. At All Souls he made lifelong friendships with Bishop Henson and Archbishop Lang. A moderate Anglican, Robertson served as a member of the archbishops' commission on the relations of church and state which reported in 1935. 


@@@@@


doc= 35776


Robertson, Sir Dennis Holme (1890-1963), economist, was born on 23 May 1890 at Lowestoft, Suffolk, the youngest of six children (he had three brothers and two sisters) of James Robertson (1836-1903), classical scholar, schoolmaster, and clergyman, and his wife, Constance Elizabeth Wilson (1857-1935). He was of mixed Scottish and English (Liverpool) ancestry. 
Robertson was born at a time of sudden decline in the family's fortunes. His father had been compelled to resign as master of Haileybury College, following a lawsuit brought by the parents of a boy who had been expelled for stealing, and the family were waiting anxiously for a suitable living to be found. Thus Robertson grew up the son of a poor country parson, at Whittlesford near Cambridge. The experience left him with an abiding fear of poverty, together with a reputation for economy in his scale of hospitality. Robertson was educated at home until aged twelve but then won a scholarship to Eton College. Here he flourished, winning many prizes, including the Newcastle prize for classics, as well as writing verse, editing the 'Eton College Chronicle', and rising to become the captain of the school. 
In 1908 Robertson won a major scholarship in classics to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he pursued a dazzlingly successful undergraduate career. He was placed in the first division of the first class in part one of the classical tripos in 1910 and then read for part two of the economics tripos, in which he achieved another first in 1912. Along the way he was awarded both the Porson and the Craven (university) scholarships, the latter during his 'annus mirabilis' in 1911, in which he also won the chancellor's medal for English verse for the third time and was president of the union society, the Liberal club, and the amateur dramatic club. He was an accomplished actor and retained a lifelong interest in the amateur stage. Research at Cambridge on the causes of the trade cycle followed. This brought him the Cobden prize in 1913 and a fellowship of Trinity College the following year. His dissertation was published as 'A Study of Industrial Fluctuation' (1915), a classic text that laid the foundations for all his subsequent work in the field. 
Robertson had trained with the university cavalry squadron and though opposed to the war he joined up immediately in August 1914. He served as a transport officer with the territorials in Egypt and Palestine and in the occupation of Constantinople. For his gallantry in maintaining vital supplies to the front line in the first battle of Gaza in 1917 he was awarded the military cross. 
Robertson returned to Cambridge in 1919 and apart from five years (1939-44) at London University and in the Treasury, spent his professional life there. He was a fellow of Trinity College from 1914 to 1938 and from 1944 to 1963, and successively university lecturer (1924), Girdlers' lecturer (1928), and reader in economics (1930); in 1944 he succeeded A. C. Pigou as professor of political economy, and held the chair until his retirement in 1957. In 1926-7 he obtained leave of absence to undertake an eight-month tour of Asia and the Far East, travelling out via Russia and the Trans-Siberian Railway and returning by way of India and Egypt. He was elected to the exclusive Cambridge Apostles in 1926. During the 1920s he was among the admirers of George 'Dadie' Rylands (1902-1999), with whom he had a protracted intimate relationship: he never married. 
Robertson rapidly established an international reputation as an economist. He published prolifically and was always in demand as a lecturer and book reviewer. He took part in the Clapham (British Association) inquiry into the gold standard (1921), gave evidence to the Macmillan committee on finance and industry (1930), and carried out, with A. L. Bowley, a survey on behalf of the Indian government of the provision of statistical and other economic data in India (1933-4). In 1935 he was a member of a sub-committee, on the trend of unemployment, of the committee on economic information (a standing committee of the Economic Advisory Council) and served on the committee itself between 1936 and 1939. Also in 1939 he was a member of the Treasury (Phillips) committee on the control of savings and investment. It was a measure of his reputation that between 1936 and 1938 he was adviser to the financial section of the League of Nations, especially with regard to Jan Tinbergen's econometric testing of Gottfried Haberler's trade-cycle hypotheses. 
Robertson made contributions in several areas of economics but chiefly to the study of the relationship between money, the trade cycle, and economic growth. In the 'Study of Industrial Fluctuation', he used historical evidence to argue that economic cycles had real (that is, related to investment and saving) as opposed to monetary or psychological causes and that some degree of fluctuation was a necessary part of the growth process. It was a thesis that challenged orthodox thinking in Britain and established Robertson as a possible precursor of real business cycle theory. 
Money was woven into the theoretical scheme in 1926 after Robertson had worked out the economic implications of fractional reserve banking in his Cambridge handbook 'Money' (1922). In 'Banking Policy and the Price Level' (1926), the most innovative of his works, he developed a theory of forced or involuntary saving which anticipated the work of the Austrian school in the following decade. By this process banks were given the power to regulate investment and saving -- and hence cycles and economic growth -- through manipulation of money and the price level. The book was also remarkable for its extensive use of neologism, amounting almost to a private language, which greatly reduced its appeal. 
From this basic position Robertson never departed, though he did, in the 1930s, spell out a dynamic, period-analysis of saving, based on the concept of the Robertsonian 'day', and re-cast his theory in Wicksellian, interest-rate, terms following initiatives by J. M. Keynes and F. A. Hayek. 
Robertson was known as a literary economist. Much of his writing is witty, elegant, and charming and he peppered his books and essays with literary allusions and quotations, especially from Lewis Carroll's 'Alice' books, which became a characteristic feature. It was an approach partly dictated by his lack of facility in mathematics and his aversion to statistical modelling of economic phenomena but also because he found economics aesthetically arid. It won him many faithful admirers but repelled many others and in some quarters led to his capacities being underestimated. 
For much of the 1920s Robertson worked in close collaboration with J. M. Keynes, fellow of King's College, Cambridge (he had been Keynes's pupil as an undergraduate and his postgraduate supervisee), and it was Robertson who was in some ways the more innovative in striking out on new lines of development. But with his deeply conservative temperament, Robertson sought always to build on established and, in particular, Marshallian, foundations. When Keynes, less inhibited, began to question old certainties in the 1930s, Robertson could not follow. The erstwhile collaborator became a formidable and increasingly embittered critic of Keynes's new economics. Their differences centred ultimately on the nature of saving and, therefore, the relationship between investment, saving, money, and the rate of interest, with the Robertson and Keynes positions represented by the loanable funds and liquidity preference theories respectively. 
In January 1939 Robertson took up the Sir Ernest Cassel chair (of money and banking) at the London School of Economics, where he could work among like-minded colleagues. Within a year, however, Britain was at war and from the end of August 1939 Robertson was seconded to the Treasury as economic adviser to Sir Frederick Phillips, initially helping to manage the balance of payments. He was employed, first in London and then in Washington, on tasks -- principally arithmetical computations -- which some believed were below his capacities. During his period in Washington, however, he was involved in work relating to the Anglo-American monetary discussions, and Keynes was persuaded to include him in the British delegation to the Bretton Woods conference of 1944. Robertson proved himself an invaluable lieutenant and earned Keynes's highest praise. A reconciliation then seemed possible but an unfortunate misunderstanding during the negotiations in June and July 1944 led to a rebuff that scarred Robertson for the remainder of his life. Their breach set the tone for the next two decades as Robertson took up the chair at Cambridge. Though Keynes was soon dead, his influence lived on and continued to shadow Robertson's declining years. 
During his tenure of the Cambridge chair, Robertson's writing lacked the originality of the earlier years but he continued to produce volumes of highly polished essays on current topics and, all too often, exposures of Keynesian 'error'. The definitive Robertson position is to be found in his 'Lectures on Economic Principles' (1957-9), published after he retired. 
Robertson served on the royal commission on equal pay (1944-6) and together with Sir Harold Howitt was a member of the Council on Prices, Productivity and Incomes chaired by Lord Cohen (dubbed The Three Wise Men, 1957-8). Robertson's ideas influenced the deflationary policy pursued by Peter Thorneycroft during the latter's brief period as chancellor of the exchequer (1957-8). He was also called upon to give evidence to expert inquiries, including the committee on the rating of site values (1948) and the Canadian royal commission on banking and finance (1962). 
Robertson received ample public recognition of his achievements: fellow of the British Academy (1932), CMG (1944), fellow of Eton College (1948-57), president of the Royal Economic Society (1948-50), knighthood (1953). Honorary degrees were conferred by universities at home (London, Manchester, Durham, and Sheffield) and abroad (Harvard, Columbia, Amsterdam, and Louvain). 
Robertson exercised his right to delay retirement until the age of sixty-seven and continued working almost to the end. He became ill shortly after returning from Canada in 1962 and entered the Evelyn Nursing Home, Cambridge, where he died on 21 April 1963. The funeral was at the Cambridge crematorium on 24 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 35777


Robertson, Donald Struan (1885-1961), classical scholar, was born in London on 28 June 1885, the fourth child and only son of Henry Robert Robertson (1839-1921), etcher and painter, and his wife, Agnes Lucy Turner. His eldest sister was Agnes Arber, the botanist. He went as a day boy to Westminster School, whence he won a major entrance scholarship at Trinity College, Cambridge. He was placed in the first class in part one of the classical tripos in 1906 and in part two in 1908, specializing in classical archaeology. His distinctions included the members' Latin essay prize in 1906, the first chancellor's medal in 1908, and the Stewart of Rannoch (1905), Pitt (1907), and Charles Oldham (1908) scholarships. He competed for a Trinity fellowship with a dissertation on the manuscript tradition of Apuleius's 'Apologia' which he enlivened with stories from Apuleius's 'Metamorphoses' and, successful at the first attempt, was elected in 1909. 
In the same year Robertson married Petica Coursolles (1883-1941), daughter of Major Charles Jones of the Royal Artillery, to whom he had become engaged after an acquaintanceship as brief as the marriage was successful. She was one of six sisters, all distinguished, nieces of Robert Ross, the friend of Oscar Wilde; one of them was E. B. C. Jones, the novelist. Their first child, (Charles) Martin Robertson (1911-2004), was later professor of classical archaeology at Oxford; he was followed by Giles Henry Robertson (1913-1987), who became professor of fine art at Edinburgh. 
In 1911 Robertson was appointed assistant lecturer on the classical staff at Trinity, joining Ernest Harrison and Francis Cornford. On the outbreak of war, in spite of a slight congenital lameness, he was commissioned in the Royal Army Service Corps, in which he rose to the rank of major. He returned in 1919 to lecturing and supervising at Trinity, and in 1928 he succeeded A. C. Pearson as regius professor of Greek. 
Between the wars Robertson lived a full and happy life in his Bateman Street house in Cambridge, where many of the most interesting and distinguished figures of the university young and old, as well as visiting scholars, were to be encountered. His wife was an enthusiastic, although unpretentious, hostess, who gave reassurance to those who sensed a certain intellectual austerity in their host. 
From the beginning archaeology and literature were the fields of classical scholarship that engaged Robertson's interest. He was sensitive to the visual arts and had a keen enjoyment of poetry in many languages, although largely indifferent to what in his day was called 'modern'. It was on archaeology that he first lectured, but soon after his return in 1919 he turned to Greek literature; he took particular pleasure in his course on poetry from Homer to Aeschylus, which attracted large audiences. His delivery was rapid and his matter highly compressed, but he spoke with patent sincerity touched at times with eloquence, especially when Homer or Pindar was his subject. He gave also specialist courses both on literature and on textual criticism. 
Robertson's first book was 'A Handbook of Greek and Roman Architecture' (1929), which covered some of the same ground as the sections on architecture which he contributed to volumes 4-6 of the 'Cambridge Ancient History'. It was a masterly survey by one who clearly had it in him to write far more than a textbook. He revised it for a second edition in 1943 and it has been several times reprinted. In 1969 the word 'handbook' was dropped from the title. 
The work for which Robertson will be best remembered is his text of the 'Metamorphoses' of Apuleius, published in the 'Bude' series (3 vols., 1940-45). He spent many years over the collation of the manuscripts, whose relationship he established, and produced a greatly improved text accompanied by an apparatus criticus remarkable for its economy. 
In 1941 Robertson suffered a stunning blow in the loss of his wife, who, while on duty as an air-raid warden, became the only person in Cambridge to be killed by a German bomb. He now moved from his house to rooms in college, and continued to take an active part in university affairs and in college administration, serving as vice-master from 1947 to 1951. But the shock of his wife's death seems to have caused him to turn away from his old studies. At all times he had read widely in several languages and on varied subjects, and a colleague with some truth described him as 'a Renaissance polymath'; but he now ranged far beyond the Greek and Latin classics, acquiring expert knowledge of Icelandic and Old Persian. Soon after his retirement from his chair in 1950, he suffered a series of heart attacks, and the state of his health caused great anxiety; he was looked after with kindness by Nora Kershaw Chadwick, the widow of H. M. Chadwick. But the effect of his wife's loss more than any other factor seems to have been responsible for his failure to complete the work on Pindar of which he had spoken in his inaugural lecture of 1929. In view of the high quality of the articles and notes that he brought out, which combined rare learning with rare literary sensitivity, this is much to be regretted. 
A young Trinity colleague of great promise, George Cary, son of Joyce Cary, was writing an important study of the various versions of the 'Alexander Romance'. Cary died suddenly in 1953, and Robertson became occupied in helping his widow, Margaret Ann ('b'. 1925), daughter of Sir Eric Phipps, in preparing the work for publication. They were married in 1956, and Robertson spent his last years in their house, 37 Madingley Road, Cambridge. He died in the Evelyn Nursing Home, Cambridge, on 5 October 1961. Robertson had been elected fellow of the British Academy in 1940; he received honorary degrees from the universities of Durham, Glasgow, and Athens. 


@@@@@


doc= 35778


Robertson, Douglas Moray Cooper Lamb Argyll (1837-1909), ophthalmic surgeon, born in Edinburgh, was the son of John Argyll Robertson (1798-1855), surgeon and lecturer in the extra-academical school of medicine and president of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh in 1846. His father took a special interest in ophthalmic surgery and was one of the founders of the Edinburgh Eye Dispensary in 1822. Douglas was educated successively at the Edinburgh Institution, at Neuwied in Germany, and at the universities of Edinburgh and St Andrews. He graduated MD at St Andrews in 1857, and in the same year was appointed house surgeon at the Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh. He then went to Berlin to study ophthalmic surgery under F. W. A. von Graefe. On his return to Edinburgh he acted for several sessions as assistant to John Hughes Bennett, and conducted the first course of practical physiology held in the University of Edinburgh. He was succeeded by William Rutherford. At the time of his appointment, no substance was known that could stimulate the muscle of accommodation and contract the pupil, although atropine was known to dilate it. By experimenting on himself, he proved that physostigmine, the alkaloid of the Calabar bean, would do this. He published his results in the 'Edinburgh Medical Journal' in 1862 and was admitted FRCS Edinburgh in the same year. The following year his former teacher Graefe used physostigmine in the operation of iridectomy, widening Argyll Robertson's fame. 
In 1867 Argyll Robertson was appointed assistant ophthalmic surgeon to the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary under William Walker, whose colleague he became in 1870. In 1882 Argyll Robertson married Carey, fourth daughter of William Nathaniel Fraser of Findrack and Tornaveen, Aberdeenshire; they had no children. 
Walker retired in the same year, and Argyll Robertson remained the sole ophthalmic surgeon to the Infirmary until 1897, when he was appointed consulting surgeon. He lectured on his subject for many years during each summer session. In 1868, the year after his appointment to the university, he described the phenomenon of the tabetic pupil that became known by his name. In cases of syphilis affecting the nervous system, he could not observe any contraction of either pupil when stimulated by light, but when presented with a near object, both pupils contracted. He was able to show that the Calabar bean alkaloid produced further contraction of the pupil. By having agents both to contract and to dilate, he refuted the theory that the size of the pupil depended on the state of relaxation of the blood vessels supplying it, and elucidated the action of the circular muscles. 
Argyll Robertson was elected FRSE in 1872 and was president of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh for 1886-7. He was the first president (1893-5) of the Ophthalmological Society of Great Britain to be chosen from the ophthalmic surgeons who practised outside London; he presided over the International Ophthalmological Congress in Edinburgh in 1894, and over the Edinburgh Medico-Chirurgical Society in 1896. In 1896 the University of Edinburgh conferred on him the honorary degree of LLD. He was also surgeon oculist in Scotland to Queen Victoria and later to King Edward VII. 
Argyll Robertson was a noted golfer. He considered it the finest recreation in the world, attributing to it his good health. He won the gold medal of the Royal and Ancient Golf Club, St Andrews, five times, and that of the Honourable Company of Edinburgh Golfers three times. He was the first captain of the Royal Colleges Golf Club and presented to it a medal, known by his name and awarded annually for the best scratch score. This medal he won himself on two occasions. He was also fond of shooting and was a member of the Royal Archers of the King's Body-Guard for Scotland; and he was a good curler and fisherman. 
Argyll Robertson was one of the earliest British specialists in ophthalmic surgery; previously a surgeon adopted this branch of work after a longer or shorter experience of general surgery. As an operator he was neat, rapid, and resourceful, and he introduced into practice several new procedures, especially that of trepanning the sclerotic for the relief of glaucoma. 
On retiring from practice in 1904 he settled at Mon Plaisir, St Aubin, Jersey, where he took charge of the eldest daughter of the 'thakur' of Gondal, a former pupil at Edinburgh, and afterwards his friend. In 1892 and 1900 Argyll Robertson visited India and on a third visit in the winter of 1908-9 he died at Gondal, India, on 3 January 1909. He was cremated on the banks of the River Gondli, the thakur sahib himself kindling the funeral pyre of his guru and friend. 


@@@@@


doc= 35779


Robertson, George Matthew (1864-1932), psychiatrist, was born at Simla on 15 May 1864, the son of Colonel John Robertson of Liddington Hall, Guildford, and his wife, Marie Frederique Gumbert. He attended Madras College, St Andrews, and studied medicine at Edinburgh University, graduating MB ChB in 1885. He did not take his MD until 1913, when, however, he received a gold medal for his thesis on general paralysis of the insane. After working as a resident physician at the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary and in the university's pathological laboratory, he spent time at the Bethlem Royal Hospital, London, and the National Hospital, Queen Square, London. At the latter he was greatly impressed by the teaching of John Hughlings Jackson. 
Robertson was subsequently appointed to the post of assistant physician at the Morningside Asylum, Edinburgh, under Thomas Clouston. In 1890 he won the Gaskell prize of the Royal Medico-Psychological Association, followed by the bronze medal two years later. He attained the MRCP Edin. in 1891, and was elected a fellow in 1893. During this period he also visited Hippolyte Bernhiem and J. M. Charcot in France to observe the use of hypnotism in the treatment of the insane, and described his findings in two papers in 1892. He occupied, in succession, the posts of superintendent of the Perth District Asylum at Murthly (1892-9), and of the Stirling District Asylum (1899-1908). During this period, Robertson made several innovations in patient care. At Murthly he was responsible for creating the villa system of housing patients, and he also introduced hospital trained nurses into the wards. At Stirling he arranged for certain groups of male patients to be placed under the charge of female nurses both night and day. Robertson built upon these innovations, which he styled the 'hospitalisation of the asylum', when he succeeded Clouston as superintendent of the Morningside Asylum (later the Royal Edinburgh Asylum) in 1908. In 1898 he married Lilias Catherine Buchanan (died 1914), daughter of Daniel Ritchie, of Blackwood, Victoria, and widow of George Buchanan of Arden; they had a son. 
At Edinburgh, Robertson established a series of nursing homes for the treatment of patients with milder forms of mental illness, who did not require either hospital admission or compulsory certification. The success of this scheme, which was available only to those patients who could afford to pay, led Robertson to extend the scheme to poorer patients by opening the Jordanburn Nerve Hospital in 1929. This unit was also one of the first to make provision for the out-patient treatment of mental illness. Robertson's final innovation was the creation of a special residential clinic for the treatment of children with emotional and behavioural disorders. In 1910 he was appointed lecturer in mental diseases at Edinburgh University. The status of the lectureship was raised to that of a chair in 1919, and Robertson became the first professor of psychiatry in Scotland in 1920. He left no extended work on the subject of mental illness, and his writings consisted of occasional papers on practical aspects of patient care and the history of psychiatry. None of these was considered to be original by his contemporaries, and, perhaps as a result of his unremarkable output, Robertson has not been the subject of scholarly reassessment. His main contribution was in helping to transform the medical response to the mentally ill into one that was more flexible and less coercive. 
Robertson was Morison lecturer (1911, 1913, 1927), Maudsley lecturer (1926, 1927), president of the Royal Medico-Psychological Association (1922), president of the Royal College of Physicians, Edinburgh (1925-7), and Cullen prizeman (1930). He was also president of the British Medical Association's Edinburgh branch (1926) and of the section for mental diseases (1922, 1927). In 1931, St Andrews University awarded him the degree of LLD, and he was elected an honorary fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons, Edinburgh, in 1927. He gave evidence before the royal commission on lunacy in 1924 and was involved in the discussions that took place prior to the passing of the 'Mental Treatment Act for England' in 1930. Robertson was described by contemporaries as a genial, kindly man, with a penchant for the dramatic. He died from heart disease at Tipperlinn House, Morningside Place, Edinburgh, on 28 March 1932, and was buried three days later at St Cuthbert's, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 35780


Robertson, Sir George Scott (1852-1916), administrator in India and politician, was born in Southwark on 22 October 1852, the second son of Thomas James Robertson, pawnbroker, formerly of Rousey, Orkney, and his wife, Robina Corston, daughter of Robert Scott of Kirkwall, Orkney. Educated at Westminster Hospital medical school, he entered the Indian Army Medical Service in 1878, and was with the Kabul field force throughout the Second Anglo-Afghan War (1878-80). For the next eight years he was a civil surgeon with the Indian medical services. In 1882 he married Catherine Edith (1863/4-1886), daughter of Colonel Alexander John Edwin Birch, with whom he had one daughter, Gwendoline. 
In 1888 Robertson entered the Indian foreign department when he was chosen by Captain Algernon Durand as companion on a mission to northern Kashmir to investigate hostilities between Kashmir and its tributaries, Hunza-Nagar, and to visit the other parts of Dardistan. There were underlying political objectives: to ascertain the growth of Russian influence, to emphasize the advantages of Indian government intervention, and to present recommendations on how to bring stability to the warring tribes. The two men travelled throughout the region; they were welcomed with ceremonies, involved in long negotiations, and were successful in achieving allegiances with promises of government subsidies. 
It was a mission of four months during which a close bond developed between the two men: Robertson -- two years the senior -- tall, calm, resourceful, quiet-spoken; Durand -- handsome, clever, impulsive, burdened with the family tradition of Indian service. The Indian government accepted Durand's recommendations: the British agency in Gilgit was reopened in 1889 with Lieutenant-Colonel Durand as political agent and Surgeon-Major Robertson as medical officer. 
In October 1889 Robertson, interested in making a study of Kafiristan, the isolated buffer state between Afghanistan and Chitral, undertook a preliminary visit, which with governmental approval was followed by an extended stay. From October 1890 to September 1891 he lived among the Kafirs. It was an exhausting visit: he suffered from intrigues, thieving, and threats, and, though not a total prisoner, was rarely allowed to travel beyond one village. His understated description of the Kafirs was that their cupidity, jealousy of one another, and proneness to quarrel made it difficult to live among them. 
Robertson had little occasion to promote the advantages of Indian intervention, but ample opportunities to study a pagan society. Throughout he remained resolute and patient, developing particular skills in negotiating, and achieved some success in securing their acceptance of him. When he left, six Kafirs accompanied him as guests of the government on an educational visit to India. His confidential report appeared in 1894, and his 'Kafiristan and its People' in 1895. His major work, 'The Kafirs of the Hindu Kush', was published in 1896 -- an impressive ethnographical study and graphic account of his solitary experiences. 
Robertson arrived back in Gilgit to find extensive preparations under way for a punitive expedition against Hunza-Nagar. There were particular difficulties with these two small states -- societies based on brigandage and slave trading, inaccessible cliffside forts -- which were actively welcoming Russian and Chinese advances. Durand's proposed action to prevent an inheritance dispute erupting into general violence received governmental approval and he planned the advance into the mountain ravines with precision. On the first day of the campaign, in the attack on the Nagar fortress, he was severely wounded: his plans were not followed, and there was confusion and the possibility of retreat. Robertson, taking over as chief political officer, kept the force in position for twenty days, ending in the capture of Nagar and Hunza. Durand acknowledged to Lord Roberts that Robertson's strength of will and his determined support of the actions of junior officers had ensured success. 
Durand stayed on in Gilgit, never completely recovering from his wound and without his earlier assurance. When he took long recuperative leave, Robertson took charge. With governmental approval he embarked on an active campaign, travelling south to visit small states in the Indus valley. He was attacked, retaliated, crossed the Indus, burned the fortress of Chilas, was besieged, and 'with the sublime disregard for odds which characterised him, [he] attacked in his turn with about eighty men and routed the enemy' (Durand, 'The Making of a Frontier', 368). Chilas, astride the Indus valley, came under British control. At the end of 1894 Robertson became British political agent in Gilgit when Durand's career as a frontier officer ended. 
In Chitral on 1 January 1895 the 'mehtar' (ruler), Nizam al-Mulk, was murdered by his half-brother, Azim al-Mulk, who was acknowledged as his successor. Opposing forces gathered quickly under the leadership of Umra Khan, an ambitious Pathan chief. There was also a rival candidate, Sher Afzul, who had Afghan support, and there seemed every prospect of escalating conflict throughout the region. Robertson was instructed to march to Chitral, but not to intervene if he considered Azim's position was accepted. Travelling by forced marches, he and his small force arrived on 31 January. With the group was Azim's brother Shuja al-Mulk, aged sixteen. 
It was difficult to remain neutral with Umra giving support to Sher Afzul and marching against Azim al-Mulk. In a complex situation of intrigue and treachery Robertson aimed to establish the British position with a forthright decision: at a gathering in Chitral he declared Azim to be replaced as 'mehtar' by the young Shuja, subject to the approval of the Indian government. It was a declaration not accepted by Umra Khan and Sher Afzul. Robertson and his forces, Shuja, his family, retainers, and treasures, withdrew to Chitral fort. Robertson sent out a reconnaissance force, which was ambushed, retreating in confusion into the fort. They were besieged by the Chitralis and Umra Khan's forces: from 4 March to 20 April 1895 more than 500 people, including more than 100 non-combatants, endured and existed. Aid came relatively fast and from two directions: from Gilgit a force under Colonel James Kelly, and from the south an army under Sir Robert Cunliffe Low. 
The responsibility over the weeks of the siege rested with Robertson as political officer, with Captain Colin Powys Campbell, badly wounded, and Captain Charles Vere Ferrers Townsend in military command. Robertson's diary provides a record of endurance and bravery, discipline and camaraderie, resourcefulness and ingenuity in combating boredom and despair. At first Robertson expected reinforcements from the northern garrisons, and was fully occupied, rejecting false peace offers, finding ways to send messages, using all his negotiating skills during short periods of truce. There were frightening attacks from the besiegers, dangerous sorties for water, the almost disastrous mining of the tower: and overall there was the awfulness of their conditions, the resilience of the British officers, the bravery of the Sikhs. On 19 April their captors left, and next day Kelly and his force arrived. Tales of the siege captured the imagination of the British public; Robertson's own vivid account was published as 'Chitral: the Story of a Minor Siege'. There were awards to the British officers and the Indian troops involved, and Robertson was made KCSI. 
Robertson returned to England on furlough and, to the surprise of his friends, never returned to India. New prospects in business, politics, and science claimed his attention. In 1894, his first wife having died, he married Mrs Mary Gertrude Bird, a widow and the daughter of Samuel Laurence, the portrait painter. In 1897 he was in Canada at the British Association for the Advancement of Science sixty-seventh annual meeting in Toronto, receiving the honorary degree of DCL from Trinity University. 
Robertson's parliamentary ambitions faltered with defeat in the 1900 election in Stirlingshire, but he was successful as Liberal candidate for Central Bradford in 1906, and was returned in 1910. He was not a prominent parliamentary speaker, but was a good constituency MP of advanced views (he advocated female suffrage, payment for MPs, and more working men in parliament). In parliament he took a close interest in all matters relating to India; in 1914 his intimate knowledge of Indian soldiers was of value on special missions to France. He was also a successful businessman, actively involved in two manufacturing companies. He died in London on 2 January 1916 having been in poor health since 1914, and was buried on 7 January at Golders Green cemetery. He was survived by his second wife and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 35781


Robertson, Sir Howard Morley (1888-1963), architect, was born in Salt Lake City, Utah, USA, on 16 August 1888, the second child and younger son in the family of three children of Casper Ludovic van Uytrecht Robertson of Liverpool and his wife, Ellen Duncan, of Ohio. He was sent to Britain to be educated at Malvern College, and in 1905-7 he attended the Architectural Association school of architecture, then located in Tufton Street, Westminster. This was followed by a course at the Ecole Superieure des Beaux-Arts in Paris (1908-12), where he qualified with the French architectural diploma in 1913. He gained practical experience as an assistant in architects' offices in London, Boston, New York, and on a project in Le Touquet which brought him into contact with his future partner. 
During the First World War, Robertson served with distinction in the army in France, 1915-19, and was promoted to the rank of colonel and awarded the Military Cross, Legion d'honneur, and USA certificate of merit; he was also appointed officier de l'Etoile Noire. On his return to Britain he joined with John Murray Easton (died 1975) in private practice as Easton and Robertson. Robertson's cosmopolitan background was well complemented by Easton's creative skills and interests, and they shared an admirable enthusiasm and total commitment to their work. Their concern for excellence in building and for the satisfaction of the client were the underlying principles of their long and successful partnership. 
In 1920 Robertson joined the teaching staff of the Architectural Association School of Architecture, which had by then moved to Bedford Square, to aid in the integration of student instruction with experience in the office and on site. He became a friend and travelling companion of the school's secretary, F. R. Yerbury. He was appointed principal of the Architectural Association school in 1926 and later director of education from 1929 to 1935, and it was during this period that the school achieved the distinction of being the first to receive final recognition of its diploma for full qualification. Robertson never allowed administrative matters to interfere unduly with lectures and personal contact through studio tuition. His aim was to teach broad principles, as reflected in his writings on theory and composition, urging students thereafter to find things out for themselves. 
Robertson had thus a considerable influence during a period of aesthetic change. His teaching proved more progressive than his own designs, so often hampered by restrictions: although at one time he was a member of the international avant-garde group the Congres Internationaux d'Architecture Moderne (CIAM), he withdrew because it was too partisan. By trips abroad, however, he kept in close touch with current movements both in continental Europe -- particularly in France, Sweden, the Netherlands, and Italy -- and in the United States, where in 1927 he renewed his acquaintance with and married a former architectural pupil, Doris Adeney, daughter of John Reynolds Lewis of Melbourne, Australia, and his wife, Sara Day. The couple had no children. 
In the late 1920s, it became necessary for Robertson to devote all his time to a thriving and varied practice which merged in 1931 with that of Stanley Hall under the three names, until it was again reconstituted after the Second World War. He had become FRIBA in 1925 and later an honorary member of the American Institute of Architects. In 1933 he was awarded the Godwin and Wimperis bursary of the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) for his report on continental schools; during this period he spent a short while in the tense atmosphere of the Bauhaus, then close to its disintegration. 
Robertson's most notable commission, designed in collaboration with Easton, was the permanent exhibition hall for the Royal Horticultural Society, which was awarded the RIBA architecture bronze medal in 1928. This was one of many similar awards to the firm in later years: he received RIBA architecture bronze medals in 1936 and 1937. Robertson and Easton were at the forefront of modern developments with their designs for exhibition halls and similar types of building. They were involved with the design of the British pavilion at the 1925 Paris Exhibition of Decorative Arts, and further national exhibition pavilions at Brussels in 1935 and Johannesburg in 1937, and the New York World Fair in 1939, when Robertson received the distinction of being made honorary citizen of the city of New York. Other memorable achievements include: interior designs in hotels, such as the Berkeley, Savoy, and Claridge's, and for several large liners for the New Zealand Shipping Company; a hotel, bathing-pool, and pavilion at Prestatyn, north Wales; the printing works for the Bank of England at Debden, Essex; the post-war extension of the library at the University of Newcastle (1949-60); the faculty of letters at Reading University, where he was honoured with a DLitt in 1957; Hatfield Technical College; and various office buildings, blocks of flats, and schools. Although Robertson's architecture tended towards the traditional rather than the modern, his teaching was more radical and his school produced many architects of the modern movement. 
During the Second World War, Robertson devoted much thought to designing the original standard industrial-type hostels used by the Ministry of Works, at the same time preparing typical schemes of interior decoration, the warm friendliness of which contributed to the hostels' success. In 1947 he served the Architectural Association as president during the centenary year, and thereafter remained on the advisory council. On the RIBA council he was vice-president (1938-40) and president (1952-4), and also served on the Building Industries' National Council. In 1949 he was awarded the royal gold medal for architecture, and in the same year was elected ARA; he became a full academician in 1958. He was knighted in 1954. His partner, Easton, achieved similar recognition. He was appointed president of the Architectural Association in 1939, served as vice-president of the RIBA 1945-7, and was awarded the royal gold medal for architecture in 1955. 
In the international field Robertson was technical adviser to the secretary-general in connection with the League of Nations building in Geneva and also a member of the jury which assessed the international competition for parliament buildings in Ankara. Later, in 1947, he was selected to be the British representative on the international board of design for the United Nations headquarters in New York, in which he showed courageous firmness for ethical as well as aesthetic rectitude. His last major work was the vast and immensely complicated Shell centre on the south bank of the River Thames, which was fated to receive from the critics less understanding tolerance than Robertson himself was inclined to show to others. He was a man of parts, liveryman of the Goldsmiths' Company, with a keen appreciation of modern paintings and sculpture and of music -- reflecting a worldly wisdom lightened by humour. His career and personal credo are summed up in a series of autobiographical articles entitled 'Obbligato to Architecture' in 'The Builder', published in April to June 1962. Among his other writings were 'The Principles of Architectural Composition' (1924) and 'Modern Architectural Design' (1932). After a long illness, Howard Robertson died in London on 5 May 1963. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35782


Robertson, James Patrick Bannerman, Baron Robertson of Forteviot (1845-1909), politician and judge, born at the manse of Forteviot on 10 August 1845, was the second son of Robert John Robertson (1791-1856), parish minister of Forteviot, Perthshire, and his second wife, Helen Saunders Bannerman (1804-1877), daughter of James Bannerman, parish minister of Cargill, Perthshire. Following his father's death Robertson was brought up by his mother in Edinburgh and from 1857 to 1860 attended the Royal High School, of which he was Latin dux in his final year. At Edinburgh University he distinguished himself as a political speaker in college debates, and graduated MA in 1864. Between 1864 and 1867 Robertson took law classes at Edinburgh. He also spent time in a writer's (solicitor's) office, but was said to have left after quarrelling with a partner. He became a member of the Juridical Society in 1866 (he was also librarian in 1868-9 and president in 1869-70), and passed to the Scottish bar on 16 July 1867. 
Robertson made slow progress at first, but he gradually acquired a large practice and a reputation for a sharp and biting wit. He had lost sympathy with his Presbyterian background early in life. At the Disruption of the Scottish church in 1843 his father had remained in the establishment, while his mother had joined the Free Church of Scotland. Robertson himself, on attaining adulthood, joined the Scottish episcopal communion. On 10 April 1872 he married Philadelphia Mary Lucy Fraser (1847-1907), daughter of William Nathaniel Fraser of Tornaveen, Aberdeenshire, and his wife, Philadelphia Lambe Veitch. They had two sons (one of whom died in the South African War) and one daughter. 
Robertson's professional interests lay more in politics than in law. An ardent admirer of Disraeli, he did much to promote a Conservative revival in Scotland, and at the general election of 1880 he unsuccessfully contested Linlithgowshire against Peter Maclagan, the sitting member. He became QC when he was appointed solicitor-general for Scotland in the short-lived Salisbury government of 1885, and was returned for Bute at the general election of that year; but he lost office when the Liberals came in, in February 1886. On the defeat of Gladstone on home rule in June 1886 and the consequent dissolution of parliament, Robertson was re-elected for Bute. In Salisbury's second administration he became again solicitor-general for Scotland. 
Robertson quickly made his mark in the House of Commons. On 13 April 1887 he spoke with effect in support of the 'Criminal Law Amendment (Ireland) Bill'. His speech, a defence of the bill on the analogy of Scottish criminal law, was published under the title of 'Scotland and the Crimes Bill'. On 24 October 1888 he was appointed lord advocate, and he was sworn of the privy council. As lord advocate he carried the 'Local Government (Scotland) Act' of 1889, by which free elementary education was established in Scotland. In 1890 he received the honorary degree of LLD from Edinburgh University, of which three years later he became lord rector. His rectorial address of 1895, 'The duty of educated intellect to the state', was published in the same year. 
On 21 September 1891 Robertson succeeded John Inglis as lord president of the Court of Session. Contemporaries believed that a desire for financial security underlay his abandonment of a political career. Embittered by the absence of political advancement, he wrote to a friend on his appointment: 'My life is done'. His tenure of the presidency was undistinguished except on the administrative side. In 1899, on the death of William Watson, Baron Watson, he became a life peer, as Baron Robertson of Forteviot, with a seat on the judicial committees of the privy council and the House of Lords. In the privy council he was often charged with the duty of delivering the judgment of the board, especially in appeals from those parts of the empire where Roman-Dutch law prevailed. In the House of Lords, on the appeal 'Walter v. Lane' on 6 August 1900, he dissented from the majority and held that 'The Times' had no copyright in Lord Rosebery's speeches published by Lane in book form from 'The Times' reports. His best-known judgment was in 1904, in the appeal by the minority of the Free Church of Scotland against the decision of the Court of Session in the litigation which followed the union (in 1900) of the Free Church of Scotland and the United Presbyterians. He favoured reversing the decision and giving the property of the Free Church to the objecting minority. 
Robertson was chairman of the Irish University commission and author of its 1904 report which, while recognizing that the ideal system for Ireland would combine all creeds, recommended a virtually Catholic university as the only practicable solution to the problem. He remained a keen politician to the last, but dissented vigorously from the Conservative tariff policy. He died suddenly at the Cap Martin Hotel, Menton, France, on 2 February 1909, and was buried at Elmstead, Kent, later in the same month. 


@@@@@


doc= 35783


Robertson, John Mackinnon (1856-1933), author and politician, was born on 14 November 1856 at Brodick, Isle of Arran, the second son of John Robertson of Perthshire and his wife, Susan, daughter of John Mackinnon of Brodick. His family moved to Stirling, where he left school at the age of thirteen. He became a railway telegraph clerk and, moving to Edinburgh, a law clerk for four years. While working for an insurance company, he began a lifetime's career in journalism, writing for local newspapers, and in 1878 he succeeded William Archer (on Archer's recommendation) as leader writer for the 'Edinburgh Evening News'. In that year he came under the influence of the radical freethinker Charles Bradlaugh and, after being active in the Edinburgh Secular Society, accepted Bradlaugh's invitation to join him in London as assistant editor of the 'National Reformer'. When Bradlaugh died, Robertson became editor until the publication failed in 1893, when he founded the 'Free Review', which he edited until 1895. In 1893 he married Maude Mosher, daughter of Charles Mosher of Des Moines, Iowa, USA; they had a son and a daughter. 
During the late 1880s and the 1890s Robertson extended his interests beyond atheism, free thought, and neo-Malthusianism and became increasingly involved with radical and ethical causes, establishing himself as an effective and sought-after public speaker, and espousing 'socialist' ideas at a time when socialism generally signified a belief in the redistribution of wealth, a recognition of social interdependence, and the harnessing of the state to the cause of social reform. He was associated with many of the groups and movements active in moulding progressive secular politics. One of them was South Place Ethical Society, where he was a member of the Sunday lecturers' team from 1899 until the 1920s, an office interrupted only by his political duties. Another was the Rainbow Circle, a society for leading progressive thinkers and politicians, of which Robertson was a member from 1899 to 1931 and where, as his friend J. A. Hobson noted, he impressed his colleagues with his 'brilliant debating'. These experiences facilitated Robertson's attachment to the rising new Liberalism and he endorsed its collectivist politics as a means of furthering social justice and reason in politics. His 'The Meaning of Liberalism' was one of the major new Liberal statements, inviting an evolutionary approach to the regulation of social evils and presenting society as a network of reciprocal obligations, while cautiously attempting to strike a balance between state intervention and private initiative. At heart, however, Robertson was an individualist and remained committed to some of the older Liberal causes. He fought hard against protectionism and his 'Trade and Tariffs' became a bible for free-traders pursuing the case for cheap food and the expansion of trade. He was also sceptical about the increasing demands emanating from the trade union movement and about the feasibility of socialist proposals. 
In 1895 Robertson began his active political life by standing as an independent radical parliamentary candidate for Northampton, a seat he failed to win. He conducted a lecturing tour of the USA in 1897-8 and in 1900 was sent by the 'Morning Leader' to South Africa, where he reported on the effects of martial law in Cape Colony and Natal over the signature Scrutator. A strong opponent of the South African War, he was a vigorous anti-imperialist and condemned British policy in Egypt (which he visited in 1907), and in India. In 1906 Robertson was elected as Liberal MP for the Tyneside division, a seat he held, with increased majorities, until 1918. Although politics was never his prime interest, and he was handicapped by his noted unwillingness to compromise on matters of principle, he was a trenchant, if not exhilarating, speaker and an able, if not outstanding, politician. In 1911 he became parliamentary secretary to the Board of Trade, having to relinquish his post in 1915 upon the formation of Asquith's coalition government. In the same year he was sworn of the privy council. From 1915 to 1927 Robertson was chairman of the Liberal publications department, and he also served as president of the National Liberal Federation. In the 1923 elections he unsuccessfully contested Hendon. In his final years, alienated from political developments both institutionally -- as an Asquithian Liberal -- and ideologically -- because he refused to follow many new Liberal colleagues in what they saw as a natural progression towards Labour Party politics -- he returned to the pursuit of his formidable intellectual concerns. 
Robertson was a self-taught man, of whom H. J. Laski wrote: 'I doubt whether there was a more learned man... in Great Britain'. He acquired a working knowledge of six languages and made original and incisive contributions to an unusually wide range of disciplines. An eminent historian of free thought, he also earned distinction (as well as notoriety) as a Shakespearian scholar, promoting a 'scientific' and 'disintegrative' textual analysis. He contributed to comparative historical sociology and subjected Christianity to searching secular assessments. In economics he produced, independently of Hobson, an unorthodox under-consumptionist theory which attacked over-saving. He engaged in extensive literary criticism, and his studies of H. T. Buckle and of nineteenth-century humanists accompanied works on population, and on early modern theorists and philosophers, as well as current polemics on Joseph Chamberlain and Lloyd George. Robertson was immensely prolific, working ten to twelve hours, seven days a week, and was blessed with a powerfully retentive memory. He wrote over a hundred books and pamphlets and the number of his articles ran into four figures. At the time of his death his library contained some 12,000 books, the collecting of which was his only extravagance. 
Robertson was an avowed rationalist and combative seeker of truth, scrupulously honest, who courted controversy and was often content to plough his own furrow at the expense of popularity and academic recognition. He could be abrasive and austere, applying his reasoning powers to make short shrift of opponents, and his wit was caustic. Yet he was entirely without vanity, possessed charm, and was generous to his friends and devoted to his family. He was good-looking, tall and spare, bearded with a long oval face, and a smart dresser in his youth. He died of a stroke on 5 January 1933 at his London home, 24 Pembroke Gardens, South Kensington, and was cremated without a service at Golders Green crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 35784


Robertson, Sir Johnston Forbes- (1853-1937), actor and theatre manager, was born in Crutched Friars, London, on 16 January 1853, the eldest of the eleven children of John Forbes-Robertson (1822-1903) and his wife, Frances, the daughter of John Cott, of London. His father was a Scot from Aberdeen who won some success in London as an art critic and journalist. The son was educated at Charterhouse, then still a London school, and was sent for a great part of his holidays for over six years to Rouen. He was originally intended for an artist, and on leaving school was admitted as a student to the Royal Academy in 1870. At the end of three years' hard work he had shown so much promise that his future as a painter seemed assured. Instead, he turned for his profession to the stage, where he was later joined by two of his brothers and one of his sisters. 
'Rarely, very rarely have I enjoyed myself in acting,' wrote Forbes-Robertson in his autobiography. He considered himself temperamentally unfitted for the stage, but a desire to relieve his family of the expense of his upkeep made him take an opportunity to earn his living. He had appeared in an amateur production, and the ascetic beauty of his face -- he had sat to D. G. Rossetti, Ford Madox Brown, and other artists -- and the resonance of his deep voice led to an offer from W. G. Wills in March 1874 of a part in his play 'Mary Stuart', then running at the Princess's Theatre, at a salary of $4 a week. 
In April, Forbes-Robertson appeared with Ellen Terry in Charles Reade's 'The Wandering Heir', and after a tour with her he played a round of parts in Manchester under C. A. Calvert. By the end of 1874 he was back in London, playing with Samuel Phelps at the Gaiety Theatre. Forbes-Robertson afterwards paid affectionate tribute to Phelps as his master, under whom he studied elocution, and painted the portrait of Phelps as Wolsey in the Garrick Club collection. The high promise of that early painting (1876) shows that Forbes-Robertson had always an alternative avocation. He may have thought of himself as essentially a painter: the characteristic of his playing was a sense of beauty (of movement, speech, and aesthetic morality) that implied links with the visual arts. Painting fed his style of acting. But the stage claimed him, and he owed it to Phelps's teaching, as well as to his own natural graces, that he soon made a name. Engagement followed engagement, until in September 1876 he made his first notable personal success, as Geoffrey Wynyard in W. S. Gilbert's 'Dan'l Druce, Blacksmith'. From that time on his name appears constantly in stage records, with the Bancrofts, with Wilson Barrett and Helena Modjeska, with Henry Irving, and with John Hare; and the list of his parts is remarkable for their variety and growing importance. 
Forbes-Robertson made the first of many appearances in the United States of America in October 1885, in New York as Orlando with Mary Anderson. After a long tour in America he appeared with her in London, at the Lyceum Theatre in September 1887, as Leontes in a famous production of 'The Winter's Tale', for which he designed the dresses. He was now recognized as one of the leading London actors, and for eight more years he continued in constant demand until in 1895 he decided to go into management for himself. Again, as at the beginning of his stage career, he was taking an opportunity rather than realizing an ambition. 
Forbes-Robertson's first season, at the Lyceum, was only a moderate success. His leading lady was Mrs Patrick Campbell, an actress of great talent and temperament to whom Forbes-Robertson was for a time attached and may have been engaged. He was now 'in thrall to a fury' (Frances Donaldson), and for four years 'she led him a terrible dance'. It was thought that he delayed putting on his masterpiece, 'Hamlet', because Mrs Campbell prevailed upon him to produce 'Romeo and Juliet'. Juliet was a fine part for her; Ophelia does not compete with Hamlet. Forbes-Robertson's management venture did not go well until, at the same theatre and with much misgiving, he presented himself as Hamlet in September 1897. This was the greatest artistic success of his career, and it established his fortunes. Even in his farewell season, when he was sixty, the dignity and poetic grace of his interpretation of the young man were unforgettable. 
Forbes-Robertson's private life then took a decisive turn for the better. He parted from Mrs Patrick Campbell in 1899, and met his future wife. In the autumn of 1900 he engaged for a tour with his company a young American actress, (Mary) Gertrude ['see below'], the daughter of Thomas Dermot, a sea captain, and his wife, Adelaide Hall. Her stage name was Gertrude Elliott, and she was the sister of a more famous actress, Maxine Elliott. On 22 December 1900 he married her, and she remained his leading lady until his retirement and his devoted companion until his death. They had four daughters, the second of whom, Jean Forbes-Robertson (1905-1962), followed her parents on to the stage with notable success. Forbes-Robertson's happy marriage was the personal and professional stabilizer of his later life. 
During the next decade Forbes-Robertson continued to enjoy high artistic prestige and a modest prosperity. His finest role, after Hamlet, was Caesar in Shaw's 'Caesar and Cleopatra'. As Shattuck wrote, 'The genetic relationship between Forbes-Robertson's Hamlet and Shaw's Caesar is implicit in Shaw's pronouncement just before the London production [1907]: 'I wrote 'Caesar and Cleopatra' for Forbes-Robertson, because he is the classic actor of our day, and had a right to require such a service from me.'' Forbes-Robertson also produced Shaw's 'The Devil's Disciple' (1900), playing Dick Dudgeon. As an actor, Forbes-Robertson scarcely had a failure; he was admired by critics and public. As a manager, he put on a mixture of classical and modern plays with fair success. They included Maeterlinck's 'Pelleas and Melisande' (1898), Madeleine Lucette Ryley's 'Mice and Men' (1902), and 'The Light that Failed' (1903), an adaptation of Rudyard Kipling's novel. He was by now pre-eminent in his profession, and in 1905 he organized the lobbying that secured Sir Henry Irving's burial in Westminster Abbey. 
In 1908 Forbes-Robertson produced Jerome K. Jerome's play 'The Passing of the Third Floor Back', and it became his chief box-office success. The play has little artistic merit, but the part of the mysterious and Christ-like Stranger, who puts to shame the petty human failings of his fellow guests in a boarding-house, brought out the sweetness and goodness of his character. Forbes-Robertson came to be heartily sick of the play, but it was often revived and became the staple of his later prosperity. In 1917 he starred in a film made of it. 
Forbes-Robertson's name was never connected with a particular London theatre. In twenty years he played only four seasons in London, but spent many years on tour in the USA and Canada. His farewell London season came in 1913, at the end of which he was knighted, in June, by George V. His last professional appearance was given at Harvard University in April 1916, as Hamlet. After more than twenty years of contented retirement he died at his London home, 22 Bedford Square, on 6 November 1937. In 1925 he published his autobiography, 'A Player under Three Reigns'. He received honorary degrees from Columbia University (1915) and Aberdeen University (1931), and was the first actor of any nationality upon whom an American degree was conferred. 
Forbes-Robertson was widely regarded as the finest Hamlet of his time. Robert Atkins, who had seen thirty-five Hamlets, thought him 'the most perfect'. Bernard Shaw was unstinting in his praise, and defined Forbes-Robertson's qualities: 'Mr Forbes-Robertson is essentially a classical actor, the only one, with the exception of Mr Alexander, now established in London management. What I mean by classical is that he can present a dramatic hero as a man whose passions are those which have produced the philosophy, the poetry, the art, and the statecraft of the world, and not merely those which have produced its weddings, coroners' inquests, and executions. ('Our Theatres in the Nineties', 3.201)' He would not, James Agate noted, speak 'I'll lug the guts into the neighbour room.' This was a Hamlet founded on breeding and social address, physical grace, and 'a voice like a violoncello'. Hamlet was the epitome of Forbes-Robertson's art. 'Forbes-Robertson was a gracious and noble actor, and in his private life a gracious and noble gentleman' (Agate, 228-32). 

'Hamlet', a film shot in Lulworth Cove (1913), is at the British Film Institute; it records the grace and nobility of Forbes-Robertson's gestures. His voice has been preserved through several Shakespeare speeches which are on record at the National Sound Archive. 




@@@@@


doc= 35785


Robertson, Sir Robert (1869-1949), chemist and explosives expert, was born on 17 April 1869 at Cupar, Fife, the eldest of four children, and the only son, of John Alexander Robertson, dentist, and his wife, Euphemia, daughter of Andrew Russell, a farmer of Balmerino, Fife. 
Educated at Madras Academy (the Bell-Baxter School), Cupar, and St Andrews University, where he graduated in both arts and science (1890), Robertson was for a short time an assistant in the laboratory of the Glasgow city analyst. In 1892 he was appointed to the staff of the royal gunpowder factory at Waltham Abbey, where the military were in the process of introducing smokeless nitro- compounds as explosive replacements for black powder. He made a study of the chemistry of nitrocellulose and ethylene glycol dinitrate, and successfully incorporated the results into his doctoral thesis at St Andrews in 1897. 
As chemist in charge of the laboratory of the factory from 1900, Robertson studied the purification of gun cotton (nitrocellulose), and developed an improved method that allowed greater stability of cordite, the propellant used in British ammunition. He became an acknowledged expert on the stability of explosives, and in 1906 he accompanied Sir Frederic Lewis Nathan on a mission to investigate explosions which had occurred in magazines in India. In 1903 he married Kathleen (died 1938), daughter of Hugh Hutton Stannus, a lecturer in applied art at South Kensington and Manchester. 
Robertson was appointed in 1907 as superintending chemist of the research department at Woolwich arsenal, at a time when defects in ammunition used during the South African War were being studied. During the following years he organized very wide investigations of old and new explosives, their stability, power, and sensitivity, including particularly tetryl and trinitrotoluene (TNT). During the First World War he was responsible for the development of the manufacture and use of TNT, and of the explosive mixture 'amatol', which made possible a much larger and cheaper supply of high explosive. Another vital development was his introduction of an alcohol-ether mixture in place of acetone, which was scarce, in the production of propellants. 
In 1921 Robertson was appointed government chemist. The work of his department, which provided chemical advice and services to other departments (particularly the board of customs and excise), was considerably increased between 1921 and 1936 by the introduction of various new import duties, and by legislation involving chemical control. Robertson placed much emphasis on promoting independent research activity among staff of the laboratory. As an innovation, he introduced occasional seminars at which staff (including himself) would read research papers. These meetings, held after hours, were not popular and were abolished soon after he left. He also served on numerous government committees. 
During this period Robertson pursued important fundamental research. In collaboration with John Jacob Fox, who succeeded him as government chemist, he made a detailed study of the infra-red absorption of the gases ammonia, phosphine, and arsine and interpreted the main features of their spectra. This pioneering work stimulated the growth of infra-red spectroscopy both in Britain and abroad. Subsequently he made a detailed examination of the infra-red and Raman spectra of diamonds, of which a certain proportion showed several abnormal physical properties. 
After his retirement from the government laboratory in 1936, Robertson continued his experimental work at the Royal Institution, of which he was treasurer. In 1937 he became director of the Salters' Institute of Industrial Chemistry. 
At the outbreak of war in 1939 Robertson rejoined the research department at Woolwich and was placed in charge of a major branch at University College, Swansea, where he directed general chemical work on explosives and was at the same time chairman of several government committees. 
Robertson was a man of great personal vigour. Described as 'a broad-shouldered man of small stature... with a deep voice' (Hammond and Egan, 205), he was an able administrator who worked hard and expected his staff to do the same, but his domineering temperament made him unpopular. He had a wide range of interests, and was an active supporter of scientific societies both national and international. He held office twice as vice-president of the Chemical Society, was president of the Faraday Society (1922-4), and vice-president of the Institute of Chemistry. He also presided over the chemistry section of the British Association at Toronto in 1924. Robertson was elected FRS in 1917 and received the society's Davy medal in 1944. He was appointed KBE in 1918, and received the honorary degree of LLD from St Andrews University in 1923. 
Robertson died at his home, 51 Bedford Court Mansions, Bedford Square, Bloomsbury, London, on 28 April 1949, as a result of influenza and broncho-pneumonia. He was survived by one son and one daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 35786


Robertson, Sir William Robert, first baronet (1860-1933), army officer, was the son of Thomas Charles Robertson, village postmaster and tailor, and his wife, Ann Dexter Beet (died 1893). Born on 29 January 1860 at Welbourn, Lincolnshire, in very humble circumstances (both of his parents were illegitimate), Robertson had two brothers and four sisters. After completing his formal education in the village school at age thirteen, he worked as a domestic servant for the Cardigan family at Deene Park, Northamptonshire, and the Vernon family at Hanbury Hall, Worcestershire. Almost nothing is known of his four years as a domestic servant, and he makes no mention of it in his autobiography. 
In November 1877 Robertson enlisted in the 16th lancers at Aldershot. His devout mother was shocked, writing to him, 'I would rather Bury you than see you in a red coat' (Bonham-Carter, 5). Robertson's choice of an army career seemed an especially unfortunate one for someone without the advantages of birth, wealth, or education. The Victorian army was dominated by middle- and upper-class officers, and a ranker had little opportunity for self-improvement and advancement. But Robertson was not typical of his fellow troopers who devoted their free time to women and excessive drinking. Strong and athletic, he dominated troop competitions. But it was his intellect rather than his physical fitness that largely explains his extraordinary rise through the ranks. He read widely on warfare and mastered the subjects necessary for promotion. Especially good at languages, he qualified in six Indian ones: Urdu, Hindi, Persian, Pashto, Punjabi, and Gurkhali. He also mastered German and French. His advancement is all the more noteworthy because it was achieved in the intellectual sphere of the army, in such areas as intelligence and staff work. He never commanded troops. 
At Aldershot, Robertson's progress was steady but not remarkable: lance-corporal, February 1879; corporal, April 1879; lance-sergeant, May 1881; sergeant, January 1882; and troop sergeant-major, March 1885. In 1888 he was gazetted second lieutenant in the 3rd dragoon guards. Conscious of his inferior social standing, he was apprehensive about taking his meals in the officers' mess. 'You see', he wrote to his mother, 'I feel that I am acting under a false flag if they do not know my previous life' (Bonham-Carter, 32). His posting to India, where pay was higher and expenses for officers smaller, allowed him to survive on the economic margin. He drank water instead of alcohol and did not smoke. A pipe, for which he could afford tobacco, was not allowed in the mess. 
Attached to the intelligence branch at army headquarters at Simla, Robertson was assigned the semi-independent and independent territories along the north-west frontier. As a member of the intelligence staff of the Chitral relief force in 1895, he was mentioned in dispatches and made DSO after he was attacked and wounded by native guides who were accompanying him on intelligence work. In December 1896 Captain Robertson departed for England with his wife (they had married on 8 September 1894), Mildred Adelaide (died 1942), the second daughter of Lieutenant-General Charles Thomas Palin of the Indian army, and their five-month-old child, Brian Hubert Robertson. Their first child, Hugh, had died in infancy. Another son, Hugh William John, born on 17 September 1909, died on 12 March 1928 when he was eighteen. There were two daughters, Rosamund Mildred ('b'. 21 Sept 1901) and Helen Millicent ('b'. 17 Dec 1905). 
Robertson's career now took a dramatic turn. Having passed the entrance exam for the Staff College at Camberley, he joined Britain's emerging military elite. As the first ranker to be accepted at Camberley, Robertson more than held his own with classmates such as Douglas Haig, Edmund H. H. Allenby, Archibald J. Murray, and George F. Milne, officers destined to play prominent roles in the First World War. Robertson's intellectual mentor, the military theorist George F. R. Henderson, emphasized the concentration of forces in the primary theatre of the enemy in order to overwhelm his main force in a decisive battle. These principles served as a bond between Robertson and Haig when the two men dominated British military policy. 'There was never, so far as I know, any material difference of opinion between us in regard to the main principles to be observed in order to win the war', Robertson notes in his autobiography (Robertson, 'From Private to Field-Marshal', 98). 
Robertson left Staff College, and, after a brief stint with the intelligence branch of the War Office, joined the intelligence branch of the headquarters staff of Lord Roberts in South Africa. His service in the South African War was brief. Having arrived in Cape Town on 20 January 1900, he was ordered back to the War Office after only nine months. As head of the foreign military intelligence section (1901-7) he identified Germany as the greatest strategic threat to Britain, and believed that an alliance with France was essential to the security of the empire. In November 1903 he became one of the youngest colonels in the army. At the end of January 1907 he was put on half pay until May, when he became the assistant quartermaster-general at Aldershot; and in December he replaced Archibald Murray as General Sir Horace Smith Dorrien's chief of general staff at the Aldershot command. In June 1910 he was offered the prestigious position of commandant of the Staff College at Camberley, and in December he was promoted major-general. 
Taking a common-sense approach to the art of war, Robertson trained officers at Camberley to conduct retreats as well as advances. Application took precedence over theory. 'Training manuals do not pretend to be exhaustive tactical treatises', he emphasized. 'They lay down certain principles, but they do not pretend to show how these principles must be treated or modified under conditions which are so infinitely diversified' ('Remarks on visit to battlefield, 1912', Robertson MSS, 1 Feb 1912). Although Robertson did not possess the gift of extemporaneous speech, his prepared lectures were well received and especially noteworthy for their clarity. Sir James Edmonds, the compiler of the official British history of the war, ranked him with Henderson as a teacher. In October 1913 Robertson became director of military training in the War Office, an appointment that disappointed him because he wanted to command troops. Sir John French, the chief of the Imperial General Staff (CIGS), however, promised that the 1st division at Aldershot would be his to command the following summer. Britain's involvement in the First World War altered this arrangement. Robertson, or Wully as he was affectionately known, was fifty-five years old at the outbreak of war. Powerfully built with a prominent jaw, he had a physical presence to match his blunt personality. Fools were not suffered gladly. His directness, however, was not always in evidence: known for his witticisms, he was good company and moved easily in the highest social circles. 
When Archibald Murray became Sir John French's chief of general staff, Robertson replaced him as quartermaster-general. By transferring supply bases from the Belgian to the Atlantic coast and cutting red tape, Robertson kept the British expeditionary force (BEF) supplied during its retreat from Mons. His hands-on approach won him the nickname Old Any-Complaints. When visiting the troops, he often enquired, 'Any complaints men?' On 25 January 1915 Robertson replaced Murray again. Dwarfed by the much larger French army, the BEF played a supporting role on the western front. The British First Army, commanded by Haig, launched four offensives in 1915 that achieved little. Anticipating a long and wearing conflict, Robertson envisaged Britain, once her reserves of manpower were mobilized, as the decisive factor in Germany's defeat. Assisted by his handpicked director of military operations, Sir Frederick B. Maurice, Robertson in his new role as chief of general staff attempted to solve the riddle of static trench warfare which had replaced the war of movement of the first months of the war. The ever-expanding system of earthworks had the property of an elastic band. They bent rather than broke. Robertson concluded that a decisive battle was unlikely so long as Germany had reserves to bring forward. To prevent the Germans from gradually giving ground while inflicting heavy losses on the attacker, Robertson and Maurice hoped to nail the defenders to their trenches by choosing an objective which the enemy considered strategically vital. 'If the Germans are to be defeated they must be beaten by a process of slow attrition, by a slow and gradual advance on our part, each step being prepared by a predominant artillery fire and great expenditure of ammunition', he argued in a general staff note on 8 February 1915 ('Memorandum on the possibility of undertaking offensive operations', TNA: PRO, WO 158/7). Robertson's cautious approach of placing killing Germans above conquering territory was bound to be costly, although not as costly as attempts to carry the German defensive system in a one-step breakthrough. 
Something more than deliberate tactics was necessary for success. Robertson also lobbied for changes in the higher conduct of the war: the revitalization of the general staff in the War Office (which was being ignored by the British government's military adviser, Lord Kitchener, secretary of state for war); the adoption of conscription and an increase in the size of British forces in France and Flanders; and the formulation of a common Anglo-French plan to conduct operations. 
Horrified by the long casualty lists, Britain's war leaders were divided over their country's military role. Acting as supreme war-lord, Kitchener sought to limit involvement in trench warfare until Britain's allies had exhausted Germany's reserves. Other war leaders, such as David Lloyd George and Winston Churchill, sought theatres where both political and military gains might be made without engaging the main body of the German army. Involved now in planning and co-ordinating allied campaigns in the western theatre, and in touch with both the political leadership and general staff in London, Robertson opposed limiting Britain's liability. Britain could not shift the responsibility of defeating its chief strategic rival to its continental allies. The casualties involved in protracted trench warfare could not be avoided so long as a victor's peace remained the goal. Robertson's criticism of peripheral operations was given added force when the Gallipoli and Dardanelles ventures ended in disaster and a British force advancing on Baghdad was surrounded by the Turks at Kut al-Amara. Meanwhile, because of French prodding, another theatre opened in the Balkans at Salonika, Greece, with little regard for military ends and means. 
Having lost faith in Kitchener, and with his cabinet unable to achieve any consensus on strategy, H. H. Asquith, the prime minister, turned to Robertson. In delicate negotiations with Kitchener, Robertson extracted terms that revitalized the general staff and reduced the secretary of state's role to little more than feeding and clothing the army. Robertson's position as the sole military adviser to the government was subsequently given constitutional authority in January 1916 by an order of council issued by George V. 
Robertson's arrival in the War Office on his own terms on 23 December 1915 was part of a larger shake-up of the British high command. Haig replaced French as commander-in-chief. Robertson had been considered for this position, but his abilities seemed best utilized in London as CIGS. Although he lost the greater prize, Robertson enthusiastically endorsed Haig as French's successor. Robertson did not share Haig's enthusiasm for seeking decisive victory in every major offensive, but he closed ranks with him to prevent opponents of concentrating British military resources in the western theatre from exploiting any division in the high command. 
In December 1915 allied military leaders meeting at Chantilly designated France, Russia, and Italy as the 'principal' fronts. Although all other theatres were declared 'subsidiary', Robertson was displeased. What he called the 'hideous nightmare', the allied campaign in the Balkans, had not been terminated because of pressure from Britain's allies (Robertson, 'Soldiers and Statesmen', 1.288). The allied leaders at Chantilly also decided upon simultaneous offensives in 1916 in the 'principal' theatres, and Robertson sought to end talk in London of limiting Britain's participation in the war until German forces had become demoralized and exhausted. He gained approval for a major Anglo-French offensive on the Somme and then successfully lobbied for conscription to replace the BEF's losses. Robertson's success in gaining a larger British commitment to the western theatre was in large part due to the logic of his arguments. A powerful German offensive, launched in March against Verdun, was wearing down the French army. And there was little sympathy within the government for President Woodrow Wilson's offer of American mediation of the conflict. As Robertson argued, a compromise peace would only lead shortly to a future war in which Germany would represent an even greater strategic threat to the British empire. 
British losses on the first day of the Somme offensive -- almost 60,000 casualties -- shocked Robertson. Haig's one-step breakthrough attempt was the antithesis of Robertson's cautious approach of exhausting the enemy with artillery and limited advances. Although he secretly discussed more prudent tactics with Haig's subordinates he defended the BEF's operations in London. The British offensive, despite its limited results, was having a positive effect in conjunction with the other allied attacks under way against the central powers. The continuation of Haig's offensive into the autumn, however, was not so easy to justify. The French army was no longer in danger at Verdun, and the Russians were in retreat in the east where the Germans had regained the strategic initiative. When Lloyd George, who had become secretary of state for war in June 1916 without in any way altering the Kitchener-Robertson compact, demanded that reinforcements be sent to aid Romania (a recent addition to the alliance), Robertson argued that maintaining pressure in the west could best prevent that country from being overrun. Romania's subsequent collapse coincided with Robertson's admission that Germany, despite its enormous losses in 1916 at Verdun and on the Somme, had increased the number of its divisions. Although Robertson had not promised victory in 1916 and had been candid about Britain's potential casualties, the civilians expected more than the apparently barren results of Haig's offensive. No strategic advantage had been gained and Haig's breakthrough mentality had not made attrition work in Britain's favour. 
In December 1916 Lloyd George replaced Asquith as prime minister. Robertson, although he sided with no political faction, supported this transfer of power. Asquith had deferred to the soldiers, but Robertson believed him incapable of providing the dynamic and purposeful leadership required to see the war through to victory. Lloyd George's ascendancy, however, threatened Robertson's control over strategy. Sickened by the mounting casualties, which he blamed on the high command's fixation on the western front, Lloyd George planned to assert civilian control over the higher direction of the war. Britain, however, continued its commitment to the western front in 1917 because Britain's allies were more inclined to Robertson's views than to the prime minister's. The prime minister's influence over strategic and military questions was also limited by the support that Robertson enjoyed from the king, powerful elements in the national press, and key members of the government. 
After failing to shift emphasis to the Italian front at an inter-allied conference at Rome in January 1917, Lloyd George manoeuvred to give the new French commander-in-chief, Robert Nivelle, who promised to rupture the German defences in twenty-four to forty-eight hours, operational command of the BEF at an Anglo-French conference at Calais in February. Robertson, exploiting France's apparent desire to co-opt the BEF, succeeded in removing some of the more objectional aspects of this flawed effort to unite the British and French forces for the next campaign. Nivelle's subsequent failure to live up to his inflated promises demoralized the French army whose decline was only one of Britain's many concerns in the spring of 1917. The Russian army collapsed following the overthrow of the Romanov dynasty in March. Italy wanted British support, more for defensive than offensive purposes. And the United States, a new entrant in the war, was building an army from scratch and was unlikely to be a factor in the war for a year or more. The primary burden of fighting the German army shifted to Britain. Fearing that Britain's manpower might be exhausted, Lloyd George opposed the all-British offensive that general headquarters had long favoured in Flanders. Haig was confident that he could decisively defeat the German army as well as satisfy his government's desire to capture the Belgian ports from which German surface raiders threatened British sea traffic. Robertson did not think in such grandiose terms and was not prepared to squander British manpower in a prolonged offensive aimed at decisive victory. But he saw no other theatre where British arms might be as effective or where the war would ultimately be won or lost. If the BEF assumed a passive position during the last half of 1917, Britain's continental allies might falter before American troops arrived in force. In Flanders the Germans would have to stand and fight, and Robertson believed that British artillery superiority would make attrition work in Britain's favour. The war cabinet, at Lloyd George's prodding, considered alternative offensives all around the Mediterranean from Alexandretta (Iskenderun) to the Italian front to the Balkans. The government, however, eventually sanctioned an offensive in Flanders, but only on the condition that operations would be suspended if the attack degenerated into another Somme. Robertson initially accepted these conditions, suggesting to Haig that the success of his offensive might be judged after only two weeks. Fearing that his government would make Italy the primary theatre, Haig protested. He demanded and got Robertson's support for the continuation of his Passchendaele offensive although heavy rain reduced the ground to a quagmire throughout much of the prolonged battle and limited both his progress and the effectiveness of his artillery. Believing that the enemy would crack at any moment, Haig continued to push forward in September and October. A concerned Robertson met with the BEF's commanders. With Haig looking on, they expressed confidence in the ultimate success of their offensive. One word from Robertson would have emboldened the civilians to terminate the offensive. This word never came. In retrospect Robertson clearly regretted his silence. The dispatch of some of Haig's divisions to rescue Italy after the Austro-German success at Caporetto finally forced Haig to halt his attack after the village of Passchendaele was captured in November. 
Robertson's support for the Flanders offensive (third Ypres) undermined his position, as did his technical advice on British operations in the Turkish theatres. The political leadership in late 1917 had to consider the possibility that Germany might defeat their continental allies. In this event control of areas such as Palestine would be vital to secure the British empire from a Turko-German threat and to acquire bargaining chips if peace negotiations materialized. Robertson is frequently pictured as an inflexible 'westerner', but this view requires modification. Recognizing that a victory over the Turks would boost British morale, and being concerned about the defence of the empire, he had supported an aggressive stance in the Turkish theatres at the beginning of 1917 when the conquest of Baghdad coincided with reports of a British victory at Gaza. But these favourable military conditions changed abruptly. Unrestricted German U-boat warfare created a serious shipping crisis in the outlying theatres. A Russian advance out of Persia (which would shield the forward British position at Baghdad) collapsed following the March revolution; and reports of British success at Gaza proved misleading. Robertson consequently urged a passive policy in the Turkish theatres. Despite the depressing results of the battles on the western front, Robertson argued that it was more important than ever to concentrate British resources there. Lloyd George, now backed by the war cabinet, wanted to reinforce and expand the mission of the Egyptian expeditionary force (EEF) under General Allenby. When Allenby captured Jerusalem with relative ease in December 1917, Lloyd George and other members of the war cabinet suspected Robertson of trying to limit the EEF's role by exaggerating its requirements. Rather than face a public reaction to Robertson's dismissal, Lloyd George chose indirect means of circumventing him: the creation of an inter-allied body, the supreme war council (SWC) with its own general staff located at Versailles. Robertson objected to this inter-allied body whose military representatives provided advice independent of the national general staffs. Robertson had long recognized the necessity of co-ordinating allied military operations, and had worked to create the model for previous allied co-operation, the meeting of allied generals at Chantilly in December 1915. But Lloyd George's previous efforts at unity of command suggested that he was inclined towards subordinating Haig to the French rather than co-ordinating allied operations. An additional goal of the prime minister now seemed to be the diminishing of Robertson's influence over strategy. 
Robertson's opposition to the new machinery of the SWC provided the background for his removal as CIGS. At a meeting of the supreme war council (30 January-2 February 1918) Lloyd George's soldier on the SWC, Sir Henry Wilson, shepherded a proposal through the committee of military advisers for a major spring campaign in Palestine. Robertson, convinced that Germany would try to win the war in the west before the United States became a factor, angered the prime minister when he spoke in the presence of other allied political leaders against gambling scarce military resources in the outside theatres. A further disagreement between Robertson and the prime minister emerged over the command of a general reserve. Robertson thought a reserve essential to counter the German offensive he anticipated, and was prepared to accept Field Marshal Joseph Joffre as generalissimo if he were appointed his chief of staff. When Lloyd George rejected this proposal Robertson insisted that the chiefs of the general staff be given authority over the general reserve, but Sir Henry Wilson and Lloyd George supported an executive war board, chaired by Ferdinand Foch, with broad powers over allied reserves. Robertson expressed his opposition to General Sir Herbert Plumer in a letter on 4 February: 'It is impossible to have Chiefs of the General Staffs dealing with operations in all respects except reserves and to have people with no other responsibilities dealing with reserves and nothing else. In fact the decision is unsound, and [neither] do I see how it is to be worked either legally or constitutionally. (Woodward, 'Military Correspondence', 283)' When the London press took up the issue and parliament became involved, Lloyd George's ministry appeared in danger. Robertson's political skills, however, were ill-matched to those of Lloyd George. Unity of command was in reality a secondary issue. As Robertson told the war cabinet on 14 February, the real question was whether the war cabinet wished to retain him as their military adviser. When this civil-military conflict focused on who was in charge, the prime minister or his CIGS, Robertson could not win, especially when Haig did not put up a fight to save him. Rejected by Haig as one of his army commanders, Robertson took the eastern command when he left the War Office on 18 February. 
Robertson had been removed from the centre of power but the government still felt his presence on two occasions during the last months of the war. When the German offensive, launched on 21 March, destroyed the British Fifth Army, critics of Lloyd George's war leadership demanded that Robertson be returned as CIGS. To placate Robertson's supporters Lloyd George considered sending him to France as Haig's second in command. Robertson, however, wrote to Haig on 19 April: 'My job is C.I.G.S. or nothing' (Haig MSS, no. 126). As this controversy died down in the press another erupted when Maurice, having consulted Robertson, published a letter that accused the government of dangerously weakening the BEF prior to the 21 March German offensive. Lloyd George, fighting for his political life, suspected a military conspiracy to place the soldiers in charge of the country. Robertson may have hoped that the government might reappoint him CIGS, but that was not the same as aspiring to be a British Hindenburg. Lloyd George emerged from the 'Maurice debate' in parliament in a stronger political position than ever. In June, Robertson became commander-in-chief, home forces. Following the armistice Robertson took command of the British army of the Rhine. When the list of war honours and rewards was published in October 1919 he received a grant of $10,000 (Haig got $100,000, French and Allenby $50,000 each) and a baronetcy. After relinquishing his command in Germany in March 1920 he returned to London. No official greeting party awaited him at Victoria Station. 'Having secured a broken-down taxi', he writes, 'I drove to my residence in Eccleston Square, and thereupon joined the long list of unemployed officers on half-pay' (Robertson, 'From Private to Field-Marshal', 377). Although his military career was over, other honours awaited him. Because of Churchill's intervention, he was promoted field marshal, the most impressive of the many 'firsts' he had achieved as a ranker. He was also created GCVO (1931); he had earlier been made CB (1905), CVO (1910), KCVO (1913), KCB (1915), GCB (1917), and GCMG (1919). Cambridge awarded him the LLD degree in 1919 and Oxford that of DCL in 1920. In 1925 he became colonel of his old regiment, the 3rd dragoon guards. He also became a member of the royal household when he accepted the colonelcy of the Royal Horse Guards (the Blues). 
Of modest means, Robertson became a business executive, serving as chairman of the Brewers' Trustees and as a director on numerous boards, including British Dyestuffs, the Palestine Corporation, and the London General Omnibus Company. At his death he had amassed a considerable estate with a probate value of $50,000; this did not include gifts he had made to family members. 
Robertson published his autobiography, 'From Private to Field-Marshal', in 1921, and in his later work, 'Soldiers and Statesmen, 1914-1918' (2 vols., 1926), he gives a generally even-handed account of the formulation of British wartime policy and strategy. In 1932 he served as president of the British Legion. Although he wrote on war, emphasized preparedness, and criticized the United States for going too far in reducing its naval strength, his public opposition to war made him a prominent spokesman for peace. 
Robertson's pastimes were fishing, shooting, and golf. In retirement he lived at 88 Westbourne Terrace near Paddington Station. On 12 February 1933, while dressing at his home, he died of a thrombosis. On 16 February, following a memorial service at Westminster Abbey, which was attended by many dignitaries, including Lloyd George, he was buried at Brookwood. He wanted to be remembered as a 'simple civilian', and his strictly private funeral was surely unique for such a distinguished British soldier. No uniformed officers were present, no gun carriage conveyed his coffin, and the 'Last Post' was not sounded. The only indication of his forty-two years' military service was that a union flag, which had been used at the funerals of Haig, C. C. Monro, and Plumer, covered his coffin. 


@@@@@


doc= 35787


Scott, John William Robertson (1866-1962), journalist, was born on 20 April 1866 at Wigton in Cumberland, the second of eight children (the first died in infancy) of David Young Crozier Scott (1844-1887), commercial traveller and temperance orator, and his wife, Janet (1843-1905), daughter of John Robertson. His border origins were wholly rural. He was educated at Quaker and grammar schools. His parents, who held broad and liberal views, welcomed many like-minded visitors of several nationalities to a home that was 'serious but not austere, of great affection and care'. Robertson Scott wrote of his father, as one who had much to do in setting the course of his life, that he was 'not only a teetotaller and a non-smoker, but a believer in cold baths and a disbeliever in bottles of medicine'. His parents were members of the Evangelical Union, but the family went to Quaker, Wesleyan, and Congregational services 'impartially'. 
The family moved to Carlisle about 1876 and later to Birmingham, where Robertson Scott's father was summoned to take charge of the organization to which he had devoted already a disproportionate share of his time and energies: the Independent Order of Good Templars. One of Robertson Scott's first jobs was as secretary to Joseph Malins, head of the grand lodge of the Good Templars in England; but he had already decided on a career in journalism. His father died at the age of forty-two, when he was still in his teens. As the eldest surviving son he accepted the challenge and supported his mother, brother, and three sisters on meagre journalistic earnings. In retrospect he was grateful for 'a realizing sense of what poverty is'. The first payment had come from C. P. Scott of the 'Manchester Guardian', and he was contributing to several national journals when H. J. Palmer offered him a staff appointment on the 'Birmingham Gazette'; but he had to leave when he stipulated that, as a Liberal, he should write nothing in support of the Conservative cause. He was working again as a freelance when, in 1887, he was invited by W. T. Stead to join him on the 'Pall Mall Gazette'. He worked for six years on that paper under Stead and then Edward T. Cook. When Cook left to found the 'Westminster Gazette' in 1893 Robertson Scott accompanied him and wrote a daily feature, 'Round the world'. In 1899 he transferred to the 'Daily Chronicle' under H. W. Massingham, but resigned with him in November of that year on the issue of the South African War, with which the proprietors sympathized. 
It was then that Robertson Scott decided to live and write in the country. He acquired a cottage at Great Canfield in Essex and 'invented that pioneer in rural journalism and authorship, 'Home Counties''. In 1902 he was invited by J. St Loe Strachey to contribute farming articles to the 'Country Gentleman'. In the next few years, using the same pseudonym, he was closely associated with the 'World's Work' and 'The Field'; he also wrote hundreds of articles and several books in a style peculiarly his own. They were for townspeople about farmers and smallholders, farm workers and landowners, how they lived and made a living, omitting the technicalities. He travelled the country and made frequent visits abroad, notably to the Netherlands and Denmark. His energy was prodigious, his journalistic output remarkable. In 1906 he married the talented Elspet (1858-1956), daughter of George Keith, of HM customs. They had no children. Together they contributed to the life of rural Essex, forming at Dunmow the Progressive Club for 'men and women of markedly different upbringings and associations, politics, denominations and incomes', and producing in Lady Warwick's big barn plays by Synge, Barrie, and Bensusan. 
When war broke out in 1914 Robertson Scott was above military age. He paid two visits to the Netherlands, then sold his Essex property and went to Japan. Looking ahead to the period of post-war reconstruction, he had in mind two studies: one of the small-farming system and rural life in Japan, the other (never accomplished) of large-scale farming in the American mid-west. While in Japan, gathering material with characteristic penetration and vigour, he started and edited with official backing a monthly, the 'New East'; he refused to adopt a propagandist approach and tried to explain Japan and the Japanese to the West and Western ideas to the East. In 1916 appeared, in both English and Japanese, his book 'Japan, Great Britain and the World'; but it was not until 1922, a year after his return home by way of the United States, that his copious notes were published as 'The Foundations of Japan', long the standard work in English on the rural life and people of that country. 
On his return Robertson Scott resumed his journalistic writing, became an enthusiastic adviser to the National Federation of Women's Institutes (he published, in 1925, 'The Story of the Women's Institute Movement'), and was a hard-working member of the Liberal land committee which produced 'The Land and the Nation' (1923-5). At this time he contributed to 'The Nation' a series of four articles which grew to twenty-four and was published anonymously as 'England's Green and Pleasant Land' (1925), his best-selling book. It described frankly and penetratingly, through the people and their talk about neighbours and themselves, the life of a contemporary village. 'The Dying Peasant and the Future of his Sons' followed a year later. 
In 1923 Robertson Scott had moved to the Cotswold hamlet of Idbury in Oxfordshire. Four years later, at the age of sixty-one, he founded the quarterly review, 'The Countryman'. He and his wife were business and advertisement manager, editor, sub-editor, and principal contributors. Ignoring the advice of friends, and with never more than $500 capital, they made it the most successful venture in periodical publishing between the two world wars. Non-party, though firm enough in opinion, it was packed with rural life and character, placing before town, city, and country dwellers vividly and convincingly the facts, and strengthening the forces of rural progress; but to achieve its more serious purpose it needed also to entertain. Robertson Scott sold the magazine in 1943 and continued to edit it with full independence for a further four years. 
Despite the demands of 'The Countryman', Robertson Scott was active in local government. Housing had been one of his most compelling interests since he contributed to the 'Country Gentleman' a series of articles entitled 'In search of a $150 cottage'; this led to an exhibition at Letchworth opened by the duke of Devonshire. For ten years he chaired his district council housing committee, and served under four ministers of health on the Central Housing Advisory Committee. He became a JP and founded the Quorum Club, an educational society with a good library for magistrates. He set great store by the gatherings of 'village neighbours' in Idbury School to hear an invited speaker each Sunday afternoon. In 1947, on his retirement, Robertson Scott was made a Companion of Honour. Two years later he was awarded an honorary MA degree by Oxford University. 
A self-styled agnostic, Robertson Scott had an infectious faith in humanity. He envisaged a future where ordinary men and women would grow in stature as their opportunities expanded. All his strivings, tremendous energy, knowledge, and journalistic skill were directed to extending these opportunities. He was always welcoming to people and causes. He was greatly helped by a devoted wife, herself a gifted writer, who provided him with a satisfying home background. He lived until his middle nineties with faculties undiminished, and died at home at Idbury Manor on 21 December 1962. 
John Cripps', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35788


Robey, Sir George (1869-1954), comedian, was born on 20 September 1869 at 334 Kennington Road, London, the elder of two sons of George Wade, civil engineer, and his wife, Elizabeth Mary Keene. He also had two sisters. His father often worked on tramway installations which took him and his family to the provinces and abroad, with the result that Robey's childhood tended to be peripatetic. Although he began his education at an English dame-school, between the ages of eleven and sixteen he studied in Dresden, where he also acquired an appreciation of art and of music up to and including Wagner, though not beyond, and also in Leipzig. For a period he lodged with a clergyman's family, eventually, it is claimed, becoming fluent in the language. He never lost his love of German or of Germany, despite remaining the most patriotic of Englishmen. 
Back in England, Wade was guided by his father into a clerical post with a Birmingham tramway construction business. Boredom with office routine led him to take up football, a game at which he excelled, and to sing comic songs with like-minded amateurs at smoking concerts and charity shows. Soon he realized that winning the applause of an audience was the most exciting and gratifying activity he had ever known. He went back to London in 1891, and, although prudently retaining an office job, began to earn the occasional guinea as an entertainer at evening functions. To save his family embarrassment he adopted the stage name of Robey. It was based on Roby, the name of a Birmingham firm: when he saw it misprinted as Robey he so liked the look of it that he took it as his own. 
After serving an apprenticeship as stooge to a theatre hypnotist George Robey made his professional debut in July 1891 at the old Oxford Music-Hall in Oxford Street. His patter and songs were well received and earned him a twelve-month engagement. Within a short time he achieved equal billing with famous names such as Dan Leno and Marie Lloyd. Gifted with a strong constitution, teeming energy, and supreme self-confidence, he revelled in the exhausting routine of playing five music-halls a night, dashing from one to the other in a strict timetable that allowed him only a few seconds to adjust his make-up in the wings. He had by now perfected the costume that became his trademark: a bald-fronted wig, a red nose, and naturally prominent eyebrows heavily blacked, accompanied by a small flat bowler hat, a shapeless crumpled soutane without collar, and a short flexible cane. The effect was of a dissolute, unfrocked clergyman. He flew on stage in a tremendous hurry and his lightning attack was such that the audience fell under his control before he even spoke a word. His method was to wind them up with a sort of ratchet technique, hinting at the most outrageous things and daring his hearers to imagine the worst, but then, at the last minute, relenting and leaving the worst unspoken. It was the procedure later employed by such as Max Miller and Frankie Howerd. 'Desist!', he would sternly command, arching his famous eyebrows as the first peal of laughter broke out: 'Kindly temper your hilarity with a modicum of reserve.' Having again convulsed the audience with another flood of possible double meanings, he would raise an admonitory finger and intone: 'Let there be merriment by all means, but let it be tempered with dignity and the reserve which is compatible with the obvious refinement of our environment.' The threat of obscenity was dissipated in a flow of polysyllabic orotundity which he would puncture, 'in other words', to quote one of his catch-phrases, with an abrupt descent into everyday slang. 
Robey wrote his own patter, although the songs by other hands that were so closely identified with him have not survived, apart from 'If you were the only girl in the world'. Ironically enough in later life, despite the boisterous double meanings of his own patter, he often criticized other performers for using what he righteously called 'smut'. He distinguished this from what he preferred to term as his own brand of 'honest vulgarity'. 'Honest vulgarity', he declared in his second autobiography, 'Looking Back on Life', 'never did a man any harm in the world, and never will... Honest vulgarity is neither filth nor prudery' (G. Robey, 'Looking Back', 118-20). Gramophone records and existing film of his act testify to his crystal clear enunciation, that 'whiplash diction', in Laurence Olivier's admiring phrase (Harding, 158), which carried every nuance to the target Robey described as 'the last man in the gallery' (G. Robey, 'Looking Back', 70). As the years passed he added to his repertory many humorous character studies, including 'The Mayor of Mudcumdyke', which he gave at the first royal command music-hall performance in 1912. For more than forty years he starred as an uproarious pantomime dame, generally agreed to be the best of his generation. In 1937, at the age of sixty-eight, he featured in a non-stop revue at the Prince of Wales Theatre, still fresh as a daisy after giving sixteen performances of his act each day. 
When the golden age of music-hall began to fade the versatile Robey went into revue with 'The Bing Boys are Here' (1916), where he sang with Violet Loraine 'If you were the only girl in the world', with which he became for ever associated. He adapted brilliantly to the demands of operetta in 'Helen!' (1932), C. B. Cochran's lavish reworking of Offenbach. His most ambitious experiment was in 1935 when he played Falstaff in 'Henry IV, Part 1'. The production, by Sydney Carroll at His Majesty's Theatre, also featured John Drinkwater in the title-role, Lewis Casson as Owen Glendower, and Lady Tree as Mistress Quickly. Despite his occasional trouble with lines and echoes of the stand-up comedian, the critics were in general impressed. 'He has the authentic geniality of the old fribble', declared James Agate (Agate, 102). In 1944 he played Falstaff on his deathbed in a scene added by Laurence Olivier to the film 'Henry V'. He made a number of silent films which are apparently lost, and several unremarkable sound films. His most interesting film was 'Don Quichotte' (1934), in which he played Sancho Panza to Chalyapin's Don Quixote under the notable direction of G. W. Pabst. 
Although the Prime Minister of Mirth, as he was usually billed, presented a disreputable and anarchic figure on stage, Robey in his private life was highly conventional and held right-wing political opinions. Though he dearly loved a lord, however, he was not a snob. He taught himself to become a connoisseur and shrewd collector of Chinese porcelain, netsuke, and Japanese antiquities. Other interests included Egyptology, oriental art, and comparative religions. As an accomplished watercolourist he exhibited at the Royal Academy. He also made violins. At the same time he was an energetic footballer, making guest appearances with professional teams such as Chelsea and Aston Villa. Cricket, in which he once played against W. G. Grace, was another passion, as were athletics, rugby, boxing, tennis, and, in old age, golf. Made CBE (1919) in recognition of the vast sums he raised for wartime charities, he was knighted in 1954, the last year of his life. 
Robey had married, on 29 April 1898, the Australian actress Ethel Haydon ('c'.1877-1954); they had two children. His son, Edward George ('b'. 1900), was later a barrister and prosecuting counsel who achieved seventy-four death sentences, subsequently becoming a stipendiary magistrate. His daughter, Eileen, had gifts as a portrait painter. The marriage withered away over the years and Robey was officially divorced in 1938. 'Women were his one weakness', Robey's son commented, 'almost one might say an obsession' (E. Robey, 31). At the age of sixty, however, wearied of philandering, Robey fell deeply in love with Blanche Littler ('b'. 1899), a member of the well-known theatrical family, who was thirty years younger. She responded with a fierce and loyal devotion, managed all his business affairs, organized every aspect of his life, and nursed him tenderly at the end. They married on 30 November 1938. Robey retired, reluctantly, in 1948, moving first to Hove and then to nearby Saltdean, Sussex, where he died on 29 November 1954. His funeral and cremation took place at Downs crematorium, Brighton, two days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 35789


Robins, Thomas Ellis, Baron Robins (1884-1962), businessman and soldier, was born on 31 October 1884 in Philadelphia, USA, the son of Major Robert P. Robins of the United States Army, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Thomas de la Roche Ellis. He was educated privately and at the University of Pennsylvania. At the age of nineteen he became the first Rhodes scholar from Pennsylvania to go to Oxford University, where he was at Christ Church from 1904 to 1907. He read history, but failed to get a degree. He played cricket for the Bullingdon Club. He then spent two years in New York in journalism and became assistant editor of 'Everybody's Magazine'. He returned to England in 1909 to be private secretary to one of his Oxford friends, the sixth Earl Winterton. 
Robins married in 1912 Mary St Quintin (died 1974), youngest daughter of Philip Wroughton MP and deputy lieutenant, of Woolley Park, Berkshire. They had two daughters. Also in 1912 he became a naturalized British subject and joined the City of London yeomanry, with which he was mobilized on the outbreak of war in August 1914. He served overseas in the Middle East, being twice mentioned in dispatches and appointed to the DSO. For two years after the armistice he was provost marshal in Egypt and Palestine. After demobilization, he became secretary of the Conservative Club in London (1921-8). From 1925 to 1928 he commanded the City of London yeomanry battery of the Royal Horse Artillery, which in 1928 won the coveted King's cup. 
Robins was invited in 1928 to join the British South Africa Company (chartered in 1889) as its general manager in Salisbury, Southern Rhodesia. He quickly made his mark with this powerful commercial company, the principal assets of which were the mineral rights in Southern and Northern Rhodesia, and ownership of the railways. On the death of Sir F. Drummond Chaplin he became resident director of the company in 1934. 
Robins formed a close friendship with Sir Ernest Oppenheimer, chairman of the Anglo-American Corporation of South Africa, and of De Beers Consolidated Mines. He served on the board of directors of both of these companies. Other companies of which he was a director included Barclays Bank DCO, Union Corporation, African Explosives and Chemical Industries, Wankie colliery, Rhokana Corporation, and Nchanga Consolidated Copper Mines. He was an original director, and later chairman, of Rhodesia and Nyasaland Airways; and chairman of its successor, Central African Airways. 
Robins's characteristics were a devotion to duty, untiring energy, a readiness to accept the burdens of responsibility, and a willingness to serve the public interest in any field. His interests were much wider than the success of the company which he directed. A keen freemason, he was for twenty years district grand master of Rhodesia. He was commissioner for Boy Scouts in that country and held the Silver Wolf decoration. For his long and devoted leadership in ambulance work he was made knight of the order of St John of Jerusalem. For two decades he was chairman of the Southern Rhodesia Agricultural Society. 
Soon after the outbreak of war in 1939 Robins joined east Africa command in Kenya, commanding from 1940 to 1943 the 1st battalion of the Rhodesia regiment. At the request of (Earl) Wavell he served on the general staff in India in 1943. He returned to Southern Rhodesia to be assistant adjutant and quartermaster-general of the Southern Rhodesia forces until the end of the war. For his war services he was knighted in 1946. 
It was inevitable that Robins should be made chairman and principal organizer of the Central Africa Rhodes Centenary Exhibition held in Bulawayo in 1953, which was opened by Queen Elizabeth, the queen mother. He was an original trustee of the Rhodes-Livingstone Institute and of the Rhodes National Gallery. Later he became president of the Royal African Society in London. 
Besides his merits as an administrator Robins was a genial host. His home, June Hill, Avondale, Salisbury, Rhodesia, was for thirty years as much a centre of attraction as Government House, to which all Rhodesians flocked, as did all visitors to the country from overseas. He commanded respect, admiration, and the affection of a host of friends of all ages, as of those who served under him. 
In 1957 he returned to London and succeeded Christopher Hely-Hutchinson as president of the British South Africa Company. He was raised to the peerage as Baron Robins, of Rhodesia and of Chelsea, in 1958. 
As Cecil Rhodes wished, here was one of his scholars from overseas, imbued with the spirit of Oxford, who exemplified Christian virtues of truth, courage, and kindliness; and, to a marked degree, of leadership: a man 'sans peur et sans reproche'. Robins died at his London home, 76 Sloane Street, Chelsea, on 21 July 1962. 
H. St. L. Grenfell', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35790


Robinson, (Esme Stuart) Lennox (1886-1958), playwright and theatre director, was born on 4 October 1886 in Castletreasure, near Douglas, co. Cork, the youngest of the seven children of Andrew Craig Robinson ('c'.1842-1921) and Emily Anna, 'nee' Jones (1850-1932). When Lennox was six his father, a stockbroker, took orders in the Church of Ireland and in 1895 moved his family first to Kinsale and thence in 1902 to the rectory in Ballymoney in west Cork. Owing to ill health Lennox had little formal education, being tutored at home except for a few years spent at Bandon grammar school up to 1904. At home he read widely and dabbled in music, taking correspondence courses in harmony and composition. In 1906 he obtained a teaching post at a preparatory school in Wellington, Shropshire, from which he was dismissed for incompetence after one term. On his return to Ballymoney he edited a family magazine, 'Contributions', with a cousin and here Robinson gained his first experience as writer. He also tried his hand at exotic dramas based on late nineteenth-century favourites seen in Cork. Then on a visit to the Cork Opera House in August 1907 Robinson was suddenly and lastingly affected, like so many aspiring dramatists of his generation, by the plays and acting style of the fledgeling Abbey Theatre company, then on tour. The programme comprised Yeats's nationalistic 'Cathleen ni Houlihan' and poetic 'The Hour Glass', together with Lady Gregory's new play 'The Rising of the Moon'. 'It came on me in a flash, as a revelation, that play-material could be found outside one's own door, at one's own fireside' (Robinson, 18). Robinson was inspired to write a play in the Abbey mode, 'The Clancy Name'. He was to go on to write twenty-two plays for the Abbey Theatre. 

'The Clancy Name', a one-act play first staged at the Abbey on 8 October 1908, subsequently revised and published, was a peasant play in a harsher style of realism than Synge had introduced to the Abbey. In order to preserve the family name Mrs Clancy suppresses her son's dying confession to a murder. Here and in the plays which followed over the next eight years Robinson displayed the influence of Henrik Ibsen, then regarded as the major exponent of modern tragic drama. These were bleak, pessimistic expositions of rural life, linking Robinson to T. C. Murray and R. J. Ray as one of the so-called Cork realists. Successful at the time, these early plays are nowadays little regarded. Although no admirer of Ibsen, Yeats saw merit in Robinson's work and offered him the post of manager in the Abbey Theatre. Ignorant though he was at this time of theatrical production, Robinson accepted the position. Yeats was to be the dominating influence in his life and he made Robinson his disciple. 
Having spent, through Yeats's arrangement, a brief time early in 1910 as private secretary to Shaw in London in order to learn the theatrical trade and attend rehearsals at the Duke of York's Theatre, Robinson was launched as manager and producer-director at the Abbey Theatre. He was immediately embroiled in controversy when, owing to a misunderstanding on his part, he kept the theatre open at the time of King Edward VII's death on 7 May 1910. The Abbey's patron, Annie Horniman, construing this act as a political insult, withdrew her subsidy of the theatre when Yeats backed Robinson and no public apology was made. As a consequence of this loss of income the Abbey company was obliged to make a series of annual tours to the United States, managed by Robinson, between 1911 and 1914. However, Lady Gregory, who never fully approved of Robinson, blamed him when the final tour lost money and Robinson resigned as manager. 
At something of a loss where to turn next, Robinson joined the newly founded Irish Volunteers in Cork, but left following the split and later tried to join the Munster fusiliers after the outbreak of the First World War, in which his brother Arthur was killed. But Robinson was rejected by the army for poor eyesight, although his frail constitution (Robinson was over 6 feet tall but weighed only 8 stone) would hardly have fitted him for combat duty. For a time he had a job as clerk in Dublin Castle and lived in the home of Mrs Hester Travers-Smith, daughter of Edward Dowden, where there were books, music, and seances to compensate for the drudgery of work. In 1915 he took a position as organizing librarian for the Carnegie (UK) Trust, then establishing a network of public libraries throughout Ireland. He remained with the trust until his dismissal in 1924 amid controversy over a short story he published in the short-lived magazine 'Tomorrow' edited by Francis Stuart. In the meantime he continued to write plays, and won much success with 'The Whiteheaded Boy' (1916) and 'The Lost Leader' (1918). The latter was in some measure a political play, in which Robinson imagines what Parnell might think of the Ireland that had emerged by 1918 if he were still alive incognito. The former, Robinson's first comedy, displayed his talent for plot construction and his skill in delineating scheming small-town characters obsessed with status and respectability, observed with geniality and mild satire. Later staged in London and in New York 'The Whiteheaded Boy' became Robinson's most enduring play, being frequently revived on the Abbey stage. 
In 1917 Robinson published his only novel, 'A Young Man from the South', which is autobiographical and emphasizes the strong nationalist feelings also evident in some short pieces entitled 'Dark Days' (1918). He also published 'Eight Short Stories' (1918). But his genius lay mainly in the theatre. His interest in contemporary European drama led Robinson in 1918 to help found the Dublin Drama League, which performed modern experimental plays at the Abbey on Sunday and Monday evenings. He himself both played in and directed some of these productions which created a new audience in Dublin and paved the way for the Edwards-Mac Liammoir Gate Theatre (founded 1928). He returned to the Abbey in April 1919 as manager and producer-director and in 1923 was made a member of the board of directors, filling the place left vacant since the death of Synge in 1909. Robinson is usually credited with reviving the Abbey at this time, which was weakened by the loss of many actors and by the violent political events of the day which led to early curfews in Dublin. Lady Gregory did not believe that Robinson was a good administrator, yet he worked hard to bring the Abbey out of the doldrums until it received a government subsidy in 1925. He proved a skilled and influential director of Abbey plays, encouraging the new talents of George Shiels and Sean O'Casey in the 1920s, Teresa Deevy and Paul Vincent Carroll in the 1930s, as well as many others. He also established a school of acting in 1926 and for many years taught in it himself. 
At the same time Robinson as dramatist strove in the 1920s to move beyond the conventional Abbey 'peasant' play by writing about the post-war generation in Ireland. These interesting experiments, such as 'The Round Table' (1922) and 'The White Blackbird' (1925), were not among Robinson's more successful plays, for there was always something unfinished about each of them, as if he could not quite find sufficient courage to express his theme. Indeed, he lacked a point of view or coherent philosophy of life as a dramatist (O'Neill, 170). On the other hand, 'The Big House' (1926) hit upon the important theme of the Anglo-Irish caught up in the wars which ravaged Robinson's native co. Cork from 1918 to 1923 and about which he, his brother, and sister were later to write so graphically in the pages of 'Three Homes' (1938). For the first time the plight of the long-time colonialists, the protestant minority surrounded by the Catholic majority intent on liberating Ireland, received sympathetic treatment. Robinson returned to this theme in the elegiac 'Killycreggs in Twilight' (1937). Unfortunately, neither of these plays was as popular as the lighter comedies, both one-act and full-length, which Robinson seemed effortlessly to write for the Abbey. 
In autumn 1928 Robinson went to the United States on a lecture tour which was not a financial success. On 8 September 1931 he married Dorothy Travers-Smith (1901/2-1977), an artist and scene designer at the Abbey and granddaughter of the famous Edward Dowden, professor of English at Trinity College, Dublin. There were no children of this marriage, and as time passed Robinson sank into alcoholism and depression. Yet his work rate remained impressive, not only in writing plays but in organizing the Abbey Theatre Festival in 1938, editing a collection of the lectures given during it, 'The Irish Theatre' (1939), and editing Lady Gregory's 'Journals' (1946). He occasionally wrote for the Gate Theatre, notably 'Roly Poly' (1940), a modernized adaptation of de Maupassant's 'Boule de suif', ordered to be closed after one performance by the department of justice following objections by the German and French legations in Dublin. Robinson, a very cultured man, also edited anthologies of Irish poetry and wrote biographies of an Irish artist Dermod O'Brien, 'Palette and Plough' (1948), and the Anglo-Irish agriculturist and politician Bryan Cooper (1931). He was virtually identified with the old Abbey, however, and his 'Pictures in a Theatre' (1947), a dialogue woven around the Abbey portraits, drolly represents him as a kind of custodian. In recognition of his diverse achievements Trinity College awarded him an honorary DLitt on 9 December 1948. In the same year he helped found the Actors' Church Union, served as vice-president and president, and took an active interest in the relief of indigent actors. In 1951 Robinson published the official history of the Abbey Theatre, just as fire destroyed the original building and the company moved to the Queen's Theatre. He resigned his directorship in 1956. 
Robinson was probably the most complete man of the theatre the Abbey has nurtured in its hundred-year history. As playwright his place in that history is in the second rather than the first rank, and only 'The Whiteheaded Boy' is revived nowadays. His best work, whether as director or playwright, was done before the end of the 1930s. It is likely that his personality was always too dominated by Yeats, whom he revered, for him to develop his full potential, yet he achieved much in his varied career and to the last was involved in furthering developments in drama in Ireland. He was appointed honorary patron of the All-Ireland Amateur Drama Council in 1953 when the first national amateur drama festival was held at Athlone, and acted as dedicated adjudicator thereafter. In 1956 he was invited by the Chinese government to give a centenary lecture on Shaw. 
Lennox Robinson died in Glensilva Nursing Home, Monkstown Road, co. Dublin, on 14 October 1958 of complications arising from heart failure, and was buried in St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, on 17 October. To the last, the Abbey Theatre was in his thoughts, for in his will Robinson left the copyrights of his work to the directors as a trust fund to assist playwrights, players, directors, stage designers, and stage musicians. 


@@@@@


doc= 35791


Robinson, Frederick William (1830-1901), novelist, was born in Spitalfields, London, on 23 December 1830, the second son of William Robinson (1796/7-1873), a baker, latterly of Elmore House, St James's Road, Brixton, who owned much house property in London, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' St John (1789/90-1852). After an education at Dr Pinches's school at Clarendon House, Kennington, Surrey, where Henry Irving, Conrad Hume, Edward Clarke, and J. L. Toole were also pupils, he acted for some time as his father's secretary. He married, on 12 July 1853, Rosalie Jane (1835-1913), daughter of John May Stephens, with whom he had twelve children. 
Robinson's first novel, 'The House of Elmore', begun before he was eighteen, was published in 1855. It met with success and was followed by more than fifty others, most of which were popular and reprinted at least once. 'Grandmother's Money' (1860) secured him fame, which was maintained in an anonymous series of semi-religious novels, among them 'High Church' (1860), 'Church and Chapel' (1863), 'Carry's Confession' (1865), and 'Beyond the Church' (1866). He was equally successful with three works of a different character: 'Female Life in Prison, by a Prison Matron' (1862), 'Memoirs of Jane Cameron, Female Convict' (1863), and 'Prison Characters Drawn from Life' (1866). These were based upon actual records and were so realistic in treatment that they were considered actual documentaries of social history. Donations for prisoners were forwarded to him, and his revelations led to improvement in the conditions of prison life. (These works have on occasion been wrongly assigned to Mary Carpenter, the philanthropist.) 
Robinson, who adopted William as a middle name, was also a pioneer in novels of low life, which included 'Owen, a Waif' (1862), 'Mattie, a Stray' (1864), and 'Milly's Hero' (1865). Among his later works of fiction the best were 'Anne Judge, Spinster' (1867), 'No Man's Friend' (1867), and 'The Courting of Mary Smith' (1886). 'Poor Humanity' (1868) was dramatized by the author and played with some success at the Surrey Theatre in London with William Creswick in the chief role of a returned convict. Robinson's last complete novel, 'The Wrong that was Done', appeared in 1892, and a volume of short stories, 'All they Went through', was published in 1898. He also contributed to the 'Family Herald', 'Cassell's Magazine', and other periodicals, and for some years wrote dramatic criticisms for the 'Daily News', 'The Observer', and other papers. His novels appeared in the three-volume format, and when that genre fell out of favour his popularity waned. A disciple of Defoe and Dickens, he wrote too rapidly for the fullness of his powers to be best expressed. 
In 1884 Robinson brought out a weekly penny magazine, 'Home Chimes', which was heralded by a sonnet from Theodore Watts-Dunton, contained contributions by Algernon Charles Swinburne, Moy Thomas, and Phil Robinson, and introduced several young authors such as J. M. Barrie, Jerome K. Jerome, and Israel Zangwill. In February 1886 the paper was converted into a fourpenny monthly and was carried on in that form until the end of 1893. Robinson's friends of an older generation included, besides Swinburne and Watts-Dunton, Ford Madox Brown, Dante Gabriel Rossetti, Philip Bourke Marston and his father, and Sir Henry Irving. Chess-playing was among his accomplishments. 
Robinson died at Elmore House, St James's Road, Brixton, London, on 6 December 1901 and was buried in Norwood cemetery in London. His wife and six sons and five daughters survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35792


Robinson, George Frederick Samuel, first marquess of Ripon (1827-1909), politician, was born on 24 October 1827 at 10 Downing Street, London. His father, Frederick John Robinson (1782-1859; Viscount Goderich, 1827; earl of Ripon, 1833), was the second son of the second Baron Grantham. Goderich's elder brother, Thomas Philip Robinson, had inherited the Grantham title and before his death in 1859 had added the earldom of de Grey, which was later inherited by his nephew, George. At the time of George's birth Goderich was the distracted prime minister of a strife-ridden and short-lived administration during the autumn and winter of 1827-8. George's mother, Lady Sarah Albinia Louisa (1793-1867), was the daughter of Robert Hobart, fourth earl of Buckinghamshire. She was in poor health and fearful for her new baby, as she had already lost a son, who had lived only two days, and she was still grieving her daughter's childhood death a year before George's birth. The anxieties of both parents for their new son and heir added to Goderich's political problems and hastened the demise of his government. 
George remained an only child, much cosseted by his pious mother but introduced at a very early age to the political issues of the day by his father. George attended neither school nor university, but was educated at home in the Lincolnshire countryside at the family home at Nocton. He imbibed a love of the countryside and developed a lifelong interest in entomology. He was described as 'an active, well grown and noisy boy' by his father in 1830. George took wholeheartedly to country pursuits, which remained a source of relaxation for him throughout his long life. He became a fine shot, though late in his life according to a beater (who told the story to the present writer) he killed a chicken by mistake while on a shoot with his son and jestfully threatened a similar fate for the beater if he revealed the truth. George learned to read by copying his father's letters, and his mother imparted to him her strict evangelical beliefs. Apart from the fact that he became a voracious reader little is known of his formal instruction. His home life was conventional enough and it remains something of a puzzle why he entered early manhood with extremely radical ideas. The high-mindedness, idealism, and deep Christian faith which characterized his whole public life are no doubt the consequence of the religious training acquired at his mother's knee. Though in the years to come he was to have profound political disagreements with his father, his mother remained a major religious guide and influence. Her death in 1867 was one of the major factors in inducing what would now be called a mid-life crisis, which ended with his conversion to Catholicism. 
In the course of his life George enjoyed a number of titles. From 1853 to 1859 he was known as Viscount Goderich, a courtesy title he took on the elevation of his father to the earldom of Ripon. In 1859 he succeeded both to his father's earldom and to the more senior one, that of his uncle de Grey, by which he was known until he was elevated to a marquessate in 1871, when he chose the Ripon title. 
The events of 1848 coincided with George's coming of age and they reinforced his conviction that drastic change was required to solve the political and social ills of Britain. On a visit to the continent in 1849, initially as an attache to Sir Henry Ellis's mission to Brussels, arranged by his father, he spent some months in Italy, Switzerland, and France. In Paris he witnessed, and was much impressed by, the operation of the 'associations ouvrieres', the co-operative workshops set up in the first flush of revolutionary enthusiasm early in 1848. On his return home, through the agency of Tom Hughes, he associated himself with the Christian socialists, who were interested in similar experiments. Founded by F. D. Maurice, J. M. Ludlow, and Charles Kingsley, the Christian socialists sought a solution to the 'condition of England question' in the application of Christian fellowship to harmonize social relationships. For George the most practical expression of this ideal was the self-governing co-operative workshop which he argued substituted 'a free Cooperative organisation of Labour for the present tyrannical Disorganisation'. In 1852 he supported E. V. Neale's attempts to establish associative workshops of engineers in London, having previously aided the Amalgamated Society of Engineers with money and in print during the lock-out of the newly formed union in the previous winter. In 1850 he had joined other Christian socialists in organizing nine existing self-governing, profit-sharing workshops, and set about encouraging the establishment of others. George believed that nothing short of the moral regeneration of society was called for, and this required substituting the co-operative for the competitive principle in industry and manufacture. Working men had to be regarded as brothers and citizens, and until this was recognized the 'terrible evils' of industrial disputation would continue. Similarly he came to support schemes for industrial arbitration as instruments for binding people together. He had also been active promoting schemes for the elementary education of children, but he believed equally in adult education, arguing that 'it should be possible for all who had the faculty and desire to profit by it, to obtain the very highest and widest education'. He helped set up the Working Men's College in 1854. He supported it financially and lectured there from time to time on entomology and poetry. Throughout his life Goderich (as he had now become) supported mechanics' institutes and the educational activities of the co-operative movement. 
Goderich's most significant work for the Christian socialist movement was a pamphlet he wrote called 'The Duty of the Age', in which he attempted to reconcile Christianity with democracy and socialism. He claimed that aristocracies, both of birth and talent, bred 'exclusion, division, selfishness' (quoted in Wolf, 'Life', 1.30-33), and consequently class warfare. Their privileges separated 'man from man instead of uniting them' and bred 'hatred and revolution, instead of love and peace'. He proposed two basic solutions. Firstly, perceiving the state as a living organism, it should rid itself of the cancerous elements within it which produced class warfare. It had to heal itself by promoting institutions which bound men closer together. The co-operative movement, schemes of industrial arbitration, even trade unions -- provided they did not become disruptive elements themselves -- tended to further this end. Secondly, he frankly embraced the full implications of democracy, which he said was determined by two factors: 'First, that every man, so far forth as he is a man, has a claim to share in the government of his country in all its duties, responsibilities, and charges; and secondly that self government is the highest and noblest principle of politics, the safest foundation on which the State can rest. (ibid.)' In practical terms self-government involved not only the gradual extension of the franchise to the masses but the obligation on the part of the state to prepare people by education and institutional reform. By this means the 'people' could be distinguished from the 'mob' and the excesses of 1848 avoided. 
This pamphlet, though rejected by Maurice and suppressed by the Christian socialists, is crucial to an understanding of Ripon's later career, for he never deviated from these radical ideals. In 1908 in a speech at a meeting to honour his retirement he said: 'What has been the guiding principle of my course in public life? I started at a high level of Radicalism in 1852. I was considered to be a very dangerous young man. I am a Radical still, just as much as I was then, but I am afraid that I am much more respectable. ('The Times', 25 Nov 1908)' In May 1852 this career began with Robinson's election to parliament as member for Hull. Though ignorant of the corrupt electioneering practices made on his behalf, he was unseated on petition but was returned for Huddersfield the following year. Both this seat, which he held until 1857, and the West Riding, which he served until his elevation to the Lords in 1859, had substantial artisanal electorates. In the meantime he had fallen in love with his cousin Henrietta Anne Theodosia Vyner (1833/4-1907), and their marriage, encouraged by all sides of the family in the expectation that it would curb the outrageous views the young man had come to hold, was celebrated on 8 April 1851 at the house of his uncle de Grey in St James's Square, London. The family were to be disappointed. Henrietta was soon a firm favourite with his Christian socialist friends and loyally supported her husband through his long career, as hostess and a common-sense sounding board. In January 1852 Henrietta was delivered of a boy, who was given the name Frederick Oliver in honour of his Cromwellian ancestry. He was to be the only child of the union. 
From 1853 to 1859 Goderich was the leader of a small group of radical politicians in the Commons soon to be known as the Goderichites. He established a reputation as a sound, balanced debater, with a conciliatory tone combined with firm convictions. A political sensitivity, nurtured no doubt by youthful fireside chats with his family at Nocton, and an inherited trait of amiability, which enabled him to see both sides of a question, made him many friends on all sides of the house, so much so that some saw him as a future radical prime minister. In the early 1850s Goderich rejoiced in the lack of firm party lines in parliament which enabled the small group that he gathered around him to exercise an influence out of proportion to its numbers. At the core of the group were the Merthyr Tudful MP, Henry Bruce, and Austen Henry Layard, who represented Aylesbury in the 1850s. They were joined at times by fellow parliamentarians Edward Horsman and Danby Seymour, and by several like-minded men who were not yet in parliament, including Tom Hughes and W. E. Forster. The group met frequently at the Cosmopolitan Club, at dinner and breakfast parties, and in the house, where they plotted the downfall of Palmerston and he planned campaigns to remove the aristocratic stranglehold on public life. 
In pursuit of these ends Goderich argued in the Commons for an effective legacy tax on the rich, the removal of the patronage system of church livings, and the extension of limited liability legislation to protect the producer and retail co-operative societies. He supported Charles Dickens's London Administrative Reform Association and planned schemes of industrial arbitration with Bruce. He spoke against the deleterious effects of the truck system as unjust to working folk. Reform in India and of the army figured prominently in the designs of the Goderichites, but it was in the field of civil service reform that Goderich and his friends met with their greatest success. 
What they sought was the full implementation of the Northcote-Trevelyan report of 1853, especially the recommendation that open competition replace nomination for entry into the civil service. Their speeches in the house touched raw nerves, and their efforts were rewarded by 1857 when some government departments were recruited by competition. Of course the struggle for full competitive recruitment was not achieved until 1870, but their efforts in the 1850s had helped to break the back of resistance. Goderich's support for civil service reform was based not only on the existing inefficiencies and corruption but rather more on the encouragement open competition would give to education, and the opportunities it provided for the elevation of ordinary folk to share in the government of the country. 
By 1859 Goderich was looking for a further extension of the franchise to 'the upper portion of the working classes', as well as a further redistribution of seats from the smaller boroughs to more populous counties like the West Riding and Lancashire. This was fully consistent with the gradualist approach to reform of all kinds that he had espoused since his contact with the political realities of parliamentary life. He always believed, he said, in catching one hare and eating that first before proceeding to catch the next. Goderich served his political apprenticeship in the Commons in the 1850s, but 1859 brought this to an end. In January his father died and he moved to the Lords as earl of Ripon, and in November his uncle de Grey died and he inherited that earldom as well. He now became a man of great wealth, with large estates and influence especially in Lincolnshire and in the West Riding. 
Equally important was de Grey's decision to join Palmerston's government that year as under-secretary of state for war when that statesman took a lurch to the left in forming his new administration. Apart from a brief spell at the India Office in 1861, de Grey held this position until 1863, when he was promoted secretary of state for war and admitted to the privy council. This cabinet post he held until 1866. Not surprisingly de Grey gravitated to the reforming section of that government, and in doing so entered, albeit somewhat reluctantly, Gladstone's orbit. 
Now in office de Grey had the opportunity to implement some of his radical ideas, particularly the link he made between democratization and efficiency. Both were singularly absent in the army, and though he laboured under the twin pillars of Palmerstonian indifference and Gladstonian retrenchment some useful reforms were made which paved the way for the more substantial achievements of Cardwell. In the 1850s, like other radicals, he had welcomed the Crimean War against tsarist tyranny, but had deprecated the army's shortcomings in the prosecution of the war, blaming in part the purchase of commissions, the lack of education and professionalism, as well as the administrative structures. In office he was unable to break the power of the duke of Cambridge at the Horse Guards, but he was more successful in the War Office, dividing it into a number of efficient and expert departments. De Grey was, however, more interested in improving the lot of the ordinary soldier, and in this he found an invaluable ally in Florence Nightingale. Barrack conditions, education for soldiers and their children, military prisons, libraries, army hospitals, and the sanitary reform thereof, were all made the subject of inquiry and subsequent action. 
De Grey gave unconditional support to the volunteer force, which he intended should become a permanent feature of military organization. The volunteer movement came close to his rather romantic views of a citizen army, which can be attributed to his Cromwellian ancestry, of which he was inordinately proud. He assisted his old Christian socialist friends who raised companies from among the students of the Working Men's College, and was himself an honorary colonel of a Yorkshire regiment. In February 1866, on the elevation of Charles Wood to the Lords, de Grey was moved to fill his post as secretary of state for India, though he continued to speak regularly on army matters and was later an ardent supporter of Cardwell's reforms. This period in high office established de Grey's reputation as an able and efficient administrator committed to reform. In spite of heading one of the great spending departments, he had attached himself to the ever-frugal Gladstone, and in doing so thus brought his unique brand of Christian socialist radicalism to the embyronic Liberal Party. 
On 9 December 1868, at Windsor, de Grey and three other Goderichites -- Bruce, Layard, and Forster -- were sworn in as members of Gladstone's first administration and that evening they dined together to celebrate. The next five years were to see the accomplishment of many of their dreams of the fifties -- the secret ballot, elementary education reform, a measure of justice for Ireland, and the success of the principle of arbitration applied to a thorny international dispute with the Americans. De Grey, as lord president of the council, played a major role in these achievements, mostly by reasoned, firm, but conciliatory debate in the hostile Lords and, in the case of the 'Alabama' negotiations, by his skilful leadership of the British high commission, which concluded a landmark reconciliation with the USA by the treaty of Washington in May 1871. For this he was rewarded with a marquessate, and was known thereafter by the Ripon title. His later support for Irish home rule has its origins in his friendship with Charles Gavan Duffy, which dates from the 1850s, and from his experience in piloting the disestablishment of the Irish church through the Lords. In this matter, his negotiating skills and placatory manner were much in demand, but his firmness of purpose was such that he was instrumental in stiffening even Gladstone's resolve, who thought of dropping the measure in July 1869. Co-operation with Forster, who was vice-president of the council, meant that the two friends had departmental responsibility for the safe passage of the famous landmark elementary education legislation of 1870. Though falling short of de Grey's desire for 'compulsion', it was none the less a tribute to the committee skills and persistence of both men in the face of widespread opposition from many interest groups that it was passed at all. The Goderichites were intimately involved in yet another major Gladstonian reform. Bruce initiated a select committee inquiry into the ballot in 1869, and Forster and Ripon took the lion's share in the parliamentary debates and deserve much of the credit for the passage of the secret ballot, eventually achieved in 1872. 
In August 1873 Ripon resigned from the government, ostensibly on the grounds of an uncharacteristic opposition to a projected extension of the suffrage to the counties. In fact this was more an excuse than the cause of his departure. Ripon had experienced some disillusionment over the influence of nonconformists in the party, especially during their opposition to aspects of the education legislation of 1870, but the underlying reason for the resignation lay in a spiritual crisis which had been gathering momentum for some years. 
The death of Ripon's mother, his first and most influential intellectual and religious guide in 1867, was followed by the death of his 'prophet' of the 1850s, F. D. Maurice, in 1872. Some measure of the extent of his spiritual anxieties can be gauged from the fact that in 1870, the year he became grandmaster of English freemasons, after twenty full and active years in the craft, he attended his first mass following the assassination of some close relatives at the hands of Greek brigands. An accident to his son, which brought him close to death in 1873, exacerbated and accelerated the crisis. As he grappled with the full implications of a conversion to Catholicism at the height of the crisis over the 'Syllabus of Errors' and the doctrine of papal infallibility, all his own well-worn and tried political and religious beliefs came into question. The conservative tenets of the church in fact delayed his conversion until he had resolved all the difficulties without sacrificing his liberal values. But this did nothing to diminish the howl of 'no popery' protests when the announcement of his reception was made in September 1874. 'The Times' claimed that he had 'renounced his mental and moral freedom', and when Gladstone in a pamphlet argued that converts placed their 'civil loyalty and duty at the mercy of another' Ripon's own first assessment that his conversion would require the sacrifice of his political career appeared justified. A spirited correspondence with Gladstone elicited a concession that Gladstone did not consider that Ripon would be personally short on civil loyalty and duty to his queen and country, and there the matter rested until the furore died down. Manning's advice that 'a little while of silence and patience' was required proved correct, to the extent that when Gladstone again came to power in 1880 Ripon was offered and accepted a post requiring maximum 'civil loyalty and duty', that of viceroy of India. 
In the meantime Ripon threw himself into the activities of his new co-religionists after a prolonged stay in Italy in the winter and spring of 1875-6. He became a leading figure in the Catholic Union, a member and from 1890 president of the St Vincent de Paul Society, and active in overseas missions and Catholic education concerns at home. Political activity was limited to speeches in the Lords on behalf of Catholic education, and the mid-1870s were devoted to reading, writing, and the domestic pleasures of his two country estates at Nocton and Studley Royal. Two articles published in 'The Month' in 1879 heralded his return to active politics, and reveal that his radical social gospel and liberal values had survived the intellectual trauma of his conversion. The first of these was 'Some thoughts on international morality', published in February 1879, in which he condemned the immoral statecraft of Napoleon III and Bismarck. In a barely concealed attack on Beaconsfieldism he argued that the Christian nation, while pursuing the highest well-being of the people, should be distinguished 'by its scrupulous respect for the rights of its neighbours, and a just consideration of their interests'. A Christian's patriotism, he insisted, was wider than that of the pagan, and to put considerations of policy and force before considerations of right was not only wrong but folly, for 'higher wisdom' has it that in the long run material force is the weakest, and that solid foundations can only be laid on 'justice alone'. In the light of his subsequent government of India these views are of great importance. The second article, 'On cooperation', returned to his lifelong interest in, and support for, the co-operative movement in all its forms. It arose from a presidential address he had given to the Co-operative Congress in April 1878. Though originally more interested in producer co-operatives, Ripon had long supported the Rochdale model of co-operation as well. In the 1850s he had sponsored legislation to protect all kinds of co-operative activity, culminating in the important part he played in securing the safe passage of the 'Industrial and Provident Societies Act' of 1862. The presidency of the 1878 congress was a recognition of his support and commitment to the movement. Ripon saw the co-operative movement as a way of breaking down the barriers between labour and capital. It provided moral training, and wherever applied, he wrote, co-operation 'tends to bind men together, to give them common instead of conflicting interests'. 
Ripon was one of the Liberal Party's foremost experts on India long before he became viceroy. In 1861 he had spent seven months as under-secretary of state for India and was largely responsible for the passage of the 'India Councils Bill' through the Lords. This legislation, introducing non-official members to the governor-general's council, was but the first instalment of a number of conciliatory measures after the mutiny. When Russell reshuffled the cabinet on Palmerston's death, Ripon became secretary of state in this short-lived administration, during which he advanced a scheme for improved sanitary regulations in India in alliance with Florence Nightingale. She complained bitterly, when the government fell, that they had missed the opportunity of establishing a public health service in India by twenty-four hours. Like most advanced radicals before Chamberlain, Ripon disliked imperialism, accepting that ultimately self-government was the end of policy. Meanwhile India, like other imperial responsibilities, should be well governed by instituting political, administrative, and educational reforms to prepare the subject people for self-government. Unlike many Liberals, Ripon also believed in effective social reform as well. 
On his arrival in India, Ripon had the difficult task of extricating Britain from the messy problem of Afghanistan by reversing the 'forward' policies of his predecessor, Lord Lytton, and by establishing a firm, reliably independent Afghanistan as a better guarantee of Indian security against Russia than any jingoistic theory of 'scientific frontiers'. In this he was remarkably successful, in spite of some strong opposition in his council as well as from the India Office at home and the not altogether wholehearted support of the two secretaries of state, Hartington and Kimberley. His policy of peace and conciliation was fully in accord with Gladstone's Midlothian ideals and, of course, his own as expressed in 'Some thoughts on international morality'. In fact his success in Afghanistan and his stout-hearted refusal to go to war in Upper Burma on behalf of Rangoon merchants were genuine triumphs for Midlothian principles, in contrast to the sullied policies pursued by Gladstone himself in South Africa in 1881 and in the British occupation of Egypt the following year. 
Having cleared the decks Ripon then attempted to do 'some little good for India', as he put it. By 1884 he had established in all provinces, except Bengal, the legislative framework for a network of self-governing local authorities elected by what he said were 'the best, most intelligent, and most influential men in the community'. Again there was much opposition, and the results were disappointing, partly because of official hostility but also on account of apathy among many Indians themselves. Ripon's achievement, however, rested less on the tangible results but rather more in reconciling native opinion to continued British rule after Lytton. In social policy India received factory legislation protecting children, and efforts were made to reduce famine and improve elementary education. In Bengal a partially successful attempt to provide tenants with the three 'Fs' of Irish reform -- fixity of tenure, fair rents, and free sale -- met with great opposition and was condemned as 'socialistic'. Lytton's press laws, which had muzzled the native press, were substantially repealed and a more liberal administration of the 'Arms Act' was instituted. Anglo-Indian anger reached unprecedented ferocity in 1883 when Ripon proposed that Indian magistrates and district judges should exercise jurisdiction over European subjects. This was the 'Ilbert Bill', discussion and disputation about which raised fundamental questions about the nature of British rule in India. In the end, under pressure from Lord Kimberley and in the face of a virtual mutiny of Europeans in India, a compromise was reached which allowed Europeans trial by jury. But this was not before much damage had been done. The 'Ilbert Bill' acted as a catalyst both for the formation of Anglo-Indian hostility to a liberally governed India and for the emergence of a political consciousness among native Indians. The speedy and effective organization of Anglo-Indian opposition to the proposed legislation had many lessons for Indians. The Indian Association of Bengal organized its first conference in December 1883 and this became the model for the Congress Movement two years later. 
In the face of all this Ripon declared that he was becoming 'more radical every day', and in response to the charge that his policies were unrealistic and indeed sentimental, Ripon prophetically wrote to Forster about his Indian subjects: 'Unless we provide these men with outlets for their political aspirations they will become most naturally our bitter and very dangerous opponents... it is our duty to raise the people of this country politically and socially... making the educated natives the friends instead of the enemies of our rule. (Denholm, 161)' But it was not only the educated Indians that he had reached. On leaving India in November 1884 at the end of his term of office he was overwhelmed by the popular expressions of thanks and manifestations of support among ordinary Indians in the streets. 
Ripon arrived back in England on 23 January 1885 to a Liberal Party on the point of being torn asunder by the Irish question. Ripon's 'advanced' views on Ireland date from his friendship with Charles Gavan Duffy and the campaigns they fought together in the Commons in the early 1850s. His local self-government reforms in India were motivated in part by his fear that India could become another Ireland if the Anglo-Indian community there established themselves as another 'ascendancy'. After some months putting his personal affairs in order Ripon invited Sir Charles to Studley Royal in August, resulting in a proposed home-rule constitution with guarantees for the minorities and based on colonial models of which Gavan Duffy had had much experience in Australia. Ripon sent the scheme to Gladstone on 20 January 1886. It is clear that he had worked out an Irish policy similar to that of Gavan Duffy, and this made it easy for him to accept office in the new Gladstone government pledged to inquire into the practicability of establishing an Irish legislature. 
Initially sympathetic to Chamberlain's radical 'programme', Ripon remained loyal to Gladstone when the party split, and he campaigned more vigorously than at any time in his life on behalf of home rule. He was sceptical about the round-table conference of 1887 which attempted to heal the breach with Chamberlain and Hartington, exclaiming that he had no desire 'to see the Party once more inundated with the cold stream of Whig country gentlemen'. Passionately sympathetic to his co-religionists in Ireland and incensed by the evictions, he worked strenuously to keep the Yorkshire Liberals loyal to Gladstone. In February 1888 Ripon and Morley took the crusade to Dublin itself, where they were enthusiastically received and rewarded with the freedom of the city. In the long years of opposition to come Ripon remained committed to home rule, much more so than many Liberals. He claimed that apart from some issues he had dealt with in India he had never felt so strongly about any public question so much as home rule. He was finally induced to accept Campbell-Bannerman's 'step by step' approach of November 1905, but, given the persistent opposition of the House of Lords, there was little choice. 
Ripon served as first lord of the Admiralty in the short-lived administration of 1886 and as colonial secretary under Gladstone and Rosebery from 1892 to 1895. In the latter period the Colonial Office was preoccupied with the struggle between Rhodes and Kruger in South Africa. Initially Ripon regarded Rhodes as a good Liberal who should be supported, but the conduct of the Matabelele War and the actions of the British South Africa Company led to a growing suspicion of Rhodes. This was reinforced by the Jameson raid and culminated in Ripon's opposition to the South African War. 
In 1892 Ripon's policy was based on conditional and wary support for Rhodes, coupled with a conciliatiory attitude to Kruger in the hope of persuading him to become a co-operative and moderate force in the direction of a voluntary union of Dutch and British South Africa. This was probably never very realistic, but after the Jameson raid, and with Chamberlain and Milner in the ascendancy after 1895, it was a lost cause. Though never a simple Little Englander, Ripon opposed the Liberal Imperialists and the South African War. He supported Campbell-Bannerman during the leadership struggle with Rosebery in 1901 and advocated a lenient treatment of the Boer republics at the end of the war. 
In December 1905, at the age of seventy-eight, Ripon accepted the office of lord privy seal and the leadership of the Liberals in the Lords when Campbell-Bannerman formed his government. Small in stature and heavily bearded in later life, he had become something of a pixie-like elder statesman. In spite of bouts of angina he performed his tasks with great vigour and enthusiasm, especially in debates in the Lords where his expertise on Indian, Irish, and educational matters was much respected. 
The death of Lady Ripon in February 1907 was a severe blow and accelerated his desire for retirement. An unfailing source of comfort and support, a hostess of great charm and some influence, uniting both Gladstone and Disraeli in their admiration of her, Lady Ripon was a constant helpmate for the fifty-five years of their marriage. Though separated by religious belief they remained devoted to one another. 
When Asquith replaced Campbell-Bannerman in April 1908 Ripon stayed on as privy seal but declined to remain leader in the Lords. He finally resigned in October 1908, officially on the grounds of ill health but chiefly on account of the mishandling by the government, and particularly by Herbert Gladstone, of a Catholic procession through the streets of London. 
Honoured by the Eighty Club in November 1908, Ripon claimed that he had pursued radical objectives throughout his career by adopting what he considered to be a 'wise and sound principle of public life' ('The Times', 25 Nov 1908), that of taking what he could get and waiting to get more. He last spoke in the Lords on the 'India Councils Bill' in March 1909. Two days before his death he expressed the view that there was a 'fair case for the extension of the franchise to women'. On 9 July 1909 Ripon suffered a heart seizure at his beloved home of Studley Royal and died later that day, an hour before his son arrived. He was buried in St Mary's Church in Studley Park on 14 July, and a requiem mass was sung for him in Westminster Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 35793


Robinson, Henry Wheeler (1872-1945), Baptist minister and biblical scholar, was born on 7 February 1872 at 10 Castilian Street, Northampton, the son of George Robinson, a butcher, and his wife, Helen Turner. His father went to South America before the boy's birth, maintaining little or no contact with his wife and child. Robinson's boyhood was a somewhat restricted and shadowed one, but in the home of his mother's uncle, where he lived with his mother, the foundations of his strength of character and concentration of purpose were laid. On leaving school at the age of fifteen he entered the counting-house of a wholesale leather merchant and was soon carrying considerable business responsibilities and spending much time in evening classes. 
Association with College Street Baptist Church, one of the strongest nonconformist bodies in the midlands, introduced Robinson to a wider world. He was baptized on profession of faith on 28 March 1888 and began to direct his thoughts towards the Christian ministry. On reaching college his progress was swift and sure. After a year at Regent's Park College, London, as a lay student he entered Edinburgh University, where he graduated in 1895. He came to know J. S. Blackie, and A. S. Pringle-Pattison was among his teachers. He was also influenced by Alexander Whyte and Henry Drummond. In 1895 he went up to Mansfield College, Oxford. Robinson owed much to the encouragement of A. M. Fairbairn, then at the height of his powers, and to the teaching of George Buchanan Gray. He had already determined to concentrate on 'Old Testament' studies. He was placed in the second class of the school of oriental studies (1898), and was awarded the Hall-Houghton Syriac prize (1900), the junior and senior 'Septuagint' prizes (1899 and 1901), and the junior and senior Kennicott Hebrew scholarships (1898 and 1901). 
In 1900 Robinson married Alice Laura, daughter of Evan Charles Ashford, chemist, of Northampton, and they had a son and two daughters. For six years he served as a Baptist minister, first at Pitlochry (1900-03), then in Coventry (1903-6), discharging his duties with characteristic conscientiousness and intensity, and at the same time carrying forward studies in Hebrew psychology and preparing for future literary work. From 1906 to 1920 he was tutor at Rawdon Baptist college. His gifts as a teacher, although he was exacting, were soon evident, and his first three books -- a commentary on 'Deuteronomy and Joshua' (1907), 'The Christian Doctrine of Man' (1911), and 'The Religious Ideas of the Old Testament' (1913) -- established his reputation among competent critics. A serious illness in 1913 directed his thinking towards the doctrine of the Holy Spirit and the problem of suffering. 
Robinson's appointment in 1920 as principal of Regent's Park College, London, gave him wider scope as a teacher and led to the greatest achievement of his life, the transfer of the college to Oxford. His patient and persistent advocacy of the move overcame the hesitations felt by many of his fellow Baptists. A site off St Giles' was secured in 1927, but the stone-laying of the new buildings was not possible until 1938, and a formal opening had to be abandoned owing to the outbreak of war. While in London, Robinson had become a valued member of the London Society for the Study of Religion and a leading figure in the Society for Old Testament Study. With Dr Walter Robert Matthews he planned and edited the 'Library of Constructive Theology', an important series of volumes taking religious experience as its starting point. Robinson himself contributed 'The Christian Experience of the Holy Spirit' (1928) and 'Redemption and Revelation' (1942). He also published many smaller books and essays on the 'Old Testament', including a notable study of the Hebrew conception of corporate personality. 
In Oxford, Robinson quickly became one of the best-known theological lecturers, in frequent demand as examiner and supervisor. In 1934 he was appointed reader in biblical criticism and in 1937-9 was the first free churchman to be chairman of the board of the faculty of theology. On his retirement from the principalship of Regent's Park College in 1942, he was elected speaker's lecturer in biblical studies and planned to give himself to the writing of a major work on 'Old Testament' theology. The posthumously published lectures 'Inspiration and Revelation in the Old Testament' (1946) were intended as prolegomena. His health, however, failed shortly after his retirement and he died at the Acland Nursing Home in Oxford on 12 May 1945. 
Robinson was for many years president of the Baptist Historical Society, and his 'Baptist Principles before the Rise of Baptist Churches' (1911) and 'The Life and Faith of the Baptists' (1927) had a wide circulation. He received the honorary degree of DD from the universities of Edinburgh (1926) and Manchester (1943). The wide range of his intellectual interests and influence and the volume of work he accomplished were possible only by rigid self-discipline, but under a somewhat austere manner lay a simple kindliness, a deep interest in human beings, and unusual spiritual understanding and power. His personal faith was most clearly and simply set forth in 'The Veil of God' (1936) and 'Suffering, Human and Divine' (1940). 
E. A. Payne', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35794


Robinson, Sir John (1839-1903), politician in Natal and journalist, son of George Eyre Robinson, was born at Hull, Yorkshire, on 17 March 1839, and went to Natal with his parents in 1850. The colony was only seven years old, with no secondary schools, so he had little chance of education, apart from the stimulus of 'cultured parents'. In his youth Robinson was attracted to the life of a missionary, and then to the law; but he finally turned to journalism in the offices of the 'Natal Mercury', which his father had started. When his father's health failed Robinson was able, at the age of twenty-one, to take over management of the paper (31 March 1860). In September 1860 he entered into partnership with Richard Vause, later a prominent mayor of Durban; but Robinson remained editor. 
In 1861 Robinson travelled to England by the east coast of Africa, Mauritius, and the Red Sea; he stayed some five months in the United Kingdom, where he studied the International Exhibition of 1862, and lectured on the colony of Natal. He also visited part of the continent before setting out again for Natal. In 1863, aged twenty-four and with considerable knowledge of politics and government gained from his work as a reporter, he was elected to the council for Durban, thus becoming one of the twelve elected members of the old legislative council. He supported union of the states and colonies of South Africa under the British flag. In 1865 he married Agnes, daughter of Dr Benjamin Blaine of Verulam, Natal; they had three sons and three daughters. 
Robinson continued his newspaper and literary work. The 'Natal Mercury' grew from a weekly paper to three issues a week, and then became a daily paper. Robinson wrote for the Cape Town press and for British journals such as the 'Cornhill Magazine', where his first article, 'A South African watering place', appeared in 1868. He also wrote a novel, 'George Linton' (1876). His work and reputation as a lecturer became increasingly focused on his political interests. 
After some fifteen years' experience of administration of the colony by the crown, Robinson became a strong supporter of responsible government for Natal. He had been impressed by the troubles of the Langalibalele affair in 1873; he favoured a South African federation and was a delegate for Natal at the South African Conference in London in 1876, and faced the Anglo-Zulu War in 1879. 
Robinson's friend Sir Harry Escombe opposed self-government for the colony. Robinson was defeated in the elections of May 1882, losing his seat for Durban, but was back in the council in 1884, and in 1887 was chosen as its representative at the Colonial Conference of that year in London. During this visit he was received by Queen Victoria and presented the colony's loyal address on the occasion of her jubilee. In 1888 he represented Natal in the South African Customs Conference which led to the formation of the customs union. He was created KCMG in 1889. 
Robinson's determined support for a self-governed colony and for railway links with the interior, expressed in his writings and speeches, gradually convinced his opponents. In 1892 Escombe took up Robinson's cause. Robinson was one of the representatives who went to England in that year to press the colonists' views and present a draft constitution. His efforts succeeded, and on 4 July 1893, when the new regime began, he assumed office as the first prime minister of Natal, with the portfolios of colonial secretary and minister of education. Responsible administration was effected quietly, and while his term of office was uneventful, his government saw the completion of the railways from Durban to Johannesburg and from Natal to the Orange Free State. In March 1897 he resigned on account of failing health, hastening his retirement so that his successor might accept the invitation to Queen Victoria's diamond jubilee. Robinson went to England that summer in a private capacity, and then on to Rome, which he revisited in 1900. In 1899 he wrote 'The Colonies and the Century' and, in 1900, 'A Lifetime in South Africa'. 
In 1898 the legislature voted Robinson a pension of $500 a year. For the rest of his life he lived mainly in retirement at his home, The Gables, Bayside, Durban, where he died on 5 November 1903. He was buried at the Durban cemetery; the staff of the 'Mercury' bore him to his grave. His wife survived him. Robinson was regarded as a man of probity, governed by high ideals, and his work as a journalist was lucid and temperate. 


@@@@@


doc= 35795


Robinson, Sir John Charles (1824-1913), museum curator and art collector, was born on 16 December 1824 in Nottingham, the son of Alfred Robinson. He was brought up by his grandfather, a bookseller, and educated in Nottingham. Originally intending to train as an architect, he turned instead to painting, and studied in the studio of Michel-Martin Drolling in Paris. While there, he laid the foundations of his knowledge of a wide field of the fine and decorative arts. Returning to England in 1847, he taught at the School of Design in Hanley, Staffordshire. In 1852, he went to London to work as a teachers' training master, but was soon appointed curator of the Museum of Ornamental Art at Marlborough House. In 1857 the collection moved to the newly established South Kensington (later Victoria and Albert) Museum, where Robinson worked until 1867, his post changing in 1863 to that of art referee. He built up the museum's collection of Italian Renaissance sculpture, acquiring many pieces from the Gigli and Campana collections in Rome. Robinson's catalogue 'Italian Sculpture of the Middle Ages and Period of the Revival of Art' (1862) was a landmark in the scholarly study of the subject. In the same year he organized the immense special loan exhibition of medieval and Renaissance works of art at the museum. He developed the collections in many other areas, and in the 1860s travelled to Spain and Portugal, where he acquired a selection of works of art from the Iberian peninsula which rendered the museum unique in Europe. In 1856 Robinson organized a collectors' club, to hold evening receptions, conversazioni, and exhibitions; in 1857 this became the Fine Arts Club, which later merged gradually with the Burlington Fine Arts Club, formed in 1866, with Robinson as first president. The club fulfilled an important function at a time when loan exhibitions were rare. With his friend Sir Francis Seymour Haden, Robinson also founded the Royal Society of Painter Etchers; a collection of etchings by Robinson is preserved in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. 
Robinson's taste was in many ways advanced for his period, not only in his love for earlier Italian painting and sculpture, but also in his admiration for Piero della Francesca, whose 'Baptism' (National Gallery, London) he acquired in Italy in 1860, and in his interest in early Spanish painting, in particular the work of El Greco, whose 'Christ Expelling the Money-Changers from the Temple' Robinson presented to the National Gallery in 1895. His own collections were vast and included paintings, drawings and prints, sculpture, medals and gems, ceramics, tapestry, and embroidery. By the age of thirty-six he had amassed a phenomenal collection of drawings which passed 'en bloc' in 1860 to John Malcolm of Poltalloch; it is now in the British Museum. He helped a number of other private collectors to form their cabinets, particularly Sir Francis Cook, to whom he sold 100 paintings in 1860 and many more during the course of their association. 
In 1870 Robinson wrote the seminal 'Catalogue of the Drawings by Michael Angelo and Raffaelle in the University Galleries at Oxford', the first 'catalogue raisonne' of a group of drawings. He helped to organize the syndicate which attended the Fountaine sale at Christies on 16 June 1884 to prevent the random dispersal of an important cabinet of ceramics. From 1882 to 1901 he was surveyor of the queen's pictures. He was knighted in 1887 and made a CB in 1901. He continued to be active in the art world into his eighties, and was a dominant critic and controversialist. He was noted by contemporaries not just for the scope of his collections and the quality of his eye, but also for his indefatigable energy and for the tenacity of his opinions. 
On 24 December 1852 Robinson had married Marian Elizabeth (died 1908), daughter of the lawyer Edmund Newton of Norwich; they had five sons and two daughters. They lived in London, first at York Place, and then at 107 Harley Street. In 1874 Robinson had bought Newton Manor in Swanage, and he died there on 10 April 1913. He was buried at Marlborough in Wiltshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 35796


Robinson, Sir John Richard (1828-1903), journalist, born on 2 November 1828 at Witham, Essex, was the second son of eight children of Richard Robinson, Congregational minister, and his wife, Sarah, daughter of John Dennant, also a Congregational minister, of Halesworth, Suffolk. At eleven he entered the school for the sons of Congregational ministers, then at Lewisham. Withdrawn from school on 26 June 1843, he was apprenticed to a firm of booksellers at Shepton Mallet. His ambitions, however, were directed towards journalism, and his first effort was a descriptive account (in the 'Daily News', 14 February 1846) of a meeting of Wiltshire labourers to protest against the corn laws. After reporting for the 'Bedford Mercury', he obtained a post on the 'Wiltshire Independent' at Devizes, and soon sent regular reports of the local markets to the 'Daily News'. In 1848 Robinson went to London; having become a Unitarian, he was made sub-editor of a Unitarian journal, 'The Inquirer', and did most of the work for John Lalor, the editor. His next post was on the 'Weekly News and Chronicle', under John Sheehan, and in 1855 he became editor of 'The Express', an evening paper in the same hands as the 'Daily News'. At the same time he was a prolific contributor elsewhere. He cherished a deep interest in movements for freedom throughout Europe. He had a profound reverence for Mazzini, who asked to make his acquaintance after reading an appreciation of himself from Robinson's pen; he also knew Kossuth, Garibaldi, and other revolutionary leaders. 
Now settled in London, on 14 July 1859 he married Jane Mapes (died 1876), youngest daughter of William Granger of The Grange, Wickham Bishop, Essex; they had one son and one daughter. 
In 1868, when the price of the 'Daily News' was reduced to 1died, Robinson was appointed general manager. Under his direction the fortunes of the paper, which had been falling, quickly rose. He saw that the public demanded news not only quickly but in an attractive form. At the start of the Franco-Prussian War he instructed his correspondents to telegraph descriptive details and not merely bare facts, and after the war was well in progress he secured, with exemplary promptitude, the services of Archibald Forbes, who long remained a valuable contributor. At the prompting of another correspondent, John Edwin Hilary Skinner, he started the French Peasants Relief Fund, which reached a total of $20,000. On 22 June 1876 Edwin Pears of Constantinople contributed to the 'Daily News' the first of a series of letters describing Turkish atrocities in Bulgaria. Public indignation was roused, and Robinson sent out an American journalist, Januarius Aloysius MacGahan, who was accompanied by Eugene Schuyler, the American consul-general in Turkey, to make enquiries. Pears's charges were corroborated, and Robinson's services were warmly acknowledged by the Bulgarians. 
In 1887 Robinson became titular editor of the 'News', the actual night editing being carried on chiefly by Peter William Clayden. In 1893 he was knighted. The fortunes of the paper meanwhile declined, to the alarm of the Liberal Party leadership. On 1 February 1896 E. T. Cook became editor with undivided control of policy and Robinson resumed his post of manager, though he later regretted not retiring (Koss, 365). During 1899 and 1900 Cook -- a follower of Lord Rosebery -- supported the South African War, but Robinson's sympathies were with the Boers. Early in 1901, in a coup masterminded by Lloyd George, the paper was captured by the pro-Boers. Robinson declined the offer of a consultant directorship and retired, aged seventy-two (Koss, 398). 
Robinson was an habitue of the Reform Club, and formed one of the circle in which James Payn, William Black, Sir Wemyss Reid, Frank Finlay, and George Augustus Sala were conspicuous. He was an excellent raconteur and mimic, a great reader, especially of modern French literature, and a regular 'first-night' attender at the leading theatres. In 1854 he had become a professional member of the Guild of Literature and Art, a society founded by Charles Dickens and his friends for the benefit of authors and artists. The guild failed to fulfil the aims of its founders, and Robinson with Frederick Clifford, as the last surviving trustees, arranged for its dissolution in 1897. In that year he was chairman of the journalists' Newspaper Press Fund dinner, and in 1898 of the proprietors' Newspaper Society dinner. 
Robinson died in London on 30 November 1903, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. Though he bridged the activities of editing and managing, he was innovatory in neither, and was unable to combat Unionist press dominance after 1886. 


@@@@@


doc= 35797


Robinson, Joseph Armitage (1858-1933), dean of Westminster and Wells, was born in the vicarage of Keynsham, near Bath, on 9 January 1858, the third son among thirteen children of George Robinson of Monagham, Ireland, vicar in turn of the poor parishes of Keynsham and St Augustine's, Everton, and his wife, Henrietta Cecilia, daughter of Arthur Forbes of Craig-a-ved, co. Down. He was educated at the Crypt Grammar School, Gloucester, at Liverpool College under George Butler ('c'.1872), and, like three of his brothers, at Christ's College, Cambridge, of which he was scholar (1877), fourth classic and second chancellor's medallist (1881), fellow (1881-99), and honorary fellow (1905). After ordination (1881, 1882) he was during 1883-4 domestic chaplain to J. B. Lightfoot, a powerful bishop and probably the leading patristics scholar in Europe. Lightfoot gathered round his home at Auckland Castle six or eight ordinands for instruction in pastoral matters and direction in theological study. Later at Westminster Abbey Robinson adapted this custom, but enlarged the range to include promising pupils in history and science. On returning to Cambridge he engaged in teaching and research, varied by a curacy at St Mary the Great (1885-8) and the vicarage of All Saints (1888-92). 
On the way to Patmos in 1887 Robinson met at Athens S. P. Lambros, who, in discussing a famous forgery by Constantine Simonides, showed him an essay he had written and a fresh collection he had made of the Athos manuscript of the 'Shepherd of Hermas'. For these Robinson secured publication by the Cambridge University Press, with an English translation and valuable prefaces and appendices of his own. In 1890 he discovered in MS Brit. Mus. 11884 the original Latin of the 'Acts of the Scillitan martyrs', and shortly after in Vienna he detected the Buddhist romance of Barlaam and Joasaph (or Josaphat), and the original Greek of the 'Apology' of Aristides, of which a text and translation from a Syriac version found by James Rendel Harris at Mount Sinai were passing through the press. The result appeared in 1891 as the first of a new series of Cambridge 'Texts and Studies' under Robinson's editorship, with an elaborate appendix by himself, which helped 'to open a new field before the students of Christian Apologetics'. In 1891 the series was continued with freshly edited text of St Perpetua, 'the most beautiful of all the records of Christian martyrdom' and of the Scillitan martyrs, and in 1893, separately, of Origen's 'Philocalia'. His high position in international scholarship was marked by the honorary degree of PhD from Gottingen University (1893) and by Halle University's conferral of the degree of DTheol (1894). He was elected to be Norrisian professor of divinity at Cambridge in 1893. From 1894 to 1899 he held the prebend of Compton Bishop in Wells Cathedral. In 1895 he published 'Euthaliana' ('Texts and Studies', 3/3), a work which required great editorial skill and proved his mastery of Armenian. In 1920 he produced his translation of the Armenian version of St Irenaeus's 'Demonstration of the Apostolic Preaching' and his most useful introduction to this 'handbook of Christian evidence... as it presented itself to a master-mind at the end of the second century'. 
Meanwhile Robinson's reputation had been growing as a scholar who was also a preacher; and his appointment to the rectory of St Margaret's with the annexed canonry of Westminster Abbey was welcomed in 1899 to a stall which was exchanged for another in 1900. The approach of the coronation of Edward VII gave the new canon, with the approval of Archbishop Temple, on whom the responsibility for the service lay, an opportunity of dealing with the disastrous changes in the rite introduced by William Sancroft with his ill-advised alterations for James II, followed by those of Henry Compton for William and Mary, until the ceremony reached its lowest liturgical level in the form adopted for William IV. This process of restoration and repair was carried further in the service for George V prepared by the Lambeth librarian, Claude Jenkins, under Robinson's supervision in 1911. After Edward VII's coronation (9 August 1902), the octogenarian Dean Bradley resigned and Robinson was appointed to succeed him at the age of forty-four. He came to high office when energetic action and even drastic decisions seemed to be called for. If allowed mostly to go his own way he was not difficult to work with, even if he appeared at times to be angular and unbending. The powers of a dean of Westminster are very extensive, and Robinson was considered by his colleagues to have exercised his powers without adequate collaboration with the canons. He was an unflinching upholder of the rights of the abbey, which he served with devotion. But his deanship (1902-11) was marked at times by serious differences with a chapter that also believed they had rights. In August 1908 three canons (Beeching, Hensley Henson, and Duckworth) formally made appeal to the sovereign as visitor of the abbey as to whether the dean should be considered as ordinary. The king then asked the lord chancellor, Loreburn, to act for him. In March 1911 the king decided the matter according to the chancellor's advice that the dean ought to be treated as the ordinary. Robinson had suffered from the strain and decided to resign from Westminster, but retained the office of lord high almoner, to which he had been appointed in 1906. He thereupon accepted nomination to the deanery of Wells. 
Robinson's literary work at Westminster followed two distinct lines, theological and historical. In one class were vivid and stimulating essays such as 'Unity in Christ' (1901) and 'The Vision of Unity' (1908), 'The Study of the Gospels' (1902), 'Some Thoughts on the Incarnation' (1903), 'On Inspiration' (1905), 'On the Athanasian Creed' (1905), and especially an elaborate and masterly commentary on the 'Epistle to the Ephesians' (1908; new edn, 1929). To the other category of his writings belong four works especially of great help to the study of early monasticism in England: 'An Unrecognised Westminster Chronicler, 1381-94' (1907), 'The History of Westminster Abbey by John Flete' (1909), 'Gilbert Crispin, Abbot of Westminster', and 'The Abbot's House at Westminster', both published in 1911. To these must be added his share in 'The Manuscripts of Westminster Abbey' by M. R. James (1909). 
At Wells the new dean was in familiar surroundings and was able to renew friendships, especially at Downside. Robinson found additional happiness in his marriage, on 5 January 1915, to a close Lambeth Palace friend, Amy Edith, daughter of Francis Grantham Faithfull of Broxbourne, Hertfordshire, clerk to the Merchant Taylors' Company. Care of another great church of peculiar architectural features, to which he added a rood, stimulated and extended his antiquarian interests, especially his extensive study of medieval glass. His work 'The Saxon Bishops of Wells' (1918), his 'Somerset Historical Essays' (1923) and contributions to the Somerset Record Society's 'collectanea', his Ford lectures at Oxford in 1922 entitled 'The times of St Dunstan', and the studies 'Two Glastonbury Legends' (1926) and 'St Oswald and the Church of Worcester' (1919) are valuable, indeed essential, in separating off much piously produced legend. In other fields he published work on Irenaeus, a notable article on the early history of Canterbury convocation ('Church Quarterly Review', 81, Oct 1915, 1-137), further study of Hermas and the 'Didache' (1920), and speeches and booklets on prayer book revisions. He had maintained since early manhood deep interests in liturgical origins. 
Cardinal D. J. Mercier of Mechelen (Malines) and Charles Lindley Wood, second Viscount Halifax (1839-1934), had a deep friendship that worked to bring together Roman Catholics and Anglicans. They assembled at Mechelen a few leading theologians of each group. Archbishop Cosmo Lang of York (1864-1945) urged Robinson to join in. Both Mercier and Robinson were devoted to the cause of reunion, but recognized it would advance only very slowly. But they and the Malinists generally made a new beginning in 'rapprochement'. Yet such enterprises were condemned in the encyclical 'Mortalium animos' of January 1928 by Pope Pius XI. 
Robinson's last months were clouded by recurrent ill health. After resigning in March 1933 he died, childless, at his home, the Old Manor House, Upton Noble, Somerset, on 7 May 1933, and was buried on 11 May in Cloister Garth, Wells Cathedral. He was one of the early fellows of the British Academy (1903) and was appointed KCVO in 1932. 


@@@@@


doc= 35798


Robinson, Sir Joseph Benjamin, first baronet (1840-1929), mine owner in South Africa, was born at Cradock, Cape Colony, on 3 August 1840, the youngest son of Robert John Robinson (died 1886), a farmer, and his wife, Martha Emily (died 1854), daughter of William Henry Strutt. Robinson's parents had emigrated from England about 1820, as participants in a colonization scheme promoted by the British government. On 3 October 1877 he married Elizabeth Rebecca (died 1930), daughter of James Ferguson, a Kimberley merchant. They had five sons and eight daughters, three daughters dying in infancy. 
Robinson was first employed as a storekeeper and wool buyer at Dordrecht, Cape Colony, in 1856. In 1865 he fought with an Orange Free State commando unit in the Basuto War. After farming and stock breeding for several years Robinson, in 1867, prospected successfully in Griqualand's Vaal River diamond diggings. He was one of the earliest arrivals in 1871 at the Kimberley diggings, where as a diamond merchant he made his first fortune. 
Robinson bought the Kimberley 'Independent' in 1873, was elected mayor of Kimberley in 1880, and in 1882 defeated Cecil Rhodes for the Kimberley seat in the Cape Colony house of assembly. A vigorous opponent of illicit diamond trading, Robinson in 1882 secured passage of the 'Diamond Trade Act', which forced a person possessing an uncut stone to prove ownership. He was among the first to grasp the possibilities of the Transvaal gold discoveries, and one of the earliest arrivals in the Rand goldfield in 1886. Starting with the Langlaate Farm about 25 miles from Johannesburg, he pieced together several western Rand goldfields into the Randfontein Estates Company. By 1891 Robinson's Rand gold claims were valued at over $15 million. He also acquired valuable goldfields at Barberton in Natal colony. At the end of the century Robinson was generally acknowledged to be the titan of the South African gold industry, wealthier than Cecil Rhodes, Alfred Beit, Adolf Goerz, and other leading entrepreneurs ['see 'Randlords]. 
Unlike the Rhodes group of capitalists, with whom he was never on good terms, Robinson cultivated the friendship of Transvaal's Boer politicians, especially President Paul Kruger. Robinson was completely unsympathetic to the Uitlander conspiracy that culminated in the Jameson raid of 1896. He kept aloof from the South African War of 1899-1902, but from his recently acquired London home was in touch with moderate Boer politicians, including J. C. Smuts. Robinson contributed funds to the pro-Boer wing of the British Liberal Party during the 1900 election. 
Robinson's success in recruiting black miners in South Africa proved that Sir Alfred Milner's Chinese indentured labour scheme was not needed. His ridicule of the Milner plan furnished useful ammunition to the Liberals in the 1906 election. His financial support of the Liberal Party, and his advocacy of self-government in the conquered South African republics, earned him his baronetcy in 1908. 
Joseph B. Robinson was arrogant, quarrelsome, ruthless, highly individualistic -- and unpopular with many of his social and financial peers. On the other hand, his employees viewed him as exacting but fair. His almost total deafness made personal relations difficult in any event. He undoubtedly cut many corners in his business dealings, and was frequently in legal difficulties. Nevertheless, after moving to London in the late 1890s he became an acquaintance of other wealthy men, and was on the fringe of the prince of Wales's social circle. He retired from business in 1916 after selling his Rand properties, but subsequently some shady dealings came to light and resulted in considerable embarrassment for him. In 1921 he lost a suit brought against him in the South African courts for misrepresentation, stock-watering, and inside trading, which forced him to pay $462,000 in damages. Further humiliation came in 1922 when Robinson had to decline a peerage offered by the Lloyd George government, following attacks on his business ethics in the House of Lords. 
Robinson died at his residence, Hawthornden, Wynberg, near Cape Town, on 30 October 1929. He was succeeded as second baronet by his eldest surviving son, Joseph Benjamin Robinson (1887-1954). Much of his outstanding collection of paintings had been sold at auction in 1923; he donated the remainder to the South African National Gallery in Cape Town. His second daughter, Ida Louise (died 1961), married Count Natale Labia (died 1936), the Italian minister to South Africa, and was given the rank and title of princess by the king of Italy. 


@@@@@


doc= 35799


Robinson, Philip Stewart (1849-1902), journalist and writer on natural history, was born at Chunar, North-Western Provinces, India, on 13 October 1849, the eldest son in a family of three sons and three daughters of Julian Robinson, Indian army chaplain and editor of 'The Pioneer', and his wife, Harriet Woodcocke, daughter of Thomas Sharpe DD, vicar of Doncaster and canon of York. After education at Marlborough College (1860-65), he was from 1866 to 1868 librarian of the free library in Cardiff. He resigned this post to go to India, where he assisted his father in editing 'The Pioneer' in 1869. In 1872 he was appointed editor of the 'Records of the Benares Collectorate' (2 vols., 1876), and in the following year became professor of literature, and then in 1875 of logic and metaphysics, in Allahabad College. He edited the 'Cameleon: an Anglo-Indian Periodical of Light Literature' in 1872-3, and later became censor of the vernacular press. Robinson returned to England in 1877 and joined the staff of the 'Daily Telegraph' as leader writer. In the same year he married Elizabeth King. They had one son and one daughter. 
In 1878-9 Robinson served as correspondent of the 'Daily Telegraph', in the Second Anglo-Afghan War and in the Anglo-Zulu War, and during the next five years he acted as publisher's reader for Sampson Low & Co. and edited and prepared for the press H. M. Stanley's 'Through the Dark Continent' (1878). In 1881-2 he travelled the United States as special commissioner of the 'New York World', publishing his experiences as 'Sinners and Saints' (1883; new edn, 1892). Later in 1882 he went to Egypt as war correspondent of the 'Daily Chronicle', and in 1885 he was in the Sudan. Subsequently he made lecturing tours through the United States and Australia, and in 1898 was correspondent at first of the 'Pall Mall Gazette' and then of the Associated Press in Cuba during the Spanish-American War. The hardships of the Cuban campaigns, including imprisonment and fever, undermined his health, and in his last year he wrote very little. 
In addition to his many newspaper and journal contributions, Robinson published some twenty-three works between 1871 and 1902, the majority being keenly observed, whimsically humorous essays on Indian natural history. These included his 'Indian Garden' series -- 'Chasing a Fortune' (1884), 'Tigers at Large' (1884), and 'The Valley of Teetotum Trees' (1886) -- which enjoyed the largest circulation of any of his works. In this respect he might be considered one of the pioneers of Anglo-Indian literature, yet his work guaranteed him little lasting reputation. Other diverse topics of his work included mythological fishes (1883), Cyprus (1878), and the Indian famine (1877). Between 1882 and 1899 he contributed twenty-one articles to the 'Contemporary Review'. He also wrote for the 'Quarterly Review', 'Gentleman's Magazine', and 'Harper's Monthly'. Robinson died on 9 December 1902. 


@@@@@


doc= 35800


Robinson, Roy Lister, Baron Robinson (1883-1952), forester, was born on 8 March 1883 at Macclesfield, near Adelaide, South Australia, the eldest son of William Robinson, a mechanical engineer, and his wife, Annie Lowe. He was educated at St Peter's College, the School of Mines, and the university in Adelaide. He graduated BSc in 1903 and obtained his diploma in applied science (mining engineering) in 1904. Selected as South Australia's second Rhodes scholar, he went to Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1905. After achieving first-class honours in natural science (geology) in 1908, he was awarded the Burdett-Coutts scholarship and obtained his diploma in forestry under Sir William Schlich, who acclaimed Robinson as his most brilliant student. His athletic prowess was equally remarkable and he represented his university at lacrosse (1906-9), athletics (1907-9), and cricket (1908-9). In middle life he changed to golf, commenting that it helped him to get to know younger members of staff in a less official atmosphere. 
After university, Robinson stayed in Britain. He was appointed an assistant inspector in the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries in 1909 and, three years later, was promoted superintending inspector. In 1910, he married Charlotte Marion Cust, daughter of Henry Cust Bradshaw. They had two daughters and one son, who became a wing commander and died in action in 1942. By intensive surveys in Wales and the north of England, and several extensive motorcycle tours of Scotland, Robinson laid the foundations of his wide knowledge of the growth of trees in Britain. In 1915 he was seconded to the Ministry of Munitions (this work earning him the OBE in 1918), but in 1916 he moved to become secretary to the forestry reconstruction (Acland) committee; in this post he helped to frame the committee's final report, which became the basis of forest policy for the next twenty years and led to the establishing of the Forestry Commission in 1919. Robinson was first a technical commissioner, then vice-chairman (1929), chairman (1932 until his death), and director-general (1945-7). In 1931 he became the first Rhodes scholar to receive a knighthood. 
'[Robinson's] gigantic work in forming a Forestry Department from scratch' (Long, 2) to one responsible for over 1000 square miles by the time of his death was plagued by political, economic, and technical difficulties, especially in wartime. Apart from a year (1940) as deputy controller in the Ministry of Supply's timber control, Robinson remained in forestry, taking a leading part in the preparation of the commissioners' reports on post-war forest policy ('Parl. papers', 1942-3, 4, Cmd 6447) and private woodlands ('Parl. papers', 1943-4, 3, Cmd 6500). The Royal Forestry Society and private foresters objected to several of the proposals but Robinson succeeded in devising the 'dedication of woodlands' scheme as a means of co-operation between the state and the private owner, to ensure that heavy wartime fellings were restocked. 
Robinson's work extended beyond the United Kingdom. He was the only man to attend all six Commonwealth forestry conferences between 1918 and 1952. In each he played an increasingly important part: he was vice-chairman for the third conference in Australia in 1928, and chairman of the fourth conference (South Africa, 1935) and the fifth (UK, 1947). In 1947 he became the fifth Australian and first Rhodes scholar to be given a peerage. He took the title Baron Robinson, of Kielder Forest and of Adelaide. He was the first recipient (1947) of the medal of the Society of Foresters of Great Britain of which he had been first president (1926-8), and he received the honorary degree of LLD from the University of Aberdeen in 1951. He sat on the Forest Products Research Board, was a first governor of the Imperial Forestry Institute, Oxford (1924-34), an honorary member of the American Society of Foresters and of the Institute of Foresters of Australia, and a corresponding member of the Agricultural Academy of France. He never fully recovered from a serious illness in 1950, but he was at the sixth Commonwealth forestry conference in Ottawa, and there he died, of pneumonia, on 5 September 1952. His wife survived him. His ashes were scattered in Kielder Forest, Northumberland. 
Robinson was 'the chief architect in creating State forestry in the United Kingdom' (Steven, 274). He had a first-class brain, a forceful personality, and an impressive physique, which lent him natural authority. He disliked compromise, did not suffer fools gladly, but was a delightful friend. 'He won the respect of all who knew him and the affection of most' (Courthope, 58). One of his chief attributes was tenacity of purpose, while being cautious when faced with difficult technical problems. His approach to forestry was mathematical and detailed. Severely practical, he tried most operations himself and abandoned anything not strictly necessary. Believing that growing trees were the best indicators of site potential, he instituted many sample plots and trained upon them his great powers of observation. He came to view forests as living organisms in the widest sense, producers of timber but also a wise use of poor land, with all the economic and sociological implications. Anticipating the need for public recreation and enjoyment of forests, he advanced the idea of forest parks, the first of which (1936) predated national parks by fifteen years. Robinson went continually into the woods and remained an observant and practical forester to the end. 'An exceptional man alike in gifts and personality... he would have dominated the forestry world whether Chairman of the Forestry Commission or no' (Steven, 274). 


@@@@@


doc= 35801


Robinson, Vincent Joseph (1829-1910), collector and dealer in Islamic artefacts, was born in London on 5 March 1829, the son of Vincent Robinson, shipowner and merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth Hannah. A younger brother, Henry, was professor of civil engineering at King's College, London, from 1880 to 1902, and his sister Elizabeth Julia (died 1904) was an artist; a posthumous exhibition of her work was held at the Fine Art Gallery, London, in 1905. 
After studying at King's College, London, Robinson took over the family business following his father's premature death, achieving marked success as a commissioning agent. It is not known when Robinson first became interested in Indian artefacts; however, by the mid-1870s his friendship with George Birdwood of the India Office, a noted scholar in Indian studies, prompted him to lend carpets and textiles for display at the South Kensington Museum. There Robinson's loans joined the India Museum collection, which formerly belonged to the East India Company. A number of Robinson's Indian textiles and Islamic carpets were displayed at the 1878 Universal Exhibition, Paris, in the British Indian section, where they were praised by Birdwood as 'remarkable... for their great excellence of quality and design' (Birdwood, 118); the carpets in particular prompted one curator to note they were 'a high class branch of fine art production... hitherto... utterly ignored by museum administrators' (V&A archives, doc. 4149). Robinson's connections with the South Kensington Museum continued through both loans and sales, but it is unclear which artefacts came from his own private collection and which from his London firm. By 1880 the firm was replacing its textile loans often two or three times a month; loans of Islamic pottery, tiles, and metalwork were also given but it is unclear by whom. In 1893 the museum acquired from Robinson the famous 'Ardabil' carpet for $2500, then an enormous sum, unaware that he also owned the twin carpet. Heavily used to repair the former piece, it was later sold to the American collector, C. Y. Yerkes, and is now housed in Los Angeles County Museum of Art. 
In 1882, perhaps prompted by two German publications (the first carpet studies), one of which was translated into English in 1879, Robinson published 'Eastern Carpets: 12 Early Examples' drawing from his own collection, with an important introduction by Birdwood and outstanding watercolour illustrations by his sister Elizabeth. Although the majority of attributions, concerning places and dates of production of the carpets illustrated, are no longer tenable, these concerns, alongside his theories of their history, makers, and symbolism, were to dictate the development of carpet research in the West for almost a century. The publication was well received, with the South Kensington Museum sending copies to all major schools of art in Britain and Ireland in 1889, and the book undoubtedly aroused public interest in the subject. Robinson was then asked to contribute an article on Persian-Indian carpets as displayed at the 1891 Vienna Handelsmuseum exhibition. After this, studies in Islamic carpets proliferated both in Britain and abroad. 
Robinson was appointed director of the British Indian section at the 1889 Paris Exhibition and created a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur; in the same year he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, London, and was made CIE in 1891. He had retired from his company in 1888, but the loans to the South Kensington Museum (now the Victoria and Albert Museum) continued to cause confusion after his death as his executors queried whether these items were from company stock or his private collection, for he had become an important collector in his own right, travelling extensively with his sister Elizabeth. 
This collection was the subject of the illustrated 'Ancient Furniture and other Works of Art', published by Robinson in 1902. It was first housed at Hopedene, built by the architect Norman Shaw near Dorking, Surrey, but in 1896 Robinson moved to Parnham House, Beaminster, Dorset, where he lived until the death of Elizabeth in 1904. He then moved into Netherbury Court (near Beaminster) to be close to her grave; he died at home on 21 February 1910 and was buried by her side at Netherbury church. Reportedly blunt and plain-spoken, he never married. The contents of the house were sold at auction by Hampton & Sons (2-9 August 1910) and realized over $13,500, even though many curators had begun to question the provenances, dates, and attributions of some of the items. 


@@@@@


doc= 35802


Robinson, Sir (William) Arthur (1874-1950), civil servant, was born at Long Marton, Westmorland, on 9 September 1874, the only son of William Robinson, tailor and draper, and his wife, Hannah Kidd. He was educated at Appleby grammar school and Queen's College, Oxford, where he obtained a first-class degree in both classical moderations (1893) and 'literae humaniores' (1895), and a second-class degree in modern history (1896). He was placed first in the civil service examination in 1897 and entered the Colonial Office, rising to the position of first-class clerk in 1907. He acted as assistant secretary to the imperial conferences of 1907 and 1911, and was secretary of the royal commission on the dominions, 1911-12. On 24 October 1910 he married Jean Pasley Mitchell ('b'. 1884), the daughter of Robert Mitchell of North Kensington, London, with whom he had one son. 
In 1912 Robinson became an assistant secretary at the office of works on the recommendation of Sir Lionel Earle, the permanent secretary, and after distinguished service in this post took his first position as permanent secretary at the new Air Ministry in January 1918. He was then moved to the key peacetime post of permanent secretary in the Ministry of Health in 1920 in succession to Sir Robert Morant, and remained there until 1935, establishing a reputation as one of the most prominent civil servants of his day. 
The ministry was at the forefront of policies on a wide range of economic and social problems. There was major legislation on housing and slum clearance, public health, town and country planning, mental deficiency, old age pensions, and rating and valuation. In addition a key focus of the ministry's energies was the preparation and implementation of the 1929 'Local Government Act'. This abolished the poor law boards of guardians and transferred their services to the county and county borough councils. Outdoor relief was restyled public assistance, and the rest of the poor law was broken up and united with other local authority services. The act also introduced the first centrally determined exchequer block grant to local authorities to be distributed on the basis of a needs-related formula. The structure of local government, the orientation of modern British social policy, and centre-local financial relations were recast in one legislative measure. 
Priding himself to one of his private secretaries on having 'a first-class brain, the constitution of an ox, and some ideals but not too many' ('DNB'), Robinson saw his role in these reforms as being to develop the general principles, leaving the detail to others. In this he was disinclined to be such a slave to work as his predecessor, Morant. In focusing on the big picture he was nevertheless viewed by one colleague as 'a mailed first beneath a velvet glove' (Ross, 22). In respect of the 1929 'Local Government Act' he countered Treasury arguments for a block grant irrespective of whether it was combined with other reforms, as well as those of his own senior health officials and richer local authorities who wanted the pre-1929 regime of expenditure-related grants to continue. Neville Chamberlain, the minister of health, found Robinson to be his crucial ally in negotiating reform through the policy process. 
Robinson would have retired in 1935 but in deference to Chamberlain, then chancellor of the exchequer, he became chairman of the supply board. He oversaw the manufacture of goods for military service requirements and sought to achieve closer co-ordination for the different parts of the armed services. Robinson became the first permanent secretary of the Ministry of Supply in 1939, retiring in the following year. He was appointed CB (1915), CBE (1918), KCB (1919), GCB (1929), and GBE (1941). 
To his colleagues Sir Arthur was a reserved and private man. During his working life he tended to be in London only during the week, disappearing back to the family cottage in Seaford, Sussex, at weekends. His manners were formal and his morals were Victorian. His one obvious passion was golf, for which he organized annual matches between Ministry of Health officials and senior local government officers. He lived quietly in retirement and died on 23 April 1950 at his home, Rodmell Hill Cottage, near Lewes, Sussex. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35803


Robinson, William Heath (1872-1944), cartoonist and illustrator, was born on 31 May 1872 at 25 Ennis Road, Stroud Green, London, the third of the seven children of Thomas Robinson (1838-1902), illustrator, and his wife, Eliza (1849-1921), daughter of William Heath, innkeeper, and his wife, Mary. 
The Robinsons were a family of artists and craftsmen. William's paternal grandfather, Thomas Robinson (1806-1885), worked as a bookbinder in Newcastle upon Tyne before becoming a wood-engraver in London, his work appearing in such periodicals as 'Good Words' and 'London Society'. His father graduated from watchmaking to wood-engraving to illustration, becoming chief illustrator of the 'Penny Illustrated Paper'. His elder brothers Thomas (1869-1953) and Charles (1870-1937) became well-known book illustrators, particularly the latter, who had a strong influence on his own style. 
In his autobiography 'My Line of Life' (1938), Heath Robinson (as he was invariably known) remembered his early years at home with affection. Since illustration was a respectable but not a highly paid profession, the family lived at a succession of modest but comfortable houses in the Islington and Hornsey area of north London. There was no money for luxuries: 'we had to provide our own amusements and make many of the things we played with... I think I may attribute the seeds of inspiration for the humorous drawings I have since attempted to those early efforts to make things out of homely materials originally intended for some wholly different purpose. In such circumstances, drawing became a necessity and a normal means of expression. My father consistently encouraged it. (Heath Robinson, 25)' If life at home in a large, busy, close-knit family was happy, life at school was less so. Heath Robinson attended Miss Mole's dame-school, Holloway College from 1880 to 1884 ('the education was of a meagre character'; Heath Robinson, 41), and Islington proprietary school from 1884 to 1887 ('few happy memories remain to me of this school'; ibid., 47). Perhaps his failure to learn stemmed from his extreme shyness and from the fact that 'I did not want to be anything else than an artist' (ibid., 71). His father removed him at fifteen to Islington Art School, where for five years he drew from the antique. He then won a coveted studentship to the Royal Academy Schools where, over a further five-year period, he drew from the antique; consequently his attendance was 'never very regular' (ibid., 78). During his last year he sold some illustrations to the magazines 'Sunday' and 'Little Folks'. 
By the time he left the Royal Academy Schools in January 1897 Heath Robinson saw landscape painting as his metier. However, when the pictures he painted that summer on Hampstead Heath failed to sell, he decided, aged twenty-five and penniless, that he must pursue the family craft of illustration. For the rest of his life he painted landscapes and figure studies in watercolour for relaxation, largely from imagination: 'to these financially unrewarded labours I owe more than I can say' (Heath Robinson, 171). 
Heath Robinson's earliest book illustrations, for editions of the classics, were published in 1897. By 1899, in editions of 'The Arabian Nights' Entertainments' and 'Fairy Tales from Hans Christian Andersen' (shared with his brothers Tom and Charles), he was beginning to attract favourable attention, further enhanced in 1900 by his illustrations for 'The Poems of Edgar Allan Poe', much influenced by Beardsley. But it was the publication by Grant Richards of Heath Robinson's own fantasy for children, 'The Adventures of Uncle Lubin' (1902), that revealed a truly original imagination and sense of humour. H. G. Wells, in his novel 'Marriage' (1912), called it 'a rare good thing' (p. 269). 
In 1899 Heath Robinson had become engaged to Josephine Constance Latey (1878-1974), daughter of John Latey (died 1903), his father's close friend and colleague on the 'Penny Illustrated Paper'. On the strength of his earnings from 'Uncle Lubin', the couple married on 30 April 1903, and set up home in Holloway Road. Heath Robinson's earnings were swelled by a series of humorous advertisements drawn for Lamson Paragon, a Canadian company, but his high hopes rested in a sumptuous edition in two large quarto volumes, 'The Works of Mr Francis Rabelais', commissioned by Grant Richards. This was published in 1904 and Heath Robinson's 254 illustrations, 100 being full-page, represented a notable achievement. He chose a grotesque style which emphasized the earthiness of the epic while overlooking the bawdy. Although the book advanced his reputation, it did little to help his bank balance as Grant Richards went bankrupt in November 1904. 
With a daughter now as well as a wife to support, Heath Robinson needed new outlets for his work. He approached the large-format 'society' magazines which, printing illustrations full-page, offered him most scope as an artist. In 1905 'The Tatler' and 'The Bystander' published a few of his comic-sentimental allegories, but these had a limited appeal. Starting in 1906, he found his true direction in 'The Sketch', whose editor, Bruce Ingram, gave him encouragement and wise advice. His first series, 'The Gentle Art of Catching Things' ('Whelks on the Shores of the Caspian Sea', for example), included most of the ingredients on which his humour was based -- ingenuity, pretence, and disguise -- and in the next, 'British Sports and Pastimes', a prototype 'contraption' appeared. 
These series, and 'Great British Industries' which followed in 1908, had an immediate impact. In a profile published in the 'Strand Magazine' for July 1908 the anonymous author wrote that, 'not least of the widespread interest Mr Robinson has excited is the seeming abruptness of his public appearance in the role of humorist'. He had discovered the niche which made him a synonym in the English dictionary for absurdly ingenious devices, but he needed more time to discover the appropriate style. Under the influence of S. H. Sime, he often favoured a comic-grotesque style which could be repellent, especially in the treatment of animals. Gradually the macabre subjects and settings were eliminated, as were the standard joke properties -- receding chins, bulbous noses, staring eyes -- all in the interest of credibility. By 1914 the revolution was almost complete. 
The year 1908 also saw the birth of Heath Robinson's son Oliver (three more sons followed); a move from north London to Hatch End, Pinner, then in rural Middlesex; the publication of his illustrations to 'Twelfth Night', atmospheric watercolours that were exhibited at the Brook Street Gallery; and the appointment of A. E. Johnson as his agent. Johnson, who became his close friend and trusted adviser, wrote the first study of his work, 'W. Heath Robinson' (1913). 
From 1908 to 1914 Heath Robinson divided his time between book illustration and cartoons for 'The Sketch', the 'Strand Magazine', and other periodicals. His best books were his own fantasy 'Bill the Minder' (1912) and 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' (1914), in which, most notably in line drawings, he surpassed himself. His 'Sketch' cartoons included in 1910 a series called 'Am Tag', predicting the consequences of a German invasion. When war came in 1914 he was too old to enlist and uncertain how to react. A cartoonist in wartime was expected to vilify the enemy or bolster the morale of his own side. Heath Robinson decided to carry on being absurd, and because the men on active service loved it -- he had an immense correspondence with them -- the authorities could not disapprove. The Germans (wearing the uniforms of the Franco-Prussian War) invented 'frightful' means of teasing, discomfiting or embarrassing our troops who (looking scarcely less ridiculous) confounded them. 'Some 'Frightful' War Pictures', selected from 'The Sketch' and the 'Illustrated Sporting and Dramatic News', was published in 1915, and the 'popular edition' published the following year went into six impressions. 'The Saintly Hun: a Book of German Virtues', published in 1917, was a masterpiece of deadpan irony. The line drawings had an unaccustomed bite, yet were mild compared with the excoriations of artists like Raemakers, Dyson, and E. J. Sullivan. A nearer comparison could be made with the work of Captain Bruce Bairnsfather, who strove for as much reality as he could get past the censor. Heath Robinson dealt in fantasy, yet the humour of both men, in the context of the times, was conspicuously good-natured. 
Heath Robinson was obeying his instincts. As a man he was kind, shy, quiet, diffident, prudish, unambitious for money, and unadventurous -- he only once went abroad, in 1918, when a syndicate of Americans paid him to record the exploits of their forces on the western front. As an artist he prided himself on freedom from class-consciousness and racial prejudice. Unlike contemporary cartoonists in 'Punch' (which published only one of his original drawings, in 1923, although it reprinted a few illustrations later), he made no jokes about Irishmen and Jews, nor about illiterate servants and drunken tramps. In appearance he was 5 feet 9 inches tall, weighed about 10 stone, had hazel eyes, a bushy moustache, a pale complexion, and generally wore a serious if not earnest expression. He liked reading -- mostly classic English novels -- pottering in his garden, going for country walks, and the company of his cats. He also enjoyed occasional visits to his two London clubs, the London Sketch Club (elected 1910) and the Savage (elected 1924). His interest in sport and machinery was restricted to their comic potential; the artist who depicted the 'Humours of Golf' (1923) never swung a club and the 'gadget king' was totally impractical. In 'The Art of the Illustrator' (1916) by Percy V. Bradshaw, Heath Robinson wrote: 'I really have a secret satisfaction in being considered rather mad... I am playing the part of an Artist who strains, with all his powers, to suggest the absolute conviction, logic and solid quality of the things he portrays' (p. 15). Heath Robinson's draughtsmanship in humorous work, as opposed to his 'serious' book illustration, was laboured to show labour: 'my technique', he explained in 'The Art of the Illustrator', 'must be naive and have all the appearance of absolute conscientiousness... a hard, obviously painstaking, uncompromising outline with an evident anxiety to leave nothing out' (p. 15). 
During the war Heath Robinson had illustrated 'The Water Babies' by Charles Kingsley (1915), 'Peacock Pie' by Walter de la Mare (1916), and fairy stories in the 'Strand Magazine'. Afterwards only 'Old Time Stories' by Charles Perrault (1921) evoked his skills as an artist. Instead he concentrated on cartoons and on humorous advertisements, nearly always featuring machines or devices, for a wide variety of clients, including the Great Western Railway, for whom he produced 'Railway Ribaldry' (1935), his finest effort. More than 400 of his better cartoons appeared in 'The Bystander' between 1919 and 1928, and although most of them were examples of ingenuity, only a quarter contained 'contraptions'. These contraptions, designed (for example) to split peas or test artificial teeth, which looked as if they 'ought' to work, were only marginally funny in themselves. The joke lay in the solemn-faced men who operated the machines and manifestly thought their efforts worthwhile. Other favourite subjects were sport of all kinds, seaside holidays, travel, mainly in alpine districts, crime, mainly smuggling and burglary, and Scotsmen torturing themselves by parsimony and others by the bagpipes. Very occasionally, and always facetiously, Heath Robinson noticed current affairs. As he got older he often repeated himself in cheap magazines like 'The Humorist', and his draughtsmanship suffered accordingly. 
Heath Robinson also supplied inter-war magazines with illustrations to articles and short stories, his work appearing in the 'Strand Magazine', 'Good Housekeeping', the 'Passing Show' and, most notably, 'Nash's Pall Mall Magazine', for which he also designed full-colour covers so striking as to suggest that he could have made an excellent poster artist. Delightful too are the pictures of 'little folk' painted for special numbers of 'The Graphic' in the early 1920s, and most impressive of all are the full-colour depictions of convivial occasions published in 'Holly Leaves' in the late 1920s and 1930s. 
Heath Robinson made the first of three radio broadcasts in 1923. In 1924 there was an exhibition of his work at the Fine Art Society in Bond Street, London, and in May of the following year his art was discussed, sympathetically, by A. L. Baldry in 'Studio' magazine. He decorated two rooms on the liner 'Empress of Britain' in 1930 and in 1934 he designed a house, The Gadgets, for the Daily Mail Ideal Home Exhibition. In the same year 'Absurdities', a collection of his humorous drawings, was published. In 1936 came 'How to Live in a Flat', the first of four popular 'How to...' books concocted with the journalist K. R. G. Browne. By 1938, when his autobiography was published, Heath Robinson was one of the best-known men in the country. It was a pleasant, sentimental, and unrevealing book. 
From Moy Lodge, Pinner, to which Heath Robinson had moved in 1910 and where a plaque now commemorates his residence, he moved in 1918 to Cranleigh in Surrey for peace and quiet. There he was often visited by members of his family and by artist friends like Bert Thomas, whose son, like his own four boys, was educated at the local independent school, Cranleigh. A neighbour, the author Frank Swinnerton, wrote in 'Reflections from a Village' (1969) that Heath Robinson 'was a fellow villager but his modesty and ultra respectable demeanour were such that I doubt whether the majority of villagers ever identified him. He was a most sweet-tempered and attractive man' (Swinnerton, 51). By 1929 he was suffering from a heart condition which inhibited gardening and walking. Since his two eldest children were working in London he returned there himself: to Shepherd's Hill, Highgate. In 1932 his second son Alan, then a student at the Royal College of Art in London, converted to Roman Catholicism and entered a Benedictine monastery. Upset at first, partly because Alan was the only one of his children to show artistic ability, he later became reconciled, and visited the monastery on several occasions, presenting the monks with humorous interpretations of their building activities to help fund-raising. His wife became a Roman Catholic too and he, though never a churchgoer, read books on theology. Some of the private watercolours he painted about this time evince sacred preoccupations. 
Although depressed by the outbreak of war in 1939, Heath Robinson rose to the occasion. The lack of inspiration that had marked some of his recent cartoons vanished; now he had new toys to play with: tanks, dive bombers, barrage balloons, parachutists, and air raid wardens. Above all he had camouflage: assuming the Germans invaded, they would never defeat us because they would never find us. They had the armaments but we had the brains, and guile would triumph. His drawings were published in 'The Sketch' and a selection were reprinted in 'Heath Robinson at War' (1942). In co-operation with Cecil Hunt, he also produced three books, 'How to Make the Best of Things' (1940), 'How to Build a New World' (1941), and 'How to Run a Communal Home' (1943). He was working on a set of illustrations almost up to the end. 
In 1944 Heath Robinson underwent exploratory surgery in hospital for a prostate operation. Returning to his home, 25 Southwood Avenue, Highgate, he died of a stroke on 13 September; he was buried at St Marylebone cemetery, East Finchley. A memorial exhibition, covering all aspects of his work, was held at the Fine Art Society in February 1945. 'What may be unexpected in this exhibition', wrote the art critic of 'The Times', 'is the fineness of Heath Robinson's craftsmanship, the clean and firm fluency of his pen line and the quality of his watercolour washes.' Without that 'fineness of craftsmanship', which included compositional skills of a high order, he could not have succeeded as an illustrator nor, in the main territory he chose, as a humorist. He was by no means the discoverer of that territory; George Cruikshank among others had passed through it, but among contemporaries he was able to claim it for his own, because no other artist could so combine fertility of invention with artistic expertise. 
Heath Robinson's reputation, kept alive in 1947 by the publication of Langston Day's 'The Life and Art of W. Heath Robinson', declined in the 1960s. His optimistic absurdity did not chime with the denigrating spirit of the age, and his (deliberately) laboured style offended against the cult of spontaneity expressed in the 'loose doodle'. It was principally as an illustrator, the rival of Rackham and Dulac, that he started to enjoy a comeback in the Medici Society's exhibition (1972) and in John Lewis's book 'Heath Robinson: Artist and Comic Genius' (1973). In the same year Duckworth published 'Inventions', the first among several reprints of his cartoons. The Science Museum in London mounted a touring exhibition of his work in 1973 and others followed, the most notable being those at the Chris Beetles Gallery, London (1987, 1992, and 2000); the Royal Festival Hall, London (1992); and the city art galleries of Portsmouth (1976), Sheffield (1977), and Manchester (2000). Further studies were published, the most comprehensive being James Hamilton's 'William Heath Robinson' (1992). The prices of his artwork soared. The most expensive picture at the memorial exhibition in 1945 cost $26 5's'.; in 1992 Chris Beetles was selling one for $25,000. 
The significance of Heath Robinson's humour has been variously interpreted. He himself saw it as 'a gentle satire on the fussiness of people, the people who take themselves very seriously and have no sense of humour' ('West Australian', 14 Jan 1939). Langston Day saw him as the caricaturist of machinery who, unwittingly, 'struck a blow at Machine Worship and enabled the machine-servers to laugh at their Frankenstein' (Day, 243). He quoted Kenneth Bird (Fougasse), who thought of Heath Robinson as the enemy of mass production. James Hamilton in 'William Heath Robinson' (1992) saw his comic art as reflecting both his desire for order and his impulse to try to build a better world through encouraging man's creativity. 
These interpretations have to be set in the context of Heath Robinson's total lack of pretension. He was not by intention any sort of reformer, simply a professional entertainer providing for a large family by giving the public what it wanted, with a charm that derived from a childlike innocence and optimism. In so doing, he created his own world, the mark of a great cartoonist. 


@@@@@


doc= 36637


Sir Harry James Veitch (1840-1924), the second son of James [ii] Veitch, was born at Exeter on 29 June 1840. He was educated at Exeter grammar school and continued his training at Altona, near Hamburg, and at Paris with the firm of Vilmorin-Andrieux. He joined the Chelsea branch of the firm in 1858 or 1859 and worked at Chelsea, Coombe Wood, and Langley. He took a particular interest in plant hunting and was instrumental in commissioning the notable expeditions of Richard Pearce, a gardener at the Exeter Veitch nursery, to China, Peru, and Bolivia in 1859 and afterwards; of Frederick William Burbidge to Borneo in 1877; and of Ernest Henry Wilson to China and Tibet in 1899-1902 and 1903-5. (Appropriately Wilson received the Veitch memorial medal in 1906.) During Harry James's time at the nursery it established its reputation for orchid hybridization and the successful introduction to British gardens of many exotics. He retired from the firm in 1900, but came out of retirement to manage the firm between 1906 and 1914. (In the years immediately preceding 1914 the firm declined rapidly, and in 1914 much stock had to be sold off.) He was elected fellow of the Linnean Society in 1886. He received the Victoria medal of honour of the Royal Horticultural Society in 1906, and later served as the society's treasurer and vice-president. He was knighted in 1912. He published a manual of Coniferae in 1881 and of orchidaceous plants (1887-94), both of which contain much information about the plants brought to Britain by the firm's collectors. He died at East Burnham Park, Slough, on 6 July 1924. In 1867 he had married Louisa Mary (died 1921), daughter of Frederick W. Johnston of Stoke Newington. Like James Herbert and his wife they had no children, and, as there was no successor in the family to take over the business, the nursery at Coombe Wood was sold. 


@@@@@


doc= 36638


James Herbert Veitch (1868-1907), eldest son of John Gould [i] Veitch, who was born at Chelsea on 1 May 1868. He was educated at Crawford College, Maidenhead, and in technical subjects in Germany and France before starting work at the Chelsea nursery in 1885. He continued to work there and at Coombe Wood, Surrey, at Langley, Buckinghamshire, and at Feltham, Middlesex. He was elected fellow of the Linnean Society in 1889 and the Horticultural Society. From 1891 to 1893 he toured the world collecting plants for the nursery and published accounts of his travels in the 'Gardener's Chronicle' (1892-4) and as 'A Traveller's Notes' (1896). In 1898 James Veitch & Sons was formed into a limited company of which James Herbert became managing director. James Herbert prepared 'Hortus Veitchii', privately published in 1906, an invaluable history of the family firm. Shortly after this poor health obliged him to retire from business and his uncle Harry James came out of retirement to take over from him. He died of paralysis at Exeter on 13 November 1907. He was survived by his widow, Lucy Elizabeth Wood, whom he had married in 1898. They had no children. 



@@@@@


doc= 36877


Whitman, Alfred Charles (1860-1910), writer on engravings, was born at Hammersmith, London, on 12 October 1860, the youngest son of Edwin Whitman, a grocer, and his wife, Fanny. He was educated at St Mark's College School, Chelsea, after which he was employed by the firm of Henry Dawson & Sons, a typo-etching company of Farringdon Street and Chiswick. On 12 August 1885 he married, at Hammersmith, Helena Mary Bing. Later that same year, on 21 December, Whitman was appointed an attendant in the department of prints and drawings in the British Museum. For some years he served in his spare time as amanuensis to the translator Lady Charlotte Schreiber, and helped her to arrange and catalogue her collections of fans and playing cards. He was promoted to the office of departmental clerk in the print department on 20 May 1903. His tact, patience, and courtesy, combined with an exceptional knowledge of the English prints in the collection, made his aid invaluable to the museum's visitors, and he acquired, in particular, a well-deserved reputation as an authority on British mezzotint engraving. 
Whitman's earlier books, 'The Masters of Mezzotint' (1898) and 'The Print Collector's Handbook' (1901; new and enlarged edn, 1912), which were aimed at the amateur collector, were popular in character and have less permanent value than his catalogues of eminent engravers' works, which were the outcome of notes methodically compiled during many years, not only in the British Museum, but in private collections and salerooms. 'Valentine Green', published in 1902 as part of a series, 'British Mezzotinters', to which other writers contributed under his direction, is less satisfactory than 'Samuel William Reynolds', published in 1903 as the first volume in a series entitled 'Nineteenth Century Mezzotinters'. It was followed by 'Samuel Cousins' (1904) and 'Charles Turner' (1907). These two books rank among the best catalogues of an engraver's work produced in England during this period. 
Whitman's health began to fail in the autumn of 1908, and he died in London after a long illness, on 2 February 1910; he was survived by his wife. His annotated copy of J. C. Smith's 'British Mezzotinto Portraits' was sold at Christies on 6 June 1910 for a considerable sum. 


@@@@@


doc= 36878


Whitmore, Sir George Stoddart (1829-1903), army officer and police officer in New Zealand, was born in Malta on 30 May 1829, the son of Lieutenant (later Major) George St Vincent Whitmore RE and his wife, Isabella Maxwell, the daughter of Sir John Stoddart, chief justice of Malta. He was educated at Edinburgh Academy and destined for a conventional military career, but instead joined the Cape mounted rifles as an ensign in January 1847. 
Whitmore flourished in irregular colonial warfare. In South Africa he distinguished himself in the Cape frontier wars of 1847 and 1850-53, and participated in the 1848 defeat of the Boers at Boomplaats, the town where he married Eliza McGlocking about 1851. She died in the early 1860s after they had had three children. In May 1850 Whitmore was promoted lieutenant, and on return to England in 1854 was made captain in the 62nd (Wiltshire) regiment of foot that July. During service in the Crimea and elsewhere from 1855 (during which he was promoted brevet major in 1856, and earned the fourth class of the Turkish order of the Mejidiye) his courage was reconfirmed and his organizational skills finely honed. In 1858 and 1860 (interrupted by a spell as aide-de-camp to the commander of forces in Canada) he attended the staff college at Aldershot and passed with top marks. 
In 1861 Whitmore became military secretary to Lieutenant-General Duncan Cameron, the newly appointed commander of the imperial forces in New Zealand. But, tiring of the prevailing truce with 'rebel' Maori, he resigned in 1862 to improve a sheep and cattle run he now co-owned at Rissington, near Napier. Soon a JP, he combined a ruthless but efficient run-holding operation with many political, military, and bureaucratic positions in the colonial state, and was also a volunteer on Cameron's staff when war against Maori broke out again in 1863. That year alone he became civil commissioner for his region, a legislative councillor, in command of the local militia, and chief inspector and then commandant in the colonial defence force. On a visit to England on 11 March 1865 he married Isabella, the daughter of William Smith of Roxeth; they had no children. 
As head of the local militia, Whitmore made his mark by decisively crushing a small invasion of 'rebels' at Omarunui on 12 October 1866. In March 1868 he was appointed commandant of the armed constabulary, a militarized police body founded to 'pacify' the supposedly defeated Maori. But with renewed 'rebellion' from the forces of Te Kooti Rikirangi and Titokowaru, on the eastern and western seaboards of the North Island respectively, he was given the task of transforming the armed constables into soldiers, and reforming all colonial military forces. 
Whitmore now led the campaigns for which he became famous, switching from side to side of the island in pursuit of the 'rebel' chiefs. In effect commander-in-chief of the forces, he was elevated to full colonel on 21 October 1868, and created CMG in 1869. Despite losing key battles against Te Kooti (Ruakituri, 8 August 1868) and Titokowaru (Moturoa, 7 November 1868), he redeemed himself by defeating the former's forces at Ngatapa (5 January 1869) and penetrating his mountain sanctuary that May, and, in between, by pursuing the remnants of Titokowaru's forces after they abandoned their fortress at Tauranga-ika. Although there were further incidents of rebellion, the backbone of resistance to the state had been broken. However, in mid-1869 the inability of the colonial forces to capture the two 'rebel' chiefs led to the fall of the 'war policy' ministry. The new premier, William Fox, sought quickly to demilitarize the armed constabulary, since the colonial military had largely secured peace in the countryside. At the end of July 1869 command of the armed constabulary was stripped from Whitmore (ostensibly on grounds of ill health) and given to a career policeman. 
During his arduous campaigning, Whitmore had sat in the Hawke's Bay provincial council (1867-9), and he remained involved in politics, notably as a legislative councillor, as well as farming for the rest of his life. On 18 October 1877 he became colonial secretary in Sir George Grey's Liberal administration, and on 1 January 1878 he was also appointed commissioner of the recently formed New Zealand constabulary force, which combined the colony's policing and military functions. He sought to improve the colony's external defences against the supposed foe, Russia, including by ordering heavy harbour-defence guns. Internally, the job of control and surveillance of both Maori and Europeans gave him considerable authority. That the commissioner was also a minister made him even more powerful. But it also meant that he lost both positions as a result of Grey's fall on 8 October 1879. He was created KCMG in 1882. 
In August 1884 Whitmore entered the twelve-day Stout-Vogel ministry as minister without portfolio, and, some time after Stout and Vogel returned to power, he was appointed commander of the forces on 27 April 1885. In November of that year he was again gazetted commissioner of the New Zealand constabulary force (as well as under-secretary for defence). His major job in the Stout-Vogel ministry was to restructure the colony's coercive forces, to reflect both the state of internal tranquillity and further fears of Russian intentions. On 1 September 1886, when separate policing and military organizations were established, Whitmore added to his duties as the most senior military officer and military bureaucrat in New Zealand that of the founding commissioner of the New Zealand police force. He was commissioner only long enough to place the force on a firm footing before resigning on 31 December 1886; meanwhile, on 4 December, his position as linchpin of the colonial forces was recognized when he became the first New Zealander to attain the rank of major-general. 
In January 1888 Whitmore resigned from his military positions to return to politics, having abandoned his earlier association with radical politicians. In 1902, while on his way to England to publish 'The Last Maori War in New Zealand under the Self-Reliant Policy', a stroke partially paralysed him. On 16 March 1903, shortly after his return to New Zealand, he died at the Blue Cottage, Napier, Hawke's Bay; he was buried in the local cemetery. 
Whitmore combined courage in the field with considerable organizational capacity. He fell out with most people, subordinates and superiors, European and Maori, but dominated the New Zealand politico-military/policing scene for two decades because of his superior abilities. 


@@@@@


doc= 36879


Whitney, James Pounder (1857-1939), ecclesiastical historian, was born at Marsden, near Huddersfield, Yorkshire, on 30 November 1857, the only son of Thomas Whitney, perpetual curate of Marsden, and his wife, Ann Jane, daughter of James Morice. Both parents were of south Welsh extraction. A precocious boy, he showed an early interest in academic history. He was educated at King James's Grammar School, Almondbury, near Huddersfield, and was a student at Owens College, Manchester (1874-7), under Sir A. W. Ward, who remained his mentor and friend. As a foundation scholar of King's College, Cambridge (1877), he was a wrangler in the mathematical tripos of 1881 and was also bracketed senior in the first class in the historical tripos of that year. In 1882 he won the Lightfoot scholarship for ecclesiastical history and the Whewell scholarship for international law. 
Ordained deacon in 1883 and priest in 1885, Whitney became, after holding three curacies, the rector of Hempstead-with-Lessingham, Norfolk (1890), and then rector of Milton, near Cambridge (1895). He continued to study ecclesiastical history, and was assistant lecturer in history at Owens College from 1882 to 1887. In 1900 he was appointed principal of Bishop's College, Lennoxville, Quebec, Canada, and held the office, along with a canonry of Quebec Cathedral, for five years. He returned to Cambridge in 1906 as chaplain of St Edward's Church (1906-8). In 1906 he was also Hulsean lecturer. From 1908 to 1918 he was professor of ecclesiastical history at King's College, London, and after a brief tenure of the rectory of Wicken Bonhunt, Essex, in 1918-19, was elected Dixie professor of ecclesiastical history and fellow of Emmanuel College at Cambridge in 1919. He held both these posts until his death, which took place at 6 St Peter's Terrace, Cambridge, on 17 June 1939. 
Whitney was an inspiring teacher, exerting considerable personal influence over his pupils and generously recognizing younger scholars. He was a man of attractive character and in early years notably handsome. His scholarship was wide and deep, but discursive. He was a joint-editor of the 'Cambridge Medieval History' from 1907 to 1922; he contributed some excellent chapters; but as an editor he was unbusinesslike, and his colleague C. W. Previte-Orton's generous tribute to him in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' has to be revised in the light of Peter Linehan's study of the 'History'. Whitney's own works, which included 'The Reformation' (1907, revised 1940) and 'Hildebrandine Essays' (1932), reveal a judicious and widely read historian. But he published little; the 'coup d'oeil', exact, luminous, and instructive, was his forte. He was remembered for his conversational 'obiter dicta'; he could be caustic, but he was without rancour. Himself a devout Anglican, he had friends in other denominations. He married on 29 April 1891 Roberta Frances Anne ('b'. 1866/7), daughter of Robert Champley, of Scarborough; there were no children of the marriage. After his death, his widow gave his valuable collection of books to the Seeley Historical Library at Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 36880


Whittaker, Sir Edmund Taylor (1873-1956), mathematician and astronomer, was born at 7 Virginia Street, Southport, on 24 October 1873, the only son of John Whittaker, gentleman, and his wife, Selina Septima, daughter of Edmund Taylor, who practised as a physician at Middleton, near Manchester. Whittaker was taught by his mother up to the age of eleven, when he entered Manchester grammar school on the classical side, but on promotion to the upper school he gladly escaped to specialize in mathematics. In 1892 a scholarship took him to Trinity College, Cambridge, where in 1895 he was bracketed second wrangler; he obtained a first class in part two of the tripos, and the Tyson medal, was elected a fellow of Trinity (1896), and was awarded the first Smith's prize (1897). In 1901 he married Mary Ferguson McNaghten, daughter of the Revd Thomas Boyd, of Cambridge, Scottish secretary of the Religious Tract Society; and granddaughter of Sir Thomas Jamieson Boyd. They had three sons and two daughters. Their second son, John McNaghten Whittaker (Jack), was professor of pure mathematics at Liverpool (1933-52) and vice-chancellor of the University of Sheffield (1952-65). 
In 1906 Whittaker was appointed professor of astronomy in the University of Dublin, with the title of royal astronomer of Ireland. The observatory at Dunsink was poorly equipped, and it was tacitly understood that the chief function of the professor was to strengthen the school of mathematical physics in the university, where Whittaker gave courses of advanced lectures. Some of his pupils were members of other academic foundations, among them Eamon de Valera, later prime minister and president of Ireland. 
In 1912 Whittaker was elected to the professorship of mathematics at Edinburgh where he taught until his retirement in 1946. His personal achievements included the institution in 1914 of what was probably the first university mathematical laboratory in Britain, the establishment of a flourishing research school, and the development of the Edinburgh Mathematical Society. 
Whittaker made numerous and important contributions to mathematics and theoretical physics which had a profound effect by reason of their great range, depth, and fertility; but these were rivalled, if not surpassed, in interest, importance, and influence by his scientific books and monographs. In addition he wrote numerous philosophical and historical papers and books, which all bear the marks of his learning, literary powers, and critical judgement. 
Whittaker's contributions to pure mathematics were mainly to the theories of interpolation, of automorphic functions, of potential theory, and of special functions. His interest in the theory of interpolation arose from his association with the actuaries engaged in life assurance in Edinburgh, especially G. J. Lidstone. He succeeded in solving two fundamental questions and thus provided a logical basis for the Newton-Gauss formula and for the method of the graduation or adjustment of observations. In the theory of automorphic functions he solved the problem of the uniformization of algebraic functions of any genus by considering a special discontinuous subgroup of elliptic transformations each of period 2. 
The most significant section of Whittaker's researches, however, relates to the special functions of mathematical physics regarded as constituents of potential functions. He obtained a general solution of Laplace's equation which brought a new unity into potential theory by exhibiting all the usual special functions in the form of a 'Whittaker' integral, and he also introduced the important confluent hypergeometric functions. In theoretical physics he made substantial contributions to dynamics, to relativity and electromagnetic theory, and to quantum theory. In dynamics his discovery of the 'adelphic' integral provided the solution of the difficulties indicated by Poincare's celebrated theorem relative to the convergence of the series solutions of celestial mechanics. In electromagnetic theory he gave a general solution of Maxwell's equations in terms of two real scalar wave functions, and gave a relativistic generalization of Faraday's theory of tubes of force. In general relativity he investigated the problem of giving an invariant definition of distance which should correspond to the actual procedure adopted by astronomers, and he obtained a generalization of Gauss's theorem on the Newtonian potential. In his researches on quantum theory he generalized Hamilton's 'principal functions', expressing them in terms of non-commutating variables, and thus obtained a new foundation for Schrodinger's wave equation. 
In 1905 Whittaker co-founded the series of 'Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics and Mathematical Physics', an influential series of short volumes designed to introduce the principal elements of specific modern developments. His own contribution was 'The Theory of Optical Instruments' (1907), which was later translated into German. Three of Whittaker's scientific books have had a great influence. 'A Course of Modern Analysis', published in 1902, and in many subsequent editions with the collaboration of G. N. Watson, remained in print throughout the century. It was the first, and for many years almost the only, book in English to provide students with an account of methods in mathematical analysis and mathematical physics. The 'Treatise on the Analytical Dynamics of Particles and Rigid Bodies' (1904) remains the standard work on this subject. 'The Calculus of Observations' (1924, with G. Robinson; 4th edn, 1944) brought together many techniques in numerical analytical analysis, together with the practical work effected in his laboratory. 
Whittaker's monumental 'History of the Theories of Aether and Electricity' was first published in one volume in 1910 and subsequently in a greatly enlarged edition of which Whittaker lived to complete only two volumes (1951-3). The 'History' provides a systematic and critical account of the development of the physical theories of electromagnetism, atomic structure, and of the quantum theory from the seventeenth century to 1926. It will remain an outstanding achievement by reason of its clarity, comprehensiveness, and penetration, which give it the force and authority of an original investigation, although Whittaker was criticized for attributing special relativity theory to Henri Poincare and Hendrik Lorentz rather than to Albert Einstein. 
Whittaker also wrote historical articles of various kinds -- for example, several fine obituaries for the Royal Society, and uncommonly good centenary articles on the appropriate occasion for major figures of the past such as W. R. Hamilton and Laplace. In 1899 he brought the British Association for the Advancement of Science nicely up to date on the three-body problem in celestial mechanics, and in 1912 he wrote the article on the theory of planetary perturbations for the great German 'Enzyklopadie der mathematischen Wissenschaften'. 
Whittaker, who was knighted in 1945, was elected FRS in 1905, served on the council in 1911-12 and 1933-5 (vice-president 1934-5), and was awarded the Sylvester medal in 1931 and the Copley medal in 1954. With the Royal Society of Edinburgh he had continuous contact, being Gunning prizeman in 1929 and president in 1939-44. He was president of the Mathematical Association (1920-21), of the mathematical and physical section of the British Association (1927), and of the London Mathematical Society (1928-9), being awarded its De Morgan medal in 1935. An honorary member of a number of foreign learned societies, he received honorary degrees from several universities, and was an honorary fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge (1949). 
At Cambridge in his Tarner lectures (1947) Whittaker lucidly traced the development of natural philosophy from Euclid to Eddington, and in 1951 he gave the Eddington memorial lecture, 'Eddington's principle in the philosophy of science'. At Oxford he gave the Herbert Spencer lecture (1948), 'The modern approach to Descartes's problem'. He figured as a natural theologian in his Riddell memorial lectures (Durham, 1942) on 'The beginning and end of the world' and in the Donnellan lectures (Dublin, 1946) on 'Space and spirit' in which he restated the classical scholastic arguments for the existence of God in the light of current theories of scientific cosmogony. 
Whittaker was received into the Roman Catholic church in 1930. He served as honorary president of the Newman Association (1943-5), was awarded the cross Pro Ecclesia et Pontifice in 1935, and was appointed a member of the Pontifical Academy of Sciences in 1936. He died at his home, 48 George Square, Edinburgh, on 24 March 1956. 
Whittaker's death marked the end of an epoch, for he was conversant with a range of mathematics which no other Briton has encompassed. His pervasive influence in mathematics is seen in his peculiar facility for coining names for analytical concepts and entities, many of which have obtained a wide currency in the language of mathematics. That influence was mainly the effect of his amazing intellectual powers but it was reinforced by his never-failing kindness to his students, the hospitality offered in his Edinburgh home, his slightly mischievous humour, and the devotion and support of his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 36881


Whittard, Walter Frederick (1902-1966), geologist, was born on 26 October 1902, in Battersea, London, the youngest of four children of Thomas Walter Whittard, a successful grocer of Clapham, and his wife, Sarah Cotterell. 
Whittard attended the county secondary school at Battersea where he was a founder member of the school natural history society. While still at school, he was introduced to T. Eastwood of the Geological Survey who inspired in Whittard an interest in geology and advised him to attend evening classes in geology at Chelsea Polytechnic. There began a lifelong friendship with geologists Oliver Bulman and C. J. Stubblefield. In 1920 he began full-time study at Chelsea Polytechnic. In 1922 he became a student in the geology department of Imperial College under Professor William Watts and obtained in 1924 first-class honours in geology and zoology in the ARCS examinations and also in geology in his external London BSc. Attendance while an undergraduate at David Watson's lectures (at University College, London) enlarged his interest in palaeontology and this remained with him throughout his life, leading to a succession of papers which included important contributions to the study of trilobites. 
With the award in 1924 of a Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) scholarship, Whittard began his researches on the Valentian rocks of Shropshire under the supervision of Watts, while also pursuing part-time research under Watson on fossil Amphibia. Whittard's investigations of the Lower Palaeozoic rocks of Shropshire continued throughout his life. In two years he gained his London PhD and in 1926 he entered Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, with a senior DSIR award. Here he joined in the social life with vigour and rowed for his college with distinction. Nevertheless, he completed his work for a Cambridge PhD within two years, and published the first of his major papers on the Valentian rocks of Shropshire (1928). He visited east Greenland as chief geologist to the 1929 Cambridge expedition under J. M. Wordie. This was an experience he greatly valued and he subsequently encouraged his staff and students to join expeditions to Greenland. The same year he was awarded an 1851 senior studentship at Imperial College to continue his Shropshire work and in 1930 he received the Daniel Pidgeon award of the Geological Society. It was in 1930 that he married Caroline Margaret (died 1978), daughter of Albert William Sheppard, an engineer. They later had one son. 
In 1931 Whittard was appointed assistant lecturer in geology at Imperial College and in 1935 to a lectureship. In 1937, at the early age of thirty-four, he accepted the chair of geology at Bristol University, made vacant by the move of Arthur E. Trueman to the University of Glasgow. He remained at Bristol for the rest of his life. 
Until 1960 Whittard returned regularly to Shropshire to continue mapping and collecting and he became the recognized expert on the geology of the area. His work on the extraordinarily rich harvest of fossils collected over four decades reached its acme with the monograph on the Shelve trilobites, published in eight parts between 1955 and 1966 and effectively complete when he died, although a synthesis of the geology was never finished. 
During the Second World War, Whittard was geological adviser to the south-west region of England dealing with problems ranging from the cutting of quartz oscillator plates to water supply. From the mid-1950s he became increasingly involved in marine geology, mapping the geology of the English Channel. The results of this work, which partly appeared in published maps in 1962 and 1965, formed the basis of the subsequent joint Anglo-French map of the English Channel. 
Whittard was a most efficient administrator. He built up and ran well a happy department, enlarged threefold during his leadership, served on numerous committees, and executed the move of the department of geology from its old and cramped accommodation into the well-designed Queen's Building in 1958. He simultaneously pursued his research, and was able so to do largely because of his natural energy, the long hours he worked, and his remarkable ability to switch his mind back to research from administrative detail almost immediately. His main recreation was gardening and he lovingly supervised the university gardens. He was a shrewd but kindly man. 
Whittard was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1957 and in 1965 received the Murchison medal of the Geological Society. After visiting Canada in 1965 he was taken ill and died of heart failure at his home, Coombe Farm House, Westbury-on-Trym, Bristol, on 2 March 1966. He was cremated at Canford crematorium, Bristol. 


