@@@@@


doc= 36882


Whitworth, Geoffrey Arundel (1883-1951), founder of the British Drama League, was born in Kensington, London, on 7 April 1883, the youngest child of William Whitworth, barrister, and his wife, Phyllis Mary Draper; he had two brothers and two sisters. Owing to early developed spinal trouble -- which prevented him from going to school and which he met courageously -- he was educated privately until he went up to New College, Oxford, where he obtained a third class in modern history in 1906. He joined the staff of the 'Burlington Magazine', edited by Charles Holmes; then, from the autumn of 1907, he worked for Chatto and Windus, the publishing firm. There, in building up a list of contemporary books, he was a colleague of Frank Swinnerton, the novelist, who noticed his 'eager adventurousness' and his 'indomitable good temper, a part of his nature and his faith'. Whitworth knew many writers, established and new; through him the firm attracted works by such authors as G. K. Chesterton, Lytton Strachey, and Clive Bell. 
In 1910 Whitworth married Phyllis Grace (died 1964), fifth daughter and ninth of the ten children of the Revd George Edward Bell, vicar of Henley in Arden, Warwickshire, from 1876 to 1914. They had a son and a daughter. During the first two years of their marriage Phyllis Whitworth did the secretarial work for a monthly literary magazine, the 'Open Window', which her husband published from their Chelsea home with Vivian Locke Ellis. 
Whitworth's main love was the theatre. He enjoyed going to plays, and occasionally writing them; he had frequented the Court Theatre and was devoted to George Bernard Shaw. But his first enthusiasm at that time was for the project of a national theatre, to be regarded as a Shakespeare memorial and (it was hoped) opened in time for the tercentenary in 1916 of Shakespeare's death. With all his preoccupations in publishing, and his own writing -- for example, 'A Book of Whimsies' (with Keith Henderson, 1909) and 'The Art of Nijinsky' (1913) -- Whitworth never ceased to think of the national theatre. 
With the coming of war in 1914 these plans were shattered, but Whitworth became in 1919 the honorary secretary of his own organization, the British Drama League, founded 'to assist the development of the art of the Theatre and to promote a right relation between Drama and the life of the community'. In the previous autumn he had been much impressed by an amateur rendering, half-reading, half-performance, of a one-act play in a hut attached to a factory at Crayford in Kent -- something undertaken, he said, 'in the spirit of community enterprise... which had endowed the performance with a peculiar dignity' (G. Whitworth, 14). He held that this dignity must be the mark of a national theatre, and that the theatre itself, 'for all its costly elaboration, for all its perfection or professional technique', must be 'nothing more and nothing less than a Community Theatre writ large' (ibid., 14-15). For him the drama was ''par excellence' the art of the people, and the theatre everybody's business'. 
Hence the conception of the British Drama League, devoted to the 'encouragement of senior amateur actors throughout the land' ('The Times', 11 Sept 1951). Lord Howard de Walden served as president, Harley Granville-Barker as chairman of council, and Whitworth as honorary secretary. It held its first annual conference in the summer of 1919 at Stratford upon Avon, where one resolution pledged members to help the development of 'acting, the drama, and of the Theatre as forces in the life of the nation', and another called for 'a National Theatre policy adequate to the needs of the people'. These phrases might speak for Whitworth's career: his constant and ardent advocacy of the theatre as a power in life. Rapidly the Drama League burgeoned. In 1928 Whitworth at last left publishing to give his whole time to the league, as a practical achievement, and to the national theatre, as a hoped-for vision. He was able to see in the league's growth -- with its many affiliated societies, its 100,000 actors and playgoers, its training department, its National Festival of Community Drama, and its library (eventually the largest in the world devoted solely to the theatre) -- a 'new and extraordinary outbreak of dramatic energy'. His steady insistence on the value of drama in education prepared the way for the appointment of full-time professional county drama advisers. 
No man was better fitted than Whitworth, selfless, persuasive, and much loved, to battle for causes he admired. As director of the league and as honorary secretary of the Shakespeare Memorial National Theatre Committee (1930-51), he used his talents as speaker and organizer. Before giving his entire time to these tasks, he acted as drama critic of 'John O'London's Weekly' (1922) and the 'Christian Science Monitor' (1923); and in 1924-5 he organized the theatre section of the British Empire Exhibition at Wembley. From 1919 until 1948 he edited the league's magazine, 'Drama'. 
At a public tribute to him in 1934, the year before the league's move from Adelphi Terrace to Fitzroy Square, Shaw described Whitworth as 'one of the most important people in the theatre today'. When war again intervened, Whitworth did not cease from crusading. It was owing to his persistence and vision that the league's civic theatre scheme -- first suggested in 1942 -- was approved, and that in 1948 the insertion of a clause (132) in the 'Local Government Act' enabled municipal authorities to spend up to the value of a 6died rate on providing all kinds of entertainment, including the theatre. Whitworth had a final reward when the queen laid the foundation stone (later moved) of the National Theatre upon the South Bank site, London, in July 1951: it was just two months before his death at the Acland Nursing Home, Oxford, on 9 September 1951. He had retired from the directorship of the Drama League during 1948, a retirement he described as 'a sort of minor death', and had become instead chairman of its council. 
Whitworth, a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature, translated 'The Legend of Tyl Ulenspiegel' (1918); and wrote a novel, 'The Bells of Paradise' (1918), and two notable plays, 'Father Noah' (1918) and 'Haunted Houses' (1934). He was also the author of works on his special subject, 'The Theatre of my Heart' (1930; revised 1938) and 'The Making of a National Theatre' (1951), as well as 'The Civic Theatre Scheme' (1942). He served on the executive committee of governors of the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre and the committee of the Carnegie United Kingdom Trust. In 1947 he was appointed CBE. 
Whitworth was survived by his wife, Phyllis Whitworth, who died in 1964. A tireless worker on behalf of the league, she also directed, and managed, between 1924 and 1931, the Three Hundred Club for staging plays of merit likely at first to have a limited public. 


@@@@@


doc= 36883


Whitworth, William Allen (1840-1905), mathematician and Church of England clergyman, was born at Bank House, Runcorn, on 1 February 1840, the eldest son in the family of four sons and two daughters of William Whitworth, at one time schoolmaster at Runcorn and incumbent of Little Leigh, Cheshire, and of Widnes, Lancashire, and his wife, Susanna, daughter of George Coyne of Kilbeggan, co. Westmeath, and first cousin to Joseph Stirling Coyne. 
After education at Sandicroft School, Northwich (1851-7), Whitworth proceeded to St John's College, Cambridge, in October 1858, and in 1861 was elected a scholar. In 1862 he graduated BA as sixteenth wrangler, proceeding MA in 1865, and he was fellow of his college from 1867 to 1884. He was successively chief mathematics master at Portarlington School and Rossall School and professor of mathematics at Queen's College, Liverpool. 
From early youth Whitworth showed a mathematical promise and originality to which his place in the tripos scarcely did justice. While an undergraduate he was principal editor with Charles Taylor and others of the 'Oxford, Cambridge, and Dublin Messenger of Mathematics', started at Cambridge in November 1861; Whitworth remained one of the editors until 1880, and was a frequent contributor. His earliest article, 'The equiangular spiral, its chief properties proved geometrically' ('Messenger', 1, 1861, 5-13), was translated into French in the 'Nouvelles Annales de Mathematiques' (1869). An important treatise, 'Trilinear Co-ordinates and other Methods of Modern Analytical Geometry of Two Dimensions', was issued at Cambridge in 1866. Whitworth's best-known mathematical work, 'Choice and Chance, an Elementary Treatise on Permutations, Combinations and Probability' (1867, 5th edn, 1901), was elaborated from lectures delivered to women at Queen's College, Liverpool, in 1866. A model of clear and simple exposition, it presented a very ample collection of problems on probability and kindred subjects, solutions to which were provided in 'DCC Exercises' (1897). 
Whitworth was ordained deacon in 1865 and priest in 1866, and won high repute in his clerical career. He was curate at St Anne's, Birkenhead (1865), and of St Luke's, Liverpool (1866-70), and perpetual curate of Christ Church, Liverpool (1870-75). His success with parochial missions in Liverpool led to preferments in London. He was vicar of St John the Evangelist, Hammersmith (1875-86), and from November 1886 until his death, vicar of All Saints, Margaret Street, Marylebone, one of the early strongholds of the Tractarian movement. He also held from 1885 a sinecure college living in the diocese of Bangor, and was in 1891-2 commissary of the South African diocese of Bloemfontein. Whitworth was select preacher at Cambridge five times and Hulsean lecturer there in 1903-4, and was made a prebendary of St Paul's Cathedral in 1900. On 10 June 1885 he married Sarah Louisa, only daughter of Timms Hervey Elwes; the couple had four sons, all graduates of Trinity College, Cambridge. 
Whitworth, though he had been brought up an evangelical, was influenced at Cambridge by the scholarship of J. B. Lightfoot and B. F. Westcott, and he studied later the German rationalizing school of theology. He was considered a 'vigorous and original preacher' ('The Times', 9). His sympathies lay mainly with the high-church party, and in 1875 he joined the English Church Union. In the ritual controversy of 1898-9 he took a moderate position, differing from the union over its opposition to the archbishops' condemnation of the use of incense. He contended that the obsolete canon law should not be allowed 'to supersede the canonical utterance of the living voice of the Church of England'. His ecclesiastical publications included an almanac of dates of Easter (1882), a description of All Saints Church, Margaret Street (1891); 'Worship in the Christian Church' (1899), and two posthumous volumes of sermons (1906, 1908). 
Whitworth died on 12 March 1905 at Home Hospital, 16 Fitzroy Square, after a serious operation on 28 February and was buried at Brookwood, on 16 March, in ground belonging to St Alban the Martyr, Holborn. His wife survived him. There is a slab to his memory in the floor of All Saints Church, Margaret Street. 


@@@@@


doc= 36884


Whymper, Edward (1840-1911), mountaineer and wood-engraver, was born on 27 April 1840 at Lambeth Terrace, Kennington Road, London, the second of the eleven children of Josiah Wood Whymper (1813-1903), wood-engraver, and his first wife, Elizabeth Whitworth Claridge (1819-1859). He was educated at Clarendon House School until the age of fourteen, when he was apprenticed as a draughtsman engraver in his father's firm. His diary from 1855 to 1859 records his avid interest in public affairs and his frequent attendance at Baptist chapel and cricket matches at the Oval. After an early desire to go to sea or become an engineer Whymper developed an intense but unfocused ambition: 'I had ideas floating in my head that I should one day turn out some great person, be 'the' great person of 'my' day, perhaps Prime Minister, or at least a millionaire' (Smythe, 50). In 1859 the family moved to Town House, Haslemere, Surrey. 
In 1860 the publisher William Longman commissioned Whymper to make illustrations of the Alps, for which he visited Saas Fee, Zermatt, Chamonix, and the Dauphine. Whymper later claimed that he had first gone to the Alps 'to acquire such a knowledge of snow and ice as might perhaps procure me a post upon some future English Arctic Expedition' ('Alpine Journal', 6, 1873, 161). In 1861 he climbed Mont Pelvoux and was elected to the Alpine Club. Over the following summers he made a series of brilliant climbs and many first ascents, including the Barre des Ecrins in the Dauphine, the Aiguille Verte, and the Matterhorn. 
Whymper centred his climbing ambitions on the Matterhorn, and from 1861 to 1865 he made seven attempts from the Italian side, sometimes in partnership with his rivals John Tyndall and Jean-Antoine Carrel, a guide from Val Tournanche. On 14 July 1865 he climbed the Matterhorn from Zermatt with Lord Francis Douglas, brother and heir presumptive to the marquess of Queensberry, Charles Hudson, vicar of Skillington in Lincolnshire, Douglas Hadow, a former student of Hudson's, Michel Croz, a Chamonix guide, and two Zermatt guides named Peter Taugwalder, a father and son. On the descent Hadow, an inexperienced climber, slipped and fell, knocking over Croz and dragging Hudson and Douglas off their feet. Whymper and the Taugwalders braced themselves and the rope tying them to the others broke, plunging the other four climbers 4000 feet to the glacier below. An inquest determined that the rope that broke was a spare piece of inferior quality, which had been improperly used. 
Although Whymper was the subject of much personal criticism, his account of the accident helped to quell an acrimonious debate about mountaineering in 1865 and became the dramatic climax of his 'Scrambles amongst the Alps in the Years 1860-69' (1871), one of the most popular mountaineering books ever written. 'The book is entirely personal, all ego', Whymper told a friend in 1869. 'It will have a hundred illustrations -- the best your humble servant knows how to produce, and they will contain enough sensations for half a dozen volumes' (Smythe, 225). The book is written with simplicity, directness, and verve, and is profusely illustrated with his woodcuts. 
Whymper opened an office for his engraving business on the Strand, London, in 1865 and contributed illustrations to numerous books of travel, such as Samuel Manning's 'Swiss Pictures Drawn with Pen and Pencil' (1866), and to journals, such as the 'Sunday Magazine', 'Leisure Hour', and the 'Illustrated London News'. He also drew many portraits, examples of which appeared in 'British Heroes and Worthies' (1871). With his father he contributed many engravings to Joseph Wolf's 'Wild Animals' (1873-4). He eventually took over his father's business, which maintained offices in both Lambeth Road and Ludgate Hill in the 1890s. In the face of competition from cheap photographic reproductions, however, the business closed in 1900. 
Whymper occasionally interrupted his work as an engraver to continue his interests in Arctic and mountain exploration. In 1867 and 1872 he explored the interior of Greenland and returned with large collections of fossils and botanical specimens. From 1872 to 1874 he served as vice-president of the Alpine Club, and also in 1872 the king of Italy conferred on him the order of St Maurice and St Lazarus. Prevented by political difficulties from climbing in the Himalayas, however, he travelled in 1879-80 to Ecuador with his former Matterhorn rival J. A. Carrel and the latter's cousin Louis Carrel, to test the physiological effects of low pressure at high altitudes and the phenomenon of 'mountain sickness'. They twice climbed Chimborazo (20,498 feet), the highest mountain in Ecuador, and other peaks including Cotopaxi (19,613 feet), an active volcano. Whymper also surveyed the area and collected over 8000 zoological and botanical specimens. Often considered his 'magnum opus', 'Travels among the Great Andes of the Equator' (1891-2) combines a popular account of his ascents with his detailed scientific observations. He also published a pamphlet: 'How to Use an Aneroid Barometer' (1891). In 1892 Whymper received the patron's medal of the Royal Geographical Society. He also designed a new tent for his Ecuador journey that was widely used by mountaineers for many years. 
Whymper returned frequently to the Alps and spent several years in painstaking and thorough research for his guidebooks on Chamonix (1896) and Zermatt (1897), both of which enjoyed considerable commercial success as a result of his skill as a writer and salesman: he travelled literally from hotel to hotel and from bookshop to bookshop through the Alps selling advertising and collecting royalties for the books. From 1896 to 1901 he spent his summers revising his books and his winters lecturing on the Alps and the Andes. 
In 1900 Whymper made a lecture tour of the United States and Canada, and from 1901 to 1909 he returned to the Canadian Rockies periodically to promote tourism on behalf of the Canadian Pacific Railway. With his guides he made ascents and identified walking trails near the route of the railway in the Rockies. In 1905, however, he was injured in a train crash in Canada after which he began to experience memory loss, failing eyesight, and fainting spells. Whymper dropped his aitches throughout his life, but only appears to have been worried about this habit between 1905 and 1908, when he asked a nephew to correct it during his lectures. 
Whymper was involved in a brief love affair with Charlotte Hanbury ['see under 'Hanbury, Elizabeth] that ended with her death in 1900. On 25 April 1906 he married Edith Mary Lewin, forty-five years his junior, the daughter of W. Lewin of Forest Gate, London. They had one daughter, Ethel, before they were divorced in December 1910. 
Although Whymper achieved his early ambition in the ascent of the Matterhorn, the bitter-sweet triumph and personal obloquy he endured after the accident permanently embittered him. An 1865 photograph shows the intense gaze of the powerful and confident climber with arms akimbo in a relaxed and resolute pose. An oil portrait by Lance Calkin, exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1894, again depicts Whymper in his climbing gear, but his crossed arms, receding hairline, furrowed brow, downturned lips, granite jaw, and steely eyes darkened by circles from years of insomnia all suggest the forbidding, taciturn, and often morose demeanour for which he was known in his later years. 
While on a visit to the Alps Whymper died at Chamonix on 16 September 1911; he was buried in the churchyard of the English church in Chamonix four days later. In 1925 a bronze plaque with a likeness of Whymper was unveiled on the facade of the Monte Rosa Hotel in Zermatt. 


@@@@@


doc= 36885


Whymper, Josiah Wood (1813-1903), wood-engraver and watercolour painter, was born on 24 April 1813 at Stoke Green, Ipswich, the second son of Nathaniel Whimper, a brewer and town councillor in Ipswich, and his wife, Elizabeth Orris. The Whimper family was a well-established aristocratic family in Suffolk. After 1840 Josiah adopted what he considered the original spelling of his name, Whymper. His early works are signed 'Whimper Sc', or JW Whimper; later works are signed JW Whymper. He was educated at private schools in Ipswich and then apprenticed to a stonemason because he wished to become a sculptor; a near-fatal accident in the mason's yard terminated his apprenticeship before he was sixteen. When his mother died in 1829 he went to London hoping to join a sculptor's studio, but was dissuaded from this profession by John C. F. Rossi RA. He taught himself to draw and from 1829 studied watercolour painting with W. Collingwood Smith. He and his brother Ebenezzar Whymper set up a wood-engraving business, working in London from premises at 31 Paradise Road, Lambeth. 
Work on orders for shop notices led to commissions from Charles Knight for 'Arabian Nights' Entertainments' (1839), 'Pictorial Shakespeare', and 'Penny Magazine'. Josiah Whymper established himself as an illustrator with an etching of New London Bridge on the occasion of its opening (1831), which made $30 profit. Finding that his brother was too irresponsible to share in the running of the business, he moved to new premises at 20 Canterbury Place, Lambeth, about 1842. In 1837 he married Elizabeth Whitworth Claridge (1819-1859), and they had nine sons and two daughters. He intended his sons to continue his business. 'But shall we finally keep to this -- I think, in fact I 'know' we shall not', he wrote in his diary (Engen, 286). The sons who followed his plan most successfully were Alfred, who was sent to train with the Edinburgh printer R. Clark in 1857, and Frederick, Charles, and Edward Whymper, who were trained by Josiah as draughtsmen on wood. Edward eventually took over the business. Josiah was also master to an impressive succession of apprentices who were to become some of the most prominent draughtsmen of the 'Sixties school': Frederick Walker, Charles Keene, J. W. North, Charles Green, and G. J. Pinwell. His wood-engraving business became one of the most thriving in London, taking on most of the work for John Murray the publishers, for the Religious Tract Society, and the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge. Fine examples of his book illustrations are those in Scott's 'Poetical Works' (Black, 1857); 'Picturesque Europe' (Cassell, 1876-9); some of Murray's editions of Byron's 'Childe Harold' and Schliemann's 'Works'; 190 engravings after Joseph Wolf for C. A. John's 'British Birds in their Haunts' (1862); and twenty engravings after Wolf for 'Life and Habits of Wild Animals' (1873-4), produced with his son Edward. Whymper also engraved for periodicals such as 'Illustrated London News' (1855) and 'Sunday at Home' (1869). He engraved a large number of illustrations by Sir John Gilbert, his friend and constant travelling companion for watercolour sketching: 'Lady of the Lake' (1853) and 'Lay of the Last Minstrel' (1854) are two of the finest examples. Whymper was also a competent draughtsman illustrator, often engraving his own natural history illustrations. These appeared in C. R. Conder's 'Child's History of Jerusalem' (1874), L. J. Jenning's 'Field Paths and Green Lanes' (1877), and C. R. Conder's 'Tent Work in Palestine' (1878). Although his engraving work did not allow him much time to pursue watercolour painting, he exhibited frequently at the New Watercolour Society from 1844, where he was elected associate in 1854 and member in 1857; and also at the Society of British Artists, the Royal Academy, and the Royal Institute of Painters in Oil-Colours. His wife, Elizabeth, died in 1859, and in 1866 he married Emily Hepburn (died 1886), a talented watercolour painter, who exhibited watercolour landscapes at the Royal Academy in 1877-8 and the Royal Institute in 1883-5. She was also a draughtsman illustrator and illustrated 'Beauty in Common Things' (1874). By 1882 Whymper's engraving business at 43 and 45 Lambeth Road was jointly managed with his son Edward and appeared in the directories as J. W. and Edward Whymper, draughtsmen and engravers on wood. From 1859 he had a country house at Haslemere, Surrey, but did not finally retire from his work in London until 1884, when Edward took over the firm, continuing to run it throughout the 1890s. During Josiah's career the Whymper name had established an excellent reputation for high-quality wood-engraving. He died at his home, Town House, Haslemere, on 7 April 1903, and was buried in Haslemere churchyard. Collections of his work are held at the British Museum, the Bodleian Library, Oxford, and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 36886


Whyte, Alexander (1836-1921), United Free Church of Scotland minister, was born at Kirriemuir, Forfarshire, on 13 January 1836. His parents were John Whyte (1812-1871) and Janet Thomson (died 1882); they never married. His father left Kirriemuir and Alexander was brought up by his mother, who earned her living as a weaver and harvester; the boy owed much to her influence, and to that of two local ministers and several keenly intelligent artisans. Abandoning the shoemaking trade, to which he had served his apprenticeship, Whyte taught for four years in village schools. At the age of twenty-two (1858) he matriculated in King's College, Aberdeen, and, supporting himself mainly by teaching evening classes, succeeded in graduating as MA with second-class honours in mental philosophy in 1862. Sir William Duguid Geddes and Alexander Bain were the professors who made the deepest impression on him. During this period he became acquainted with the writings of Thomas Goodwin the elder, and Goodwin's influence persisted to the end of his life. 
Whyte decided to enter the ministry of the Free Church of Scotland, and four years (1862-6) devoted to the study of theology at New College, Edinburgh, enabled him to become a licentiate. After serving as colleague at St John's Free Church, Glasgow (1866-70), he became colleague to Robert Smith Candlish at St George's Free Church, Edinburgh; on Candlish's death in 1873 he became sole minister of the congregation. Alone for the next twenty-two years, and subsequently with the assistance of a colleague, Whyte held this charge until 1916, when he resigned. He married on 9 September 1881 Jane Elizabeth, daughter of George Freeland Barbour, of Bonskeid, Perthshire. His wife was a cultivated person who shared his intellectual interests, such as corresponding with J. H. Newman. They had three sons and three daughters, and a son who died in infancy. In 1898 he was elected moderator of the general assembly, and in 1909 principal of New College, Edinburgh, a position which he held until 1918; he left an interesting record of the content of the classes he taught (Barbour, 647). The freedom of the city of Edinburgh was presented to him in 1910. The union of 1900, whereby the Free Church and the United Presbyterian Church of Scotland were merged into one communion, was warmly advocated and welcomed by him. The movement, which began some years later, for the union of the Church of Scotland and the United Free Church also won his enthusiastic support. He was a strong Liberal -- an admirer of W. E. Gladstone and, later, a friend of Lloyd George. 
A traditionalist himself, Whyte championed the cause of liberty in biblical criticism; a Calvinist in theology, he was catholic in his sympathies with exponents of the devotional life. His preaching was famous even in an age of famous preachers. It was distinguished by a rich imagination, with a streak of humour, genial or grim, running through it; by a passion for righteousness which betrayed him at times into exaggerated confessions and attributions of evil motives; and by a mysticism which expressed itself in rapturous and moving eloquence. 
For twenty years Whyte's evening sermons were published in the 'British Weekly', and he wrote many volumes on biblical subjects, including 'A Commentary on the Shorter Catechism' (1882) and 'Bible Characters' (6 vols., 1896-1902). Between 1892 and 1908 he published books on J. H. Newman, James Fraser, Samuel Rutherford, St Teresa of Avila, Lancelot Andrewes, William Law, Father John of the Greek church, Thomas Shepard, and Thomas Goodwin. He also published 'Bunyan Characters' (4 vols., 1893-1908). 
In 1919 the Whytes moved to 22 Church Row, Hampstead, London, to be near their children. Whyte died there on 6 January 1921 and was buried on 11 January in the Dean cemetery, Edinburgh, his wife surviving him. 
The Whytes' eldest son was 


@@@@@


doc= 36887


Wickham, Edward Charles (1834-1910), dean of Lincoln, eldest son of Edward Wickham (1801-1862), at one time vicar of Preston Candover, Hampshire, and his second wife, Christiana St Barbe, daughter of C. H. White, rector of Shalden, Hampshire, was born on 7 December 1834 at Eagle House, Brook Green, Hammersmith, Middlesex, where his father then kept a private school of high reputation. Here he received his early education, entering Winchester College as a commoner in January 1848. On 8 July 1850 he was admitted to a place in college, was senior in school in November 1851, and in January 1852 he succeeded to a fellowship at New College, Oxford, beginning his undergraduate career at the age of seventeen. In December 1854 he took a first class in classical moderations, and a second class in 'literae humaniores' in July 1856, winning the chancellor's prize for Latin verse in the same year, and the Latin essay in 1857. He graduated BA in 1857 and proceeded to the degrees of MA in 1859, and of BD and DD in 1894. 
Wickham was ordained deacon in 1857 and priest in 1858, and after two years' experience in teaching sixth book at Winchester he was recalled to Oxford, where he still retained his fellowship, by the offer of a tutorship. Here he took a leading part in the series of reforms which threw New College open to scholars and commoners who had not been educated at Winchester, and he helped to amend the statutes so as to allow tutors and other college officers to retain their fellowships after marriage. In conjunction with his friend Edwin Palmer of Balliol he initiated the system of intercollegiate lectures. Wickham's fine scholarship, his influence with the undergraduates, and his power of preaching made him one of the most successful tutors of his time, and it was largely owing to him that New College was transformed into one of the leading colleges. 
In September 1873 Wickham succeeded Edward White Benson as headmaster of Wellington College, and shortly afterwards, on 27 December 1873, he married Agnes (1842-1931), eldest daughter of William Ewart Gladstone. Wickham's twenty years' tenure of the headmastership attracted differing judgements. His cold manner and unimpressive physique (the duke of Wellington, one of the governors, thought him lacking in height and girth) stood in the way of anything like general popularity among boys or masters, and he was subjected to many personal attacks. A series of crises not of his making, notably two epidemics (1883 and 1891) attributed to defective sanitation, and the appointment of a royal commission (1879-80) in response to complaints from army officers that the school's endowment was not being applied to their benefit, effectively ruined his ambitious schemes for expansion. Although in the shadow of a predecessor of almost legendary reputation, he succeeded in leaving the school better equipped and organized than he found it. A fine classical scholar, he devoted his leisure to an elaborate edition of Horace (2 vols., 1874, 1893). 
In politics Wickham was a strong supporter of the Liberal Party, following his father-in-law with absolute faith and devotion. After Wickham resigned from Wellington in the summer of 1893, Gladstone, ignoring charges of nepotism, appointed him dean of Lincoln in succession to William John Butler in January 1894. He showed great administrative skill in both cathedral and city affairs. His sermons, exquisitely delivered and given in fastidiously chosen language, had been widely appreciated both at New College and Wellington, and he was chosen select preacher before the University of Oxford for four different years. Wickham also took a prominent share in the debates of convocation and was a member of the committee on prayer book revision. He was active in the organization of primary and secondary education in the diocese of Lincoln, and was vice-chairman of the city education committee. Although he defended the Anglican position in the controversies following the 1902 'Education Act', he was conciliatory towards nonconformists, acting as one of the leading spirits on the education settlement committee formed in 1907 to bring nonconformists and churchmen together. 
Wickham died on 18 August 1910 at Sierre in Switzerland, where he had gone with his family for a holiday. He was buried there, Dr Randall Davidson, archbishop of Canterbury, performing the service. He was survived by his wife and two sons and three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 36888


Wiggins, Joseph (1832-1905), Arctic explorer and merchant navy officer, born at Norwich on 3 September 1832, was the son of Joseph Wiggins (died 1843) and his wife, Anne Petty (died 1847). The father, a driver and later proprietor of coaches serving the London-Norwich road, set up in 1838-9 at Bury St Edmunds as innkeeper and coach proprietor but suffered from railway competition. At his death his widow, left with small means, returned with her six sons and three daughters to Norwich, where Joseph was sent to Farnell's School. At the age of fourteen he was apprenticed to his uncle, Joseph Potts, a Sunderland shipowner. He rose rapidly, being master of a ship at twenty-one and subsequently owning cargo vessels. In 1868 he married Annie Potts (died 1904), daughter of his former master, and also became a Board of Trade examiner in navigation and seamanship at Sunderland. 
Wiggins became interested in the possibility of establishing a trade route between western Europe and Siberia, by way of the Arctic seas and the rivers which drain into them. The overland route by sledge and caravan was slow, erratic, and expensive, but the sea route was held to be impracticable owing to ice and fog. He argued that a branch of the warm Atlantic drift ought for part of the year to open up the western entrances to the Kara Sea and (in conjunction with the outflow of the great rivers) a route through the sea itself. He chartered and fitted at his own expense a steamer of 103 tons and sailed from Dundee on 3 June 1874; but after reaching the mouth of the Ob, he was compelled to return owing to lack of provisions, expense, and the attitude of his crew. He reached Dundee on 25 September. Although his route was already used by Norwegian fishermen and had been followed by Russian traders as early as the sixteenth century, his voyage called attention to the possibility of establishing a new commercial route with large vessels. He expounded his results in lectures which won him wide fame and thenceforth occupied him when on shore. 
In 1875, with private financial support, Wiggins fitted out a sloop of 27 tons and reached Vardo on 27 July, where he met the Russian admiral, Glassenov, and others interested in his work. He accompanied Glassenov (who promised to use his influence with the Russian government and merchants) to Archangel, where he obtained maps, rejoined his sloop, and worked her nearly to Kolguyev Island, but thence turned back, the season being spent. Private British and Russian money financed his third Siberian journey, in a steamer of 120 tons carrying an auxiliary launch. He sailed in July 1876, inspected the Kara River late in August, and by 26 September, having found the Ob inaccessible owing to winds and current, was in the estuary of the Yenisey. On 18 October his ship reached the Kureyka (a right-bank tributary of the Yenisey, which it joins close to the Arctic circle), and was there laid up for the winter. The next year he started for Siberia accompanied by Henry Seebohm the ornithologist, but his ship was wrecked shortly after reaching the Kureyka. In 1878 O. J. Cattley, a merchant in St Petersburg, sent Wiggins in command of a trading steamer to the Ob, whence a cargo of produce was successfully brought back. Other vessels performed the same feat; but in 1879-80 the failure of some British and Russian trading expeditions, with which Wiggins declined to be connected (owing to the unsuitability of the vessels), checked public confidence in his schemes, and from 1880 to 1887 he acted as master mariner in other seas. 
In 1887-8 the Phoenix company sent Wiggins in the 273 ton 'Phoenix' up the Yenisey River to Yeniseysk, far above what was supposed to be the head of navigation for so large a ship. He left his brother Robert, who was his chief officer, on the river as agent. Another ship followed in 1888, but this voyage and the company failed. In 1892 Wiggins was the only one of the polar explorers of the Royal Geographical Society to have confidence in Nansen's plan to explore the Arctic in the 'Fram'. 
In 1893 Wiggins, by arrangement with the Russian government, took command of the 'Orestes', a larger vessel than any which had hitherto reached the mouth of the Yenisey, and safely delivered a cargo of rails for the Trans-Siberian Railway. For this voyage he was rewarded by the Russian government. The next year, after convoying two Russian steamers to the Yenisey, he was shipwrecked near Yugor Strait and, with his companions, made a difficult land journey home, when the Royal Geographical Society awarded him the Murchison medal. In 1895 he made his last voyage to the Yenisey, and in 1896 he failed to get beyond Vardo, which involved him in some undeserved censure. From 1897 to 1903 he sailed elsewhere. 
In 1905 the Russo-Japanese War brought famine to Siberia. The Russian government planned a large relief expedition by sea. Wiggins took as active a part in the organization of the expedition as failing health permitted, but when the ships sailed he was too ill to accompany them. He died childless at his home, Rossett View, Rossett Drive, Pannal, Harrogate, Yorkshire, on 13 September 1905, and was buried at Bishopwearmouth. 


@@@@@


doc= 36889


Wigham, John Richardson (1829-1906), engineer and inventor of gas lighting for lighthouses, was born on 15 January 1829 at 5 South Gray Street, Edinburgh, the youngest of three sons (there were three daughters) of John Wigham ('c'.1784-1864), shawl manufacturer, of Edinburgh and his wife, Jane Richardson (died 1830); his father was a member of the Society of Friends. Eliza Wigham, the women's activist, was his sister. Eliza Wigham was his elder sister. Following meagre schooling at Edinburgh, he went in 1843 to Dublin, where he continued his studies privately while serving as apprentice to his brother-in-law, Joshua Edmundson, who ran a hardware and manufacturing business. The business subsequently traded as Joshua Edmundson & Co. and then transferred to Wigham's control on the death of Edmundson. 
With Wigham as chairman, Edmundson's Electricity Corporation grew rapidly; a branch was opened in London and taken over by a separate company. In Dublin the firm devoted itself largely to experiments in gas-lighting and Wigham was particularly successful in designing small gasworks suitable for private houses and public institutions. In addition to his private business he held various engineering posts, and as engineer to the Commercial Gas Company of Ireland he designed the gasworks at Kingstown (later Dun Laoghaire). Wigham also played a prominent part in the commercial life of Dublin. He was a director of the Alliance and Dublin Consumers' Gas Company from 1866 until his death; director and vice-chairman of the Dublin United Tramways Company from 1881 to his death; and a member of council (1879), secretary (1881-93), and eventually president (1894-6) of the Dublin chamber of commerce. Wigham was married, on 4 August 1858, to Mary, daughter of Jonathan Pim of Dublin, MP for Dublin City from 1865 to 1874; they had six sons and four daughters, of whom three sons and three daughters survived him. 
Wigham is remembered mainly as the inventor of important applications of gas to lighthouse illumination. In 1863 he was granted a small sum for experiments by the commissioners of Irish lights, and in 1865 a system invented by him was installed at the Baily lighthouse on Howth Head near Dublin. The gas was manufactured on the spot and the system's main advantages were that it dispensed with the lamp glass essential to the four-wick Fresnel oil lamp of 240 candle-power, in use from 1835, and that the power of the light could readily be increased or decreased: a 28 jet flame, which gave sufficient light for clear weather, could be increased successively to a 48 jet, 68 jet, 88 jet, or 108 jet flame -- 2923 candle-power -- on foggy nights. Although highly valued in Ireland, the system was condemned on trial by Thomas Stevenson, engineer to the Scottish northern lights board. It was made more effective, however, by Wigham's invention of a powerful composite burner in 1868, and in 1869 its further employment in Ireland was strongly advocated by John Tyndall in his capacity as scientific adviser to Trinity House and the Board of Trade. Wigham's ingenuity also acted as a powerful stimulant to rival patentees and led to various improvements in oil apparatus by Sir James Nicholas Douglass and others. 
In 1871 Wigham invented the first of the many group-flashing arrangements which enabled mariners to distinguish between different lighthouses. His arrangement was adopted at Galley Head, Mew Head, and Tory Island off the Irish coast. In 1872 a triform light of his invention was installed experimentally at the High lighthouse, Happisburgh, Norfolk; but its further adoption in English lighthouses was discouraged by a committee of Trinity House in 1874. The Irish lights board, however, continued to favour Wigham's system, and in 1878 they installed at Galley Head a powerful quadriform light with four tiers of superposed lenses and a 68 jet burner in the focus of each tier. In 1883 the Board of Trade appointed a lighthouse illuminants committee to consider the relative merits of gas, oil, and electric light. For some years Tyndall had felt that Sir James Douglass had used his influence as engineer to Trinity House for the furtherance of his own patents, to the disadvantage of Wigham's system. He now protested that, as rival patentees, Douglass and Wigham ought both to be members of the lighthouse illuminants committee or ought both to be excluded. His objection was overruled, and consequently he resigned his position as scientific adviser to the Board of Trade in March 1883. A bitter controversy followed in the press between Tyndall and Joseph Chamberlain, president of the Board of Trade. On Tyndall's resignation the lighthouse illuminants committee collapsed. A new committee, of which Douglass was a member, was appointed by Trinity House and, after extensive experiments at South Foreland, it decided to recommend oil and electric light in preference to gas. Wigham protested against his lack of opportunity to demonstrate the advantages of his system, and claimed that his rival Douglass, who had condemned in official reports Wigham's invention of superposed lenses, afterwards employed them for the improvement of his own oil apparatus. Wigham eventually received $2500 from the Board of Trade as compensation for the infringement of his patent. Among Wigham's other inventions were a device for fog signals; a gas-driven siren; a 'sky-flashing arrangement' and a 'continuous pulsating light' in connection with his system of gas illumination for lighthouses; and a lighted buoy or beacon in which, using oil as the illuminant, he obtained, by imparting motion to the wick, a continuous light needing attention only once in thirty days. 
Wigham was a member of the Royal Dublin Society and of the Royal Irish Academy, an associate member of the Institution of Civil Engineers, and a fellow of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers. He read papers on gas as a lighthouse illuminant and related subjects before the Society of Arts, the British Association, the Royal Dublin Society, and the Shipmasters' Society. In politics he was a unionist and a member of the Irish Unionist Alliance, and he spoke at public meetings against Gladstone's 'Home Rule Bill'. He was also one of the leaders of the temperance movement in Dublin. As a member of the Society of Friends (the Quakers) he twice refused knighthood in 1887. He died on 16 November 1906 at his residence, Albany House, Monkstown, co. Dublin, after four years of ill health. He was buried on 19 November in the Quaker burial-ground, Temple Hill, Blackrock, co. Dublin. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 36890


Wigram, Clive, first Baron Wigram (1873-1960), soldier and courtier, was born on 5 July 1873 at Madras, the eldest of three sons of Herbert Wigram (1842-1914), of the Madras civil service, and Amy Augusta (died 1935), daughter of Lieutenant-General John Wood Rideout, of the Indian army. He was educated at Winchester College (1886-91), where he excelled at games, most notably cricket, and at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich (1891-3). In 1893 he was commissioned in the Royal Artillery and two years later he was appointed aide-de-camp to Lord Elgin, viceroy of India. He served with the 18th Bengal lancers in the Tirah campaign on the north-west frontier in 1897-8, and in 1900 joined Kitchener's horse in the South African War, where he was mentioned in dispatches. Life in a vice-regal establishment suited Wigram and he returned to India as aide-de-camp to Lord Curzon, who succeeded Elgin as viceroy. When the prince of Wales (later George V) visited India in 1905 his chief of staff, Sir Walter Lawrence, invited Wigram to be his assistant. Wigram became military secretary to the commander-in-chief at Aldershot in 1908 but, upon the accession of George V in 1910, he exchanged a promising military career to be equerry and assistant private secretary to the king. Sporty and down-to-earth, with chauvinist views typical of many army officers, Wigram suited the king's taste for simplicity and directness in his aides. Tall, handsome, and athletic, he was the model of the soldierly courtier. 
George V's reign was marked by war, industrial unrest, and the advent of socialism and universal suffrage, all of which the king took to be a danger to the crown. Given the many crises of the reign the office of the private secretary became increasingly important to the monarchy. For most of his career in royal service Wigram served as assistant to the sagacious Arthur Bigge, Lord Stamfordham, from whom he learned the niceties of the king's constitutional position and the need to be well informed and trusted by all parties. At the end of the First World War social malaise and the drift of democratic politics galvanized the monarchy into defending its position more vigorously. The king's advisers felt obliged to consider a more coherent strategy of self-defence than palace precedent provided. In view of the constitutional constraints this meant forging bonds of affection at home and across the empire. Wigram was among the palace reformers and once described those who opposed any changes in the dignity and status of the sovereign as 'Palace Troglodytes' (Rose, 227). A master of propaganda and imaginative gestures, he wanted greater publicity given to imperial tours and welfare missions to working-class communities. He called for a full-time press officer, who was appointed in 1918, and urged the royal family to widen its social circle. Behind the scenes he monitored expressions of republicanism in the Labour Party and, through contacts outside government, kept the king informed of Communist Party activity. He was created KCVO in 1928, later promoted GCVO. 
Wigram was appointed private secretary to the king after Stamfordham's death in 1931, and the following year was sworn of the privy council. He lacked Stamfordham's intellectual gifts or skill as a draftsman, but beneath the bluff exterior of an Indian army colonel there was shrewdness and purpose. He knew the king's mind and could draw on a wide circle of friends and contacts for advice. Within months of his appointment as private secretary, in the depths of the depression, he had to face a political crisis of the first magnitude. Personally, he favoured setting up an emergency government and supported the king's decision to intervene to that end. The use of the royal prerogative led to the formation of the National Government, with Ramsay MacDonald at its head. Though he acted on advice the king's role was contentious, not least because it led to a division in the Labour Party. At the time several Labour MPs accused him of political meddling. 
George V was highly sensitive to what he felt to be encroachments on his prerogative and threats to the integrity of the empire, and in the final years of his reign Wigram had to deal with, among other issues, the appointment of governors-general, the rise of Indian nationalism, and German rearmament. More agreeably he oversaw the festivities surrounding the king's silver jubilee in 1935, an event which he described as 'a dream -- a miracle arranged by Providence' (Royal Archives, GV P633/324). In jubilee year he was made a peer (25 June) and appointed keeper of the privy purse. Within months of the celebrations his duties extended to nursing the ailing king. It was to Wigram that George V spoke his dying words, asking about the state of the empire. 
Wigram stayed on as private secretary, to settle in the new king, but their relations were uneasy from the start. Edward VIII regarded Wigram as a courtier of the old school, which did not recommend him. For his part Wigram was all too familiar with the king's failings and soon came to believe that his state of mind bordered on insanity. He left Edward's service in July 1936 but was recalled by George VI, albeit briefly, after the abdication and appointed permanent lord-in-waiting and extra equerry. During his career as a palace official he also served as deputy constable and lieutenant-governor of Windsor Castle, and keeper of the Royal Archives. For many years he and his family lived in the Norman tower at Windsor. A keen gardener and fellow of the Royal Horticultural Society, he converted the moat garden into a botanical showpiece. He retired to London in 1945. 
During and after his long period in royal service Wigram was active in charitable and educational institutions, where his connections and buoyant humour were much valued. He was a fellow of his old school, Winchester, and a governor of Wellington College and Haileybury College. He served as president of the Westminster Hospital, vice-president of King Edward VII's Sanatorium, vice-president of the National Association of Boys Clubs, and was on the board of King George's Jubilee Trust. On 5 December 1912 he had married Nora Mary, only daughter of Colonel Sir Neville Chamberlain. They had two sons, the younger of whom was killed in action in 1943, and a daughter. Lady Wigram died on 5 January 1956 and their daughter two years later. Thereafter Wigram's mental and physical powers declined. He died in London on 3 September 1960 and was succeeded in his title by his surviving son, George Neville Clive. It would be easy to underrate his career in royal service. Not only was most of it spent in the shadow of Lord Stamfordham but the discretion and secrecy surrounding court life cloaked the machinations behind the throne. But in an era in which the monarchy felt threatened Wigram, despite his conservatism, was among the principal architects of its transformation into an institution more in tune with social democracy. There is a tablet to his memory in the north choir aisle of St George's Chapel, Windsor. 


@@@@@


doc= 36891


Wigram, Woolmore (1831-1907), Church of England clergyman and campanologist, was the fifth son of ten children of Money Wigram (1790-1873), director of the Bank of England, of Manor Place, Much Hadham, Hertfordshire, and Mary, daughter of Charles Hampden Turner, of Rooks Nest, Godstone, Surrey. He was born on 29 October 1831 at Devonshire Place, London. His father's mother was Eleanor Wigram, Lady Wigram. His father was the elder brother of Sir James Wigram, Joseph Cotton Wigram, and George Vicesimus Wigram. Of his own brothers, Charles Hampden (1826-1903) was knighted in 1902, and Clifford (1828-1898) became director of the Bank of England. Wigram entered Rugby School in August 1844, and in 1850 matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1854 and proceeded MA in 1858. Among his close friends at Cambridge was John Gott (1830-1906), afterwards bishop of Truro. After taking holy orders in 1855, Wigram was curate of Hampstead (1855-64), vicar of Brent Pelham with Furneaux Pelham, Hertfordshire (1864-76), and rector of St Andrew's with St Nicholas's and St Mary's, Hertford (1876-97). From 1877 to 1897 he was rural dean of Hertford, and in 1886 was made honorary canon of St Albans, where he lived from 1898 until his death, and was an active member of the chapter. A high-churchman, Wigram was for a long time a member of the English Church Union. He married on 23 July 1863 Harriet Mary (died 1927), daughter of the Revd Thomas Ainger of Hampstead; they had four sons, including William Ainger Wigram, who became an advocate of the Assyrian church and people, and three daughters. 
Wigram was an enthusiastic campanologist, and became an authority on the subject. A series of articles in 'Church Bells' was collected in 1871 under the title 'Change-Ringing Disentangled and Management of Towers'. 
In his earlier days Wigram was an enthusiastic alpine climber. He was a member of the Alpine Club from 1858 to 1868. His most memorable feat was the first successful ascent, in the company of Thomas Stewart Kennedy (with Jean Baptiste Croz and Josef Marie Kronig as guides), of La Dent Blanche, near Zermatt, on 18 July 1862. 
Wigram died from the effects of influenza at his home, Watling House, Watling Street, St Albans, on 19 January 1907, and was buried in St Stephen's churchyard there. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 36892


Wilberforce, Ernest Roland (1840-1907), bishop of Chichester, was born on 22 January 1840 at his father's rectory at Brighstone in the Isle of Wight, the third son of Samuel Wilberforce (1805-1873), bishop successively of Oxford and Winchester, and his wife, Emily Sargent (1807-1841). His childhood was spent at Lavington and Cuddesdon, where he acquired his lifelong love of country sports. From 1854 he attended Harrow School, but left in 1857 without attaining any great distinction. After two years with a private tutor he matriculated at Exeter College, Oxford, in May 1859. His Oxford career was noted more for his prowess as an oarsman than for academic work, and he graduated BA in 1864 with an honorary fourth. He proceeded MA in 1867, and was awarded his BD and DD in 1882. 
Wilberforce's marriage on 23 June 1863 to Frances Mary, third daughter of Sir Charles Anderson, bt (1804-1891), resulted in a more serious attitude to life and work. Upon graduation he went to Cuddesdon College, then under Edward King, to train for the ministry. In December 1864 he was ordained deacon by his father, and priest the following year. After brief curacies at Cuddesdon and Lea in Lincolnshire, in 1868 he was presented to the living of Middleton Stoney, near Bicester. However, he resigned in 1870 on account of his wife's poor health; she died from tuberculosis in San Remo in October 1870. In the same year he became domestic chaplain to his father, then bishop of Winchester, and in 1871 was made sub-almoner to Queen Victoria. 
In 1873 Gladstone appointed Wilberforce to the living of Seaforth, a suburb of Liverpool and a traditionally evangelical parish. Here his moderate high-churchmanship led him to introduce a daily service and a weekly celebration of holy communion, but with such tact as to avoid any serious friction with the congregation. On 14 October 1874 he married Emily, only daughter of George Connor, afterwards dean of Windsor. They had three sons and three daughters. While at Seaforth Wilberforce became an active supporter of the temperance movement, he and his wife both taking the pledge in 1876. It was also while at Seaforth that he first became renowned for his strong voice and powerful sermons. 
In 1878 Wilberforce was appointed a residentiary canon of Winchester, and to the wardenship of the Wilberforce Mission, formed and endowed as a memorial to his father. Most of his missionary work was done in Portsmouth and Aldershot, but in 1881 a legal ruling finally removed the mission to the diocese of Rochester. Following a brief missionary journey to Quebec, in 1882 he was offered by Gladstone the new see of Newcastle. 
At the time of his consecration on 25 July 1882 in Durham Cathedral, Wilberforce was the youngest diocesan bishop in the Church of England. The act forming the new diocese has been passed in 1878, but it had taken four years to raise sufficient funds to support a bishop, a measure of the problems faced by Wilberforce in restoring the position of the church in an industrial area long neglected and now dominated by nonconformity. The 1881 census had shown a town of nearly 150,000 persons, but a contemporary local religious census revealed that fewer than 6500 attended Anglican services, a decline even on the 1851 figure. Wilberforce realized that the key to restoration was financial, and his Bishop of Newcastle's Fund raised nearly $250,000 in its first five years. Within ten years eleven new churches and seven new vicarages had been built in the city, and the clergy increased by twenty-eight. At the same time Wilberforce was determined to make his presence felt throughout the diocese, travelling great distances in rural Northumberland to perform confirmations. In the first four years of his episcopate he confirmed twice as many candidates as had been confirmed in the four years before his arrival. And despite early opposition from local nonconformists, his tactful manner of proceeding gradually won many of them to his support. In many ways Wilberforce's work in Newcastle is comparable to that of W. F. Hook in Leeds in the previous generation. 
By the mid-1890s Wilberforce's unrelenting work was starting to affect his health, and in 1895 he moved to become bishop of Chichester. However, here he soon found himself faced with a different set of problems. A number of the churches on the Sussex coast had become notorious for their ritualistic practices. Starting in 1898 the evangelicals launched a fresh campaign against ritualism, resulting in the Lambeth judgment against the use of incense and processional lights in the following year. Wilberforce persuaded five of the nine ritualist incumbents in his diocese to comply with the ruling, and attempted to avoid prosecution in the other cases. While personally unmoved by ritual practices, he was aware that legal proceedings and imprisonment following the 1874 'Public Worship Regulation Act' had largely failed to achieve anything but a legacy of bitterness and division, which he hoped to avoid. In 1905 he appeared as a witness before the royal commission on the state of ecclesiastical discipline, and in his evidence both criticized what he saw as the prejudiced and inaccurate claims of the evangelicals and defended the work of the ritualist clergy in his diocese. 
In 1896 Wilberforce's work for the temperance movement was recognized when he became chairman of the Church of England Temperance Society. In 1904, despite his age, he joined the 'mission of help' to southern Africa to aid in the process of reconciliation in the aftermath of the South African War. Following a short illness Wilberforce died on 9 September 1907 at Bembridge in the Isle of Wight. He was buried at West Hampnett, near Chichester, on 14 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 36893


Wilbraham, Sir Philip Wilbraham Baker, sixth baronet (1875-1957), ecclesiastical lawyer and administrator, was born at Rode Hall, Scholar Green, Cheshire, on 17 September 1875, the younger and only surviving son of Sir George Barrington Baker, fifth baronet (1845-1912), who took the additional surname of Wilbraham by royal licence in 1900, and his wife, Katharine Frances (died 1945), only child of General Sir Richard Wilbraham. A descendant of Sir George Baker, the physician who demonstrated the possibility of poisoning through the use of leaden vessels, notably in the manufacture of Devonshire cider, Wilbraham succeeded his father in the baronetcy in 1912. He was educated at Harrow School, where he was a scholar and head of the school, and at Balliol College, Oxford, where he was an exhibitioner and obtained a first in classical moderations (1896) and second classes in 'literae humaniores' (1898) and jurisprudence (1899). Standing as a candidate in law he was elected a fellow of All Souls College in 1899 but having married in the meantime was unable to renew his fellowship when it expired in 1906; he retained a deep affection for All Souls throughout his life. On 8 August 1901 he married Joyce Christabel (died 1958), daughter of Sir John Henry Kennaway, third baronet. They had three daughters and one son. 
Entering the chambers of Charles Sargant, Wilbraham was called to the bar by Lincoln's Inn in 1901 and practised, though not with the compulsion which lack of means might have supplied. Confining his interest to ecclesiastical matters, he was appointed chancellor of the diocese of Chester (1913), chancellor and vicar-general of York (1915), and chancellor of the dioceses of Truro (1923), Chelmsford (1928), and Durham (1929). He held these offices until his appointment in 1934 as dean of the arches, master of the faculties, and vicar-general of the province of Canterbury, and auditor of the chancery court of York. These appointments he resigned in 1955 owing to failing health. As dean of the arches Wilbraham became a judge of the highest ecclesiastical court. His reputation is overshadowed among lawyers by that of his immediate predecessor Sir Lewis Dibdin. Few appeals came before him and throughout the war the court was little used. A pre-war case (St Hilary) was heard by deputy since Wilbraham himself had already been consulted as chancellor of the diocese of Truro. The three reported judgments of Wilbraham were Ogbourne St George (1941), St Saviour's Walthamstow (1950), and Lapford (1954). 
Wilbraham was one of the original members of the church assembly and its first secretary (1920); he resigned the secretaryship in 1939 on accepting from the crown the office of first church estates commissioner, remaining, however, an active member of the assembly. His influence on the assembly during its formative years was very great. His co-operation with Lord Hugh Cecil produced the rules for conducting the assembly's business, the one supplying the legal experience and the other knowledge of parliamentary procedure. As member and secretary of the assembly he was also member and secretary of all the committees; he used the power thus given so constructively as to earn everybody's complete trust. It fell to him not only to prepare reports and the preliminary drafts of measures, work he especially enjoyed, but also to expound often complicated clauses to the assembly. This he did in short, careful sentences, impossible to misunderstand and entirely convincing by their reasoned impartiality. In the verbatim record his speeches stand out from others in the debates. His refusal to fight and his advocacy of acceptable compromises counteracted that divisive tendency, induced by suspicions between differing schools of churchmanship, which might have marred the assembly's work. 
To administration, as first church estates commissioner, Wilbraham in 1939 came late. He entered office expecting to carry through amalgamation of the ecclesiastical commissioners and Queen Anne's Bounty, plans for which had already been laid. And as a countryman who owned farmland in Cheshire he especially looked forward to visiting the estates. But with the outbreak of war came instead adaptation of curtailed activities to war conditions and the evacuation of sections of the two offices to different parts of the country. Estate visits proved impracticable and he had to give up his London house. Case work and preparation for the future occupied him. Yet it was a period of greatest happiness; gradualness suited his inclination. He had time to grow into the work and to love it. When the delayed amalgamation matured after the war he was qualified as nobody else (and not even he earlier) to complete it. Trying negotiations were followed by legislation which might easily have become dangerously controversial. The successful launching of the church commissioners in 1948 and their harmonious development over the first five critical years testify to his skill and patience in leadership. He liked to carry everybody with him. The deliberately slower pace he preferred provided a firm foundation for greater advances to follow. Nevertheless, it was in his time that the commissioners' over-large agricultural holdings were reduced and their reinvestment of securities began. He put through the assembly the measure (diocesan stipends funds, 1953) which freed large holdings of trustee stocks for profitable reinvestment. He retired in 1954 and was appointed KBE in the same year. 
By virtue of tenure of the Rode estate Wilbraham was high steward of Congleton from 1912; he was a JP for the county of Cheshire from 1919; he was appointed commissary by the dean and chapter of St Paul's in 1942. Archbishop Lang conferred on him the Lambeth degree of DCL in 1936 and he was elected a bencher of Lincoln's Inn in 1942. He died at his home, Rode Hall, on 11 October 1957; his son Randle John Baker Wilbraham (1906-1980) succeeded in the baronetcy. 
Tall, somewhat forbidding, Wilbraham exhibited the gravity of innate shyness covering natural friendliness. He lost his reserve in the Athenaeum billiard-room. At home at Rode with his wife, who was of the utmost help to him, he was a delightful host. That the church formed the centre of his interests was no accident. He was in the best sense a good churchman, deeply religious, conducting family prayers each morning in the old tradition. 


@@@@@


doc= 36894


Wild, (John Robert) Francis (1873-1939), Antarctic explorer, was born at Skelton in Cleveland, Yorkshire, on 18 April 1873, the son of Benjamin Wild, schoolmaster, of Newcastle upon Tyne, who later kept a school at Eversholt in Bedfordshire. His mother was Mary (Pollie), daughter of Robert Cook, of Sheriff Hutton, Yorkshire. Robert Cook may have been a grandson of Captain James Cook, the circumnavigator, through the latter's son James who, according to the unconfirmed family tradition, was not drowned, as officially reported, but deserted from the Royal Navy and had therefore every inducement to conceal his identity. James abandoned his wife, and a man representing himself to Robert Cook as his father was in later years turned away from his putative son's door. At the age of sixteen Francis or Frank Wild (as he was known) went to sea in the merchant service, which he left as a second officer, transferring to the navy as a rating in 1900. 
In 1901 Wild was accepted as an able seaman volunteer for the 1901-4 National Antarctic Expedition of Robert Falcon Scott in the 'Discovery'. He was a member of Albert Borlase Armitage's sledge party to the high plateau reaching an altitude of 8900 feet, the first high-level journey on the Antarctic plateau, and when a member of the party was lost over an ice-cliff in a blizzard, Wild demonstrated the resilience in the face of adversity that was to be his hallmark, keeping his head and leading the party back to safety. Wild became an experienced sledger on this expedition, gaining the skills that made him so valuable to future explorations. In 1907, on Ernest Shackleton returning to the Antarctic in the 'Nimrod', Wild was invited to join him and was one of the party of four that made the long southern sledge journey across the Ross Barrier, up the Beardmore Glacier, and over the high plateau to the record latitude of 88 degree 23' S, one of the greatest sledge journeys ever made. He showed himself to be an incomparable sledger, wiry, energetic, and buoyant, with great lasting powers and unusual muscular strength. It was this alone that saved him when, on the Beardmore Glacier, he narrowly avoided being dragged into a crevasse by a pony falling to its death. In 1911 Douglas Mawson, a member of Shackleton's 1907-9 expedition, chose Wild as one of the few non-Australasians for his Australian Antarctic Expedition (1911-14) in the 'Aurora'. Wild was placed in charge of a party of eight which occupied the Western Base on the Shackleton Ice Shelf, from which useful sledge journeys were made into Queen Mary Land and to Kaiser Wilhelm Land. This was one of the most daring winterings in Antarctic history, since the base camp was 17 miles from the land, on floating ice. 
Wild's next Antarctic expedition was as Shackleton's second in command on the British Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition, which aimed to cross the continent from the Weddell Sea to the Ross Sea passing the pole 'en route'. Obeying direct orders from the Admiralty, the expedition departed from Plymouth in the 'Endurance' on 8 August 1914, after the outbreak of war in Europe. But after the wreck of the ship by ice pressure in November 1915 the explorers sought a desperate refuge on Elephant Island, whence Shackleton and five others made a boat journey to South Georgia for help. Wild had wanted to share the dangers of this voyage with Shackleton, but the latter relied upon him to lead the party of twenty-two men left on Elephant Island. There they inhabited little more than a sand-spit, 'a precarious foothold between the grim ice-fields and the treacherous, ice-strewn sea' (Shackleton, 'South', 173). Faced with meagre resources Wild kept up morale by constantly watching for the ice to clear and, when it did, confidently proclaiming: 'Roll up your sleeping-bags, boys; the boss may come to-day' (ibid., 191). On 30 August, four months after he had left, and at his fourth attempt, Shackleton returned. To Wild's 'energy, initiative, and resource' Shackleton attributed the survival of all twenty-two of the Elephant Island party: 'He showed wonderful capabilities of leadership and more than justified the absolute confidence I placed in him' (ibid., 190). 
On his return to England Wild was commissioned as temporary lieutenant RNVR early in 1917, and served as a transport officer on the North Russian front. In 1918-19 he wintered in Spitsbergen with a small party in charge of an English coalmining property. He was appointed CBE in the 1920 new year's honours, in recognition of his war service and his role in the 1914-16 Antarctic expedition. An attempt at tobacco planting in Nyasaland was cheerfully abandoned when in 1921 Shackleton prepared a new expedition to the Weddell Sea in the 'Quest'. On the way south Shackleton died suddenly at South Georgia on 5 January 1922 and Wild took over command. A crack in the furnace of the 'Quest' had already threatened the expedition, which was in any case 'a hybrid affair; a strange medley of the quest of lost islands and of the exploration of once-glimpsed ice-infested coasts such as no other polar leader than Shackleton... would have conceived' ('GJ', 239). Under Wild it became an unexciting but worthy exercise in mapping and surveying, although without knowing it he moved within 60 miles of the Antarctic continent. This was Wild's fifth and last expedition. On 24 October 1922 he married Vera Alexandra ('b'. 1881/2), daughter of Theodore Bogosoff, tobacco broker. He had rescued her from Russia where she had been left stranded after the death of her husband, Granville Altman, a Borneo tea planter; there were no children. Wild reluctantly settled in South Africa and resumed for a time his farming, eventually moving to Klerksdorp, Transvaal, where, after a period of ill health, he died of pneumonia, on 20 August 1939. The award of a civil-list pension of $170 in May had come too late to alleviate the penury of his last years. In 1924 Wild was awarded the patron's medal of the Royal Geographical Society for his outstanding services to Antarctic exploration; he had been awarded the society's Back grant in 1916. 


@@@@@


doc= 36895


Wilde, Johannes (1891-1970), art historian, was born in Budapest on 2 June 1891, the sixth and youngest child of Richard Wilde (died 1912), a tailor, and his wife, Rosa Somlyaky (died 1928). His parents were devout Roman Catholics who brought him up in an atmosphere of piety and simplicity. He suffered bereavement with the early death of his father and his elder brother Paul, who had greatly influenced him. Educated at the state 'Gymnasium' in Budapest for eight years, he entered the university there in September 1909 to study art, archaeology, and philosophy under Gyula Pasteiner. The summer term of 1911 was spent at the University of Freiburg im Breisgau, and, with a scholarship from the Hungarian ministry of education, he continued his studies, under Max Dvorak, at the University of Vienna from October 1915 to July 1917. He was awarded a doctorate in philosophy by Vienna University 'summa cum laude' in July 1918 for his thesis 'Die Anfange der italienischen Radierung'. 
Wilde's first publication, in 1910, was a translation into his native Hungarian of Adolf Hildebrand's 'Das Problem der Form in der bildenden Kunst', which is an interesting pointer to his own approach to the visual arts. He was also to gain a reputation as a connoisseur of Hungarian poetry and literature, but his first allegiance was to art, and in August 1914 he became a voluntary assistant at the Museum of Fine Arts in Budapest. After gaining his PhD, he returned to the museum's department of prints and drawings as an assistant keeper under Simon Meller, a post he was to hold until December 1922. Here were laid the foundations of Wilde's interest in connoisseurship and the study of old master drawings. It seems likely that Meller nurtured Wilde's interest in Michelangelo, on whom he had himself published. 
During the short-lived Hungarian Soviet Republic of 1919, Wilde and Frigves (Friedrich) Antal, among others, were directed by the commissar of public education to sequestrate those privately owned works of art regarded as of national importance. However, in September 1920 Wilde was granted six months' study leave to enable him to accept Dvorak's invitation to lecture at Vienna University. This leave was prolonged to allow Wilde to prepare, in collaboration with Karl Swoboda, an edition of the collected works of Dvorak, whose death in February 1921 was a cruel personal loss to Wilde. Too young to succeed Dvorak as professor, Wilde was invited to join the Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna, in 1923; he accepted Austrian citizenship in 1928. 
Despite his demanding museum duties, Wilde continued to lecture and supervise students until the crisis of the 'Anschluss' and his subsequent resignation from the museum for reasons of conscience in November 1938. He had by then decided to leave Austria, impelled largely by fear for the safety of his Hungarian-Jewish wife, Dr Julia Gyarfas (died 1970), also an art historian, whom he had married on 6 February 1930. Assisted by a former pupil, Count Antoine Seilern, the couple left Austria ostensibly to visit an exhibition in Holland in April 1939, afterwards flying to England where they were the guests of Kenneth Clark and his wife at Port Lympne. A few months later, at the outbreak of war with Germany, Wilde went to Aberystwyth to look after Seilern's pictures, stored in the university library. At the director's request, he began to assist in cataloguing the National Gallery pictures which were in store there, together with the Italian drawings from the British Museum. This happy coincidence led to his friendship with A. E. Popham, with whom he was later to collaborate in preparing the published catalogue of Italian fifteenth- and sixteenth-century drawings in the Royal Collection (1949). Popham persuaded the British Museum trustees, in June 1940, to invite Wilde to compile the catalogue of the collection's Michelangelo drawings. But in the same month, during the panic caused by the Nazi offensive in France, Wilde was interned. Despite strong protests from English friends, he was deported to Canada and only survived the rigours of the concentration camp through the care of a fellow detainee, Otto Demus. 
In May 1941 Wilde was freed and allowed to live in Buckinghamshire as the guest of Count Seilern, who had done much to secure his release. He resumed his Michelangelo studies and began teaching at London University. On 12 March 1947 he had become a British subject, and in 1948 he was appointed reader in the history of art at London University and deputy director of the Courtauld Institute of Art. He officially retired in 1958, although he continued to teach part-time until his seventieth birthday. The title of professor was conferred on him in 1950; he was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1951, appointed CBE in 1955, and awarded the Serena medal of the British Academy in 1963. 
Wilde gained an international reputation for his work on the Italian, especially the Venetian, paintings at the Kunsthistorisches Museum, and his many contributions to the problems of dating, style, attribution, and condition appeared in the 1928 Gemaldegalerie catalogue and in the Vienna 'Jahrbuch'. His first major work was the reconstruction of the San Cassiano altarpiece of Antonello da Messina from three surviving fragments in Vienna. One of his most important achievements was the systematic use of X-rays as a tool for discovering not only the physical condition of a picture but also as a guide to the individual artist's creative process. His collaboration with the restorer Sebastian Isepp was crucial to this work, and in 1930 Wilde established at the Kunsthistorisches Museum what was probably the first museum X-ray laboratory for the examination of paintings in Europe. By 1938, more than 1000 X-rays of works in the collection had been made under his supervision. 
The study of Michelangelo's art was, however, the most profound intellectual passion of Wilde's life, and his catalogue of the Michelangelo drawings in the British Museum his greatest achievement. Published in 1953, it was supplemented by Wilde's six lectures on Michelangelo (published posthumously in 1978). These lectures skilfully guide the reader, not only through the complexities of Neoplatonism and traditional Christian theology as they shape the subject matter of Michelangelo's major commissions, but also through the even more complex processes by which Michelangelo evolved them. In 1952 Wilde also worked on the Michelangelo drawings in the Teylers Museum, Haarlem, but his catalogue of these has not survived. His impressive lectures on Venetian painting appeared in 1974. It was one of Wilde's fundamental principles to ask not only why a work of art was conceived in a particular way, but also to try to discover the extent to which its original location determined the artist's formal solution. 
A tall, sparely built man, Wilde had a grave gentle manner that masked a rigorous intellect and an incorruptible spirit. Those who knew him during his years in England remember his strong jaw and aquiline features, kindly grey eyes behind gold-rimmed spectacles, his silver hair brushed back from a broad forehead. His lectures were delivered with a clear deep voice, in an English enriched by the slow soft drawl of Vienna. Students who may at first have felt in awe of him at tutorials quickly learned of his willingness to share knowledge and give wise counsel, although he could be crushingly ironic on occasion. Kenneth Clark rightly described him as the most beloved and influential teacher of art history of his time. Wilde died at his home, 131 Burbage Road, Dulwich, on 13 September 1970, within three months of his wife's death. They had adopted a son, whom they left behind in Vienna in 1939, and who died during the war. Wilde bequeathed a drawing by Rembrandt, his library, and all his manuscripts and notes to the Courtauld Institute. 


@@@@@


doc= 36896


Wilde, William James (1892-1969), boxer, was born on 12 May 1892 at 8 Station Road, Pont-y-gwaith, in the parish of Craig Berth-lwyd, near Tylorstown in south Wales, the son of James Wilde, a coalminer, and his wife, Margaret Ann Evans, a miner's daughter. Known from birth as Jimmy, he was the second child, with an elder sister named Mary Anne and several younger than himself. After being educated at a local council school, he was able to leave school at the age of thirteen by passing a modest examination that gave him a labour certificate, and he went to work in the pits as a boy-helper at the rate of half a crown per day. To add to the family budget and to find the money to buy a few luxuries, such as cigarettes, he engaged in boxing bouts at the fairground booths, for which he received 5's'. if he won. As he was rarely defeated in this hazardous profession after an arduous week in the pits, he soon built up a reputation for himself as a glove fighter under the marquess of Queensberry rules, but also took part in illegal bare-fist contests staged in secret in the Welsh mountains on a Sunday. 
Just before his nineteenth birthday Wilde had become a star performer in Welsh rings and decided to leave the mines and devote his whole time to a boxing career. By now he had married Elizabeth Davies, daughter of Dai Davies, a miner under whom Wilde had served in his apprentice days in the pits. Himself an ardent boxer, Davies had coached Jimmy and taught him the rudiments in the small confines of his bedroom. Wilde's marriage took place at Pont-y-gwaith in 1910 and two sons were subsequently born: David, who later took up boxing, and Verdun, who had no inclination for the sport. Wilde reigned as undisputed flyweight champion of the world from 24 April 1916 until 18 June 1923, and although the weight limit for his class was 8 stone, he never went to scale at more than 6 stone 10 pounds, which meant that he was always called upon to meet opponents far bigger and heavier than himself. Among heavyweights the difference of a stone does not present anything like the handicap that it does among smaller men. Although he did not weigh much, Wilde possessed long legs and arms, with powerful shoulder muscles. He moved fast and punched with devastating power; his defence was confined to unorthodox bobbing and swaying that made him a difficult target to hit with any accuracy. He owed his amazing muscular development to his early days as a miner when, because of his small size, he could squeeze himself into the narrowest seam to hack away at the coal-face with his pickaxe. 
Wilde's last paysheet at the Ferndale no. 8 pit owned by D. Davies & Sons Ltd, dated 1 April 1911, showed him earning the sum of $6 7's'. 9died for a fortnight's work, from which was deducted 1's'. due to his check-weigher and 1's'. 7died for the services of a doctor, leaving a total of $6 5's'. 2died from which he had to pay his 'boy' 2's'. 6died a day. It was not much on which to buy a house and bring up a family -- hence Wilde's decision to become a professional boxer. In the next twelve years he was to earn thousands of pounds with his fistic talent. By 1911 Wilde could claim, without risk of repudiation, that he had taken part in over 800 contests, but from 1911 until his retirement in 1923 his official record shows 138 well-paid bouts, which included seven British or world title contests, and the winning outright of a Lord Lonsdale challenge belt. Seventy-eight of his contests during this period, mostly against bantamweights and featherweights, ended within the scheduled number of rounds, and his phenomenal punching power earned him such colourful names as the Mighty Atom, the Tylorstown Terror, and the Ghost with a Hammer in his Hands. He became a great favourite in the principal boxing arenas throughout the country, especially at the famous National Sporting Club in Covent Garden, London; at the height of his fame his name became a household word. In a triumphant tour of America, from 1919 to 1920, he earned $100,000. He was beaten only four times: once when he fought against doctor's orders, once by a disputed decision, once by an American far heavier than himself, and in the final defence of his world title in New York against the Filipino Pancho Villa, who at twenty-two was Wilde's junior by nine years. For this contest Wilde received his largest purse, of $13,000. 
On returning to Britain, Wilde announced his retirement from active boxing, but he continued to be interested in the sport, both as a manager of boxers and as a promoter of boxing tournaments. He died at Whitchurch Hospital in Cardiff, on 10 March 1969, just two months before his seventy-seventh birthday. The cause of death was given as acute influenza and severe mental abnormality. 
Gilbert Odd', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 36897


Wilding, Anthony Frederick (1883-1915), tennis player, was born on 31 October 1883 at Opawa, near Christchurch, New Zealand, the second of the five children of Frederick Wilding QC (1852-1945) and his wife, Julia Anthony (1854-1936), who had emigrated from England in 1879. Frederick Wilding, an accomplished sportsman, gave his eldest son lessons in rugby, cricket, and lawn tennis, games in which the young schoolboy soon excelled. Anthony Wilding attended Wilson's School at Christchurch, where he captained the football team and began winning tennis tournaments in his teenage years. In 1902 he was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he studied law. He was an able scholar, but made a name for himself on the tennis court. During his first summer term he won the freshmen's lawn tennis tournament; in 1904 he was secretary of the university lawn tennis club; in 1905 he was the club president; and he represented Cambridge University against Oxford in both of these years, when he was their best singles player. 
On graduating from Cambridge in 1905, Wilding read for the bar and was called by the Inner Temple in 1906, before qualifying as barrister and solicitor of the supreme court of New Zealand in 1909. Yet he retained a strong interest in lawn tennis, at which he had made steady progress. From 1903 onwards he won championships in virtually all parts of the tennis world. He was very fond of travelling to compete in tournaments, and sometimes journeyed half-way across Europe on his motorcycle to do so. From 1905 he represented Australasia in the Davis cup, a prize which, alongside Norman Brookes, he captured from Great Britain in 1907 and retained in 1908, 1909, and 1911. Wilding's record at Wimbledon was particularly impressive. In 1910 he won the All England singles championship by defeating the title-holder, A. Wentworth Gore; then he retained the title for the next three years (1911-13), defeating in turn H. Roper Barrett, A. W. Gore, and M. E. McLoughlin in the final. Wilding also won the Wimbledon championship doubles in 1907 (partnered by Brookes), in 1908 and 1910 (partnered by M. J. G. Ritchie), and in 1914 (partnered again by Brookes). 
It was by constant practice and rigorous physical training that Wilding made himself into one of the great players of his era. In his early days he would hit a tennis ball for hours against a wall. He was not regarded as one of the most brilliant or graceful of lawn tennis players, but was reckoned one of the most difficult to beat. His main strengths were concentration, determination, and physical fitness; his main weaknesses were a suspect backhand and somewhat erratic overhead play. His autobiography, 'On the Court and Off' (1912), was published at the height of his tennis fame. By then he was having to concentrate on his business career in Britain and New Zealand. 
In July 1914, at New York, Wilding and Brookes regained the Davis cup for Australasia from the United States. Shortly afterwards the outbreak of the First World War brought a halt to Wilding's tennis heroics. He joined the Royal Marines, and in October 1914 was gazetted second lieutenant at headquarters intelligence corps. His knowledge of European roads was potentially valuable, and he was keen to work with armoured vehicles. He volunteered for an auxiliary armoured squadron in the Royal Naval Air Service, and in March 1915 was posted to France with the rank of lieutenant. In early May 1915 Wilding was promoted captain, and his team was moved to the front line near Neuve Chapelle, France. Just one week later, on 9 May 1915, he was killed when a shell exploded adjacent to the dug-out in which he was sheltering. He was unmarried. He was buried the following day and reinterred after the war at a Rue-des-Berceux military ceremony. 


@@@@@


doc= 36898


Wilkie, Sir David Percival Dalbreck (1882-1938), surgeon, was born at Kirriemuir, Forfarshire, Scotland, on 5 November 1882, the younger son of David Wilkie, jute manufacturer, and his wife, Margaret Lawson Mill. Given his background, the reasons he opted for a medical career are unknown but he proceeded from the Edinburgh Academy (secondary school) to the University of Edinburgh, from which he graduated MB in 1904 and MD in 1908. He became FRCS (Edin.) in 1907 and FRCS (Lond.) in 1918. After graduation he held house appointments in Edinburgh at the Royal Infirmary, the Royal Hospital for Sick Children, and the Chalmers Hospital; thereafter, as was customary for those of his time who had adequate financial resources, he visited surgical clinics at Bonn, Bern, and Vienna. He was appointed to the surgical staff of Leith Hospital in 1910, and in 1912 he became assistant surgeon to the Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh. In 1911 Wilkie married Charlotte Ann Erskine, eldest daughter of James Middleton MD, of Stow, Midlothian; there were no children. 
In Edinburgh, Wilkie joined a formidable surgical organization inspired by Francis Caird, one of the pioneers of abdominal surgery in Scotland and a figure who has lacked recognition in the history of surgery in Edinburgh. Through him Wilkie served, along with others, such as Harold Styles and Sir James Fraser, to create a scientific school of clinical surgery. His researches won him the Victoria jubilee prize of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh, in 1918. Wilkie was an instigator of thought about such matters as the cause and development of acute appendicitis and he made other contributions to abdominal surgery, though his views on such controversial matters as diverticulosis and gall bladder disease have not stood the test of time. His hypothesis was that chronic illness with abdominal symptoms could originate from the gall bladder, from duodenal ulcer, from 'chronic' appendicitis, or from diverticular disease. This unitary concept did not have any basis in anything other than clinical observation of the often co-presence of two or more of these disorders. However, he may have been observing, and correlating with his clinical observations, data about patients who, though diagnosed differently in later years, were nevertheless suffering from what to them were real abdominal conditions. 
As a member of the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, Wilkie joined the navy on the outbreak of the First World War in 1914. He served on the hospital ship 'St Margaret of Scotland' (Portland) and thereafter in Salonika and on the western front as a surgeon to a casualty clearing station. He was appointed OBE in 1919. 
Because of his association with Harold Styles, Wilkie's place in clinical teaching grew so that when the chair of systematic surgery at Edinburgh became vacant in 1924 (on the suicide of Alexis Thomson) he was the obvious successor. Previously such chairs had been largely devoted to the pursuit of clinical practice that would support status rather than science. However, Wilkie negotiated a different contract because he considered that in the past chairs of surgery did not have a high academic content and ('pace' Joseph Lister) had been mainly appointments that could be exploited rather than carry a near or total commitment to research and teaching. Wilkie, having travelled widely on the continent and in the USA, saw the need for compromise between practice and science, and he threw himself with characteristic zeal into his role, which had been the subject of fresh negotiation between him and the university. Nevertheless he retained the right of private practice -- in the late twentieth century called 'maximum part-time' -- which he did not need financially but which he felt formed an element of his status as a surgeon. Even late in his surgical career he would think nothing of going to North Berwick (20 miles from Edinburgh) to remove an appendix for a large fee. His gift of lucid expression served him well as a lecturer, while his cheerful, dignified, yet modest presence won the hearts of his students. 
Wilkie's particular interest, derived from his experiences in the USA, was in developing surgical research, and he gathered around him a group of young surgeons both from the UK and from the USA (the latter were rare in the 1930s) who were proud to be regarded as 'Wilkie's young men'. The surgical research tradition that he fostered was significant in starting a new wave of surgical study in Scotland after the Second World War, under Charles F. W. Illingworth, James Learmonth, William Wilson, and others. Despite Wilkie's other preoccupations -- he was involved in many committees and was a recipient of a number of honorary awards -- he remained primarily concerned with impressing his personal qualities on his associates, and he was regarded by his coevals and his younger colleagues with something akin to reverence. Wilkie's personal characteristics, derived from his liberal principles and his interpretation of religion in its broadest sense, made him someone who could be sympathetic to the troubles, anxieties, and ambitions of others. One of his junior colleagues said that 'his simple almost boyish charm commanded a positive joy in sharing service with him'. He was also actively involved with the army medical advisory board, the British Empire Cancer Campaign, and the Medical Research Council (1933-7). He was knighted in 1936. 
Wilkie did not enjoy uniform good health. He had a severe gastrointestinal haemorrhage in 1937 and some time after this found a mass in his own abdomen. An attempt by his colleague Gordon Gordon-Taylor to remove this gastric cancer was unsuccessful, and Wilkie died in London on 28 August 1938. Much of his estate was gifted to the University of Edinburgh, to continue support for the department of surgery, and he is remembered 'inter alia' by the Wilkie Laboratory, which the university court, in recognition of his services, caused to be so known. 


@@@@@


doc= 36899


Wilkins, Augustus Samuel (1843-1905), classical scholar, was born in Enfield Road, Kingsland, Middlesex, on 20 August 1843, the son of Samuel J. Wilkins, a schoolmaster in Brixton, and his wife, Mary Haslam of Thaxted, Essex. His parents were Congregationalists. After being educated at Bishop's Stortford collegiate school, Wilkins attended the lectures of Henry Malden, professor of Greek, and of F. W. Newman, professor of Latin, at University College, London. He entered St John's College, Cambridge, with an open exhibition in October 1864, becoming a foundation scholar in 1866, and winning college prizes for English essays in 1865 and 1866, and the moral philosophy prizes in 1868. He distinguished himself as a fluent speaker at the union, and was president for Lent term 1868. In the same year he graduated BA as fifth in the first class of the classical tripos. Both as an undergraduate and as a bachelor of arts he won the members' prize for the Latin essay, while his skill as a writer of English was attested by the three university prizes he won -- the Hulsean for 1868, the Burney for 1870, and the Hare for 1873 -- for essays respectively entitled 'Christian and pagan ethics', 'Phoenicia and Israel', and 'National education in Greece'. 
As a nonconformist, Wilkins was legally disqualified for a fellowship. Although the religious disability was cancelled by the 'Tests Act' of 1871, Wilkins remained disqualified by his marriage in 1870 to Charlotte Elizabeth, the second daughter of W. Field of Bishop's Stortford. Moreover, he could not benefit from the removal of this second disability under the statutes of 1882, since these precluded from eligibility anyone who had taken his first degree more than ten years before, as he had. 
In 1868 Wilkins took the MA degree in the University of London, receiving the gold medal for classics, and in the same year was appointed Latin lecturer at Owens College, Manchester, where he was promoted in the following year to the Latin professorship. For eight years he also lectured on comparative philology, and for many more he undertook the classes in 'Greek Testament' criticism. In the University of London he was examiner in classics from 1884 to 1886, and in Latin from 1887 to 1890 and from 1894 to 1899. He was highly successful as a popular lecturer on literary subjects in Manchester and in other large towns of Lancashire. He was of much service to education in Manchester outside Owens College, particularly as chairman of the Lancashire Independent college, and of the council of the High School for Girls. Within Owens College he was a strong supporter of the claims of women to equal educational rights with men, and of the establishment of a theological department in the university. In 1903, after thirty-four years' tenure of the Latin professorship in Manchester, a weakness of the heart compelled him to resign, but he was appointed to the new and lighter office of professor of classical literature. He died on 26 July 1905 at the seaside village of Llandrillo-yn-Rhos, in north Wales, and was buried in the cemetery of Colwyn Bay. 
Wilkins was one of the first classical scholars to introduce to English readers the results of German investigations in scholarship, philology, and ancient history. His chief independent work was his excellent edition of Cicero's 'De oratore' (bks i-iii, 1879-92) which continued to be regularly consulted a century later. A much appreciated critical edition of the text of the whole of Cicero's rhetorical works followed in 1903. He also issued commentaries on Cicero's 'Speeches Against Catiline' (1871), and the speech 'De imperio Gnaei Pompeii' (1879), and on Horace's 'Epistles' (1885); he contributed to Postgate's 'Corpus poetarum Latinorum' a critical text of the 'Thebais' and 'Achilleis' of Statius (1904); and he produced 'Roman Antiquities' (1877) and 'Roman Literature' (1890), as well as a book on Roman education (1905). He contributed important articles to various works of reference, including the ninth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. He joined H. J. Roby in preparing an elementary Latin grammar in 1893. 
Wilkins dedicated his edition of the 'De oratore' to the University of St Andrews, which conferred on him an honorary degree in 1882; he received the same distinction at Dublin in 1892, and took the degree of LittD at Cambridge in 1885. 


@@@@@


doc= 36900


Wilkins, Sir (George) Hubert (1888-1958), polar explorer and climatologist, was born at Mount Bryan East, South Australia, on 31 October 1888, the thirteenth and youngest child of Harry Wilkins, grazier, and his wife, Louisa Smith. Until 1903 he lived and worked on his parents' sheep station where outdoor activities, coupled with his early experience of the devastation caused by drought, laid the foundations for his lifelong interest and work in the natural sciences, climatology, and meteorology. 
From 1903 to 1908, at the Adelaide School of Mines, Wilkins studied electrical and general engineering, extending his studies also to photography and cinematography. In 1908 he left Australia as a ship stowaway and commenced his career of adventure in Algiers. Later he worked in London as a newspaper reporter and cameraman with assignments in many countries, the most interesting being some months in 1912 spent filming the fighting between the Turks and the Bulgarians. Over this general period he found time also to take flying lessons and to experiment in aerial photography. 
The year 1913 saw the beginning of Wilkins's career as a polar explorer with his appointment as photographer to Vilhjalmur Stefansson's Canadian Arctic expedition. Thereafter, until early 1916 when he returned to Australia to enlist, he acquired much experience in the techniques of living, travelling, and working in the Arctic region, adding greatly to his knowledge of the natural sciences. He became convinced that the aeroplane could be used to explore and map the polar regions, and developed a plan to set up a series of permanent weather stations in those regions as part of a worldwide scheme for systematic and co-ordinated weather forecasting. 
With a commission in the Australian Flying Corps, in May 1917 Wilkins was sent to Europe, where he was appointed assistant to the official photographer to the Australian forces, Captain Frank Hurley, of Antarctic fame. His subsequent work as a war photographer in France was of such quality that he rose to the rank of captain, received the MC and bar, and was twice mentioned in dispatches. He was several times wounded and acquired a reputation for daring, courage, and leadership. 
The war over, Wilkins gained further flying experience, first as navigator on an unsuccessful attempt to fly from England to Australia in late 1919, then in British airships. Later he was appointed photographer to a mission sent to the Dardanelles to reconstruct the Gallipoli campaign. On his discharge from the services he immediately took steps to further his own plans for polar exploration. But his scheme for polar weather stations was rejected by the Royal Meteorological Society, while a proposal to fly an airship in the Arctic received no support in either England or Germany. Finally, in 1920-21 he had his first taste of work in the Antarctic as second-in-command of J. L. Cope's ill-fated expedition working in the Graham Land area. This was followed by service as naturalist with Sir Ernest Shackleton in his 'Quest' expedition, and later by a period in Soviet Russia spent surveying and filming the effects of drought and famine -- subjects close to his mind since they reiterated the need for an international weather forecasting service. Next came an expedition (1923-5) for the British Museum through northern Australia, to carry out a biological survey and to collect specimens of the rarer mammals. His book 'Undiscovered Australia' (1928) shows clearly the extent and high quality of his work, the collections made including plants, birds, insects, fish, minerals, fossils, and Aboriginal artefacts, as well as mammals. The expedition also proved Wilkins's skill as a project organizer and leader of men. 
After plans for an Antarctic expedition failed through shortage of funds, Wilkins turned his attention to the Arctic, where he successfully carried out a remarkable programme of pioneering air exploration with the American army pilot Carl Ben Eielson. On one expedition they experienced engine failure during a blizzard and were forced to make a landing on pack ice 550 miles from their point of departure, Point Barrow in Alaska. They endured a fourteen-day walk to safety, during which they drew heavily on the survival experience that Wilkins had gained with Stefansson's Arctic expedition. With stretched finances Wilkins managed somehow to acquire a new plane and in April 1928 the pair set out in a Lockheed Vega on their historic flight from Barrow eastward over the Arctic Ocean, to Spitsbergen. The purposes behind this remarkable exploit (as indicated in his book 'Flying the Arctic', 1928) were to prove the value of the aeroplane for polar exploration; to demonstrate the viability of air passenger routes over polar lands; and to further Wilkins's cherished plan for polar meteorological stations. In June of that year Wilkins was knighted by the king in London. 
Wilkins next revived his plans for aerial exploration in the Antarctic where between 1928 and 1930 he led two expeditions, making, with Eielson, the first flight in that area on 16 November 1928, as well as numerous significant geographical observations and discoveries from the air. Wilkins's reputation as a pioneer of the air age in polar regions was by now firmly established. 
In 1929 Wilkins married a fellow Australian then working in New York as an actress, Suzanne Bennett (Bennett was a stage name), daughter of John Evans, a mining engineer of Victoria, Australia. They had no children. It was a happy marriage in which both parties by mutual agreement pursued their chosen careers. 
In 1931 came Wilkins's famous venture by submarine in Arctic waters, made, as he explained in 'Under the North Pole: the Wilkins-Ellsworth Submarine Expedition' (1931), with the twofold purpose of exploring the region from Spitsbergen westwards via the north pole to the Siberian coast, and experimenting with the craft as a weather station, both above and below the ice and in radio contact with the outside world. For this expedition Wilkins was lent a submarine by the United States navy, which he renamed 'Nautilus'. The submarine suffered engine failure during the Atlantic crossing and eventually left Bergen for the Arctic circle on 5 August. When an attempt was made to dive under the ice, on 22 August, it was discovered that 'Nautilus' had been sabotaged by crew members, who had detached the diving rudders. Wilkins refused to be put off by the unwillingness of his crew to follow and kept the submarine on the edge of the ice pack, conducting useful scientific experiments over previously unexplored seabed. Then, early in September, he achieved his objective by filling the ballast tanks and diving slowly at the ice edge, forcing 'Nautilus' under, where she remained for more than an hour in spite of the terrifying noise of the ice rending on the hull. On 8 September the radio masts were re-erected and Wilkins ended five days of radio silence to communicate to the outside world that the voyage was over. The transmission ended speculation that a disaster had overtaken the expedition. Having failed to reach the North Pole, Wilkins found himself branded a failure and 'pilloried as an irresponsible adventurer': nothing, though, 'could shake his belief in the principles of submarine exploration' (Grierson, 148). It was entirely due to his resolve that 'Nautilus' had become the first vessel ever to operate beneath the Arctic ice pack, and he had led a scientific programme that revealed the potential for future research, achievements that fully justified the endeavour. 
The thirties also saw Wilkins working with the American Lincoln Ellsworth on four expeditions to the Antarctic continent, using the ship 'Wyatt Earp' and aeroplanes. He also played a major role in the search operations for the Soviet aviator Sigismund Levanevsky and his crew, who were lost over the Arctic Ocean in August 1937. Wilkins offered his services to the Soviet government, and was accepted, and spent until March 1938 engaged in the search. At the same time he carried out pioneering work in moonlight flying under winter conditions; a large programme of meteorological work; and constant studies of ice movements from the air. In June 1938 he was received by Stalin in Moscow, as a gesture of Soviet gratitude, and addressed a meeting of the Russian Academy of Sciences. 
When war broke out in 1939 Wilkins, who was in the United States, was rejected by the British and Australian governments for war work, on account of his age. But he was subsequently employed by the American government, first in missions concerned with aircraft manufacture on behalf of the allied powers; and later in missions through the office of strategic services, work which took him to the Middle and Far East. With the entry of America into the war he served from 1942 onwards as a geographer, climatologist, and Arctic adviser with the US quartermaster-general's corps, being particularly concerned with the development of efficient operational and survival techniques and equipment for the Arctic and sub-Arctic regions. After the war he served first with the US Navy office of scientific research (1946-7), then in an advisory capacity with the US weather bureau, later with the Arctic Institute of North America. Finally in 1953 he was appointed geographer to the research and development command, specializing in studies and research connected with human activities in the polar regions. 
Wilkins had the restless mind and outlook of the true pioneer. He possessed tremendous mental and physical drive -- assets which, joined to a vivid imagination and a supreme faith in his purpose, enabled him to overcome all obstacles. He was continually on the move, being irresistibly drawn to new ideas and practical projects. He rarely concerned himself with the more obvious results, implications, and significance of an achievement and consequently the published records of his many projects and expeditions were unfortunately scanty. Some of his findings were later proved to be erroneous, most notably his 'discovery' during the 1928-9 aerial Antarctic expedition that Graham Land was an archipelago and not a peninsula as previously thought. Evidence put before the Royal Geographical Society in London in 1940 proved conclusively that Wilkins was wrong, but he appeared not to be unduly concerned. The error, and Wilkins's lack of interest in its cause, led to him being regarded with some suspicion in scientific circles, but he was primarily a field explorer and trail-blazer, working to a clear if long-range plan, based upon his conviction of the necessity for a worldwide meteorological organization. He was convinced that a direct relationship existed between the meteorology of the polar regions and weather conditions elsewhere and that a full knowledge of polar geography would be required before his plan for polar weather stations could be realized. In these fields he was a pioneer, as he was in polar exploration by air and submarine. 
Wilkins was reticent, self-sufficient, and infinitely adaptable. Interested in everything, he enjoyed the company of his fellows, yet found it easy to live and work among primitive peoples, if only because he shared their intense awareness of nature in all her moods. He had a strong religious background and was actively interested in such matters as telepathy and life after death. Solitary by nature and by no means the ordinary gregarious man, he was yet a good mixer and companion both on and off the job. 
Wilkins was a fellow of the Royal Meteorological Society and of the Royal Geographical Society, which awarded him its patron's medal. Among the many other medals which he received were the Samuel Finley Breese Morse medal from the American Geographical Society, the gold medal of the International League of Aviators, and the Norwegian Air Club's gold medal of honour. He was a companion of the order of St Maurice and St Lazarus of Italy and in 1955 received the honorary degree of DSc from the University of Alaska. 
On 30 November 1958 Wilkins died suddenly in his hotel at Framingham, Massachusetts. He had lived to see the under-ice transits of the Arctic Sea by the American nuclear submarines 'Nautilus' and 'Skate', in August 1958, and it was particularly fitting that the latter vessel should facilitate Wilkins's often expressed wish that his ashes might be scattered near the north pole. In March 1959 'Skate' effected this rite, breaking through the polar ice after a long and hazardous voyage, of the kind Wilkins himself had pioneered. 


@@@@@


doc= 36901


Wilkins, William Henry (1860-1905), biographer, born at Compton Martin, Somerset, on 23 December 1860, was the son of Charles Wilkins, farmer, of Gurney Court, Somerset, and afterwards of Mann's Farm, Mortimer, Berkshire, where Wilkins passed much of his youth. His mother was Mary Ann, 'nee' Keel. After private education, he was employed in a bank at Brighton; he then entered Clare College, Cambridge, in 1884 with a view to taking holy orders, and graduated BA in 1887, proceeding MA in 1899. At the university he developed literary tastes and interested himself in politics. An ardent Conservative, he spoke frequently at the union, of which he was vice-president in 1886. After leaving Cambridge he settled down to a literary career in London. 
For a time Wilkins acted as private secretary to the earl of Dunraven, whose proposals for restricting the immigration of undesirable foreigners Wilkins embodied in 'The Alien Invasion' (1892), with an introduction by R. C. Billing, bishop of Bedford. The 'Aliens Act' of 1905 followed many of its recommendations. Also in 1892 he edited, in conjunction with Hubert Crackanthorpe, whose acquaintance he had made at Cambridge, a short-lived monthly periodical called 'The Albemarle' (nine issues). He next published four novels (two alone and two in collaboration) under the pseudonym De Winton. 'St. Michael's Eve' (1892; 2nd edn, 1894) was a serious society novel. Then followed 'The Forbidden Sacrifice' (1893), 'John Ellicombe's Temptation' (1894; with the Hon. Julia Chetwynd), and 'The Holy Estate: a Study in Morals' (with Captain Francis Alexander Thatcher). With another Cambridge friend, Herbert Vivian, he wrote under his own name 'The Green Bay Tree' (1894), which boldly satirized current Cambridge and political life and passed through five editions. 
Wilkins's best literary work was done in biography. He formed a close acquaintance with the widow of Sir Richard Burton, and after her death wrote 'The Romance of Isabel, Lady Burton' (1897), a sympathetic memoir founded mainly upon Lady Burton's letters and autobiography. Wilkins also edited in 1898, by Lady Burton's direction, a revised and abbreviated version of her 'Life of Sir Richard Burton', and her 'Passion Play at Ober-Ammergau' (1900), as well as Burton's unpublished 'The Jew, the Gypsy, and el Islam' (with preface and brief notes; 1898), and 'Wanderings in Three Continents' (1901). These were poorly edited and Burton's executors did not ask him to undertake further work. Some years later, when Wilkins fell on hard times, Burton manuscripts appeared on the market and were traced back to Wilkins (Lovell, 790). 
Ill health did not deter Wilkins from original work in historical biography which involved foreign travel. Patient industry, an easy style, and good judgement atoned for a limited range of historical knowledge. At Lund University in Sweden he discovered in 1897 the unpublished correspondence between Sophie Dorothea, the consort of George I, and her lover, Count Philip Christopher Konigsmarck, and on that foundation, supported by research in the archives of Hanover and elsewhere, he based 'The Love of an Uncrowned Queen: Queen Sophie Dorothea, Consort of George I', which was well received (2 vols., 1900; rev. edn 1903). Wilkins's 'Caroline the Illustrious: Queen Consort of George II' (2 vols., 1901; new edn, 1904) had little claim to originality. 'A Queen of Tears' (2 vols., 1904), a biography of Caroline Matilda, queen of Denmark and sister of George III of England, embodied researches at Copenhagen and superseded the previous biography by Sir Frederic Charles Lascelles Wraxall. For his last work, 'Mrs. Fitzherbert and George IV' (2 vols., 1905), Wilkins had access, by Edward VII's permission, for the first time to the Fitzherbert papers at Windsor Castle, besides papers belonging to Mrs Fitzherbert's family. In 1901 he edited 'South Africa a Century Ago', valuable letters of Lady Anne Barnard, written from 1797 to 1801 while with her husband at the Cape of Good Hope. Wilkins also published 'Our King and Queen '[Edward VII and Queen Alexandra]': the Story of their Life' (2 vols., 1903), a popular book, copiously illustrated, and he wrote occasionally for periodicals. He died unmarried on 22 December 1905 at his home, 3 Queen Street, Mayfair, London, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 36902


Wilkinson, Ellen Cicely (1891-1947), politician, was born on 8 October 1891 at 41 Coral Street, Ardwick, Chorlton upon Medlock, Manchester, the second daughter and the third among the four children of Richard Wilkinson, a cotton worker and later insurance agent, and his wife, Ellen Wood (died 1916). The family lived in a terrace house with an outside privy, but they were moving up socially: three of the children went to college, two obtaining university degrees. Richard Wilkinson, from an Irish family, had a keen sense of justice and a quick temper, but he was a serious-minded pillar of his Methodist church: he gave up drink, and his wife kept the front doorstep white with regular stoning. Ellen Wilkinson inherited her father's concern for justice, whose socialist outcome reflected her Methodist background, reinforced by knowing that poor medical treatment at her own birth had produced 'a life of agonizing suffering' for her mother: 'all my childhood was dominated by the fact of mother's illness', she later recalled (Wilkinson, 'Myself when Young', 399-400). 
The urge to speak in public came early: as a small child, Ellen and her grandmother, who was caring for her, held Sunday services together during which Ellen would stand on a chair and preach. There was much talk within the home about sermons, as well as many opportunities at religious functions for recitations, debates, and speech-making. Yet Wilkinson was not a tractable child. She resented being ousted as the youngest child by the late advent of her younger brother, just as she resented the special educational privileges boys then enjoyed. Educated at Ardwick higher elementary school and Stretford Road secondary school, she was a self-confident and rebellious pupil whose formal education was supplemented by accompanying her father to lectures on theological subjects, and in later life she continued to attend Methodist chapel whenever possible. 'By the time I was fourteen', she recalled, 'I was reading Haeckel, and Huxley and Darwin with my father' (Wilkinson, 'Myself when Young', 405). She won a pupil teacher bursary which enabled her to attend as a pupil teacher for two and a half days a week at the pupil teachers' centre in Manchester, while spending the other half of the week teaching in elementary schools. 
By winning the Jones history entrance scholarship to Manchester University in 1910, Wilkinson opened herself up to gaining an upper second-class honours degree in history (in 1913), but much more importantly to a host of new and powerful political influences. Not the least among these was that of the one man to whom she ever became engaged, J. T. W. Newbold, the ungainly Quaker who probably first introduced her to Marxism and who strengthened her pacifism. The engagement was broken off in 1913, but there were other socialist influences, most notably the speeches of Mrs Bruce Glasier and the writings of Robert Blatchford. Wilkinson became a Fabian, joined the Independent Labour Party in 1912, and gained experience in the university's debating society which made her a confident, effective speaker and a vivid, fluent writer. 
Thereafter Wilkinson gravitated towards public life through becoming active in a host of pressure groups and reforming organizations. Soapbox oratory, journalistic experience, assiduity in research, broadened contacts within the labour movement -- all this and more now came her way. In 1913 she became an organizer with the (non-violent) National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies in Manchester. In 1915 she became the first national women's organizer for the Amalgamated Union of Co-operative Employees (later the Union of Shop, Distributive and Allied Workers), retaining the post for the rest of her life; from 1919 to 1925 she represented the union on four trade boards. Active in the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom, she opposed the First World War and was a member of the league's mission sent in 1920 to investigate the Black and Tans' activities in Ireland; its report urged an immediate truce, with the release of Irish political prisoners. She joined the Communist Party on its formation in Britain in 1920 and visited Russia in 1921, but in 1923 -- though still a member of the Communist Party -- she stood as an official Labour candidate for Ashton under Lyne, winning more than a quarter of the votes cast in a three-cornered contest but coming bottom of the poll. In the same year, however, she was elected to the Manchester city council, where she remained until 1926. 
In 1924 Wilkinson resigned from the Communist Party, and in three-cornered contests at the general elections of 1924 and 1929 she won Middlesbrough East for Labour. As the only woman Labour MP in the parliament of 1924, elected while still lacking the household qualification that would have qualified her to vote, she was inevitably drawn into speaking up for women. 'I feel sometimes that I am the Member for widows rather than the Member for Middlesbrough', she told MPs on 22 February 1928, when championing the cause of women over seventy who had been excluded from the government's pension scheme ('Hansard 5C', 22 Feb 1928, col. 1646). Like most Labour MPs at this time she championed women's interests without seeing these as distinct from those of the men in their social class, and in the split between the old and new feminism in the mid-1920s she naturally took the interventionist rather than the individualist side: equal opportunity for women to pursue careers seemed less important to her than the need to defend both sexes against economic exploitation. If she had been forced to choose between feminism and socialism, she would have chosen socialism, but so great was the democratic overlap between the two that the choice never presented itself, and she spoke up vigorously for equal franchise in 1928 and for equal pay in 1936. But when in March 1944 she had to choose between backing equal pay and supporting the wartime coalition government, it was the government that she backed in the three confidence votes held on the issue. 
Overriding everything for 'our Ellen', as they called Wilkinson, was a deep and passionate loyalty to her working-class constituents. 'God make us worthy of the men we lead!', Dalton reported her as saying in 1926, a year in which she worked hard for the miners in the general strike ('Political Diary of Hugh Dalton', 40). Striking a firm note of class loyalty, she drew heavily in her parliamentary speeches on local information laced with an amusingly sarcastic wit, and was never slow to 'take up the cudgels', as she put it. Dorothy Elliott recalled that 'she was stirred by individual events and by her love of people. If she heard of oppression, wherever it might be, she had to go and see for herself, and take action'. Within the labour movement 'her intense loyalty to people, her integrity, directness, courage, and the strength of her emotions gave her a great influence' ('DNB'). In her speeches Wilkinson repeatedly tried to bring home to MPs the realities of working-class life -- for example, by enhancing a speech on 29 June 1926 with a display of the rope and chain that Somerset miners used to drag their tubs. Like Winifred Holtby's headmistress Sarah Burton in 'South Riding', partly modelled on her, Wilkinson 'believed in fighting. She had unlimited confidence in the power of the human intelligence and will to achieve order, happiness, health and wisdom' (Holtby, 66). This stance prompted sharp parliamentary exchanges with Conservative women MPs, including Lady Astor, who none the less behind the scenes gave her practical help when she badly needed rest in 1929. It was in that year, in the minority Labour government, that Wilkinson became parliamentary private secretary at the Ministry of Health to Susan Lawrence, whom she admired. 
By the late 1920s Wilkinson had complemented her rapport with the extra-parliamentary labour movement by building up a reputation within the House of Commons. With her red hair and her distinctive appearance -- she was the first woman MP to wear a brightly coloured dress and shingled hair -- she could hardly be ignored. Her slight figure -- she was only 4 feet 10 inches tall -- made her perkiness seem all the more courageous, for she was afraid of nobody. She could immediately warm up a debate with her jauntily irreverent manner, yet at the same time retain parliament's respect because it knew that the respect was mutual. So immersed was she in the life of the house that she published a light-hearted book of parliamentary sketches, 'Peeps at Politicians' (1930), and a detective story, 'Division Bell Mystery' (1932). With her vitality and her disarmingly wry sense of humour, unaccompanied by self-consciousness or vanity, she was a good debater who could spark humour in others. Her lightly sarcastic, sometimes even skittish speeches were ever incredulous that the Conservatives could really think as they did. 
Yet Wilkinson was more than a good constituency MP and lively back-bencher, as Beatrice Webb in February 1927 had already perceived. Predicting 'a big political career' for Wilkinson, Webb saw that she was 'becoming, unknown to herself, moulded for the Front Bench and eventually for office': she would make a good departmental minister, more efficient and popular than those Labour stateswomen Susan Lawrence and Margaret Bondfield (Webb, 'Diaries, 1924-1932', 133). Political commentators were impressed with how carefully Wilkinson prepared her case when speaking in parliament on women's pensions in 1925, and she displayed the same grasp of detail when with all-party support in 1938 she piloted through her 'Hire Purchase Bill', which ensured a fairer deal for the customer. Her commitment and knowledge were nourished by her close identification with her constituencies, Middlesbrough and Jarrow, deeply involved as they were in heavy industry. Local loyalties lay behind her eagerness in the mid-1920s, for instance, to resume trade with Soviet Russia. 'I happen to represent in this House one of the heaviest iron and steel producing areas in the world', she told MPs in 1928: 'I know I do not look like it, but I do' ('Hansard 5C', 1 Mar 1928, col. 734). 
At the general election of 1931 Wilkinson's percentage of the votes cast at Middlesbrough fell only slightly, but this time she faced only a single, Liberal, opponent and so was soundly defeated. 'Just like you middle-class people', was her retort when her Labour colleague Edith Picton-Turbervill said she would abstain in the National Government's confidence debate on 8 September 1931 (Picton-Turbervill, 258). For political and personal reasons, Wilkinson's morale in the early 1930s was low, and for a time she seems to have found consolation in Christian Science, with further help from Lady Astor. Impulsive, emotional, and an erratic judge of character, Wilkinson experienced some difficulties that were of her own making. Her domestic life was disorganized and hurried, complicated greatly by her tendency to over-commit herself to good causes and by difficulty in meeting journalistic deadlines. Things were rendered manageable only by the devoted help of her sister Annie. In 1936 the two sisters bought a cottage in Penn, a bolt-hole which brought much-needed peace and privacy. Wilkinson's personal life was also in difficulties: she asked Beatrice Webb in July 1931 whether a woman in public life should remain celibate if she had found a congenial friend with an uncongenial wife; Webb interpreted this as referring to the Labour MP and journalist, J. F. Horrabin, with whom Wilkinson had a short-lived affair. 
Yet Wilkinson was nothing if not resilient, and in 1935 she became Labour MP for Jarrow in a straight fight. The stage was now set for one of the twentieth century's most famous identifications between MP and constituency. 'Nowadays', she told MPs in November 1938, 'any Member of Parliament for one of the distressed areas has become a kind of glorified commercial traveller for his area' ('Hansard 5C', 28 Nov 1938, col. 157). Two years earlier she had led the famous march from Jarrow to London, herself walking for most of the way, and learning much from her fellow marchers about the realities of poverty. She informed parliament that a Jarrow vicar had told her how the young men there were 'just like eggshells. They looked all right outside, but when they were faced with the infection and cold of the winter they just cracked like eggshells' ('Hansard 5C', 8 July 1936, col. 1269). On 11 November 1936 she begged MPs themselves to learn from the marchers by allowing them to appear at the bar of the house, but in vain. Three years later she educated the nation in the most important of her books, 'The Town that was Murdered', published by the Left Book Club complete with a substantial bibliography. There she used the decline of local shipbuilding to illustrate how monopoly capitalism precluded efficiency in the local iron and steel industry, and rendered irrelevant the type of 'remedy' for Jarrow's poverty and sickness that blamed the conduct of the individual rather than a defective economic system. The remedy lay only through socialism -- that is, through nationalization, tax reform, and planning. 'Jarrow's plight is not a local problem', she wrote, 'it is the symptom of a national evil' (Wilkinson, 'The Town that was Murdered', 283). For a busy back-bencher to write such a well-documented and eloquent book was a formidable achievement. 
Wilkinson had never been narrowly preoccupied with domestic policy, and in 1932 she visited India as part of a delegation from the India League; when contributing to the parliamentary debate on India on 18 April 1940 she felt able to refer to the many Indians who were her friends, including Nehru. She pleaded eloquently against using authoritarian methods against nationalists there, if only because of the bad image of Britain that this would project in the United States. Her main inter-war concern with overseas policy, however, lay closer to home: as early as April 1933 she was urging British feminists to resist Nazi discrimination against women's employment. She opposed fascism in every way open to her: helping refugees, passionately opposing non-intervention in Spain, which she visited, and seeing appeasement in 1938-9 as an outcrop of upper-class self-interest. Her House of Commons attack on Chamberlain's policy on 24 August 1939 was scathing, striking a divisive note which even some of her sympathizers in parliament found distasteful, yet it was one of the most impressive parliamentary speeches on foreign policy made by any woman MP up to that date. 
In May 1940 Wilkinson became parliamentary secretary to the Ministry of Pensions. The office narrowed her debating front within the House of Commons, but her contributions were crisp and well informed. In October 1940 she became joint parliamentary secretary to the Ministry of Home Security, which involved her more deeply in civil defence issues. She was not the sort of minister whose effectiveness with paperwork pleases civil servants, nor was she always even-tempered. But she was good at publicity, and set an example to others with her energy and courage. She spent days and nights in bomb shelters when conditions were at their worst, and was prominent in organizing civil defence and the fire service. Wilkinson, like her party, was being edged away from opposition-mindedness by the war. Her patriotism made her intensely proud of having served in the wartime coalition, and she alone among Labour MPs gave Churchill a sympathetic cheer when he entered the House after his defeat at the general election of 1945. 
Wilkinson never married, but her close relations with Herbert Morrison had probably become more than platonic in the late 1930s. In identifying closely with his political ambitions she made enemies on the left of the Labour Party, and she made more by backing him strongly late in 1943 when he allowed Mosley's release from prison. 'Little Ellen... is apt to be much too publicly emotional abt her Chief', wrote Dalton in his diary on 24 November of a discussion in the national executive committee; she 'makes an impassioned defence, with sobs in her throat, but it really isn't very convincing, except to the purists for civil liberty' ('War Diary', 674). She was still backing Morrison's designs on the leadership in 1945, but she was too passionately committed to make a successful conspirator, and in this she ultimately failed. Once more she was returned for Jarrow in a straight fight, her percentage of the votes cast rising to two-thirds, and she found that her conspiracies against Attlee did not preclude her admission to his cabinet as minister of education. 
Wilkinson's seventeen months in cabinet constituted something of an anticlimax. She was accused later of failing to advance comprehensive schools, but this is doubly anachronistic: the movement for comprehensives could not then compete with the traditional Labour Party policy of providing equal opportunity within the existing educational system; besides, the first priority at a time of post-war reconstruction and scarce resources was inevitably to implement the 'Education Act' (1944). Choosing a few key areas for special effort, she won the resources and provided the necessary drive and organization to ensure free school milk and school meals, smaller classes, extensive school building, a school-leaving age raised to fifteen, and an expansion in the county colleges which would help win acceptance for education up to the age of eighteen. But she had too little time: she was severely handicapped as a minister by poor health. She had neglected her health during the war, and had inherited her father's bronchial asthma. The situation was not helped by her being prone to accidents, especially while driving, which she did in hair-raising fashion. She died at St Mary's Hospital, Paddington, London, on 6 February 1947, of heart failure following an overdose of medication which was almost certainly accidental, while suffering from emphysema with pneumonia and acute bronchitis. Until her death she was living in a flat at Hood House, Dolphin Square, Westminster. 
For Dorothy Elliott the effect of Wilkinson's work 'was rather the sum of a long series of isolated efforts than the working out of any sustained policy' ('DNB'). Beatrice Webb would not have been surprised. Her shrewd analysis of 1927 did not find in Wilkinson a capacity for hard thinking or spiritual insight: she would therefore be only 'an interpreter of other people's thoughts and intentions' (Webb, 'Diaries, 1924-1932', 133). Rare is the politician who is more than this, but at least as rare is the politician who combines a capacity for hard-working and generous-minded protest against injustice with skill at channelling it towards parliamentary institutions, and who then goes on in a ministerial capacity to defend democracy energetically and courageously at its time of greatest danger. 


@@@@@


doc= 36903


Wilkinson, George Howard (1833-1907), Scottish Episcopal bishop of St Andrews, Dunkeld, and Dunblane, was born at Durham on 12 May 1833, the eldest son of George Wilkinson of Oswald House, Durham, and his wife, Mary, youngest child of John Howard of Ripon, Yorkshire. On his father's side he was from a long-established gentry family in co. Durham and Northumberland. Educated at Durham grammar school, Wilkinson went to Brasenose College, Oxford, in October 1851, but in November was elected to a scholarship at Oriel College. He obtained second-class honours in 'literae humaniores', graduated BA in 1855, and proceeded MA in 1859 and DD in 1883. After a year spent in travel he was ordained deacon (1857) and priest (1858) and licensed to the curacy of St Mary Abbots, Kensington, London. On 14 July 1857 he married Caroline Charlotte, daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Benfield des Voeux, fourth son of Charles des Voeux, first baronet. They had three sons and five daughters. 
In 1859 Lady Londonderry, widow of the third marquess, presented Wilkinson to the living of Seaham Harbour, co. Durham, and in 1863 the bishop of Durham, C. T. Baring, appointed him vicar of Bishop Auckland in the same county. Wilkinson had been untouched at Oxford by the Tractarian movement, but during the 1860s he moved away from his moderate evangelicalism which subordinated the sacraments to personal conversion. Under the influence of Canon T. T. Carter and others he espoused Anglo-Catholicism, though he remained ambivalent about aural confession until the 1870s. Difficulties followed with the bishop, who was an evangelical. Wilkinson's health suffered from the strain, and in 1867 he accepted the incumbency of St Peter's, Great Windmill Street, London. In this small and poor parish he began to refine the basic thrusts of his very successful parochial ministry. These included open-air preaching, then a novelty; widespread involvement of laity and particularly women as district visitors responsible to the clergy; and evangelical preaching in the context of Catholic liturgy and ritual. One of the earliest to take up parochial missions, he helped to organize the innovative high-church twelve-day mission to London in 1869. During its progress he accepted the offer by Bishop John Jackson of London of St Peter's, Eaton Square. His incumbency there, beginning in January 1870, was widely known for its success in a parish which included both wealthy, influential parishioners and poorer housing areas. 
Active in church affairs generally, Wilkinson spoke at church congresses; sought in the years of ritual trouble (1870-80) to act as an interpreter between the bishops and the ritualists; and zealously advocated foreign missions, the day of intercession for which owed its establishment to him. In 1877 the bishop of Truro, E. W. Benson, made him an examining chaplain; on 6 September of the same year his wife died. In 1878 he refused to be nominated suffragan bishop for London. Select preacher at Oxford from 1879 to 1881, in 1880 he was elected a proctor in convocation and gave evidence before the royal commission of 1881 on ecclesiastical courts. In 1882 he declined an invitation from the bishop of Durham, J. B. Lightfoot, to become canon missioner. 
In 1883, on Benson's translation to Canterbury, Gladstone appointed Wilkinson to succeed him at Truro, and he was consecrated at St Paul's on 25 April 1883. At Truro he completed the building of the cathedral and saw it consecrated on 3 November 1887, founded a sisterhood, the Community of the Epiphany, and did much for the clergy of poorer benefices. In 1885 he declined the see of Manchester. He took part in the 1888 Lambeth conference. In April 1891, after a mental collapse, he announced his resignation; he was perennially subject to depression caused by over-scrupulosity and an acute sense of sin, which existed in tension with personal vanity. 
Restored by a visit to South Africa, Wilkinson was on 9 February 1893 elected to succeed Charles Wordsworth as bishop of St Andrews, Dunkeld, and Dunblane, and was enthroned in St Ninian's Cathedral, Perth, on 27 April. In 1904 the bishops of the Scottish Episcopal church elected him primus. As a diocesan he created a fund for church extension and raised $14,000 for extensions and renovations to St Ninian's Cathedral; and he fostered interest in home and foreign missions. As primus this concern became focused especially on South Africa, which he again visited. Instrumental in establishing the Episcopal church's Temperance Society, he also took the lead in working towards closer relations between the Episcopal and Presbyterian churches, but was misunderstood because of his refusal to gloss over historic differences between the two bodies. He ministered to Gladstone during the latter's terminal illness in 1898. 
Despite his later Anglo-Catholicism, Wilkinson retained a firm belief in the need for personal conversion, which allied him with other Anglo-Catholics such as Richard Meux Benson and Charles Bodington. His Catholic evangelicalism was attested to in his many minor works of practical spirituality, including 'Instructions in the Devotional Life' (1871), 'Instructions in the Way of Salvation' (1872), and 'Lent Lectures' (1873). One of the foremost preachers of his day, Wilkinson had a wide circle of influence which included Lord Balfour of Burleigh, Donald MacLeod, one-time moderator of the Church of Scotland, and Adeline, duchess of Balfour. He died of a heart attack at 13 Queen Street, Edinburgh, on 11 December 1907, and after funeral services at Edinburgh and Perth was buried in Brompton cemetery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 36904


Wilkinson, (Henry) Spenser (1853-1937), military historian, was born on 1 May 1853 at 9 Wilberforce Terrace, Preston Street, Hulme, the second son of Thomas Read Wilkinson, a banker, and his wife, Emma Wolfenden. He was educated at Owens College, Manchester, and (from 1873 to 1877/8) Merton College, Oxford. He read for the bar at Lincoln's Inn and was called in 1880. In 1888 he married Victoria, the eldest daughter of Sir Joseph Archer Crowe (1825-1896). There were six children of the marriage: two sons and four daughters. The marriage was close and loving, and Victoria's death in 1929 was a devastating blow to Wilkinson from which he never completely recovered. 
In 1874, while on vacation from Oxford, Wilkinson chanced to read an article upon European armies. This inspired a lifelong interest in military affairs. He had joined the volunteers at Oxford, and took a commission when he returned to Manchester in 1880. With six other enthusiasts, in 1881 Wilkinson founded the Manchester Tactical Society. This was intended to remedy the volunteers' ignorance of military theory and to improve their outdated drill. Wilkinson, by selecting and translating suitable foreign texts, provided more realistic tactical exercises. While still extending and enhancing his own military education, he established his reputation as the volunteers' spokesman. 
Wilkinson had supposed that he would earn his living as a lawyer, but for more than a quarter of a century journalism was his principal vocation, providing both an income and a platform from which to promote his ideas. From 1881 he had contributed the occasional article on military subjects to the 'Manchester Guardian', and in 1883 C. P. Scott offered him a short-term engagement to cover Wolseley's Egyptian campaign. His unique gift as a newspaper writer who understood military matters was immediately recognized, even by the army's high command. Nevertheless, Scott doubted whether Wilkinson ought to be retained by the 'Manchester Guardian'. W. T. Arnold, who taught Wilkinson the art of leader writing, took his part against Scott. Wilkinson's formidable command of detail rested upon exhaustive researches and he wrote with care on a range of disparate subjects. But in 1892 Scott decided Wilkinson had to leave because of his 'lack of a real hold of Liberal principles' (Ayerst, 239). Wilkinson was not sympathetic to every nuance of the radicalism that inspired the columns of the 'Guardian'. He was no Gladstonian Liberal, nor was he always the easiest of colleagues. But his work had undoubtedly added distinction to the columns of the 'Guardian', while his comments upon military affairs were counted influential. Several years of penury as a freelance journalist followed. 
It was his friend Lord Roberts who eventually helped Wilkinson to secure a place with the 'Morning Post', where he rapidly established himself as chief leader writer on imperial and military affairs. The 'Post''s traditions -- high tory, patrician, self-consciously English, and blatantly imperialist -- were the opposite of those that informed the 'Guardian'. This did not discomfort Wilkinson, who could, on occasion, as over the infamous Kruger telegram (4 January 1896), play the ardent jingoist. Lord Glenesk, the owner of the 'Morning Post', was a sympathetic, loyal supporter and friend to Wilkinson. Not so his daughter Lilias Bathurst, who succeeded her father as proprietor. At the behest of Fabian Ware, the rabid tariff-reform editor of the 'Post', she allowed Wilkinson's copy to be censured. Ware accused Wilkinson of holding destructive views and providing material that was stale and out of date. Though Wilkinson continued writing for the 'Morning Post' until 1914, he did so with waning enthusiasm. 
Ware's comments had not been without substance. Until the South African War, a pragmatic progression had been evident in Wilkinson's thinking and writing. This was reflected, first, in his desire to improve the efficiency of the volunteers. Then he sought to solve the problems of leadership at command level by seeking inspiration from Germany's example. Next, imperial defence absorbed his thoughts, and then naval theory, to which he applied his earlier thinking on the functions of a general staff. Imperial defence questions necessarily involved him in the controversy over India. Finally, all problems combined in the one consuming question 'How might the nation best conduct the affairs and responsibilities of its great empire?' For years, often alone, Wilkinson condemned public and governmental indifference and demanded that the diplomatic, naval, and military consequences of Britain's changing imperial and global responsibilities be addressed seriously. He argued that naval and military preparations were inappropriate and insufficient. But it was only the initial defeats of the South African War that provided 'the political education... that has been utterly neglected'. Now Wilkinson enjoyed his greatest influence with the army, the 'thinking officers' rejoicing at his well-aimed censures. His influence extended to the Foreign Office, where his work was much admired, particularly by his brother-in-law Sir Eyre Crowe. Crowe's seminal memorandum of 1 January 1907 on British relations with France and Germany was in large part a summary of Wilkinson's main arguments in 'The Nation's Awakening' (1896). 
Among the many other books Wilkinson wrote before the South African War, the most important and influential were: 'Citizen Soldiers' (1884), concerning the volunteers; 'The Brain of an Army' (1890), his 'magnum opus', a brilliant description and analysis of the working of the German general staff system; and 'Imperial Defence' (1891), which was written in collaboration with Sir Charles Dilke and demonstrated Wilkinson's thinking on naval power. Although Wilkinson's attempts to reorganize the Admiralty proved futile, he became a moving spirit in the foundation of the Navy League (1894), whose subsequent actions and campaigns he did not altogether approve. It is notable that although he was encouraged and supported particularly by Lord Roberts, and despite his long-standing, frequent, and trenchant campaigns in print to improve the volunteers, it was not until 1904 that Wilkinson was at last given an official voice when appointed a member of the Norfolk commission. He used that rare opportunity effectively, if without immediate result. 
In 1909 Wilkinson was elected to a fellowship of All Souls, and became the first Chichele professor of military history at Oxford University. For years he had hoped for an academic appointment and since the South African War his interests had turned increasingly to history. He enjoyed teaching and could inspire the able and dedicated. They, sadly, proved fewer at Oxford than he had expected. His lectures, abstract and detailed, were delivered in a monotone, and made even less intelligible by his habit of chewing his beard. He wrote much. As a historian he was thorough, direct, and honest. He emphasized the practical and eschewed theory, aiming to prepare his students for the direction of war. 
The years of the First World War cast a tragic blight upon Wilkinson. Time and again he volunteered his services to the Admiralty and War Office only to be turned down. He grew ever more frustrated and disheartened by this cruel official neglect that confirmed he was now one of 'yesterday's men'. He had the ear of neither Westminster nor Whitehall. His lectures were attended by dwindling audiences. Deep personal pain was added to frustration when one of his sons was killed in action. All that was left was to make patriotic speeches and seek mental and spiritual consolation by looking backwards in his researches to earlier wars. Though he retired from Oxford in 1923, he continued writing military history until 1930, when he completed a trilogy on the Napoleonic wars. In 1932 he confided to Basil Liddell Hart that he was 'getting rather tired of war', and instead was writing his recollections and translating Homer. An autobiographical fragment, 'Thirty-Five Years, 1874-1909', was duly published in 1933, and in the year he died Wilkinson completed a translation in blank verse of the 'Odyssey'. He died at the Acland Home, Banbury Road, Oxford, on 31 January 1937. 
Wilkinson was a prolific and influential military writer. As a reformer, his bent was always practical rather than theoretical, and his overriding preoccupation, to establish the appropriate mechanism -- a properly organized general staff -- to decide questions of tactics and strategy. A unique pedagogic distinction was that Wilkinson was both a pioneer of university military education and, in Sir John Colomb's words, 'the greatest instructor of the public mind'. 


@@@@@


doc= 36905


Wilkinson, Sir Nevile Rodwell (1869-1940), army officer, artist, and herald, was born on 26 October 1869 at Highgate, Middlesex, the third son of Colonel Josiah Wilkinson, a barrister practising at the parliamentary bar, and his wife, Alice Emma, daughter of Thomas Smith, of Highgate. He had an idyllic childhood with much yachting as a family sport and spells of living in the south of France; it was there, among the cypresses, that he executed his first serious drawing. Having been educated at Harrow School, he entered the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, in 1889, before being gazetted to the Coldstream Guards. He had something of a giant's physique, standing 6 feet 5 inches in his stockinged feet and 7 feet 6 inches when wearing his bearskin. 
After a period in Dublin, Wilkinson undertook guard duties at Buckingham and St James's palaces. In addition he enrolled and worked hard at the National Art Training School (later the Royal College of Art, South Kensington). During this period he was fortunate to meet both Sir John Millais and John Singer Sergeant. On the outbreak of the South African War in 1899 he was sent to South Africa, where he served with credit, and was decorated and received four clasps. His marriage on 29 April 1903 to Lady Beatrix Frances Gertrude (died 1957), elder daughter of Sydney Herbert, fourteenth earl of Pembroke, took him once again to Ireland as he and his wife set up house at Mount Marrion, a property near Dublin belonging to his father-in-law. The couple had two daughters. Wilkinson's ten-year residence paved the way for his later appointment to the office of Ulster king of arms. 
The old sycamore tree on the Mount Marrion estate, into the roots of which his three-year-old daughter said she had seen a fairy queen disappear, was significantly to be the inspiration for Wilkinson's celebrated 'Titania's Palace'. This 'chef-d'oeuvre en miniature', completed over some eighteen years, was unique in being neither a luxurious dolls' house nor a model of an existing or possible future structure. It covered a space of 63 square feet, and was finished in every conceivable detail. Wilkinson developed, with the aid of an etchers' glass, a technique for decoration he called 'mosaic painting': minute dots of watercolour, irregular in shape like mosaic tesserae, about 1000 to the square inch. The palace was opened in 1923 by Queen Mary and was much admired by the public. It was exhibited not only in the United Kingdom but also in the Netherlands, Canada, the United States, Argentina, Australia, and New Zealand, raising thousands of pounds for children's charities: the 'raison d'etre' of the entire exercise. 
In 1908 Wilkinson was appointed to succeed Sir Arthur Vicars as Ulster king of arms, the latter having been forced to resign following the scandal of the theft of the Irish crown jewels (the jewelled insignia of the Order of St Patrick) from the Ulster office in Dublin Castle. Untainted by any previous connection with the Ulster office, Wilkinson was well known in Dublin and ideal for the post: a man of commanding presence and stature, he was also an artist of repute who had developed a knowledge of heraldry. Within a few days of taking over he had to break open the strong room in the Ulster office -- his predecessor would not hand over the keys -- in order to produce the symbols of state to be used at a forthcoming levee. The maces and sword of state were thus retrieved, in the presence of witnesses, while the lord lieutenant and Lady Aberdeen entertained their guests to dinner in another part of the castle. 
In the course of his duties Wilkinson proclaimed the accession of George V and attended his coronation. Because of Wilkinson's height a new tabard had to be made for the Ulster king of arms. He was greatly involved in the 1911 visit of the king to Dublin, being the mouthpiece, so to speak, of the lord lieutenant -- almost all correspondence on this subject passing between Dublin and London went through the Ulster office. Upon this visit he was made a CVO. With the outbreak of war in 1914 Wilkinson rejoined the army, and served in France and Gallipoli, earning a mention in dispatches and a brevet majority. Notwithstanding war service he returned to Dublin on several occasions for official duties. Following the evacuation of Gallipoli, Wilkinson was sent to Switzerland to look after British interests. 
After the war Wilkinson returned to full-time duties at the Ulster office. In 1921 he attended upon the first Catholic lord lieutenant for several centuries, Viscount Fitzalan of Derwent, at his taking up office. In the following year he arranged the first opening of the parliament of Northern Ireland by George V which took place in the Belfast City Hall. Such a location required the greatest tact and diplomacy, as the prime minister of Northern Ireland was thus the guest of the lord mayor, but it was, nevertheless, an opening of parliament. In consequence of the success of the event Wilkinson was advanced in the Royal Victorian Order and made a KCVO. He personally designed the obverse of the great seal of Northern Ireland, which was modelled by Cecil Thomas, and exhibited in the sculpture gallery of the Royal Academy exhibition of 1924: and he wryly observed that this was the first time his work had penetrated into the sacred precincts of Burlington House. He also designed and granted arms for each of the six counties of Northern Ireland. In addition, Wilkinson established the heraldic museum at the Ulster office in 1909 -- the first of its kind in the world. He also wrote several books, including his reminiscences (1925), 'Wilton House Pictures' (1907), 'Wilton House Guide' (1908), and 'The Guards' Chapel, 1838-1938' (1938). 
In his capacity as Ulster king of arms, and so the sovereign's lieutenant in matters armorial within his area of jurisdiction, Wilkinson was destined to serve during an extraordinarily difficult period of Irish history. Throughout the 1920s and 1930s he functioned from the official Ulster premises in the Bedford Tower within Dublin Castle. Despite the difficult political circumstances he managed to preserve the armorial and genealogical heritage of Ireland. Indeed, so successful was he in this that not long after the establishment of the Irish republic, followed by his death, the republic created the office of chief herald of Ireland to carry on the work so carefully fostered by Wilkinson. He was the last of the permanent royal officers to function from Dublin Castle. He ensured the preservation of records, making it possible for the new chief herald to start with registers dating back some 400 years. Wilkinson died in Dublin on 22 December 1940. His widow subsequently married the seventh earl of Wicklow. 


@@@@@


doc= 36906


Wilkinson, Norman (1882-1934), stage designer, was born at Handsworth Wood, Birmingham, on 8 August 1882, the second son of Howard Wilkinson, of Handsworth Wood, a partner in the firm of Wilkinson and Riddell, textile wholesalers in Birmingham, and his wife, Jessie Caroline Bragg. He was educated at the New School, Abbotsholme, Derbyshire, which had Swedenborgian affiliations. Here he benefited from an enlightened policy which replaced the usual patriotic heroes of conventional teaching with the great thinkers and artists. He thus gained an early familiarity with the works of, among others, Shakespeare, Blake, and Bach, and was familiar with the writings of Edward Maitland, Anna Kingsford, and other mystics. 
On leaving school Wilkinson entered the Birmingham School of Art, which was then at its peak under the able administration of Edward R. Taylor. The brilliant staff included Arthur Gaskin and Henry Payne, who were both at that time working with William Morris. Wilkinson was able to indulge and develop his highly individual taste and acquired possessions such as a sixteenth-century harpsichord, a Kelmscott 'Chaucer', and old Welsh furniture with which he furnished in part a house designed for the family by W. R. Lethaby. Although he already had a small room fitted up as a model theatre, on the stage of which he produced scenery for Shakespearian dramas, his bent was really that of the collector and producer. He composed charming musical settings for the early lyrics of W. B. Yeats and for old carols, and he played the harpsichord with taste. Naturally of a generous and affable disposition, Wilkinson was also shy and self-conscious, and though he possessed great and diverse talents, he lacked the intense application and ability necessary to make the most of them. 
There followed periods spent in Paris and Italy with an especially intensive study of Gothic art and Tudor design. Wilkinson's enthusiasm for Elizabethan drama did not, however, rule out the work of Maeterlinck, Stephen Phillips, and Bernard Shaw, and he was drawn to the less commercial stage. He began designing costumes in 1910 for Charles Frohman's repertory season at the Duke of York's Theatre, and followed this up with sets for 'A Winter's Tale' and 'Twelfth Night' (1912), and 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' (1914) for Harley Granville Barker at the Savoy Theatre. Wilkinson's memorable design for the production of the 'Dream' featured an iridescent forest and 'gold-faced fairies, their eyebrows picked out in crimson'. William Bridges-Adams, with whom Wilkinson would later collaborate on another famous production of the play at Stratford, objected to this 'stylistic treatment', which he thought rendered the play too 'stylish, sophisticated, 'towny'' (Brock and Pringle, 42). He likened Wilkinson's fairies to 'static little figurines on a London mantlepiece' rather than the ethereal creatures of Shakespeare's imagination (Speaight, 91). The design nevertheless put Wilkinson 'in the vanguard of the rebellion against nineteenth-century stage realism' and won for him an international reputation as a stage designer (Brock and Pringle, 41-2). He had further success in 1914 with his settings for Granville Barker's production of 'The Dynasts' at the Kingsway Theatre. 
The First World War had a powerful impact on Wilkinson's life and work, and he never fully recovered from the effects of its brutalities upon his sensitive and essentially pacifist nature. For a time afterwards he continued his work at the Lyric Theatre, Hammersmith, which was then under the management of Nigel Playfair, and designed sets for 'The Rivals', 'Lionel and Clarissa', and 'The Would-Be Gentleman' in 1925-6. To this period also belong his designs for plays produced by the Phoenix Society and the Stage Society. 
In 1932 Bridges-Adams invited Wilkinson to design the settings and costumes for his production of 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' at the Stratford Memorial Theatre, of which Wilkinson had become a governor in 1920. It was the last play to open in the 1932 festival spring season and it proved to be the high point, principally because of the stage design. Bridges-Adams gave Wilkinson a free hand and the 'glitter of gold' of the pre-war Granville Barker production now 'mellowed to softest silver' (Brock and Pringle, 42). The players wore robes of white and dove-grey and the overall effect was one of 'memorable and satisfying beauty' (Kemp and Trewin, 165). The next year Wilkinson and Bridges-Adams enjoyed another successful collaboration with an acclaimed production of 'Romeo and Juliet', in which they created an Elizabethan atmosphere on the apron stage with a setting notable for its simplicity. It ranked as one of the best productions of the play seen at Stratford. 
Wilkinson had proved an important source of new inspiration at the festival, though his influence there was destined to be short-lived. He died, unmarried, in London on 14 February 1934. At the time of his death he was working on designs for 'The Tempest' at Stratford, and Bridges-Adams paid tribute to his artistry: 'He was something of an Elizabethan, and his taste was catholic, embracing everything, old or new, that was first rate. Modernity held no terrors for him' ('The Times'). 


@@@@@


doc= 36907


Wilks, Sir Samuel, baronet (1824-1911), physician, was born at Camberwell on 2 June 1824, the second son of Joseph Barber Wilks, treasurer at East India House, and his wife, Susannah Edwards, daughter of William Bennett of Southborough, Kent. He was educated first in Camberwell Green and in 1835 was placed with the Revd Dr Spyers, later headmaster of Aldenham grammar school, Herts. After three years at Aldenham and one year at University College School, Wilks was apprenticed to the family doctor, Richard Prior MRCS of Newington, Surrey. He learned to prepare medicines, to vaccinate, bleed, and draw teeth. He attended an anatomy course given by Bransby Cooper at Guy's Hospital and in 1842 entered Guy's as a medical student. In 1847 he became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons. Prior died in December 1847 and Wilks oversaw the sale of the practice. He graduated MB at the University of London in 1848 and MD (with the gold medal) in 1850; in the following year he became a member of the Royal College of Physicians. In 1853, as physician to the Surrey Dispensary, he studied typhus, in Britain first distinguished from typhoid by Sir William Jenner in 1849; Wilks confirmed Jenner's observations. 
On 25 July 1854 Wilks married Elizabeth Ann Prior, daughter of Henry Mockett of Seaford, Sussex, and widow of Richard Prior. There were no children and she predeceased him. Between 1854 and 1865 Wilks was one of the editors of 'Guy's Hospital Reports', to which he contributed some important papers. These reports, the first published by any London hospital, increased Guy's fame as a centre of teaching, research, and scientific medicine. In 1856, elected FRCP, Wilks became assistant physician, conducting post-mortem examinations and lecturing on pathology for ten years until 1865. He was also curator of the museum. In the 1850s the post-mortem merely identified the cause of death, but Wilks studied morbid anatomy as a science and showed that good clinical practice depended on a knowledge of morbid anatomy. He was one of the first to study visceral syphilis, observing that the internal organs were affected in the same way as the surface of the body. Wilks's lectures on morbid anatomy, delivered in 1858-9, were published in 1859 and 'Pathological Anatomy', his most important work, became a standard text. A second edition, edited by Walter Moxon, was published in 1875 and a third, revised by Wilks himself, appeared in 1887. 
In 1865 Wilks exchanged the lectureship in pathology for that in medicine; he became physician at Guy's in 1867 and held the post until 1885 when he retired from active practice and became consulting physician. As a clinician he paid special attention to nervous diseases and in 1878 he published 'Diseases of the Nervous System', another important work developed from lectures published in the 'Medical Times and Gazette' in 1868. In 1897 Wilks was awarded the Moxon gold medal of the Royal College of Physicians in recognition of his observations and research in clinical medicine. Closely associated with Guy's all his life Wilks collaborated with G. T. Bettany in a 'Biographical History of Guy's Hospital', published in 1892. An accurate record of the history of the hospital and its personnel, this is a valuable contribution to the history of an important London hospital. Wilks always showed scrupulous fairness, giving credit without flattery to his colleagues. It was largely through him that the diseases associated with the names of Bright, Addison, and Hodgkin achieved their due place in English medicine. 
Wilks received many honours and held high offices in the medical profession. Elected FRS in 1870 he was awarded an honorary LLD by Edinburgh University in 1884. He was examiner in medicine at the University of London and at the Royal College of Surgeons. President of the Pathological Society, 1881-3, he was also a member of the senate of London University in 1885, and of the General Medical Council in 1887. At the Royal College of Physicians he was Harveian orator in 1879, vice-president in 1890, and president, 1896-9. He was created baronet in 1897 and became physician-extraordinary to Queen Victoria. He had been physician to the duke and duchess of Connaught since 1879. 
Wilks had a large private practice. Yet it was not a 'fashionable' practice, probably because of his directness and habit of speaking his mind. His character was marked by individuality, independence, and a whimsical sense of humour. Well informed on scientific, literary, and political matters he had a lively interest in every aspect of life; he was in great demand by medical colleagues as a consultant. In 1901 he retired to Hampstead, where he became an active member of the Hampstead Scientific Society. 
On 5 February 1904 Wilks was taken seriously ill with acute appendicitis and an emergency operation was performed. For some days his condition was critical. He recovered but in 1907 a second operation on an enlarged prostate gland became necessary and for the remainder of his life he was more or less an invalid. He became paralysed in the lower limbs and from May 1911 he was confined to bed. Yet he retained all his faculties and interest in intellectual developments, occupying himself with writing his 'Biographical Reminiscences' in which he described the medical advances he had witnessed during his lifetime. He died peacefully at his home, 8 Prince Arthur Road, Hampstead, on 8 November 1911; he was cremated at Golders Green on 11 November and a funeral service was held at Hampstead parish church. His ashes were interred at Hampstead cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 36908


Will, John Shiress (1840-1910), legal writer, born John Will in Dundee, was the only son of John Will, merchant, of Dundee, but described at the date of his son's admission to the Middle Temple in October 1861 as 'of the parish of Hanover, co. Cornwall, Jamaica', and his wife, Mary, daughter of John Chambers. Educated first at Brechin grammar school, and afterwards at Edinburgh University and King's College, London, but graduating from neither, Will was admitted to the Middle Temple on 20 October 1861 and called to the bar on 6 June 1864. In 1873 he married Mary Anne (died 1912), daughter of William Shiress, solicitor, of Brechin, Forfarshire; they had at least one child. 
Looking 'a little like a pig', Will was 'a hard worker, a diligent student, a plodding counsel' (Browne, 87). He obtained a large parliamentary practice, took silk in 1883, and was made a bencher of his inn on 24 January 1888. He discontinued his parliamentary practice in 1885 on his election as Liberal member for Montrose burghs, for which he was re-elected in 1886, in 1892, and in August 1895. He was a dependable supporter of Gladstone whose greatest service to his party was to resign the seat early in 1896 so that John Morley, who had been recently defeated at Newcastle, could be elected in his stead. 
Will found it hard to recover his practice, but did become the principal authority on the law relating to lighting either by gas or electricity through writings such as 'The Law Relating to Electric Lighting' (1898, six editions to 1932). Eventually the newly returned Liberal government rewarded his services by appointing him in September 1906 as one of the county court judges of Liverpool. Then sixty-six and in indifferent health, he struggled to fulfil his duties and died at Liverpool on 24 May 1910. 


@@@@@


doc= 36909


Willcocks, Sir James (1857-1926), army officer, was born on 1 April 1857 at Baraut in Meerut district, United Provinces, India, the fourth son of Captain William Willcocks ('c'.1817-1878), of the East India Company's service, and his wife, Mary Martin. Sir William Willcocks was his elder brother. He was educated privately in England, chiefly at Easton in Somerset. He was twice unsuccessful for the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, and was nearly twenty-one when he left it and was gazetted in January 1878 to the 100th foot, which he joined in the Punjab. Owing to a cholera epidemic his regiment was not in the Second Anglo-Afghan War, but when its second stage began after the murder of Sir Louis Cavagnari in September 1879, Willcocks determined to get to the front. He audaciously telegraphed headquarters at Simla, offering his services. Normally such action would have led to a reprimand. However, he received a telegram ordering him to the front. 
Willcocks served as a transport officer and learned many lessons later useful to him. Early in 1881 he served as transport officer in the Mahsud Waziri expedition, rejoining the 100th foot at Ambala in the following year. In 1884 he was appointed to the new army transport department, and was soon put in charge of army transport in the eastern frontier districts with headquarters in Assam. Captain Willcocks was selected for transport duties with the small Indian contingent in the Sudan. He served briefly at the Suakin base of Major-General Graham's force, in 1885-6. He returned to Assam, then was selected for transport duties in the Burmese frontier expedition of 1886. At its conclusion in December 1887 he was offered a permanent appointment in the amalgamated commissariat-transport department, and at the same time received an offer from his regimental commanding officer of the adjutancy of the 1st battalion Prince of Wales's Leinster regiment (Royal Canadians). 
Although it entailed pecuniary loss, Willcocks wisely rejoined his battalion. He arrived with five 'ribbons', including the DSO (awarded in 1887), then a remarkable number for a comparatively junior officer. He married in 1889 Winifred, second daughter of Colonel George Augustus Way, 7th Bengal infantry, and they had one son. She survived her husband. In 1889 he served as intelligence officer in the Chin-Lushai expedition, and in 1891 in the Manipur expedition. 
For the next five years, leave, polo, big game shooting, and staff appointments in India occupied Willcocks until, in June 1897, he was appointed assistant adjutant-general of the field force being formed in the Tochi valley in Baluchistan. On the conclusion of that campaign in November he was offered by the War Office the post of second in command of the new force about to be raised by Major F. J. D. Lugard in west Africa. Willcocks accepted, and arrived at Sierra Leone in March 1898. 
In 1898 Willcocks took part in the Borgu campaign, and in 1899 became colonel-commandant of the West African Frontier Force. His first real chance as a commander came when he commanded the Asante field force for the relief of Kumasi. Despite many difficulties Willcocks relieved it on 15 July 1900. He was created KCMG, and given the freedom of the City of London with a sword of honour. 
In 1902 Willcocks joined the army in South Africa, but he had no opportunity to display his skill in organization. He returned to India, was promoted major-general in 1906, and commanded two expeditions on the north-west frontier in 1908. Such was his rapidity of action that 'Punch' wrote of 'Willcocks's Week-End Wars'. In 1908 he was promoted lieutenant-general, and in 1910 he was appointed to the command of the northern army in India. In 1913 he was appointed KCSI. 
Willcocks reached the zenith of his career when, in 1914, he was ordered to France in command of the Indian army corps. Everything pointed to his ultimate appointment as commander-in-chief in India. But it did not happen. Although Willcocks was awarded the GCMG in 1915, friction developed between him and Sir Douglas Haig, formerly junior to him, who had been promoted general in November 1914 and became commander of the newly formed First Army at the beginning of 1915. Willcocks resigned in September 1915. He had been promoted full general in May. In April 1916 he was appointed colonel of the Loyal regiment (North Lancashire). He was appointed GCB in 1921. 
Willcocks's military career was over, and he was governor of Bermuda from June 1916 to 1922. Willcocks was a readable author. Of his three books 'From Kabul to Kumassi' (1904) was probably most popular. He died at Bharatpur, India, on 18 December 1926. 


@@@@@


doc= 36910


Willcox, Sir William Henry (1870-1941), physician and toxicologist, was born on 18 January 1870 at Thorpe End, Melton Mowbray, Leicestershire, the eldest of the ten children of William Willcox (1844-1906), master draper and town councillor, and his wife, Mary Elizabeth Barnes. He was educated at Wymondham grammar school, Oakham (1876-82), and at the Wyggeston School, Leicester (1882-7). He then studied chemistry at University College, Nottingham (1887-90), and at University College, London (1890-91). After taking the degree of BSc at London University in 1892, he taught chemistry at Queenwood College, a private school in Hampshire. In 1895 he entered St Mary's Hospital medical school with a scholarship, and he qualified as LSA (1899), MB (1900, winning a gold medal), DPH (1900), and MD (1901). At St Mary's he was awarded the Cheadle gold medal and a scholarship in forensic medicine, and was lecturer on chemical pathology (1900-30), medical registrar (1904-6), lecturer on forensic medicine (1906-35), physician to out-patients (1907-13), physician (1913-35), and consulting physician (1935-41). He was admitted a fellow of the Institute of Chemistry (1901), MRCP (1905), and FRCP (1910). In 1901 Willcox married Mildred (died 1953), the elder daughter of William Griffin, a farmer, of Clapton, Northamptonshire; they had three sons and one daughter. 
Willcox's connection with St Mary's Hospital (then the centre of modern forensic medicine), his double qualification as a physician and as a chemist, and his temperament fitted him admirably for the role of medico-legal expert. He was junior analyst to the Home Office (1904-8), senior analyst (1908-19, having succeeded Sir Thomas Stevenson), and medical adviser -- a post created at his own suggestion -- from 1919 until his death, when the title lapsed. One of his most brilliant achievements was the identification of hyoscine in the Crippen case (1910). In this and in other famous cases he was associated with Bernard Spilsbury. His work in the Seddon case (1912), the first in which the electrolytic Marsh-Berzelius test for arsenic was applied quantitatively for forensic purposes, was a landmark in the history of toxicology. He gave evidence for the crown at the trials of Smith (the 'brides in the bath' case, 1915), Greenwood (1920), and Armstrong (1922). He was an authority on drugs and poisons, and was described as the most deliberate and painstaking expert witness who ever stepped into the box; his testimony was rarely shaken. 
During the First World War, Willcox served in Gallipoli and Mesopotamia as consulting physician to the forces, and his work in controlling the incidence of disease among British and Indian troops was said by Sir Stanley Maude to be equal to two divisions. As an honorary colonel in the Army Medical Service, he contributed to the improvements made to its organization and to military hygiene, was mentioned in dispatches four times, and was appointed CMG (1916), CB (1917), and KCIE (1921) in recognition of his wartime services. 
After the war Willcox devoted more time to clinical medicine and built up a large consulting practice. In addition to his work at St Mary's Hospital he was senior physician to the London Fever Hospital and to St Luke's Hostel for the Clergy. He took a special interest in the rheumatic diseases and gave untiring assistance to the Empire Rheumatism Council, of which he was a co-founder in 1936. Industrial toxicology also engaged his attention, and the results of his wartime studies of cases of poisoning in munition workers and those engaged in the manufacture of aeroplanes were summarized in his Lettsomian (1919) and Lumleian (1931) lectures. 
Between 1924 and 1926 Willcox was a member of the departmental committee on morphine and heroin addiction (Rolleston committee). Its report (1926) had an important influence on British drug policy, but did not support Willcox's strong views on the control of addicts. His interest in alcoholism and addiction led to the publication of several articles in the 'British Journal of Inebriety', and to joint authorship of a book, 'Alcoholism in General Practice' (with A. E. Carver and T. Hunt, 1936). Other writings and lectures on forensic medicine, chemical pathology, and medicine appeared in medical journals and the transactions of societies over a period of nearly forty years. 
Willcox was for many years visitor for the privy council to the examinations of the Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain. He was president of the Harveian Society (1922), West London Medico-Chirurgical Society (1923), Society for the Study of Inebriety (1924-7), Medico-Legal Society (1928-9), Medical Society of London (1936-7), and the section of pharmacology and therapeutics of the Royal Society of Medicine (1940-41). In 1932 he was president of the section of forensic medicine of the British Medical Association and in 1935, when the association's annual meeting was held at Melbourne, he was president of the section of pharmacology, therapeutics, and anaesthetics. On that occasion the University of Melbourne conferred on him the honorary degree of MD. He was master of the Society of Apothecaries in 1935-6, and was a knight of grace of the order of St John of Jerusalem. 
Known as Wilks to his friends, Willcox had a reputation for great kindness and generosity. In his profession he was known for his wide range of interests and exceptional industry. The fact that he was often working at his desk long after midnight did not prevent him from riding in the park before breakfast. He enjoyed cycling and riding to hounds, and took a great interest in the Royal Academy of Dancing, doing much to further its interests, particularly on the educational side. He was of robust build and enjoyed good health until March 1940, when he had a heart attack, followed by another a year later. Willcox continued to work until he suffered a sudden stroke and died at his house at 40 Welbeck Street, Cavendish Square, London, on 8 July 1941. There was a funeral service at St Marylebone parish church, followed by cremation at Golders Green, on 11 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 36911


Willes, Sir George Ommanney (1823-1901), naval officer, son of Captain George Wickens Willes RN (1785-1846) and his wife, Anne Ellen, second daughter of Sir Edmund Lacon, first baronet, MP, was born at Hythe in Hampshire on 19 June 1823. He went to the Royal Naval College, Portsmouth, in February 1836 and to sea in 1838. He passed his examination in September 1842, and as mate served in the 'Cornwallis', flagship of Sir William Parker, and in the brig 'Childers' on the East Indies and China station. He was commissioned as lieutenant on 11 December 1844, and the following March was appointed to the 'Hibernia', again with Sir William Parker, then commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean. Three years later he was given command of the steamer 'Spitfire' on the same station. In August 1850 he was appointed first lieutenant of the paddle-frigate 'Retribution' in the Mediterranean, and was still in her at the bombardment of Odessa on 22 April 1854. Shortly afterwards he was promoted commander (dated 17 April), and on 1 June was moved into the flagship 'Britannia' in which he served for the rest of the campaign, and notably at the bombardment of Fort Constantine, Sevastopol, on 17 October. He received the fifth class of the Mejidiye, and was made a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur. Willes married, on 16 May 1855, Georgiana Matilda Josephine, daughter of William Joseph Lockwood of Dews Hall, Essex. In the Baltic campaign of 1855 he served on the flagship 'Duke of Wellington'. He was promoted captain on 10 May 1856. 
In February 1859 Willes was appointed to the 'Chesapeake' as flag captain to Rear-Admiral James Hope, commander-in-chief in the East Indies, and in May 1861 followed his chief into the 'Imperieuse'. Willes saw much active service during this commission. On 24 June 1859 he was in charge of the party sent to cut the boom across the Peiho (Beihe) River at the time of the unsuccessful attack, salved two stranded gun-vessels, and re-embarked the landing party. In August 1860 he was in command of the rocket-boats at the attack on the Peiho forts. For these services he received the China medal with the Taku clasp, and in July 1861 was made CB. In 1862 he was employed in investigating the creeks preliminary to operations against the Taiping, near Shanghai, and in July was relieved and returned home. In January 1864 he was appointed to command the ironclad 'Prince Consort' in the channel squadron. In April 1866 he became captain of the reserve at Devonport, where he remained until called to the Admiralty as controller of the coastguard in January 1869. 
As, in his Admiralty reform of 1869, Hugh Childers abolished the post of controller of the coastguard, Willes then occupied the post that developed into that of admiral-superintendent of naval reserves. In 1869 he and the registrar general of seamen, J. J. Mayo, conducted a departmental inquiry into the naval reserve regulations, recommending that the training period for paid reserves be considerably increased. In October 1870 Willes was given the title of chief of staff, responsible for reserves and several aspects of naval manpower. He also commanded the Reserve Fleet annual cruise. During his period at the Admiralty, Willes oversaw the creation of a modern and efficient reserve based on experienced naval personnel. He left this post in 1872. From April 1870 until his promotion to flag rank on 11 June 1874, he was an aide-de-camp to Queen Victoria. 
In May 1876 Willes became admiral-superintendent at Devonport, and on 1 February 1879 was advanced to vice-admiral. For three years from January 1881 he was commander-in-chief in China with his flag in the 'Iron Duke', and in May 1884 was made KCB. He was promoted admiral on 27 March 1885, and the following November was appointed commander-in-chief at Portsmouth; he thus commanded the fleet at Spithead at the 1887 jubilee review. He retired on 19 June 1888. In 1892 he was made GCB. He had been nominated a justice of the peace for Middlesex in 1884, and for many years, as a member of its council, played an active part in the Royal United Service Institution. He died at his London residence, 73 Cadogan Square, on 18 February 1901; his wife survived him. 
Willes was a strict and highly capable officer, equally successful on active service and in administrative duties, all of which he conducted with great skill. His service as chief of staff, his connection with the United Service Institution, and his support of the pioneer naval historian Sir John Laughton, who served with him in the 'Prince Consort', demonstrated his ability in the intellectual aspects of his profession. 


@@@@@


doc= 36912


Willett, William (1856-1915), builder and inventor of daylight saving, was born at Farnham on 10 August 1856, one of three sons of 
William Willett senior, the son of a coal merchant in Colchester, where he was born, was apprenticed to a local stonemason in 1850. By the 1860s he was in some way of business as a monumental mason in St Marylebone, London, specializing in chimney-pieces, and in 1868 he ventured upon his first speculation, a street of brick-and-stucco houses on land in Belsize Crescent, Hampstead, left vacant by a bankrupt builder. The Willetts were to build steadily on estates in Belsize Park and South Hampstead throughout their career. By the mid-1870s Willett senior had abandoned his trade and started on a second development that kept the firm busy for over thirty years, the West Brighton estate at Hove. He retired there in 1903, and died at his home, 64 The Drive, on 9 November 1913. 
The younger Willett attended Marylebone grammar school and acquired commercial experience before joining his father about 1880. Soon afterwards the firm's work became distinctive. The Italianate style of town house propagated all over Kensington had at last run its course, and the popularity of the larger London terrace house was in sharp decline. Though the Willetts continued to build some terrace housing, for instance south of Sloane Square, Chelsea, on the Cadogan estate, they specialized in big, solidly built detached houses with high standards of plumbing, wiring, and internal joinery. Such developments required more elaboration and individuality than had been common hitherto, so the Willetts had to be well capitalized and to attend to cash flow. Despite a few difficulties in the building slump of the early 1890s they seem never to have suffered serious setbacks. 
The Willetts toyed briefly with a French idiom for their houses, but were soon converted to the fashionable Queen Anne domestic style and then, in the 1890s, to the quieter vernacular revival. The gamut of 'Willett homes', passing from force and flamboyance to an opulent charm with a hint of the stockbroker Tudor style to come, was demonstrated in streets such as Lyndhurst Gardens, Eton Avenue, and Elsworthy Road in Hampstead, as well as in The Drive and Eaton Gardens, Hove. These houses were very influential, and the promoters of Hampstead Garden Suburb acknowledged the impact of 'Elsworthy Village' upon their own development. Architecture of this variable type required designers with some flair for each house. In consequence, the Willetts normally employed in-house architects under their control, and those so contracted were, successively, James Trant Smith ('c'.1880-83), Harry Measures (1883-91), and Amos Faulkner (from 1891 onwards). 
William Willett junior's personal approach lay behind much of the thrust of the firm's work after 1890. On the Camden Park and Wildernesse estates, developed on his own freehold in Chislehurst, he brought in Ernest Newton (1856-1922) to design his own house (The Cedars) and a few others; the influence of Newton's idiom is pervasive in later Willett homes. He also built a smattering of large houses on the great West End estates to independent architects' designs. Willett married Maria Mills (1857/8-1905) on 14 April 1879; they had five daughters and two sons. After her death, on 15 February 1910 he married Florence Mary Ann Strickland (1884-1957), with whom he had another two daughters and a son. 
After William Willett senior retired in 1903, his son diversified his interests. He dabbled in pure property speculation, established an estate agency business with headquarters in Sloane Square, bought brickworks and a welding firm, patented a lighting generator, and took shares in a Spanish consortium for mining bauxite, the Matallana Company. Willett's greatest claim to fame is his promotion of daylight saving; in 1907 he published a pamphlet, 'The Waste of Daylight', conceived, claimed Willett, after riding in Petts Wood near his Chislehurst home early one summer morning and noticing how many blinds were still down. The result of his advocacy was the first 'Daylight Saving Bill', whereby the clocks would be changed by one hour according to the season. It failed when introduced into the House of Commons in 1908, but Willett persisted, gaining institutional support for his idea both in Britain and abroad. The bill was several times reintroduced before the First World War but never attracted quite enough support to be passed. Daylight saving was eventually enacted as a wartime production-boosting device in 1916, under the 'Defence of the Realm Act'. It was subsequently adopted in many other countries. 
William Willett junior did not live to see daylight saving become law. Early in 1915, hearing of fraud in the Matallana Company, he travelled to Spain to unravel its difficulties. He caught a chill on the journey home, developed influenza, and rallied long enough to be taken home to The Cedars, Camden Park, Chislehurst; he died there on 4 March 1915. He left over $500,000, but his sudden death so soon after his father's, coupled with an unsatisfactory will, left his affairs entangled. His son Herbert Willett took over the business but died in 1917. A memorial to William Willett junior was erected in Petts Wood. 
The standing of urban speculative builders diminished in the second half of nineteenth-century Britain, but the Willetts were exceptions to this rule. In a construction world dominated by building contractors and professional architects, they turned out high-class houses of dignity, comfort, and real architectural merit by an old-fashioned method. They were the last of the great Victorian speculative builders. 


@@@@@


doc= 36913


Williams, Alfred (1832-1905), alpine painter, was born at Newark-on-Trent on 4 May 1832, the youngest of the three sons of Charles Williams (1796-1866) ['see under 'Williams, Frederick Smeeton], a Congregational minister, and his wife, Mary Smeeton. The Congregational minister and railway historian Frederick Smeeton Williams (1829-1886) was a brother. He was educated first at a private school and subsequently at University College School, London. He learnt drawing at a private academy and landscape painting from the watercolourist William Bennett (1811-1871). As a young man he supported himself by drawing on wood for book illustrations. From 1849 to 1856 he illustrated publications of the Religious Tract Society and of Messrs Cassell & Co., as well as his brother Frederick's 'Our Iron Roads' (1852); he was also for a time assistant to the history painter Sir John Gilbert. 
From 1854, when Williams made an extended walking tour in northern Italy and Switzerland, his interest in painting centred on mountain scenery. In 1861 he settled at Salisbury and, founding there the maltster's business afterwards known as Williams Brothers, was engaged in trade until his retirement in 1886. Meanwhile, during the summer months he travelled, chiefly in Switzerland, pursuing his art, which occupied him wholly after his retirement. In 1878 he was elected to the Alpine Club. His subjects were chiefly drawn from the Alps and the mountains of Scotland, but in 1900-01 he spent twelve months in India. At the Alpine Club, exhibitions of his watercolour drawings were held in March 1889, of his Indian paintings in 1902, and again of watercolours from 5 to 23 December 1905. Between 1880 and 1890 he exhibited four works at the Royal Academy, one at the Society (later Royal Society) of British Artists, and one at the New Gallery. He was skilful in rendering the effect of sunlight on distant snow and in giving an impression of the size of great mountains. One of his watercolour drawings, 'Monte Rosa at Sunrise from Above Alagna', is in the Victoria and Albert Museum. Williams married in 1863 Sarah, daughter of George Gregory of Salisbury; there were no children from this union. He married, second, on 26 July 1866, Eliza (died 1892), daughter of Samuel Walker of Northampton, with whom he had one son and one daughter, Frances Lilian, who married the Congregational minister and scholar George Buchanan Gray. Williams died at the Grand Hotel, St Maxime-sur-Mer, Var, France, on 19 March 1905, and was buried at St Maxime. 


@@@@@


doc= 36914


Williams, Alwyn Terrell Petre (1888-1968), headmaster and bishop of Winchester, was born at Barrow in Furness, Lancashire, on 20 July 1888, the eldest son of John Terrell Williams (died 1924), medical practitioner, and his wife, Adeline Mary (died 1949), daughter of Richard Peter, solicitor, of Launceston. He was educated at Rossall School and went up to Oxford with an open scholarship to Jesus College, where he obtained first classes in classical moderations (1908), 'literae humaniores' (1910), and modern history (1911). He won the Gladstone history essay prize in 1909, and from 1911 to 1918 was a fellow at All Souls. He was ordained deacon in 1913 and priest in 1914, and in the same year married Margaret Grace (died 1958), daughter of Colonel Charles Stewart, of Tighnduin, Perthshire; they had no children. 
In 1915 the headmaster of Winchester College, M. J. Rendall, invited Williams to come and strengthen the history teaching, and a year later Williams was appointed second master, in charge of the scholars in college. In 1924 he succeeded Rendall as headmaster, and the next ten years were, as he wrote later, a time of 'unforgettable happiness' (Hopkins, 43). He was at the height of his powers, mental and physical, and was held in the warmest respect and affection. He was considerate, cheerful, entirely without ostentation, accessible at all times, prompt in business, a man in whom it was natural to put complete trust. He was, into the bargain, a fine historian who took a delight in teaching. Modern history and modern languages were then still held in secondary esteem in the Winchester curriculum, but Williams established them securely alongside classics, mathematics, and science. The special flavour of History Bill's teaching was relished by generations of Wykehamists, some of whom took pains to record the memorable phrases with which he lit up the past. He described the Danes, for example, 'carting off large ecclesiastical candlesticks and shrieking ladies and that sort of thing, pursued by slow, heavy, infuriated Saxons' (ibid., 144). 
In 1934 Williams was appointed dean of Christ Church, where his intellectual distinction, warm humanity, and imperturbable common sense well fitted him to combine the duties of head of a college and dean of a cathedral. But his time in Oxford was all too short, for in 1939 he was appointed bishop of Durham in succession to H. Hensley Henson. 
Williams wrote to James Duff, then warden of the Durham colleges, that he 'looked forward with great happiness to coming north'. He was already a member of the court of Durham University, he thought the cathedral 'about the most magnificent place there is' (Hopkins, 58), and he admired the northern folk. He proved to be a very good bishop, less of a public figure than his redoubtable predecessor, but deeply respected and warmly welcomed everywhere in the diocese, and an excellent judge of men. But as the years went on he became increasingly anxious about his wife's health. Auckland Castle is a splendid edifice but, even in peacetime, offered formidable obstacles to domestic comfort and, indeed, to administrative convenience -- there was no telephone in 1939. By the end of the war the bishop, who never complained or spared himself, was suffering severely from an ulcerated stomach, the result of incessant journeying and hastily eaten sandwich lunches. In 1951 he at last agreed to undergo surgical treatment, and a year later left Durham to become bishop of Winchester. He had been deeply attached to Durham, but the move to the softer southern climate and the less isolated situation of Wolvesey Palace was a relief to his wife, and Williams himself rejoiced to return -- 'quasi domum repetens' in the words of the memorial tablet in the college cloisters -- to the place where they had both been so happy. 
The move made it easier, too, to carry on Williams's work in connection with the 'New English Bible', which entailed frequent meetings in London. He had been a member of the joint committee representing the churches and the 'Bible' societies since it was set up in 1947, and in 1950 he succeeded J. W. Hunkin, bishop of Truro, as chairman. He was also convener and chairman of the literary panel, whose meetings often took up two days or more. Apart from the members of the joint committee, which had overall responsibility for policy, more than forty biblical scholars and literary advisers co-operated in the work, and it was Williams's faith in its importance and his firm but unobtrusive authority which kept this large team steady on its course. The 'New Testament' was ready first and was published in 1961, and was an immediate best-seller. Williams retired from Winchester in the same year (his wife had died in 1958) and lived for the remainder of his life in Charmouth, Dorset, serene and busy to the end. He died there at his home, 3 Hillside, on 18 February 1968, when the first instalment of the 'Old Testament' was in the printers' hands. It was published, with the 'Apocrypha' and a revised edition of the 'New Testament', in 1970. 
Williams was a tall, strong man, and he looked out at the world with candid, friendly eyes set in a fine, rather narrow face. He had a deep voice, much imitated at Winchester, and a most sincere and frequent laugh. He was fond of hard physical exercise but had no skill at games. At Jesus he had been captain of boats, and nearly forty years on, as dean of Christ Church, would run along the towpath in shirt and shorts encouraging the college boat. He was a great walker, covering the ground with a springy tireless stride. He was a prodigious and very rapid reader with a very retentive and orderly memory. He disliked gadgets and wrote nearly all his letters in his own beautiful firm hand. 'He was', wrote Duff, 'the wisest, kindest and best man that I've ever known' (Hopkins, 136). 
As bishop of Winchester, Williams was prelate to the Most Noble Order of the Garter, and his first office was to install Winston Churchill. He was an honorary fellow of Jesus and All Souls colleges, an honorary student of Christ Church, and DD by decree of Oxford (1925). He received honorary degrees from the universities of Durham (1939), St Andrews (1939), Glasgow (1951), and Southampton (1962). He was chairman of the commission on training for the ministry whose Durham report (1944) recommended the setting up of a central body for the selection and training of ordinands. He wrote only one book, 'The Anglican Tradition in the Life of England' (1947). 
A. L. P. Norrington', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 36915


Williams, (Arthur Frederic) Basil (1867-1950), historian, was born in London on 4 April 1867, the only son of Frederick George Adolphus Williams, barrister, and his wife, Mary Katharine Lemon. Although born a Londoner, he attached great importance to his Somerset ancestry, and occupied his old age with genealogical researches. He was educated at Marlborough College and New College, Oxford, where he was a scholar and was placed in the first class in classical moderations (1888) and the second class in 'literae humaniores' (1890). He obtained a clerkship in the House of Commons where it was his duty to attend the parliamentary committee of inquiry into the responsibility for the Jameson raid of 1896; the appearance of Cecil Rhodes made a deep impression on him, and perhaps this accounts for his decision, many years later, to write Rhodes's biography. Williams volunteered for service in the South African War, and campaigned for a year in the same unit as Erskine Childers. The friendship thus confirmed meant much to him later: he co-operated with Childers in attempts to work out a solution of the home rule question, wrote a memoir of him after his execution in 1922, and also contributed a notice of him to the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. 
After a brief return to England, Williams went again to South Africa as a civilian, and put his services at the disposal of Lord Milner. He assisted Lionel Curtis, then town clerk at Johannesburg, and worked later in the education department. He frequently insisted that these military and administrative experiences proved valuable to him in his career as a historian, to which he now gave himself in earnest after his second return to England. In 1905 Williams married Dorothy (died 1948), daughter of Francis William Caulfeild, a descendant of William Caulfeild, first Viscount Charlemont. There were two sons of the marriage. 
Williams had already chosen the eighteenth century as his field of study, and had distinguished himself by a series of articles on Sir Robert Walpole's foreign policy in the 'English Historical Review' (1900-01). Much of his best work was biographical at least in form: his lives of William Pitt, earl of Chatham (1913), and Stanhope (1932) were for a long time the most satisfactory treatment of their subjects, though they reflect 'a weakness for personal magnetism' (Pares, 253). There was 'something about the heroic, or even the energetic, which always attracted him' (ibid., 256). His later book 'Carteret and Newcastle' (1943) was similar though less exhaustive and less well balanced. He also wrote for the 'Oxford History of England' 'The Whig Supremacy, 1714-60' (1939; rev. edn, by C. Stuart, 1962). All these books were written from a British point of view, with a certain unaffected patriotism, but showed remarkable comprehension of the relation between Great Britain and Europe. At the same time he did not lose sight of South Africa, which became for him a secondary sphere of historical interest; in 1921 he published his life of Cecil Rhodes and as late as 1946 he brought out a little book entitled 'Botha, Smuts and South Africa'. 
In the earlier part of his career as a historian Williams had no professional post, but lived on his private income. At one time he thought of a political career, and unsuccessfully contested Lewes in January 1910 and Rugby in December 1910 as a Liberal. In the First World War he served as an education officer in the Royal Field Artillery and in 1919 was appointed OBE for his services. He was Kingsford professor of history at McGill University (1921-5), and then held the chair of history at Edinburgh until 1937 when he retired, having reached the age limit. He was not an exciting lecturer, but he played some part in syllabus reform, increasing the role of European history. In Edinburgh, where the Williamses lived in Drummond Place, they became a focus of eclectic hospitality. Despite an old-fashioned manner, Williams 'held political views which were generally considered as 'advanced' and they seem to have become more advanced as he grew older' (Pares, 260). He lived in his last years at the Athenaeum, London, and at Fernshaw Mansions, Chelsea, London. He was elected FBA in 1935. He died at 46 Amhurst Park, Stoke Newington, London, on 5 January 1950. 


@@@@@


doc= 36916


Williams, Charles Frederick (1838-1904), journalist, was born at Coleraine on 4 May 1838. He claimed descent on his father's side from Worcestershire yeomen (of Tenbury and Mamble), on his mother's from Scottish settlers in Ulster. Having been educated at Belfast Academy under Dr Reuben Bryce and at a Greenwich private school under Dr Goodwin, he went for his health to the southern states of America, where he took part in a filibustering expedition to Nicaragua, saw some hard fighting, and reportedly won the reputation of a daring blockade-runner. On his return to England he became in 1859 a keen volunteer, and was engaged as leader writer for the London 'Evening Herald'. In October 1859 he began a connection with 'The Standard' that lasted until 1884. From 1860 to 1863 he was the first editor of the 'Evening Standard', and from 1881 to 1884 was the first editor of the 'Evening News'. 
Williams did his best work as a war correspondent. For 'The Standard' he was at the headquarters of the French army of the Loire at the beginning of the second phase of the Franco-Prussian War (1870), and was one of the first two correspondents in Strasbourg after its fall. In the summer and autumn of 1877 he was correspondent on the staff of Ahmad Mukhtar Pasha, who commanded the Turkish forces in Armenia. Williams remained almost constantly at the front, and his letters were the only continuous series to reach England. He published them in a revised and extended form as 'The Armenian Campaign' (1878), which, though pro-Turkish, was a largely accurate record. He followed Mukhtar to European Turkey, and described his defence of the lines of Constantinople against the Russians. He was with General Skobelev at the headquarters of the Russian army when the treaty of San Stefano was signed in March 1878, and he reported the Berlin Congress. At the end of 1878 he was in Afghanistan reporting the war, and in 1879 published 'Notes on the Operations in Lower Afghanistan, 1878-9, with Special Reference to Transport'. 
Williams accompanied the Gordon relief expedition in the autumn of 1884 for the Central News Agency. When his boat capsized in the Nile he and Frederic Villiers narrowly escaped being drowned, or killed by crocodiles; they were rescued by a naval pinnace. A truculent controversialist, Williams was, according to Aaron Watson, 'in the habit of hitting out very savagely and remorselessly against his opponents... a man of restless, stormy and combative temperament, always driving at full speed' (Watson, 201). While in the Sudan he quarrelled with Henry H. S. Pearse of the 'Daily News', and later unsuccessfully sued him. The failure to save Gordon was an emotive and bitter issue. In May 1885 Williams published a polemical article in the 'Fortnightly Review', 'How we lost Gordon', exonerating Wolseley and blaming primarily Sir Charles Wilson, who, he alleged, was unfit for command, lost his nerve, disobeyed Wolseley's orders, and fatally delayed sending the steamers to Khartoum. Wilson replied in the press. Both he and Williams were then criticized in an anonymous 'Saturday Review' article, which alleged Williams had acted in a manner prejudicial to army discipline and should have been punished, 'tied by the wrists to the tail of an ammunition waggon' (27 June 1885, p. 844). Williams sued the proprietor and was awarded $300 in damages. 
After leaving 'The Standard' in 1884, Williams was for some time connected with the 'Morning Advertiser', but soon became war correspondent of the 'Daily Chronicle'. He was the only British correspondent with the Bulgarian army under Prince Alexander in the brief war with Serbia in 1885. In the Graeco-Turkish War of 1897 he was attached to the Greek army in Thessaly. In an article in the 'Fortnightly Review' (June 1897) he attributed the Greek defeat to the disastrous influence of politics. His last war reporting was on Kitchener's Sudanese campaign of 1898. He accompanied General Gatacre up the Nile on his way to join the British brigade in January, and sent the 'Daily Chronicle' a vivid account of the battle of Omdurman and the recapture of Khartoum in September 1898. He protested against the military censorship of war correspondents. His health did not permit of his going to South Africa, but he wrote in London a diary of the South African War for the 'Morning Leader'. 
Williams was a strong adherent of Wolseley's military views and policy, and had considerable military knowledge. According to his friend Sir John French, Williams was 'as fine a judge and critic of military operations as it is possible for any man who is not a professional soldier to become' (Herbert, vi). He published much on military subjects in the 'United Service Magazine', the 'National Review', and other periodicals. In 1892 he published a controversial 'Life of Sir H. Evelyn Wood', in which he defended Wood's action after Majuba in 1881. In 1902 he published a substantial pamphlet, 'Hushed Up', in which he protested against the proposed limited official inquiry into the South African War and called for a thorough investigation. A bitter Wolseleyite polemic, it attacked the government, Kitchener, and especially Roberts -- alleging 'inter alia' that 'his indifference to the feeding and clothing of his men and his neglect of sanitary precautions were the main causes of the loss of life... from enteric and dysentery' ('Hushed Up', 100) -- and praised Wolseley and Buller (partly anticipating late twentieth-century revisionist historians). 
Williams also tried his hand at fiction, and wrote 'Songs for Soldiers'. He wrote on ecclesiastical questions, and contributed articles and stories to 'Temple Bar' and other periodicals. He was a zealous churchman, and, as a thank-offering for his safe return from Khartoum, presented to Bishop Creighton an ivory and gold mitre designed by himself. A right-wing tory, in 1886 Williams stood unsuccessfully as a Conservative candidate against Herbert Gladstone in the largely working-class and Liberal West Leeds constituency. Although of irascible temper, Williams was chairman of the London district of the Institute of Journalists in 1893-4, and was president in 1896-7 of the Press Club, of which he was founder. He died in lodgings at 70B Hackford Road, Brixton, London, on 9 February 1904. 


@@@@@


doc= 36917


Williams, (Charles Hanson) Greville (1829-1910), industrial chemist, was born on 22 September 1829 at Cheltenham, the only son of S. Hanson Williams, solicitor, and his wife, Sophia, daughter of Thomas Billings, also a solicitor. Greville Williams (as he was generally known) was educated privately and displayed an early interest in chemistry which seems to have displeased his father; on one occasion he spent his pocket money on a 'chemical chest', only to have it swept to destruction by his father's cane. Nevertheless, his first employment was as a consulting and analytical chemist in Cannon Street, London. He then spent three years as assistant to Professor Thomas Anderson at Glasgow University before moving to Edinburgh University to work under Lyon Playfair; he was then appointed to lecture on chemistry at the Normal College, Swansea. On 25 November 1852 he married Henrietta (died 1904), daughter of Henry Bosher of Taunton. They raised four sons and four daughters. 
Williams returned to Glasgow to work for George Miller & Co., manufacturing chemists, and developed his earlier work on quinolines, producing the first dye from this group: quinoline blue, or cyanin. This yielded a very attractive blue when dyed on silk, but it was unfortunately fugitive to light. Its sensitivity, however, made it of great value in the development of photography. It was at this time that Williams also discovered the unsaturated hydrocarbon isoprene, which some years later was recognized as a component of natural rubber. 
In 1868 Williams moved south to be an assistant in the factory of Perkin & Son at Greenford Green, Middlesex. The same year he left to join a partnership with John Dower and Eduard Thomas in the new Star Chemical Works at Brentford, Middlesex, which manufactured colours derived from coal tar. The uneconomic manufacture of magenta dye proved their financial undoing and the partnership went into liquidation in 1877. Greville Williams decided to retire from dyemaking; his eldest sons, Rupert Greville Williams and Lewis Greville Williams, set up Williams Bros. & Co. in a new factory at Hounslow, largely producing those dyes which their father's company had manufactured. A third son, Francis, joined them in 1884, and the business was still in family hands when it celebrated its centenary. 
During his time at the Star works Williams had followed his parallel interest in mineral chemistry, and in 1873 and 1877 he communicated two papers to the Royal Society. The earlier paper described his analyses of clear and coloured forms of beryl, and his conclusion that the green form (emerald) owed its colour to chromic acid. He included accounts of the fusion of beryl, quartz, and sapphire by the oxyhydrogen blowlamp, and reported that the brilliant flame of the blowlamp had damaged his sight even though he had worn dark glasses. In the second paper he proposed an improvement on the earlier processes which chemists had employed for such mineral analyses. In later years he continued to work on the chemistry of natural and artificial gems. 
In 1877 Williams joined the Gas, Light, and Coke Company, London, as photometric supervisor, and he pursued his studies on the volatile bases derived from various hydrocarbons. He was admitted a member of the Chemical Society and elected FRS in 1862. In 1888 he was a founder member of the Society of Dyers and Colourists. He contributed to technical journals, handbooks, and dictionaries. Until disabled by rheumatism he was an expert draughtsman and calligraphist, an excellent game shot, and an enthusiastic angler. An obituarist described him as 'one of the most charming and versatile conversationalists it has been my good fortune to know' ('Athenaeum', 767). In later life he became interested in the ancient Egyptian language. On retirement in 1901 he moved into the modest Bay Cottage, Smallfields, near Horley, Surrey, where he became something of a recluse, corresponding with, but seldom seeing, his former friends and colleagues. His wife died in 1904; he died on 15 June 1910 at Bay Cottage, and was buried at Streatham. 


@@@@@


doc= 36918


Williams, Charles Walter Stansby (1886-1945), writer on literature and theology, was born on 20 September 1886 at 3 Spencer Road, Holloway, London, the surviving member of twins born to Richard Walter Stansby Williams (1848-1929), clerk, and his wife, Mary Wall (1856-1948), daughter of James Wall, cabinet-maker. A sister, Edith, followed in 1889. Charles was baptized in St Anne's, Finsbury Park, Middlesex, on 7 November 1886, and he loved the Church of England all his life. After attending St Albans School he went to the University of London in 1901. He left after two years on financial grounds and began work in the Methodist Book Room. On 9 June 1908 he became a reader with Oxford University Press, London. Williams loved the work, and he endeared himself to his colleagues by his goodness and warmth. 
While reading Dante's 'Divine Comedy' in 1910 Williams became enraptured by the idea of the 'Beatrician experience' as a recovery of the vision which would have been common to each of us had man not fallen. In his first book, 'The Silver Stair' (1912), he explains how earthly love can be a staircase to God. But the fullest expression of this 'Romantic love', as he called it, is found in his Arthurian poems, 'Taliessin through Logres' (1938) and 'The Region of the Summer Stars' (1944). The idea is expressed more clearly in Williams's 'The theology of Romantic love' from 'He Came Down from Heaven' (1938), and 'The Figure of Beatrice' (1943). Perhaps the most lucid explanation of all is C. S. Lewis's commentary on Williams's Arthurian poems in 'Arthurian Torso' (1948). Williams experienced this love at first hand when he met Florence Sarah (Michal) Conway (1886-1970), a teacher, in 1908. She was the daughter of James Edward Worrall Conway, ironmonger, of St Albans. They married on 12 April 1917 and their one child, Michael Stansby Williams, was born on 18 June 1922. 
An interest in magic led Williams to join A. E. Waite's Order of the Golden Dawn in 1917. His fascination for the occult is evident in his early poems, but especially in his novels: 'War in Heaven' (1930), 'Many Dimensions' (1931), 'The Place of the Lion' (1931), 'The Greater Trumps' (1932), 'Shadows of Ecstasy' (1933), 'Descent into Hell' (1937), and 'All Hallows' Eve' (1945). While some regard the Arthurian poems as the finest of Williams's some forty works, these 'spiritual shockers', as he called them (Lewis, 'Essays', viii), are his most popular. 
C. S. Lewis chanced upon 'The Place of the Lion' in 1936 and liked it greatly. The book's heroine is a complacent medieval researcher who regards herself not so much the student of Abelard and St Bernard as their inspector. All is changed when the Platonic forms of a gigantic lion and other animals suddenly erupt into her world. Lewis wrote to thank Williams, who was on the point of writing a similar letter to Lewis about his 'Allegory of Love' (1936) which he was proof-reading for Oxford University Press. 'After this', said Lewis, 'we soon met and our friendship rapidly grew inward to the bone' (Lewis, 'Essays', viii). 
At the outbreak of the Second World War Williams was among the staff that Oxford University Press transferred from London to Oxford. On 7 September 1939 he moved into 9 South Parks Road, while Michal remained in London. Lewis was delighted to see him, and invited him to join the Inklings, a group of friends who met in Lewis's rooms on Thursday evenings to discuss their writings, and which included J. R. R. Tolkien and Hugo Dyson. 'In appearance', Lewis wrote of Williams, 'he was tall, slim, and straight as a boy, though grey-haired. His face we thought ugly: I am not sure that the word 'monkey' has not been murmured in that context. But the moment he spoke it became, as was also said, like the face of an angel -- not a feminine angel in the debased tradition of some religious art, but a masculine angel, a spirit burning with intelligence and charity. (Lewis, 'Essays', ix)' Oxford's English faculty was depleted by the war, and Williams soon made a reputation as a lecturer and as a private tutor. The lectures he gave on Milton during Hilary term 1940 were greatly admired by Lewis. Writing to his brother about the one he heard on 5 February, he said: 'C. W. lectured nominally on 'Comus' but really on Chastity. Simply as criticism it was superb -- because here was a man who really started from the same point of view as Milton -- That beautiful carved room had probably not witnessed anything so important since some of the great medieval or Reformation lectures. I have at last, if only for once, seen a university doing what it was founded to do: teaching Wisdom. ('Letters of C. S. Lewis', 338)' The essence of these lectures survives in Williams's 'Preface' to 'The English Poems of John Milton', edited by H. C. Beeching (1940). On 18 February 1943 Oxford made him an honorary MA. 
On 11 May 1945, two days after the war ended, Williams was rushed to the Radcliffe Infirmary with a recurrence of the intussusception for which he was operated on in 1933. He died there of an acute intestinal obstruction on 15 May 1945 and on 18 May he was buried in the cemetery of St Cross Church, Holywell, Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 36919


Williams, Edward Francis, Baron Francis-Williams (1903-1970), author and publicist, was born on 10 March 1903 at St Martins, Shropshire, where his father, John Edmund Williams, had a farm. His mother was Sally Francis, from Montgomery, just across the border in Wales. His schooling was entirely in Lancashire, where his father moved first as a dairyman in Manchester, then back to farming on the moors between Bacup and Todmorden, where Francis and his sister attended school at Rawtenstall. Shortly after the outbreak of war in 1914 the family moved to a better farm at Middleton, where Williams completed his formal education at Queen Elizabeth's Grammar School. While there two of his poems were accepted by 'Country Life' and the 'Weekly Westminster Gazette', an eccentric enough occurrence for the school to encourage his inclination to be a journalist. 
At the age of seventeen, in response to an advertisement, Williams joined the weekly 'Bootle Times', then housed in a two-roomed wooden building adjoining the railway station. There, as an impressionable young reporter, the unemployment in the Merseyside docks and the conditions in the slums impelled him to join the Independent Labour Party. At the same period he forsook religion and became a lifelong humanist. He secured a post on the Liverpool 'Daily Courier' but was impatient to get to Fleet Street and on to a national paper. With a colleague on the 'Courier' he decided to buy a horse and caravan and describe a journey through England. The only London newspaper which was interested was the Labour 'Daily Herald', edited by George Lansbury, with a small circulation but a prestigious set of contributors. For two articles a week, the travellers were paid 4 guineas. 
There was, however, no staff appointment when Williams arrived in London at the end of the series in 1922, and he earned a fickle living as a freelance until he secured a part-time job on the 'Sunday Express'. There he attracted the attention of Lord Beaverbrook when he mastered a couple of Clydesdale horses which had bolted outside the 'Express' office in the commotion of the general strike of 1926. In the same year Williams married Jessie Melville Hopkin, whom he had first met when she became an English teacher at his old school. She became a distinguished medical psychologist. They had one son and one daughter. 
Following an article which Williams had written on the controversial sculpture 'Rima' by Jacob Epstein, Beaverbrook later, and inconsequentially, appointed him as a financial reporter and personally commended him to the moneyed men of the City. To Beaverbrook's chagrin, when Odhams the publishers in 1929 took over the 'Daily Herald', of which the Trades Union Congress retained a minority interest and Labour Party control, Williams accepted the post of City editor. During the depression and the financial crisis which brought down the Labour government he became a significant figure, influential with hostile financiers, with access even to Montagu Norman, the redoubtable governor of the Bank of England, and, during his commodity market exposures of the rearming of Germany, a confidant of Winston Churchill. 
In 1936 Williams became editor of the 'Daily Herald' at a salary of $5000. The paper soon reached a circulation of 2 million, a figure which was itself an embarrassment because, in the paradoxical economics of the newspaper business, it was not drawing the advertising to sustain it. Lord Southwood, the chairman of Odhams, wanted a lively paper glowing with an optimism about world events which would encourage trade and therefore advertising. He expected Williams, as Beaverbrook's former protege, to respond. His editor insisted upon treating events, which were goose-stepping to Munich and the Second World War, with the seriousness they deserved. He had the support of the Trades Union Congress members on the policy board, including Ernest Bevin and Sir Walter Citrine. But Southwood tried to use financial sanctions to make him dispense with the foreign correspondents who were sending the pessimistic dispatches. Even the outbreak of war did not curb the interference. The break came in 1940 when Williams opened the paper and found that his signed weekly article was missing, removed on Southwood's instructions. He resigned. 
Williams took the opportunity to write a book, 'War by Revolution' (1940), on the theme of his banned article, and 'Democracy's Last Battle' (1941). He became a member of the morale committee of the Ministry of Information, and when Brendan Bracken became minister he was appointed in 1941 controller of press and censorship. In that invidious position (the more so because he was the buffer between Churchill and the press, whose criticism Churchill resented) he made censorship tolerable, or at least understandable, to the British and foreign correspondents, gaining their co-operation and respect which persisted after the war when he became a world advocate of press freedom. He went with the British delegation in 1945 to the San Francisco conference where his methods of handling the world press -- confidentiality in return for frankness -- were a new experience for most journalists. In the same year he was appointed CBE and awarded the United States medal of freedom with silver leaves for his war services. 
When Labour came to power after the war the prime minister, Clement Attlee, asked Williams to be his public relations adviser. He relied implicitly on Williams and in his meetings with President Truman and others left the communiques and press conferences entirely to his discretion. When the secretary-general of the United Nations, Trygve Lie, visited Attlee in London to ask him to release Williams to become assistant secretary-general in charge of public information, Attlee told him that Williams had undertaken to stay with him for at least a year and would not go back on his word. 
In the event Williams stayed two years in Downing Street; went next to Washington as correspondent of 'The Observer'; then returned to London as a columnist on the 'News Chronicle'. He started a column in the 'New Statesman' called 'Fleet Street' which ran for fourteen years and gave the public an insight into the workings of the press which they had never had before. He also tried, unsuccessfully, to make the socialist 'Forward' into a prosperous journal. 
In 1951-2 Williams was a governor of the BBC. He had been a frequent broadcaster since the thirties and he went on to become a television personality on a diversity of programmes. He dominated the small screen. The adjective 'leonine' could properly apply to him. His mane, his jowls, his wary look, his crouching shoulders were disconcerting to 'victims' in interrogation programmes but the impression would disappear in his twinkle, his smile, his laugh, and the lighting of the pipe which was his trade mark. Then the warmth of his personality, reflecting years of happy family life and a concern for others, would radiate. 
Williams's reputation as an authority on the media was worldwide. He was British representative on the United Nations Commission on Freedom of Information (1949), wrote 'Transmitting News' (1953) for UNESCO, and was Regents' professor at the University of California in 1961 and Kemper Knapp professor at the University of Wisconsin in 1967. 
Williams was much sought after as a Labour candidate but his ambitions did not lie in parliament or in government office. When Hugh Gaitskell prevailed upon him to become a life peer in 1962 he became an assiduous back-bencher. But his main activity after the end of the war lay in writing; his publications during this period included 'Press, Parliament and People' (1946), 'The Triple Challenge: the Future of Socialist Britain' (1948), 'Fifty Years' March: the Rise of the Labour Party' (1946), 'Ernest Bevin: Portrait of a Great Englishman' (1952), 'Magnificent Journey, the Rise of Trade Unions' (1954), 'Dangerous Estate: the Anatomy of Newspapers' (1957), 'A Prime Minister Remembers' (with Earl Attlee, 1961), 'The American Invasion' (1962), and 'A Pattern of Rulers' (1965). He was a persistent novelist ('No Man is an Island', 1945; 'A Provincial Affair', 1949; and 'The Richardson Story', 1951) whose fiction was better appreciated by the critics than by the customers. His autobiography, 'Nothing so Strange', was published shortly before he died at his home, Griffins, Abinger Hammer, Dorking, Surrey, on 5 June 1970. In it Williams recorded a comment made about him by two American newspapermen, adding that it would be a fine thing to put on one's tombstone their remark that 'The guy had grammar' (Williams, 327), an epitaph which he had fully earned both as a writer and as a speaker. He was a literary craftsman whose fluent style survived the paragraphics of the popular press. His wit was caustic and his humour emollient. He was survived by his wife. 
Ritchie-Calder', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 36920


Williams, Sir Edward Leader (1828-1910), civil engineer, was born at Worcester on 28 April 1828, the eldest of the eleven children of Edward Leader Williams (1802-1879), also a civil engineer and later chief engineer to the Severn navigation commissioners. Benjamin Williams Leader RA (1831-1923) was a younger son. Williams was educated privately and at the Royal Grammar School, Worcester, and after being apprenticed at sixteen to his father worked until 1846 on the Severn between Stourport and Gloucester, 43 miles of which he helped to make navigable during dry weather. During the next three years he was engaged as assistant engineer under Joseph Cubitt in Lincolnshire on the Great Northern Railway. He was resident engineer from 1849 to 1852 at Shoreham harbour, which he extended towards Hove. From 1852 to 1855 he served as engineer to the contractors for the Admiralty pier at Dover. On 30 August 1852 he married Ellen Maria (1827-1860), daughter of Thomas Popplewell, a merchant captain from Lincolnshire. Following her death, on 22 April 1862 he married Catherine Louisa ('b'. 1843), daughter of Richard Joseph Clinch, an agent, of Northwich. 
In 1856 Williams became engineer to the River Weaver Trust and thereafter confined himself to works for inland navigation. He improved the River Weaver out of all recognition, making the channel deeper and wider, enlarging the locks and introducing steam traction, thus attracting most of the salt traffic from Cheshire to Liverpool together with the return freight of coal. In order to establish through traffic with the Trent and Mersey Canal, which the Weaver crosses at Anderton, Williams designed, with Edwin Clark, a hydraulic lift for raising or lowering canal boats from one to the other. The lift comprised two caissons, each capable of holding two 50 ton barges side by side. From 1876 it supplied an effective substitute for a flight of five to six locks, by raising craft vertically through 51 feet from canal to river. In 1872, before the lift was completed, Williams became engineer to the Bridgewater Navigation Company. Here he enlarged the locks at Runcorn, deepened the canal from 4 ft 6 in. to 6 ft, and introduced steam propulsion, which he facilitated by building an almost vertical wall on one side of the canal for about 30 miles. Thus he trebled the maximum permissible tonnage of barges and halved the cost of haulage. 
In 1882 Williams became, jointly with Hamilton Henry Fulton, engineer to the provisional committee which was considering the formation of a ship canal to Manchester. Fulton had previously put forward a project for a tidal canal. Each engineer submitted a proposal. Fulton's sea-level canal would have reached Manchester at a depth of 60 ft below street level and would have required a link by underground railway between the docks and the city centre. On the emphatic recommendation of James Abernethy of Liverpool the committee adopted Williams's proposal to use the tidal channel of the Mersey as far as practicable, and then to cut a canal with four huge locks for raising ships gradually to the level of Manchester. He was thereupon appointed chief engineer and the canal became thenceforward 'the work of his life'. Parliament refused the necessary powers in 1883 and 1884, but granted them in 1885. The three years' contest occupied 175 days, and cost the applicants $150,000, their opponents $100,000. The failure of the first two applications was due largely to the opposition of the Mersey Docks and Harbour Board, who feared that the proposed training and deepening of the tidal channel from Runcorn through the Mersey would affect the navigation of the estuary. Williams then modified his proposals in regard to the lower portion of the projected waterway. In 1887 a contract for the construction of the canal was entered into with T. A. Walker, at a cost of $5.75 million, and the first sod was cut at Eastham by Lord Egerton of Tatton on 11 November 1887, using an ordinary spade and barrow, which was loaded, wheeled, and tipped by Williams. In 1889, however, Walker died, and the work was ultimately let in sections to several contractors. 
The difficulties emerging during the course of construction proved much greater than had been anticipated. They arose from the canal's location on the world's busiest highway of commerce, from the consequent opposition by rail, shipping, and mercantile interests, and from statutory obligations imposed on the company for the protection of public as well as private interests. Williams found that his task required 'the engineering of men as well as of matter' ('Manchester Guardian', 3 Jan 1910, 4vi). Fortunately his commanding presence, abounding energy, fertility of resource, and genial manner secured him respect as well as co-operation. During the process of construction the dimensions of the waterway were changed. The bottom width was increased by one-fifth to 120 ft and the bottom depth by one-third to 26 ft, the same depth as the Suez Canal. The material excavated amounted to 54 million cubic yards, half as much as had been removed during the construction of the Suez Canal. It was excavated at a very high speed, averaging some 750,000 cubic yards every month, mostly by means of eighty steam navvies and land dredgers; the use of such labour-saving machines almost precipitated a strike in 1890. 
The line of the canal crossed the Mersey and Irwell fifteen times. Provision had to be made for subterranean syphons and culverts and for some fifteen transverse crossings of the two rivers, which were effected by means of six fixed high-level viaducts and bridges, eight swing bridges, and one swing aqueduct. At Barton, James Brindley's aqueduct of 1760-61 carried the Bridgewater Canal, whose waters were still pure enough for fish to breed, across the River Irwell, and the task of replacing that aqueduct presented Williams with his greatest challenge. In 1883 Williams had hoped to duplicate the Anderton lift at Barton by building a fixed high-level aqueduct over the ship canal, but he abandoned that impracticable scheme and devised instead a swinging aqueduct, which proved to be his true masterpiece. The four ends of the canal and aqueduct could be sealed before the swing by means of a watertight breaking joint; the swinging span weighed 1600 tons, including 800 tons of water, and could be turned like a swing bridge in two minutes, leaving clear two 90 foot wide spans of the ship canal. The canal was 351/2 miles in length from the entrance locks at Eastham to the Manchester docks. Four more sets of locks raised vessels some 60 feet above sea-level, and there were 110 sluices which used the self-balancing roller gate patented in 1874 by Francis G. M. Stoney and adopted on the Aswan Dam. 
Williams survived successive crises in the administration of the company, especially in 1891-2 and 1893. Thereafter the company was reconstituted as a dyarchy under the aegis of the Manchester corporation. The estimated cost of $5.6 million made in 1883 was trebled to $15.2 million. That sum included nearly $3 million for the purchase of the Bridgewater Navigation Company as well as interest paid on capital during the period of construction. The lower portion of the canal was first used by traffic on 16 July 1891: eighteen directors made an inaugural voyage on board the 'Snowdrop' on 7 December 1893 and gave three hearty cheers for Williams as their vessel reached Barton. The canal was opened informally on 1 January 1894 and formally on 21 May 1894 by Queen Victoria, who was on her way to Balmoral. After the opening the financial condition of the Ship Canal Company remained parlous and would have been even worse without the Bridgewater Canal, whose gross receipts surpassed those of the ship canal during its first six years. The company paid no dividend to its ordinary shareholders until 1915. 'The engineers have brought the ship canal to its present pitiable [financial] condition'; 'The Manchester Ship Canal has proved the grave of some good reputations' ('Engineering', 8 June 1894, 751; 15 June 1894, 787). 
Williams emerged, however, with an enhanced reputation, as the engineer of the greatest work of the century and as a worthy successor to Brindley. He was knighted on 2 July 1894 and elected in 1895 president of the Manchester Association of Engineers as well as a member of the council of the Institution of Civil Engineers, of which he had been a member since 1860. In 1883 he had become a member of both the Institution of Mechanical Engineers and the Iron and Steel Institute. Self-reliant, homely, and simple in his tastes, Williams was always loath to speak of his own achievements. He became consulting engineer to the Ship Canal Company in 1905 and practised privately until shortly before his death. His hobby was photography, which he took up in its early stages. He became a burgess of the Altrincham Court Leet. His family was distinguished for its longevity: he himself died at the age of eighty-one on 1 January 1910, at his home, The Oaks, Bowdon, Cheshire. His wife survived him. Appropriately the funeral service at Bowdon parish church, where he was buried, on 4 January 1910 was conducted by the Revd Hewlett Johnson, who had qualified as an engineer before he became vicar of Altrincham in 1906. 
The ship canal permanently reduced the costs of transport on the route to Liverpool and ushered in a new era of prosperity for Manchester. Ships could complete the transit in seven and a half hours rather than in the ten originally envisaged, and could undertake night passages with the aid of a searchlight. Above all, they could use the canal when Liverpool docks closed between high tides. The Suez Canal was deepened in 1895 to 28 feet but the new port of Manchester developed its transatlantic traffic rather than its Eastern trade. Together Liverpool and Manchester increased their joint share of the nation's trade for twenty-five years after 1894, reducing in proportion the relative importance of the Severn navigation. 


@@@@@


doc= 36921


Williams, Sir George (1821-1905), a founder of the Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA), was born on 11 October 1821 at Ashway Farm, Dulverton, Somerset, the youngest of the seven sons of Amos Williams (1778-1841), tenant farmer, and his wife, Elizabeth. Long settled on the Devon-Somerset borders, his rural middle-class parents denied any Welsh connections. George was educated at Miss Timlett's dame-school in Dulverton, then at a private grammar school, Gloyns's, in Tiverton, which he left at thirteen to work on the isolated family farm. He left home two years later, in 1836, and became apprenticed to a draper, Henry William Holmes, 25 miles away in Bridgwater. The following year he was converted to evangelical Christianity, confirmed by joining the town's Zion Congregational Chapel where Holmes worshipped, and in 1839 he became a teetotaller. 'Drapery, Evangelicalism and temperance were thereafter chief determinants in his life', wrote his modern biographer (Binfield, 'Williams in Context', 11). 
Amos Williams died in 1841 and Holmes gave up running his business, so George briefly assisted a draper brother in North Petherton and then moved to London to work as a buyer for Hitchcock, Rogers & Co., a large retail drapers at 72 St Paul's Churchyard. In 1842 he was received into the old King's Weigh House Chapel in the City of London, 'the Nonconformist Cathedral of Wealth, and of the middle-classes' (Binfield, 'George Williams and the YMCA', 26), where the preacher was the self-made Thomas Binney (1798-1874). The young draper was also influenced by the puritanical American evangelist Charles Grandison Finney (1792-1875), who visited Britain in 1849-50 and again in 1858-60. 
George worked strenuously as a young man for the Weigh House Chapel's domestic mission and Sunday school, Surrey Chapel's ragged school, and for Craven Chapel's open-air preaching and West End tract distribution. He anguished at this time in his diary, 'my relations all that I know of going to Hell with the exception of an uncle what little effort have I made to save them' (Binfield, 'Williams in Context', 29-30). The living-in staff at Hitchcocks in the early 1840s were mostly Christian young men of intense religious spirit: a house chaplain had been engaged, and there were prayer meetings, a young men's missionary society, and a mutual improvement society. 
Then, on 6 June 1844, a dozen or so young shop assistants, mostly employees of Hitchcocks like George Williams, convened a prayer-group meeting in a room above the premises, and here they set up the YMCA to be 'a society which should have for its object the arousing of converted men in the different drapery Establishments in the Metropolis to a sense of their obligation and responsibility as Christians in diffusing religious knowledge to those around them either through the medium of prayer meetings or any other meetings they think proper. (Binfield, 'George Williams and the YMCA', 120)' Soon the message was spread by a paid secretary, utilizing the new railways, and the London YMCA rapidly grew into an international movement within protestant Europe, America, and the white dominions, 'the great central labour exchange of the whole empire' (Begbie, 53), of which Williams is generally accepted as the founder. He had also become indispensable, meanwhile, to the expanding St Paul's Churchyard business and on 9 June 1853 married Helen (1832-1919), eldest surviving daughter of George Hitchcock (1795-1863), the firm's enterprising head, and was taken into partnership. The married couple lived at 30 Woburn Square, London, for nearly twenty years, then also in Bloomsbury at 13 Russell Square. They had five surviving sons and one daughter, Nellie, whose sudden death at nineteen came as a severe blow. 
In the 1850s Williams left evangelical dissent for evangelical Anglicanism, first at Trinity Church, Little Queen Street, and then at Portman Chapel, Baker Street, where his father-in-law and the seventh earl of Shaftesbury (1801-1885) also worshipped. The subsequent growth of the YMCA as an arm of episcopalianism, as well as of nonconformity, owed much to his Portman Chapel years. In September 1863, on Hitchcock's death, he became sole proprietor of the drapery firm, shifted it to wholesaling, and took over as treasurer of the London YMCA. He was joined in business over the next decade by a nephew, John Williams (1844-1931), and by his two eldest sons, Frederick (1855-1938) and Howard (1856-1929), who became partners in 1883, and then by his youngest surviving son, Alfred Thomas (1866-1908). In 1892 the firm changed its name to Hitchcock, Williams & Co., closing down only during the 1984 recession, by which time it was probably the City's oldest clothing and wholesale company. 
Williams played an important role in the development of the national council of YMCAs by raising capital to prevent Exeter Hall, where the YMCA often met, from becoming a music-hall. It opened instead in 1881 as headquarters for the London YMCAs and a new national council, of which he became first president in 1882. He also went to countless philanthropic conferences, attending four of the six international YMCA conferences between 1855 and 1880, influenced the emergence of the YMCA International Committee based in Geneva, and in 1876 toured North America. Shaftesbury, the YMCA's first president (1851-85), wrote of Williams, 'he is a dear, noble, and generous man'. Short and dapper, in old age he had a patriarchal white beard but his eyes still glowed with a mischievous twinkle. 
In June 1894, the jubilee of the London YMCA, Williams received the freedom of the City of London, and the following month was knighted by Queen Victoria on the recommendation of the prime minister, Lord Rosebery. There were now about 150,000 British YMCA members, 450,000 in America, and 120,000 in Germany. In April 1905 he was in Paris for the YMCA's international jubilee, sharing the world presidency with Prince Oscar Bernadotte, the Swedish national president. Williams was said to be president and financial supporter of nearly forty well-intentioned societies, apart from the YMCA, including the London City Mission, the Christian Cyclists' Union, the Anti-Sunday Travelling Union, the Religious Tract Society, the Early Closing Association, the Anti-Tobacco Union, the Band of Hope, the Commercial Travellers' Christian Association, and the City of London Total Abstainers' Union. He died, aged eighty-four, imagining he was still addressing young men, on 6 November 1905 at the Victoria and Albert Hotel, Torquay, Devon, survived by his widow and five sons. An impressive funeral ceremony was held in St Paul's Cathedral, where he was buried in the crypt on 14 November 1905. 


@@@@@


doc= 36922


Williams, Sir Harold Herbert (1880-1964), literary scholar and local government administrator, was born in Tokyo on 25 July 1880, the eldest son of James Williams, an Anglican missionary, and his wife, Mary Grindrod. He was educated in Tokyo, at Liverpool College, and finally at Christ's College, Cambridge, where in 1901 he was elected to a scholarship. In 1903 he gained a first class in the first part of the theological tripos, with a mark of distinction for his work on the 'Old Testament'. In the same year he was bracketed for the Carus 'Greek Testament' prize and won the Steel university studentship. In 1904 he was ordained deacon and priest and took up a curacy at Swimbridge, migrating to Ripon Theological College in 1905 as lecturer and chaplain; but he returned the following year to Devon as curate of Crediton, where he remained until 1909. He then relinquished orders, having seemingly come to want more freedom of judgement than was suitable for a cleric. After this time he never alluded to his clerical past. 
Williams's freer thinking was pursued in the university extension lectures which he gave for Cambridge and London. He took his work seriously, even seeking to extend his teaching into the Oxford province. His lectures were attended by audiences sometimes 350 strong, first in Devon, then in Norfolk, Northumberland, Sussex, Lincoln, Yorkshire, and Derbyshire. As was the custom, he prepared booklets to accompany his courses, which ranged over English literature from Shakespeare upwards. The quality of these lectures may be gathered not only from his trenchantly worded syllabuses, but from his book 'Two Centuries of the English Novel' (1911), which consists of estimates of a dozen of our greatest novelists, his favourites being Thackeray, Meredith, and Butler -- with Conrad to complete the list, on the evidence of a later book. He himself wrote a novel, 'Discovery' (1913), preceded by a little book of poems, 'The Ballad of Two Great Cities' (1912). 
Williams married Jean (died 1948), only daughter of Andrew Chalmers MD in 1913, and joined the army late the following year. He served with the French forces in the Vosges and later as captain with the British in the mechanical transport section of the Royal Army Service Corps. After the war he returned to academia with 'Modern English Writers' (1918), presumably written while on active service. 'Outlines of Modern English Literature, 1890-1914' appeared in 1920. The amount of reading behind both books is immense. 
Williams was called to the bar in 1920 (Inner Temple) without any apparent intention of practising. In 1921 he again plunged into new paths, breaking all London ties, and settling at Aspenden House, Buntingford, Hertfordshire, from which he did not return to London until 1950. He now threw himself into public duties; he served as a JP, and in 1928 began work as a Hertfordshire county councillor, becoming vice-chairman in 1939 and chairman in 1947, and remaining in that office until 1952. He was chairman of the county education committee in 1939-47 and a member of the library subcommittee, of which he was chairman for over twenty years until his resignation in 1962. This subcommittee meant a great deal to him: he believed in the work the libraries were doing and did all he could to promote book borrowing. To these labours he added in 1950-63 those of chairman of the local history council, and such church offices as are open to the laity. 
The claims of authorship were not, however, neglected. Bibliography and editing became a main interest, and his scholarship was both trenchant and gracefully expressed. His first book might seem to forbid eloquence -- 'Dean Swift's library with a facsimile of the original sale catalogue and some account of two manuscript lists of his books' (1932). A paper in 'The Library' in 1935 attributed to Swift the 'History of the Four Last Years of the Queen' (1758), and when in 1951 Herbert Davis reached this particular work in his edition of the complete prose, Williams provided him with an introduction, as he had in 1941 for 'Gulliver's Travels'. Williams's important edition of Swift's poems was published in 1937, a revised edition following in 1958. The edition of the 'Journal to Stella' appeared in 1948. 
On 'Gulliver's Travels' Williams was the authority: his first publication on it was in 1925, when he contributed to 'The Library' 'The Motte editions of 'Gulliver's travels'', almost simultaneously with his edition of the first of them for the First Edition Club, complete with a long introduction and explanatory notes. Later on Williams's discovery, made independently by an American scholar at about the same time, of the superiority of Faulkner's Dublin edition of 1735 to that of the 1726 edition provided him with the topic for his 1950 Sandars lectures at Cambridge. There was much more of Swift left for his continued labours and in 1963 the first three volumes of the 'Letters' were published, followed in 1965, after his death, by the remaining two. His work on Swift was crowned by his bequest of the old books in his library to the university which had trained him in theology. 
Williams was president of the Bibliographical Society in 1938-44 and was elected FBA in 1944 and FSA in 1948. In 1951 he was knighted for his services both to bibliography and to county administration. The University of Durham conferred an honorary DLitt on him in 1954. His wife had died in 1948 and the following year he married his old friend Pauline Louise (died 1969), eldest daughter of Major C. F. Campbell-Renton, of Mordington and Lamberton, Berwickshire. 
As a person Williams was of commanding aspect, aquiline of face and straight of back. He liked presiding over public meetings and was always completely reliable in the discharge of all offices. At dinner parties -- for instance at the Athenaeum, of which he was a member -- he was an affable companion, especially when he could endlessly chat in high-pitched tones about scholarly matters. When he found his own books praised by someone he admired he could not help flushing with pleasure, having every right to be vain of his achievement in improving the twentieth century's sense of Swift's greatness. Williams died at his home, 43 Albert Court, Kensington Gore, London, on 24 October 1964. 


@@@@@


doc= 36923


Williams, Hugh (1843-1911), ecclesiastical historian, the son of Hugh Williams (1812/13-1905), carrier and small freeholder, of Menai Bridge, Anglesey, and his wife, Jane, was born at Menai Bridge on 17 September 1843. After attending schools in his native village and at Bangor, he worked for some years as a mason, at the same time continuing his studies. In 1864 he entered the Calvinistic Methodist college, Bala, where he acted as one of the tutors between 1867 and 1869. He graduated BA (London) in 1870 (first in second-class honours in classics), and MA (London) in 1871 (second in philosophy honours). From 1872 to 1875 he conducted a grammar school at Menai Bridge, at the same time ministering to Calvinistic Methodists in Anglesey, being ordained in 1873. He was appointed professor of Greek and mathematics at Bala in August 1873 and took up the post in the following year. In the vacation of 1874 he visited Germany to study the language. On 31 December 1884 he married Mary, eldest daughter of Urias Bromley of Old Hall, Chester; they had no children. 
When the Bala college was converted into a theological college in 1891 Williams was appointed professor of church history. In 1903-4 he was moderator of the North Wales Calvinistic Methodist Association. On 19 April 1904 he was awarded the degree of DD by Glasgow University. His hard work told upon his health, and he was for some time troubled by a form of laryngitis. In addition to his other work he preached every Sunday (though not reckoned a popular preacher) and conducted a weekly 'Bible' class. He was a member of the theological board and court of the University of Wales; also of the council of the Bangor college (later University of Wales, Bangor). After suffering for nearly two years from arterial disease, he died at the college in Bala on 11 May 1911, and was buried in the churchyard of Llanycil, Merioneth, the parish in which Bala is situated. 
Williams published commentaries in Welsh on 'Galatians' and 'Colossians' but his historical works were more significant. He made his mark by his edition of 'Gildas', with English translation and notes, published in two parts in the 'Cymrodorion Record' series in 1899 and 1901. He also published various magazine articles and separate papers, including 'Some aspects of the Christian church in Wales in the fifth and sixth centuries' (1895), 'The four disciples of Illtud' (1897), and the article on the Welsh church in the 1889-96 edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Cambrensis' ('Gwyddoniadur Cymreig'). These were followed by a review of Heinrich Zimmer's 'Keltische Kirche' (1901), 'Pelagius in Irland' (1901) in the 'Zeitschrift fur Celtische Philologie' (1903), and the article on the British church in James Hastings's 'Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics' (1910). These essays prepared the way for his most significant work, 'Christianity in Early Britain', which was published posthumously in 1912. It brought him a considerable reputation in Britain, France, and Germany. Placing great emphasis upon fact and eschewing speculation, it set a new standard of scholarship. Inevitably, however, its conclusions have to be modified with the passage of time, particularly in the light of archaeological discoveries in recent decades. 


@@@@@


doc= 36924


Williams, Ivy (1877-1966), first woman barrister in England, was born on 7 September 1877 at 21 Devon Square, Newton Abbot, Devon, the daughter of George St Swithin Williams, solicitor of 12 King Edward Street, Oxford, and of his wife, Emma Ewers (died 1921). She had one brother, Winter ('b'. 17 Sept 1875), a barrister, educated at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, who was killed during the First World War. In his memory Ivy endowed in 1923 two law scholarships at Oxford, one for women only. 
Educated privately with her brother, Ivy Williams studied Latin, Greek, Italian, and Russian, travelled in Europe, and spoke French and German fluently. At nineteen she joined the Society of Oxford Home Students (later St Anne's College), under its first principal, Mrs Arthur Johnson, was taught by Edward Jenks and William S. Holdsworth, and took a second class in jurisprudence in 1900 and in the BCL examination in 1902. She also took a second class in the London University examination, obtaining an LLD in 1903. Owing to the restrictions on women students she was not able to matriculate at Oxford until 7 October 1920, and received her BA, MA, and BCL a week later on 14 October 1920. 
In that same year women were first admitted to the inns of court and Ivy Williams, who was already forty-two years old, with the sponsorship of Sir John Simon, joined the Inner Temple on 26 January 1920. On 10 May 1922 she was called to the bar by Henry Dickens on a final bar examination certificate of honour (first class), awarded in Michaelmas term 1921, which excused her two terms' dinners and thereby gave her priority over some forty women who, though anxious to be called, had either not passed their final examinations or kept the terms required by the ordinances prior to call. Thus Ivy Williams became the first woman to be called to the English bar, though Ulster-born Frances Kyle had been called six months earlier to the Irish bar. The strength of her feelings at this lengthy deferment of recognition by the bar is evidenced by her comment, reported as 'a threat' by the 'Law Journal' (34, 1904, 1-2): 'The legal profession will have to admit us in their own defence... a band of lady University lawyers will say to the Benchers and the Law Society 'Admit us or we shall form a third branch of the profession and practice as outside lawyers'.' Having characterized her comment in 1904 as 'a futile attempt of a persistent lady to gain admission to the Bar' (ibid.), the 'Law Journal' revised its view, describing Dr Williams's call to the bar in 1922 as 'one of the most memorable days in the long annals of the legal profession'. Even so, its editor, noting that she did not intend to practise, concluded that the admission of women 'was never likely to be justified by any success they will achieve in the field of advocacy' ('Law Journal', 57, 1922, 161). 
From 1920 to 1945 Ivy Williams was tutor and lecturer in law to the Society of Oxford Home Students. She was elected an honorary fellow of St Anne's College in 1956. She was a dedicated teacher and scholar and devoted endless thought and care to the work and careers of her pupils and to the general advancement of women in the legal profession. Recognition in her lifetime came by way of academic honours. In 1923 she was awarded the degree of DCL at Oxford, the first woman to be thus honoured. The award was in respect of the publication of 'The Sources of Law in the Swiss Civil Code', described as 'an extremely readable introduction to the study of the latest of the great continental codes' (H. F. Jolowicz, 'Cambridge Law Journal', 2, 1924, 132) and 'an excellent monograph... not withstanding occasional symptoms of inexperience' (E. Schuster KC, 'Journal of the Society of Comparative Legislation and International Law', 5, 1923, 216-26). In 1925 she published 'The Swiss Civil Code: English Version, with Notes and Vocabulary', which, as she herself noted in the introduction, received the appreciation of the Swiss federal authorities. Her two books were republished in 1976. She served in 1930 as delegate to The Hague conference for the Codification of International Law, under Sir Maurice L. Gwyer, and in 1932 as a member of the Aliens Deportation Advisory Committee under Roland Vaughan Williams. 
In appearance Ivy Williams was slender, above average height, dark-haired, and possessed of fine blue eyes. Her recreations included tennis, travelling, gardening, and driving. From 1920 she lived at 30 Staverton Road, Oxford, and shared a house near Ludgershall, Buckinghamshire, with Miss Nora MacMunn, tutor in geography and sister of Lieutenant-General Sir George Fletcher MacMunn. Shy and reserved in manner, Ivy Williams was a woman of strong religious belief and the highest principle and to her friends and those who worked with her she was kind, wise, mild, and full of humour. After her mother's death in 1921 she was comfortably off and quietly made a number of generous benefactions to academic, medical, and other causes. 
In her later years, realizing that her eyesight was failing, Ivy Williams taught herself to read braille and found so much difficulty that she systematized her learning, first into a booklet and later into a braille primer which was published for the National Institute for the Blind in 1948 and went into more than one edition. She herself had correspondence pupils in many parts of Britain whom she taught to read and write in braille almost to the end of her long life. She died at her Oxford home on 18 February 1966. 'Of no one could it more truly be said', wrote Miss Ruth Butler, former vice-principal of the Society of Oxford Home Students, in her obituary, 'that 'she turned her necessity to glorious gain', using in old age for the service of others her powers and enthusiasm which had won her distinction in her youth'. 


@@@@@


doc= 36925


Williams, John Carvell (1821-1907), nonconformist political organizer, was born on 20 September 1821 at Trafalgar Square, Stepney, London, the eldest of the six children of John Allen Williams (died 1835), port surveyor for HM customs and excise, and his wife, Mary (died 1881), daughter of John Carvell of Lambeth. It is indicative of the social pressures on nonconformists which Williams devoted his life to combating that although his parents were Congregationalists he was baptized on 8 August 1824 at the parish church of St Dunstan. Eight months earlier his parents had joined the Stepney meeting where Joseph Fletcher ministered. Williams's formal education was confined to the schools associated with this chapel. When he was thirteen years old his father died and his school days abruptly ended. Finding a place in a firm of proctors in Doctors' Commons, he continued there for thirteen years, eventually securing a managing clerkship while gaining an extensive knowledge of ecclesiastical law. Williams's political consciousness was sharpened in 1841 when a copy of Fletcher's sermon on the birth of the prince of Wales was returned by the court because its author was a dissenter. When the nonconformist community as a whole was aroused by the education clauses in Sir James Graham's 'Factory Bill' (1843), a local committee was formed to agitate against this measure and Williams became one of its secretaries, continuing in this capacity when it became the East London Religious Liberty Society. 
This first position as an organizer of pressure-group politics was short-lived. Williams attended the founding conference of Edward Miall's British Anti-State Church Association in 1844 and the East London Society dissolved itself in deference to this national effort. Several years later the association resolved to hire a full-time secretary and Williams was eventually chosen, beginning what would become his life's work in August 1847. His future father-in-law, Richard Goodman, a timber merchant from Hornsey, London, predicted when Williams accepted the secretaryship of the young, militant association that within twelve months he would be 'clapped into jail' ('The Liberator', August 1906, 120). This prophecy proved false and on 14 August 1849 he married Goodman's daughter Anne (1814/15-1902). The couple had five children, but only their second, Sidney, survived into adulthood. They lived at 17 Stonefield Street, Islington, London, and worshipped at nearby Claremont Chapel. Their minister therefore was, ironically, John Blackburn, a prominent Congregationalist who had denounced the association at its birth. Williams was appointed to the chapel's management committee and he was never long thereafter without some position in the succession of churches which he joined. In 1857 Williams and his family moved to St Leonard's Road, Surbiton, Surrey, and he soon became a deacon at Surbiton Park Chapel. 
In 1848 Williams became a member of the executive committee of the association which, after a name change in 1853, was commonly known as the Liberation Society. Williams had repeatedly publicized the association's views by writing to 'The Nonconformist' and by July 1855 the society was ready to launch its own journal, 'The Liberator'. Williams became its editor and wrote many of the articles himself. To his friends Williams preferred to be known by his second name; he likewise signed his letters for publication 'J. Carvell Williams' and was referred to in 'The Liberator' as 'Mr Carvell Williams'. His duties and power expanded along with the society's work and by the end of 1863 he was considered its chief of staff. 
As the person responsible for the day-to-day running of the society, Williams deserves to share a portion of the credit for the achievement of some of its goals, such as the abolition of compulsory church rates (1868). The grievance, however, which Williams personally laboured most to alleviate was religious inequalities in the burial laws. This issue was addressed piecemeal by parliament and Williams's efforts can be tracked over half a century, from his letter criticizing the 'Metropolitan Interments Bill' (1850) to his support for the 'Burial Grounds Act' (1900). He was the chief promoter of the 'Burials Bill' carried by George Osborne Morgan in 1880. More of his publications were dedicated to this grievance than to any other issue, notably 'A Plea for a Free Churchyard' (1870) and 'The New Position of the Burials Question' (1878). 
In September 1867 Williams toured Ireland and helped to secure Roman Catholic support for the society's preferred solution to Irish ecclesiastical tensions: the disendowment of all religious parties and disestablishment. His most significant impact outside England, however, was in Wales. Williams had been one of the society's representatives on the tour in 1862 which sought to awaken dissenters to their political potential and thereby helped to produce a harvest of Welsh nonconformist MPs in the decades which followed. He was the co-author with Henry Richard of the volume entitled 'Disestablishment' (1885) which appeared in Sydney Buxton's 'Imperial Parliament' series of political handbooks. Williams also supported other pressure-group organizations. His loyal service to the dissenting deputies went so far toward erasing the memory of the days when that body considered the Liberation Society an upstart that its obituary tribute claimed that he deserved the title 'Father of the Deputies' (Guildhall Library, MS 3083/16, 35-6). 
During the 1880s Williams became increasingly involved in Liberal Party politics. He joined the National Liberal Club at its founding in 1883 and by 1889 he had become president of the Hornsey Liberal and Radical Association. In 1884 he was chosen as a parliamentary candidate by Chester Liberal Association, but this constituency's loss of a seat under the 'Redistribution Act' thwarted this opportunity. In the following year, however, he was adopted as a candidate for South Nottingham and was successful in the 1885 election. Although this parliament lasted less than a year, Williams's bill for extending the hours for the solemnization of marriages successfully reached the statute books. His pro-home rule stance displeased some of his erstwhile supporters, however, and he lost the 1886 election. In 1889 he was chosen as a candidate for the Mansfield division of Nottinghamshire, winning this seat in the 1892 election. He was re-elected in 1895, but chose not to stand again in 1900. His parliamentary career reflected his long-term interest in churchyard grievances: he served on a select committee to investigate the burial laws (1897-8) and twice introduced a private member's bill on this subject. 
In 1882 Williams and his family moved to 28 Crescent Road, Hornsey, and a decade later to 21 Hornsey Rise Gardens. They had been members at Park Chapel since 1872 and this association continued, although Williams also helped to establish a daughter church at Stroud Green, Essex. His national achievements and dedicated service to his denomination were crowned by his being elected chairman of the Congregational Union for 1900. This was the highest honour English Congregationalism had to offer and only the third time it had been given to a layman. 
Williams outlived all the prominent founders of the Liberation Society and doggedly held onto power well into the Edwardian age. The octogenarian leader finally agreed to resign as the society's chief of staff in June 1906, merrily noting at his retirement dinner that his deafness forced him merely to imagine the content of the congratulatory addresses given by speakers such as David Lloyd George MP. Deaf, blind, and elderly, he died at his son's home, 26 Crouch Hall Lane, Crouch End, Hornsey, on 8 October 1907, the immediate cause probably being congestive cardiac failure. His remains were interred on 12 October at Abney Park cemetery, Stoke Newington, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 36926


Williams, Sir John Fischer (1870-1947), international lawyer, was born in Kensington, London, on 26 February 1870, the only son of John Williams, a member of a firm trading in China, and his wife, Augusta Elizabeth, daughter of Maximilian Fischer, of Liverpool and later of Macau, China. He was educated at Harrow School (of which he wrote a history in 1901) and, when only sixteen, was elected to a scholarship at New College, Oxford, but being too young to matriculate spent a year on the continent studying modern languages. He was placed in the first class in 'literae humaniores' and elected a fellow of his college in 1892, and was awarded the Arnold essay prize in 1893. He then read for the bar in the chambers of Henry Studdy Theobald, and was called by Lincoln's Inn in 1894. 
After practising for some years at the Chancery bar Williams took silk in 1921. He unsuccessfully contested Oxford City as a Liberal at the general election of December 1910, and, although he did not again seek to enter parliament, he remained a staunch Liberal throughout his life. In 1912 he published his proposals for life insurance for the poor. He was a strong believer in proportional representation and for many years was treasurer of the Proportional Representation Society. In 1914 he published an important study on the subject, entitled 'Proportional Representation and British Politics' (1914; 2nd edn, 1918). 
During the First World War Williams served in the aliens branch of the Home Office, and it was at this time that he began to be specially interested in international law. From 1920 to 1930 he was legal adviser to the British delegation on the reparation commission set up in Paris by the treaty of Versailles, and he represented the delegation in several arbitrations which took place at The Hague between the commission and the German government under the Dawes plan in 1926 and the years following. He also served as chairman of the departmental committee on imprisonment for non-payment of fines (1933), which also investigated other sums payable under a magistrate's order, such as maintenance payments. 
In person Williams was tall and handsome, in manner invariably courteous, modest in his estimate of his own work and generous in his appreciation of others. He was twice married: first, in 1896 to Florence, daughter of Richard Keown-Boyd. The marriage produced one daughter but was subsequently dissolved. In 1911 he married (Eleanor) Marjorie Hay (1880-1961), daughter of Robert Evelyn Hay Murray, of Hascombe, Surrey. The couple had four daughters, one of whom, Jenifer (1914-2005), married in 1941 H. L. A. Hart, who became in 1952 professor of jurisprudence at Oxford. Williams was appointed CBE in 1917 and was knighted in 1923. 
After his retirement in 1930 Williams settled in Oxford and was employed by the Foreign Office on commissions and conferences. He took part as counsel or as arbitrator in several international arbitrations, and in 1936 he was made a member of the British panel on the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague. He also acted as chairman of the royal commission on tithe, the report of which led to the passing of the 'Tithe Act' in 1936. Besides this public work he devoted himself by lecturing and writing to promoting the study of international law, and he collaborated actively in the work of the Institut de Droit International to which he had been elected in 1929. A number of his articles in learned journals were collected in his 'Chapters on Current International Law and the League of Nations' (1929). A monograph, 'Some Aspects of the Covenant of the League of Nations', appeared in 1934. All his work combined the clearness and the realism of a first-class legal mind with the forward-looking outlook of the idealist. His last years were saddened by the failure of the league, from which he had hoped for much, and by the outbreak of war in 1939. Williams died at his home, Bowling Green House, Headington, Oxford, on 17 May 1947. He was survived by his second wife. 
J. L. Brierly', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 36927


Williams, Norman Powell (1883-1943), theologian, was born on 5 September 1883 at Durham, the eldest son of the Revd Thomas Powell Williams, for many years vicar of St Mary's Church, Tyne Dock, South Shields, and his wife and first cousin, Jane, daughter of Edward Williams, farmer, of Radnorshire. Williams, who was the third of six children but the only one to survive, was educated at the Royal Grammar School, Newcastle upon Tyne, and Durham School, and in 1902 he was elected scholar of Christ Church, Oxford. After taking a first class in honour moderations (1904) and in 'literae humaniores' (1906) he held a prize fellowship at Magdalen College from 1906 to 1909, and during part of that time studied at the universities of Strasbourg and Berlin where he made the acquaintance of C. G. A. V. Harnack and Albert Schweitzer. He was ordained deacon in 1908, on the title of his Magdalen fellowship, and priest in 1909, having in the meantime been elected chaplain fellow of Exeter College. 
Williams was a brilliant tutor and lecturer, and was fortunate in having some able pupils, among whom were Geoffrey Fisher (later archbishop of Canterbury) and the Revd Philip Thomas Byard Clayton. His initial discourse to a new pupil was summarized in his chapter 'What is theology?' in the book 'The Study of Theology' (1939), edited by Kenneth Kirk, bishop of Oxford. During the First World War Williams held three appointments as schoolmaster, at Eton College (1916-17), Malvern College (1917), and the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth (1918-19). 
Williams was a notable Bampton lecturer at Oxford for 1924; his lectures were published as 'The Ideas of the Fall and of Original Sin'. The historical part, which occupied the first six lectures, was a contribution of permanent value, but the last two lectures in which he turned from history to reconstruction, and in which he made great use of the new study of psychology, won less approval. These lectures formed the thesis with which Williams took the degree of doctor of divinity, and in the year in which they were published (1927) he was elected to the Lady Margaret professorship of divinity with a canonry of Christ Church. 
Williams devoted much of his time to the improvement of the services and furniture of the cathedral. He was made treasurer of the chapter, and for the last four years of his life was subdean. He was also active in regard to the affairs of the church at large, being intimately concerned with the establishment of communion between the Church of England and the Old Catholic churches in 1932, and with the work of the Westminster Group and the Church Self-Government League. He was one of the first two proctors for Oxford University in the convocation of Canterbury (1936). 
Theologically Williams belonged to what is sometimes called the liberal catholic school in the Church of England. In his early life he engaged in some controversy in defence of the traditional belief in the resurrection and in defence of the use of the Athanasian creed. Throughout his life he was particularly concerned with the problem of authority in matters of belief and in public worship. His principal writings in this connection were: 'Form and Content in the Christian Tradition', a correspondence with William Sanday, published in 1916; an article, 'Tradition', in James Hastings's 'Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics' (1926); and 'The theology of the Catholic revival' in 'Northern Catholicism' (edited by him in conjunction with Charles Harris in 1933). At the time of his death he was engaged upon a commentary on the epistle to the 'Romans'. 
In 1927 Williams married Muriel de Lerisson, daughter of Arthur Philip Cazenove, stockbroker. They had two sons, and three daughters of whom the youngest died in infancy. In manner Williams generally appeared cold and reserved. He was shy and did not make friends easily, while his concise and emphatic manner of speech, combined with a certain impatience of stupid people, made approach to him difficult. In his sermons he was able to give expression more easily to his feelings. He was a most eloquent preacher, admirably lucid, impressive, and stimulating. His writings were marked by an equal lucidity and great power of logic. Williams died at Christ Church on 11 May 1943; he was survived by his wife. 
E. W. Kemp', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 36928


Williams, Sir Roland Lomax Bowdler Vaughan (1838-1916), judge, was born in Queen Square, Bloomsbury, on 31 December 1838, the fifth son of Sir Edward Vaughan Williams (1797-1875) and his wife, Jane Margaret Bagot. Sir Edward was justice of the court of common pleas from 1846 to 1865 and the grandson of Serjeant John Williams, author of the well-known commentary on Saunders's 'Reports'. Vaughan Williams was educated at Westminster School, whence he was elected to a junior studentship at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1856. He graduated in 1860 with second-class honours in the school of jurisprudence and modern history. He then read in chambers with Hassard Hume Dodgson (1803-1884), the special pleader, also of Westminster and Christ Church. He was called to the bar by Lincoln's Inn in November 1864 and joined the south-eastern circuit. The following year he married Laura Susanna, daughter of Edmund Lomax of Netley, Shere, Surrey, and assumed the additional name of Lomax. 
In 1870 Vaughan Williams published 'The Law and Practice of Bankruptcy', a work which reached its thirteenth edition in 1925, and for many years was the standard authority on the subject. He eventually obtained a large common-law practice but his reputation at the bar was one of learning rather than of advocacy, and it was not until 1889, when he was over fifty, that he became a queen's counsel. He practised within the bar for less than a year, for on 10 February 1890, on the death of Sir Henry Manisty, he was appointed by Lord Halsbury (for whom, when solicitor-general, Vaughan Williams had acted as 'devil') to be a judge of the Queen's Bench Division. He was knighted the same year. In 1891 the bankruptcy jurisdiction of the High Court was assigned to him and during the next seven years he rendered conspicuous service in applying from the bench his wide experience to the problems of bankruptcy and liquidation, subjects in which the law was then still in a stage of development. Among the few 'causes celebres' that came before him were the Salomon case and the case of the New Zealand Loan and Mercantile Agency, of which Anthony John Mundella, president of the Board of Trade, was a director. The latter case involved delicate political complications, and Vaughan Williams conducted it with rigid independence and impartiality (1894). 
In 1897, on the resignation of Lord Justice Lopes (Baron Ludlow), Vaughan Williams was promoted to be a lord justice of appeal, with the dignity of a privy councillor, and he sat as a member of the Court of Appeal for seventeen years. During this long period of service he was naturally called upon to deal with every kind of civil litigation; apart from the common law and bankruptcy, on which he was clearly a recognized authority, he showed a thorough grasp of such subjects as local government and revenue law. For several years it also fell to his lot to preside over and to give the leading judgment in the equity side of the court. His reputation as a judge emphasized, for good or ill, both his love of legal technicalities and his intellectual commitment to the logically unstructured common law; he is even said to have opposed the establishment of law schools, as he thought they would certainly lead eventually to a code replacing the common law. Whether his attention to the legal niceties represented a conscientious approach to his work, or rather a kind of self-indulgence, was a matter on which contemporaries differed. His great loquacity only served to exacerbate this: 'to gain [his] ear... you had to be ready to discourse -- or rather, perhaps, listen with apparent interest to his discourse -- on propositions of law' (Parry, 186). To Frederick Pollock he was 'terribly diffuse and slipshod, though he is a very clever man' (Pollock to Oliver Wendell Holmes jun., 6 July 1903); to most of the bar he seems to have been a popular, if somewhat idiosyncratic, figure. 
Almost the only occasion on which Vaughan Williams undertook external work was in connection with the royal commission on the disestablishment of the Welsh church, of which he was appointed chairman in 1906. He handled the commission effectively and with a complete freedom from political bias; the quick solution of the difficulties attending Welsh disestablishment and disendowment were largely attributed to him. He retired from the bench in 1914, and died on 8 December 1916 at his home, High Ashes Farm, Abinger, near Dorking, where he had spent his leisure time, farming and following other country pursuits, throughout his professional career; he was survived by his wife. His eldest son, Roland Edmund Lomax Vaughan Williams (1866-1949), became KC in 1913 and was recorder of Cardiff from 1930 to 1945. Two other sons died in childhood. Ralph Vaughan Williams, the composer, was his nephew. 


@@@@@


doc= 36929


Williams, Rowland (1823-1905), Congregational minister and poet, was born in March 1823 at Pen-y-graig, near the village of Trefdraeth, Anglesey, the son of Robert Williams, farmer, and his wife, Grace, 'nee' Rowlands. When he was five years old his parents went to live at Rhostrehwfa, near Llangefni, and from that place he took his bardic name (Mon is the Welsh for Anglesey). He was brought up as a Calvinistic Methodist until the age of fourteen and was then apprenticed to a carpenter, working at his trade at Llangefni, Bangor, Deiniolen, and Y Felinheli. In 1847 he returned to his native county and was raised to the pulpit by Smyrna Independent Church at Llangefni; in the same year he entered the Independent (Congregational) college at Bala. On completing his course he received a call from churches at Bagillt and Flint, where he was ordained on 4 June 1851; two years later, on 12 May 1853, he married his predecessor's sixty-year-old widow, Mary Evans, the daughter of Abraham Williams. His next pastorate was at Bryn Seion, Brymbo (1855-62), and for a while he also took charge of a church at Wrexham. After a brief but strenuous ministry at Bethesda, the chapel after which the Caernarvonshire slate-quarrying village was named, in 1862 he moved to the church at Fetter Lane, London (later to become Tabernacle, King's Cross), where he was to remain until 1881. After returning to Anglesey in that year as minister of Llannerch-y-medd, where he was unhappy, he moved to Llangollen, Denbighshire, seven years later. He retired in 1893 and went to live in Rhyl, Flintshire. 
Hwfa Mon, as he was generally known in Wales, was a gifted preacher but not in the front rank, for his congregations found him very long-winded. It was, rather, for the prominent part he played in the pageantry of the national eisteddfod that he was held in high esteem by the public. He was invested as a member of the Gorsedd of Bards of the Isle of Britain at Aberffraw in 1849 and won his first bardic chair, one of many prizes he was to accumulate, at a local eisteddfod held at Llanfair Talhaearn, Denbighshire, in 1855. The highest distinction of all, the chair of the national eisteddfod (which is awarded for verse in the strict metres), came his way in 1862, when his ode 'Y flwyddyn' ('The year') was successful at Caernarfon; his triumph was all the greater in that he defeated the veteran Eben Fardd (Ebenezer Thomas), whom posterity has judged to be the better poet. He won the chair again in 1873 and 1878, and the crown (given for verse in the free metres) in 1867. Collected editions of his verse, both entitled 'Gwaith barddonol Hwfa Mon', were published in 1883 and 1903. Like so many of his contemporaries towards the end of the nineteenth century, he was dominated by the rules of 'cynghanedd', the traditional prosody above which the Welsh poet is expected to soar, and there now seems to be little literary merit in his work. 
From 1875 to 1892 Hwfa Mon's part in the eisteddfod's competitions was more often that of adjudicator than competitor, and he was much in demand in that capacity. In 1894, after the death of Clwydfardd 
(David Griffith; 1800-1894)
, he was elected archdruid. His personality and staunch belief in the antiquity and authenticity of the gorsedd -- it had, in fact, been devised by Iolo Morganwg 
(Edward Williams; 1747-1826)
in 1792 -- gave the bardic guild a new dignity and popular appeal as part of the great national festival, not least by virtue of his sonorous voice, impressive stage presence, and the reforms which were brought about in its regalia, ceremonies, and organization during his tenure of office. 
Hwfa Mon died on 10 November 1905 at his home, Llys Hwfa, at 11 River Street, Rhyl, and was buried in the new cemetery at Rhyl four days later. There were no children from his marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 36930


Williams, Thomas, Baron Williams of Barnburgh (1888-1967), trade unionist and politician, was born at Blackwell, in Derbyshire, on 18 March 1888, the tenth of fourteen children (eleven of whom survived infancy) of James Williams (died 1913), a miner, and his wife, Mary Ann Parton (died 1924). Aged two, Williams moved with his family to Swinton, in the burgeoning south Yorkshire coalfield. At the age of eleven he left school and began work at nearby Kilnhurst colliery. He experienced directly the perils of mining: while working with his father, the latter was blinded in one eye and subsequently suffered complete blindness, and Richard, an older brother, was left disabled by a pit accident and spent the rest of his life confined to a wheelchair. Tom Williams soon became an active trade unionist and, like many young activists in the Yorkshire coalfield at this time, he rejected Lib-Labism and was drawn to independent working-class politics. 
Williams moved to Wath Main colliery and, aged twenty, was elected to the Yorkshire Miners' Association (YMA) branch. Married on 7 September 1910 to Elizabeth Ann Andrews (died 1977), he was sacked in March 1912 for protesting about working conditions. Impressed by his rectitude and abstinence, the Wath Main YMA branch helped secure him the post of steward at the working men's club. Meanwhile he attended evening classes at Barnsley Technical Institute, qualifying as a deputy. At the same time his political horizons broadened. In 1914 he returned to the pits as a miner rather than an under-official, working at Elsecar Main, moving in 1915 to the new Barnburgh Main colliery, where he was elected checkweighman in 1916, YMA branch secretary, and subsequently branch delegate to the YMA council in Barnsley. 
Already a member of the Independent Labour Party, Williams was drawn by the radicalizing effect of the 1914-18 war to the British Socialist Party, although he speedily abandoned it in favour of the Labour Party. He can best be described as a 'non-ideological' socialist, and established a reputation as something of a firebrand. He was, for example, a noted critic of the war in the YMA. There is fragmentary evidence that pit managers and YMA officials conspired (unsuccessfully) to have him 'combed out' of the pit for military service in 1918. From 1918 he was a poor-law guardian for Doncaster, and in the following year he was elected a member of Bolton upon Dearne urban district council, which was regarded as one of the most progressive of the miner-dominated local councils, especially in the field of housing. 
In October 1920, with the backing of the YMA, Williams was invited to contest the Don Valley constituency as Labour candidate at the next general election. The seat had been held since 1918 by James Walton, the YMA delegate for the powerful Manvers Main colliery, who had failed to gain the official nomination and won the seat as National Democratic and Labour Party candidate against Edward Hough, the official candidate. Walton had been an enthusiastic supporter of the war and of co-operation between management and men; Williams was a noted opponent of both. In November 1922 Williams defeated Walton and took the Don Valley seat for Labour, retaining it until he retired from the Commons in 1959. He served as ministerial bag-carrier (parliamentary private secretary) to N. E. Noel-Buxton, the minister of agriculture, in the 1924 Labour government, and to Margaret Bondfield, the minister of labour, in the 1929 government. 
Williams's rise in the Labour ranks was helped by the decimation of 1931. Few of the survivors, among whom mining MPs were prominent, were thought capable of carrying the burdens of opposition, but Williams was identified as one of those capable of so doing. The Parliamentary Labour Party (PLP) enjoyed a surfeit of experts on the coal industry, so after 1931 Williams rapidly carved a role as Labour's expert on agriculture. This was not particularly strange as his constituency was, apart from the pit villages, rural and agricultural, and as a poor-law guardian he was well aware of the plight of agricultural communities, where social and economic conditions were even worse than in the pit villages. During these opposition years Williams gained the respect not only of the PLP but also of the Conservative benches for his knowledge of and sympathy with agriculture. In this period he grew close to Attlee, seconding David Grenfell's motion at a meeting of the PLP in November 1935 that Attlee should continue as party leader until after the general election. This reflected the strong mutual respect between Attlee and the mining MPs; in old age Attlee described Williams as 'a grand man' (Harris, 561). 
In 1940 Churchill appointed Williams as R. S. Hudson's deputy at the Ministry of Agriculture. Inter-war agriculture, like coal, had suffered from a severe depression, and Williams recognized the war, with its demand for maximum food production, as an opportunity to revive the industry. Production was hindered by the farmers' suspicion of government, which was resolved partly by the seriousness of the national crisis but also by the careful nurturing of relationships with farmers, in which Williams played a leading role. The Ministry of Agriculture had huge compulsory powers, but Williams preferred to work by co-operation and to help farmers farm well and profitably. Intervention on this scale was bound to provoke resistance, but a community of interest brought the ministry and the National Farmers' Union (NFU) closer together. The farmers ensured food production in return for government-guaranteed prices. Williams conceded this system was neither perfect nor problem free, but it had the virtue of working. Williams entrenched ministry-NFU wartime co-operation and the guaranteed price system as the basis of the 'Agriculture Act' (1947). He faced suspicion not only from the farmers but also criticism from the Labour Party at the 1946 conference for feather-bedding the farmers and not doing enough for the farmworkers. As with Bevan and the doctors, Williams recognized his dependence on the farmers, and that the 'Agriculture Act' and annual price review system were designed to give agriculture a degree of stability and financial security. In turn, this would lead to better wages and conditions for agricultural workers. The act has been described as a 'dramatically effective measure' (Morgan, 304). 
Politically Williams was very much a centrist in the 1945-51 Labour government, although he was strongly anti-communist and hostile to industrial disputes which, he felt, undermined the Labour government. He supported, for example, the postponing of steel nationalization, but was an enthusiastic supporter of Bevan's plans for the National Health Service. In opposition he remained agriculture spokesman until his retirement in 1959. In February 1961 he was made a life peer. He was sworn of the privy council in 1941, and from 1961 was one of three members of the political honours scrutiny committee. 
In his foreword to Williams's autobiography, 'Digging for Britain' (1965), Attlee described Williams as 'the most distinguished' of a group 'of young miners of remarkable quality' who entered the Commons in 1922; as minister of agriculture he judged that Williams 'effected nothing less than a revolution in British agriculture' and that 'his place in history is assured as the greatest British Minister of Agriculture of all time' (Attlee, 7-8). Williams's political career reflected his strong conviction that the purpose of political activity -- in the union or in parliament -- was to make a difference to the lives of working-class people. He was no class warrior, and his early militancy, a reflection of a sense of personal and collective injustice, was intended as a lever to secure a fair deal for the powerless within the 'status quo', using the union and the Labour Party as its instrument. His career in local and national politics, culminating in the 1945-51 government, convinced him that radical reform was possible. His later years were marred by rheumatoid arthritis. Tom Williams died at his home, 46 Town Moor Avenue, Doncaster, on 29 March 1967, being survived by his wife and their son (who was formerly married to Herbert Morrison's daughter) and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 36931


Williams, Watkin Hezekiah (1844-1905), schoolmaster and poet, was born on 14 March 1844 at Cwmgarw, Llangadog, Carmarthenshire, the second of the ten children of Hezekiah Williams, farmer, and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Williams. He was brought up on his father's farm of Cwmgarw Ganol, near Ammanford. At eight years of age he was employed in the coalmines then being opened up in the district, and he worked, chiefly as a collier, with occasional periods of attendance at various local schools, until the age of twenty-seven. On 9 April 1870 he married Mary Jones (1846/7-1871), a dressmaker of Trap, Carreg Cennen; she died three weeks after giving birth to their child, and within a year of their marriage. This led Williams to quit his home and occupation, and in January 1872 he entered the school of a relative, Evan Williams of Merthyr Tudful. His progress was rapid, and he was soon able to give assistance in teaching to Evan Williams and his successor, J. J. Copeland. In 1874 he resolved to qualify for the Independent ministry; he returned home, began to preach at Gibea Chapel, and, after a little preliminary training, was admitted to the Presbyterian college at Carmarthen in 1875. During this period he was writing poetry and being guided by Richard Williams (Gwydderig) who tutored him in 'cynghanedd'. On the conclusion of his course he married Anne Davies ('b'. 1853/4) of Llanelli on 10 July 1879, and accepted, instead of a pastorate, a post as teacher of a private school at Llangadog. Differences among the staff led to his moving, with the Revd D. E. Williams, to Ammanford in 1880, where the two friends founded the Hope Academy, a school which prepared pupils for the nonconformist ministry and other professions. In 1884 Watkin became the highly regarded principal of Ysgol y Gwynfryn, as the Hope Academy was now known, and remained so until his death. He was ordained an Independent minister in 1894, but held no pastoral charge. 
Watcyn Wyn, as Williams was generally known, was an inspiring and original teacher, whose vivacity and wit endeared him to his pupils and whose early struggles made him a sympathetic guide of young men eager for learning. He had also a wide reputation as a Welsh poet, dating from 1875, when he divided a prize with Islwyn 
(William Thomas; 1832-1878)
at Pwllheli. Both the silver crown and the bardic chair, the two chief poetic prizes of the eisteddfod, were won by him: the former at Merthyr in 1881 for a poem in free metre, 'Life', and the latter at Aberdar in 1885 for an ode in the strict metres entitled 'The truth against the world'. He was also the winner of the crown at the world fair eisteddfod of 1893 at Chicago, the subject being George Washington. These longer productions are not so likely, however, to preserve his memory as the lyrical and humorous poems which came so easily from his pen. Important among his publications are 'Caneuon' (n.d. [1871]; 2nd edn, 1873); 'Hwyr ddifyrion' (1883); 'Llenyddiaeth Gymreig', a survey of Welsh literature (1900); 'Storiau Cymru', versified folk tales (1907); and other works including two novels, 'Irfon mere dydd' (1903) and 'Nansi' (1906), co-authored with Elwyn Thomas. His best-known hymn, still sung in Welsh congregations, is 'Rwy'n gweld o bell y dydd yn dod'. A number of his poems appeared translated in Edward Thomas's 'Beautiful Wales' (1905). His autobiography, 'Adgofion Watcyn Wyn', edited by J. Jenkins (Gwili), appeared in 1907. 
Williams died of heart failure on 19 November 1905 at his home, Gwynfryn, Ammanford, and was buried there in Gellimanwydd cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 36932


Freeman, John Peere Williams- (1858-1943), archaeologist, was born on 13 April 1858 at Hamble Cliff, near Southampton, the youngest son of Frederick Peere Williams-Freeman (1815-1870), landowner, of Greatham, Sussex, and his wife, Augusta Sarah (died 1897), daughter of Captain Henry Edward Napier RN FRS. He was educated at Haileybury College and at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich (1876-8). He obtained a commission in the Royal Artillery, but resigned it soon afterwards for family reasons and studied medicine, first in London at University College Hospital and then at Durham University, taking the degree of MB in 1885 and MD in 1888. From 1889 until 1928 he practised at Weyhill, Hampshire, and held also several clinical appointments. On 16 November 1897 Williams-Freeman married his cousin, Mabel Christiana, daughter of Charles George Napier; they had one son and five daughters, the son and one daughter dying in infancy. On retirement he went to live at Botley, Hampshire, but eventually returned to his former region, living at Thruxton, near Andover. 
Although of no mean standing in the medical profession, it was as an archaeologist that Williams-Freeman earned his chief claim to recognition. From youth onwards his interests were widespread; he was a clear and original thinker and an accurate observer. In 1901 he met a near neighbour, Percy Farrer, who stimulated his growing interest in the prehistoric earthworks around Weyhill. Other contacts followed and in 1915 he published his book 'Field Archaeology as Illustrated by Hampshire', a model of its kind. It was the first book to attempt to set prehistoric man in his natural environment of vegetation, a method that in time became standard procedure. 
Williams-Freeman did no excavation but was first and foremost a field archaeologist, having himself invented that term. In the course of his medical practice he was able to observe the countryside and its natural features. He particularly noted the reaction of the crops to silted-up prehistoric ditches and the like, and realized, before air photography, how informative air photographs would be to the prehistorian. He often discussed these matters with O. G. S. Crawford, and when eventually chance put before him a set of air photographs of his own region, he showed them to the latter, to whom it fell to develop an important new technique. Crawford's works 'Air Survey and Archaeology' (1924) and 'Air Photography for Archaeologists' (1929) followed. 
Williams-Freeman was essentially an alert-minded countryman, bringing to bear upon archaeology a good brain well disciplined by professional training. Although one of the last and best of the amateur, that is, part-time, archaeologists of the nineteenth century, he belonged rather to the twentieth in his methods and outlook, which were those of modern professional archaeologists. He died at his home, Tarvers, Thruxton, on 20 December 1943. 


@@@@@


doc= 36933


Williamson, Alexander William (1824-1904), chemist, was born on 1 May 1824 in Wandsworth, Surrey, the second of three children of Alexander Williamson, a clerk in the East India House, and Antonia McAndrew Williamson, daughter of a London merchant. His father, of Scottish parentage, was a man of high culture and intellect; the family's comfortable financial circumstances were apparently due to his wife's means. He was a friend of the economist and utilitarian philosopher James Mill, who worked in the same office and who lived close by in Wright's Lane, Kensington, after the Williamson family moved there in 1831. About 1840 Williamson resigned his position, and thereafter the family went to live in France and Germany. 
As a boy Williamson had weak health, exacerbated by inappropriate medical care; he suffered from blindness in the right eye and myopia in the left, and a stiff and largely useless left arm. Despite these infirmities, he later developed a sturdy constitution. After attending day schools in Kensington, Paris, and Dijon, in 1841 he enrolled at the University of Heidelberg, intending to study medicine. He was, however, soon attracted to chemistry through the lectures and kind personal attention of Leopold Gmelin (1788-1853). In 1844 Williamson transferred to the University of Giessen in order to study under the world-famous chemist Justus Liebig (1803-1873). Here he made a minor sensation with his first published paper, on a subject (the reactions in solution of 'bleaching salts') which Liebig had assigned as a simple analytical exercise. Concerning this research, he commented presciently in a letter to his father: 'the great difficulty in a research such as that I am now pursuing consists not so much in performing the experiments once fixed upon, as in inventing and choosing from those most calculated to attain the desired object' (Divers, xxvi). 
Williamson received his PhD from Giessen in 1845 and the following year took up temporary residency in Paris. Here he became acquainted with the principal French chemists, including Jean-Baptiste Dumas, Adolphe Wurtz, Auguste Laurent, and Charles Gerhardt. He also took private lessons in mathematics from Auguste Comte, the founder of French positivism, who had been recommended to him by John Stuart Mill. Williamson was for a time a committed positivist, and Comte had high hopes that he would establish an English beachhead for his philosophical system. However, Williamson soon fell away from Comtean orthodoxy. 
Although Williamson published no research during this period, it appears that it was in Paris that he began his fundamental investigations in etherification and reaction mechanics. In 1849, supported by the eminent chemist Thomas Graham, Williamson successfully applied for the professorship of analytical and practical chemistry at University College, London, which was vacant following George Fownes's death. This was one of the earliest academic laboratories in Great Britain in which students were required to perform practical exercises. Williamson's pedagogical impact was substantial during the thirty-eight years he spent in the Birkbeck laboratory at University College. He had strong opinions on teaching technique -- he regarded it as vital to lead from individual facts to general principles, rather than the reverse -- and his students seem to have responded enthusiastically, describing him as a splendid teacher. In 1865 he published a successful elementary textbook, 'Chemistry for Students'. 
Williamson's novel reaction by which ethers could be synthesized was first announced on 3 August 1850 at the Edinburgh meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. It is no exaggeration to say that this paper marked the beginning of a turning point in the science of chemistry. The Williamson ether synthesis was one of the earliest reactions designed with the intent to build up larger molecules from smaller pieces and remains one of the most elegant reactions in organic chemistry. An ether is a molecule with a central oxygen atom connected to two hydrocarbon radicals; Williamson's reaction allowed the chemist to select each radical in advance and then join them together, thus designing new ethers at will. 
But there was an even greater significance to Williamson's discovery. In 1850 European chemists were by no means in agreement on the relative atomic weights of common elements such as carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, and they had no way unambiguously to determine relative molecular sizes. For instance, common alcohol was thought by most chemists to be simply a hydrated form of common ether, whereas Williamson was convinced that ether was about twice the size of alcohol. Williamson's reaction provided a crucial test for this viewpoint. His success in creating a novel asymmetric ether (one in which the two radicals are not the same) was consistent only with the larger formula for ether; the smaller formula would have required the product of the reaction to have been a mixture of two different symmetrical ethers. 
Williamson's 1850 paper, two additional, more detailed, articles on the same reaction published about a year later, and a further series of papers on related subjects in the following years were widely influential. They are all collected in 'Papers on Etherification and on the Constitution of Salts' (1902). The theoretical strategy he had designed to demonstrate the true structural relationships of alcohols and ethers was applied to various molecular systems by a number of other chemists during the 1850s. In the process, much of the existing confusion over relative atomic and molecular weights was eliminated, and a revised system, virtually identical to that in modern use, was established. Williamson's work had the advantage (to chemists) of deriving its force entirely from chemical evidence; chemists were inclined to distrust the growing physical evidence, for example from the theory of gases, that tended to support the new ideas which Williamson was championing. 
These developments were closely connected with what was then called the 'theory of types', and with emergent theories of atomic valence and molecular structure. In his etherification work, Williamson argued for the existence of a 'water type', the molecular construction of which could serve as a model for all other organic compounds containing oxygen, in the same fashion that Wurtz's and August Hofmann's 'ammonia type' of 1849-50 had provided the model for nitrogenous substances. More broadly, such considerations of molecular 'types' led more or less directly to the perception that atoms have definite limited capacities for combination with other atoms, and that atomic concatenations can be discerned and studied. Such structural ideas, which radically transformed chemical science and technology after the middle of the century, were developed under the immediate influence of Williamson's contributions of the early 1850s. The German chemist August Kekule (1829-1896), who was to be the central personality in the development of the classical theory of chemical structure, spent a post-doctoral stint in London in 1853-5, and ever after acknowledged Williamson as the greatest influence on the evolution of his thinking. 
Williamson's etherification studies also had broader implications for the understanding of chemical processes. In the course of this work he proposed a new view of the manner in which molecules interact with one another during the course of a chemical reaction. In place of the prevailing static conception, he suggested a more dynamic model, in which groups of atoms engage in perpetual exchanges until equilibrium is attained or physical forces remove product molecules from the process. His suggestion of ephemeral intermediate entities in chemical reactions was designed partly to oppose the mysterious notion of a 'catalytic force', and all of this did much to prepare the way for the later study of reaction kinetics and the emergence of the law of mass action. 
By the end of the first six years of his professorship Williamson had published a series of papers describing some of the best chemical research of the century. On Graham's resignation in 1855 he was rewarded by his appointment to the chair of general (theoretical) chemistry in addition to his other duties. The increase in income enabled him to marry Emma Catharine Key (died 1923), the daughter of a university colleague, Thomas Hewitt Key, on 1 August 1855. They had two children, Oliver Key (died 1941) and Alice Maude, later Mrs A. H. Fison (died 1946). 
Williamson took his newly expanded professional duties seriously, and his scientific research never really recovered. He was much involved in the reform of scientific education, not only at University College but in Great Britain generally, and even internationally -- for instance, in advocating laboratory work for engineering as well as science students, in agitating for the awarding of science degrees in British universities, and in serving as scientific adviser as well as personal host to groups of visiting Japanese students. Williamson's services as a scientific administrator were also much in demand. From 1850 on he was a leading personality in the Chemical Society of London, and twice served as its president (1863-5 and 1869-71). He was much involved with the British Association for the Advancement of Science and was its president for the 1873 session. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1855, served two terms on its council, and was its foreign secretary from 1873 to 1889. These duties doubtless interfered with his research. Yet another reason for the cessation of his scientific work after 1855 was his turn toward industrially related research. He carried out extensive studies of fireplaces, steam boilers, pharmaceuticals, and heavy chemicals manufacture. However, little of this research resulted in useful innovation or financial gain. 
Perfectly fluent in both French and German, Williamson was also eloquent in his native language; allied with his incisive analytical powers, his verbal skills made him a powerful advocate for whatever position he chose to defend. Some witnesses refer to a certain propensity to use cutting remarks in debate, but most remember him as a man of exquisite kindness and tact. He never allowed differences of opinion to damage personal relationships with colleagues. 
Williamson's most celebrated forensic encounter was with a friend, the Oxford chemist Benjamin Brodie the younger, a noted critic of the atomic theory. Defying his youthful positivism, from 1850 on Williamson had ardently defended the ontological reality of invisibly small atoms, and criticized what was then a fashionable trend towards a certain scepticism regarding atomic theory. When Brodie published his account of a 'chemical calculus' whose intent was to eliminate all atomistic reasoning from the science of chemistry (1866-7), Williamson went on the attack. In masterly addresses before the Chemical Society in 1869 and the British Association in 1873 he systematically laid out the overwhelming evidence for atoms and demolished the arguments of the critics, including those of Brodie. 'Inter alia' he argued that there was an implicit atomism even in Brodie's system, and that everyone, including the most ardent anti-atomists, actually used the theory daily, whether they realized it or not. In this, as in his publications of two decades earlier, he represented and helped to form the views of those chemists who were to complete the transformation of nineteenth-century chemistry. 
Williamson retired in 1887, and moved to an estate which he had purchased in Hindhead, near Haslemere, Surrey, where he practised agriculture on scientific principles. He died at his home on the estate, High Pitfold, Shottermill, after a long illness, on 6 May 1904. He was buried at Brookwood cemetery, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 36934


Williamson, John Thoburn (1907-1958), geologist and diamond mine owner, was born at Montfort, Quebec, Canada, on 10 February 1907, the second of four children and elder son of Bertie J. Williamson, owner of a timber company, and his wife, Rose C. Boyd, who was of French extraction. His father had emigrated from Ireland but was of Scottish descent. The family moved to Montreal when he was twelve. From Macdonald high school at Ste Anne de Bellevue, Williamson entered McGill University where he was soon diverted from law to geology, in which he became interested during a geological expedition on which he accompanied a friend and a group of students. He also became well read in more general literature. Social life he despised but he liked sport and outdoor activities and especially enjoyed fencing. He obtained his BA degree in 1928 with honours in geology, was awarded the Leroy memorial fellowship in geology in 1929, a bursary of the National Research Council of Canada in 1930-31, became a demonstrator in geology and mineralogy, and graduated MSc in 1930 and PhD in 1933. 
In 1933 Williamson accompanied his former professor of geology, Dr Richard Graham, to Johannesburg, where he gave a few lectures to the geology students at the University of the Witwatersrand. Graham had been invited by the directors of De Beers Consolidated Mines to inspect and report on some land which they suspected was diamondiferous. This was the beginning of Williamson's fascination with diamonds and with De Beers, which controlled most of the world's diamond production and marketing at the time. When he was offered a position as a field geologist by a subsidiary of De Beers, Loangwa Concessions, he accepted. This was his introduction to prospecting. The company was searching for copper on the Luangwa River in the north-east corner of Northern Rhodesia, not far from the Tanganyika border. Williamson's application to De Beers for permission to prospect for diamonds in Tanganyika and for a financial grant was refused and he resigned. 
Williamson had his first diamond experience in 1935 when he joined the Tanganyika Gold and Diamond Development Company, working under their American chief geologist, Hank Le Tendresse, whom he succeeded. In 1937 the company decided to suspend operations on grounds of the meagre yields of diamonds but Williamson remained in Tanganyika as an independent prospector. He subsequently took out rights entitling him to prospect for diamonds in Tanganyika. He prospected all over the Lake and the Western province but found nothing worthwhile. He next took a sub-lease of the Mabuki diamond mine, the first to be discovered in Tanganyika, which had been worked since 1925 but yielded too few diamonds to be viable. He pegged two claims nearby and got another area at Kizumbi. By now he had discovered many diamondiferous areas and odd diamonds here and there and had formed the theory that all these stones originated from one source somewhere in Lake province. In his search for diamonds he lived rough, was often ill, and had very little money; but he had a determined faith in his theory which finally brought him to an area which became known as Mwadui. There he found a good gem and from the formation of the gravel came to the conclusion that Mwadui was the source he had been seeking. On 6 March 1940 he pegged some mining claims and obtained an exclusive prospecting licence. In April he pegged further claims and got another licence. Suddenly further prospecting in the country was forbidden and Williamson was unable to register all his claims. An Indian lawyer, I. C. Chopra, living at Mwanza, advised him to form a limited liability company with a nominal capital of 400 shares of $500 each. Williamson kept 299 shares, gave 100 to his brother Percy, and Chopra bought one. Thus the Mwadui mine, commonly referred to as Williamsons, was born. 
Owing to the war and the threat of Italian invasion, Williamson had to operate with the most primitive equipment and very little help. He himself started the men on their work early in the morning and supervised the digging, washing, and sorting of the gravel. Then he drove 12 miles to a river for water in a lorry which often got stuck or broke down. On his return he gave food to the men, then dealt meticulously with the paperwork. Despite the difficulties he spared no effort or expense in looking after his workmen, of whom there were soon 2500. Using mostly local materials he provided houses, a hospital, offices, and other buildings. But it was not until after 1947 that the mine could be properly developed. 
Meantime in 1941 the Colonial Office had advised Williamson of the urgent need for industrial diamonds and he made every effort to produce as many as possible. The Germans, who were in still greater need, managed to get some parcels of stolen diamonds smuggled through to them before the allies put an end to the traffic. The theft of diamonds from the mine, however, continued, and by 1946 had reached such proportions that there were those who thought that the mine had petered out. Williamson knew better, but it was not until 1947 that the government could provide police and not until some years later that the ringleaders were caught and given sentences so stiff that the theft of diamonds was suppressed. 
In 1946 Sir Ernest Oppenheimer, who was always immediately informed of any major discovery of diamonds, became extremely worried about the Mwadui production -- by now amounting to $1.5 million a year -- which Williamson was selling on the open market, and about the effect this could have on world prices. Furthermore the mine, which was a gem producer with a long working life, posed a direct threat to the profitability of De Beers. Williamson, on the other hand, disliked monopolies and had not forgotten the time De Beers had refused permission for him to prospect on their behalf in Tanganyika. After some tough and protracted bargaining the recalcitrant Williamson in 1947 signed a 5-year agreement with the Diamond Corporation, controlled by De Beers, in terms of which Williamson Diamonds would be entitled to a quota percentage of all sales on the world markets by the corporation at current prices. Three years later this agreement caused a serious rift between the two parties which resulted in Williamson preferring to stockpile rather than sell his production to the Diamond Corporation. The official agreement had run its stipulated period of 5 years in January 1952. Williamson's stockpile reputedly was worth more than $6 million and there were plenty of prospective buyers on the market if he refused to renew the agreement. Early in March 1952 Harry Oppenheimer, De Beers's chief representative, flew to Mwadui. The outcome of the meeting with Williamson was a new agreement which would satisfy everyone, and the Diamond Corporation would sell the stockpile. Tanganyika's diamond exports in 1952 amounted to $4.5 million compared with $74,000 in 1951. 
After 1948 expansion was rapid. Many buildings were erected, a heavy media plant was ordered to be built, and roads were constructed and planted with shady trees. Mwadui became a garden city, and the mine became a sanctuary for birds, which came in hundreds to settle on the ponds. Williamson built two very large dams near the mine so that the country round about became cool and green and the increased rainfall brought many benefits. He was most averse to declaring any dividend of the profits of the mine. They were either ploughed back or utilized for contributing to the general good of the country. He provided a school at Shinyanga, financed higher education, and gave $50,000 to Makerere College, Uganda, for building science classrooms. 
Intensely loyal to the crown and Commonwealth, Williamson subscribed heavily to the war loan, gave generously to wartime funds and the Red Cross, and in recognition of his war services transferred a quarter of the mine to his brother, who had been seriously wounded in a commando raid. In October 1947 a rose-coloured diamond of rare beauty weighing 541/2 carats was found. Cut and polished it weighed 23.6 carats. It was made into a brooch surrounded with over a hundred blue-white diamonds of finest purity and presented to the Princess Elizabeth on her marriage to Prince Philip. Another magnificent brooch of blue-white diamonds was presented to Princess Margaret in 1957 when she visited Mwadui. 
Williamson gave large sums to help mining ventures in east Africa and had he not died when he did he would have contributed considerably to the building up of a newly independent east Africa and especially Tanzania. But symptoms of cancer of the throat became manifest and, despite consultation and treatment in London and Canada, he died at Mwadui on 8 January 1958. He was buried there on the same day, less than two months after Sir Ernest Oppenheimer, who had died on 25 November 1957. A statue representing him was erected near the baobab tree where he first camped when he started prospecting at Mwadui. He had received the honorary degree of DSc from McGill in 1956 but as a Canadian citizen had had to refuse the offer of a knighthood. 
Williamson seldom spent any money on himself and went about in khaki drill trousers and an open-necked shirt with short sleeves. He was a handsome man, nearly 6 feet tall, with dark brown hair, and was often mistaken for the well-known film actor Clark Gable. Williamson, who became a legend in his own lifetime, was shy and retiring, taciturn by nature and secretive, but had charming manners and a fine sense of humour which extended to practical jokes. His generosity was proverbial and often anonymous. He received dozens of letters a day from women all over the world offering themselves in marriage. He liked women and they were attracted to him but he never married, despite a longstanding relationship with one of his secretaries, Irene Phillips, whose marriage he had broken up. According to his biographer, Williamson was probably 'the last of the great diamond pioneers' (Gawaine, viii). In this role he was arguably the only man in the twentieth century 'who discovered, developed and maintained from his own resources, without recourse to outside financial assistance, a diamond mine which was to assist in transforming the economy of a backward country and the lives of many people of diverse races' (ibid., vii). At the time of his death shares in Williamson Diamonds Limited numbered 1200, having been increased some years earlier. He held 800, his brother Percy had 300, and his partner I. C. Chopra had 100. After his death these shares were jointly purchased by De Beers Consolidated Mines and the Tanganyikan government for $4,159,000. Production of diamonds at the mine in 1964 was worth over $6 million. 


@@@@@


doc= 36935


Willis, Henry (1821-1901), organ builder, was born on 27 April 1821 in north-west London, the eldest of four sons of Henry Willis, a carpenter. His father was also an amateur musician who sang in the choir of the Surrey Chapel, Blackfriars, and played the timpani in the orchestra of the Cecilian Society. 
At an early age Willis learned to play the organ and acquired a knowledge of its design and mechanisms. His interest in the development of pedal boards stemmed from playing the pedal harpsichord of George Cooper, Attwood's assistant at St Paul's Cathedral. At the age of fourteen he was articled to the London organ builder John Gray (died 1849), founder of Gray and Davison. During his apprenticeship he became organist at Christ Church, Hoxton, but his claim to have designed a new system of manual-to-pedal couplers during this period should be viewed with caution. Between 1842 and 1845 he was employed by the Cheltenham violinist and instrument maker Wardle Eastland Evans, with whom he collaborated in the development of his organ harmonica. This two-octave free-reed instrument (similar to the Serafina), was expanded into the 'model organ' of two manuals and pedals which was exhibited at the London showrooms of the music publisher Alfred Novello and at the Hanover Square Rooms. 
After rebuilding the organs of Tewkesbury Abbey (1846) and Gloucester Cathedral (1847), the latter of which he described as his 'stepping stone to fame', Willis was 'presumptuous enough to marry', on 7 April 1847, his organ pupil Esther Maria Chatterton, daughter of Randall Chatterton, a London silversmith. There were five children: two sons -- Vincent ('b'. 1848) and Henry (II) ('b'. 1852), who became partners in 1878 -- and three daughters. After his wife's death in 1893 Willis married her sister Rosetta on 7 August 1894 at St Luke's Church, Osney Crescent, Kentish Town. 
By 1848 Willis had returned to London and established his workshop in Foundling Terrace, Gray's Inn Road. His meteoric rise to fame with his organ for the Great Exhibition of 1851 was due to the patronage of Sir James Tyler. In order to construct this revolutionary instrument he took larger premises in Manchester Street, Argyle Square. Erected on the west gallery of the exhibition palace in Hyde Park, it comprised three manuals and pedals with seventy stops, pneumatic action, and thumb pistons located between the manuals for rapid changes of registration. It was visited by Queen Victoria and the prince consort, and as a result of a demonstration by W. T. Best, Willis was awarded the contract to build an organ in St George's Hall, Liverpool (1854-5). After the exhibition the instrument was rebuilt in Winchester Cathedral at the instigation of Samuel Sebastian Wesley. In 1859 he moved his works to 119 Albany Street, Regent's Park. At the Industrial Exhibition of 1862 Willis exhibited an organ which was afterwards installed in the Alexandra Palace, where it was destroyed in a fire in 1873. Finally, in 1863 Willis moved to The Rotunda in Rochester Place, Camden Town. 
With the organ of the Royal Albert Hall (1871) Willis attained maturity as a builder of concert instruments. A year later his instrument for St Paul's Cathedral solved the mechanical and aesthetic problems of siting a large divided organ to the satisfaction of musicians and ecclesiologists. Other cathedral organs by Willis included: Canterbury (1866 and 1886), Carlisle (1856), Durham (1876), St Mary's, Edinburgh (1879), Glasgow (1879), Hereford (1879 and 1892-3), Lincoln (1898), Oxford (1884), St David's (1883), Salisbury (1876-7), Truro (1887), and Wells (1857 and 1891). After rebuilding and restyling, few of Willis's organs have survived without significant alterations. Among the few exceptions, albeit still with minor changes, are the organs of Lambourne parish church (1858), Reading town hall (1864 and 1882), and Truro Cathedral. 
As the creator of many facets of the English Romantic organ, Willis was a successful assimilator and developer of European influences. During visits to France in 1848 and 1849 he met Cavaille-Coll and Barker. French influence was most obvious in the organs of the Royal Albert Hall and the Alexandra Palace. Some German qualities were also evident in his organs, drawn from the 'lieblich' flutes and string timbres in the organs by the Schulze family shown at the Great Exhibition and elsewhere. Nevertheless, Willis's use of French stop nomenclatures and metal harmonic flutes reflect the extent of his Gallic taste. 
The foundations of Willis's success lay in his excellence as an inventor and engineer and in the personal attention that he paid to every aspect of production. He registered nineteen patents between 1851 and 1893. These included developments of actions; improvements to the key repetition qualities of the Barker lever action, by applying balanced exhaust and throttle valves (the 'floating lever', as used at Truro Cathedral); and the electro-pneumatic action at Canterbury Cathedral (1886), which functioned efficiently for sixty years. His combination pistons (applied at Hereford Cathedral in 1893) were an advance on Cavaille-Coll's ventil system. Other innovations concerned blowing machinery (gas, water, and steam engines), crescendo pedals, and the radiating and concave pedalboard. 
The rich and clearly focused tone colours at every dynamic level of Willis's organs reflect the insight he gained into nineteenth-century trends in orchestral instruments and orchestration through his practical experience as a double bass player. This wider musical perspective led him to advance the adoption of equal-temperament tuning in Britain. Through his own systems of pipe scaling and voicing he created, in both individual flue ranks and choruses, a distinctive accord of diverse tone colours with a balance of harmonics and clarity of texture. Solo and character stops were finished to a meticulous standard. Although Willis's development of high-pressure reeds with harmonic trebles reflected the work of Cavaille-Coll, he continued to use closed and weighted shallots and full-length resonators. Moreover, the influence in this field of his brother George ('b'. 1826), who trained with J. J. Bishop and John Courcelle, should not be underestimated. 
Although much less deferential to native traditions than his rival William Hill, Willis continued to reflect some aspects of the work of Gray, notably the tierce in his mixtures. Up to the 1860s he was more conservative in his church instruments, but later examples contained more foundation ranks, reed, and orchestral stops. The influence of W. T. Best, the consultant at Wallasey parish church (1861), led Willis towards the characteristically English 'full swell' ensemble, dominated by high-pressure reeds. Willis also responded to the work of the Revd John Baron in the provision of small chancel instruments for village churches, and constructed some two hundred 'Scudamore' organs to designs inspired by medieval illustrations. 
A profile of Willis by F. G. Edwards in 'The Musical Times' of May 1898 described him as small in build, but highly charged with nervous energy. Edwards also noted his strong personality, 'obstinate perseverance', and extraordinarily thorough and very painstaking concern over every detail of his work. He concluded by conferring on him the title Father Willis. Willis's passionate recreation was yachting, and although his first vessel, the 'Vigilant', was run down in the Solent by a German tramp steamer in 1878, he later circumnavigated the British Isles in his third yacht, the 'Opal'. 
Willis died on 11 February 1901, at his home, Argyle Villa, 2 Bartholomew Road, Kentish Town, from acute pneumonia and cardiac failure, and was buried on 18 February in Highgate cemetery. His death was precipitated by a letter from George Riseley, organist of the Colston Hall, Bristol, complaining of the poor tone qualities of the new instrument, which had been supervised by Willis's son Henry. 


@@@@@


doc= 36936


Willis, William (1835-1911), barrister and judge, was born at Dunstable, Bedfordshire, on 29 April 1835, the eldest son and third child in the family of eight sons and six daughters of William Willis, a straw hat manufacturer at Luton, and his wife, Esther Kentish, daughter of Johnson Masters, who ran a straw hat business at Dunstable. He received his early education at the free grammar school, Dunstable, then at schools in Hockcliffe, Bedfordshire, and at Hatfield, and lastly at Huddersfield College. After finishing school he worked in Luton and in the Old Change in London, where he was in business for six years. He subsequently matriculated at London University in 1857, graduating BA in 1859 and LLD with gold medal in 1865. 
Willis entered as a student at the Inner Temple on 21 April 1858, winning the studentship given by the inns of court; he was called to the bar on 6 June 1861. His success from the first was swift; he had a sound knowledge of the common law and he was extremely effective with juries. He took silk on 13 February 1877 and was made a bencher of the Inner Temple on 28 January 1880. For the next twenty years he was one of the most conspicuous figures and determined fighters in the courts of law at Westminster and in the Strand. Of a fervid temperament and very voluble in speech, he would identify himself absolutely with the interests of his client, and assail his opponents with as much zeal and indignation as if his own honour and property were at stake. He came into frequent collision with both the bar and the bench. His services were greatly in demand in cases which required violent appeals to sentiment and emotion, and he could be forcible and convincing where the issue turned on points of law. Out of court his flow of conversation was the source of endless amusement to fellow lawyers, among whom he was extremely popular. He was said to enjoy speaking to everyone he met. 
On 21 March 1866 Willis married Annie, eldest daughter of John Outhwaite of Clapham, with whom he had four sons and five daughters. On 2 September 1897 he married Marie Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Moody of Lewisham. 
A Baptist by religion and a radical in politics, Willis advocated his principles in all companies. In 1903 he was chosen president of the Baptist Conference, a distinction rarely conferred upon a layman. In the general election of 1880 he was returned second on the poll as Liberal member for Colchester, defeating the Conservative candidate by a single vote. He took frequent part in the proceedings of the house, and on 31 March 1884 he succeeded in carrying a motion for the exclusion of the bishops from the House of Lords by a majority of eleven votes in spite of the opposition of Sir William Harcourt on behalf of the government. Colchester no longer having a second member, he stood unsuccessfully for Peckham in the general election of November 1885, and again in July 1886. In March 1897 he was given a county court judgeship by Lord Halsbury, first in Norfolk and Cambridge and later in Southwark, Greenwich, and Woolwich. As a judge he was said to favour the employee against the employer. His constant warfare with counsel attracted frequent press attention. 
Though largely a self-educated man, Willis had a wide knowledge of English literature and especially of the classic writers of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries and published several works in this area, as well as legal texts and a volume of 'Recollections' (1908). He lectured on Milton and Bunyan with real eloquence. On 29 May 1902 he read publicly in the hall of the Inner Temple an imaginary 'report of the trial of an issue in Westminster Hall, 20 June 1627', dealing with the Shakespeare-Bacon controversy. Willis died at his residence at 18 Belmont Park, Blackheath, London, on 22 August 1911 after a prolonged illness, and was buried later that month in Lee cemetery. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 36937


Willock, Henry Davis (1830-1903), administrator in India, was born on 25 December 1830, at the palace of Abbas Mirza, prince royal of Persia, at Oujan, Persia, the third child of Sir Henry Willock (1788-1858) of the Madras cavalry, who accompanied Sir Harford Jones-Brydges on his mission to Persia as interpreter and who, at the time of Henry's birth, was resident at the court of Tehran. Henry's mother was Elizabeth, eighth child of Samuel Davis, a former judge of Benares celebrated in Anglo-Indian annals for the defence of his house on 14 January 1799 against the attack of the deposed nawab of Oudh. Another of Samuel Davis's children was Sir John Francis Davis, British plenipotentiary in China. Willock was educated at Kensington proprietary school and at East India College, Haileybury (1851-2). He sailed for India in December 1852 and joined Fort William College, Calcutta, for the usual course of instruction in Indian languages. At the end of 1853 he was posted to Mathura in the North-Western Provinces as assistant magistrate and collector. 
At the outbreak of the Indian mutiny in May 1857 Willock was joint magistrate of Allahabad. Holed up in the fort with the other Europeans, he commanded a company of volunteers until the arrival of a relief force commanded by General James Neill and then served under Neill at the storming and capture of Kydganj. At the end of June he volunteered to be civil officer with the 'forlorn hope force' organized for the relief of Cawnpore and commanded by Major Renaud. The Cawnpore garrison fell before Renaud could reach them but Willock stayed on to serve under Sir Henry Havelock, fighting in the actions of Fatehpur, Pandu Nadi, Maharajpur, and finally, on 17 July, Cawnpore. He was one of the first Europeans to enter the 'bibigarh', scene of the massacre of about 200 British women and children, which was to become for the British public the most poignant and distressing image of the uprising. 
At the end of July, thrilling to the promised glory of lifting a siege, Willock marched to the relief of Lucknow. He accompanied Havelock on his two unsuccessful advances to the city, was with Outram and Havelock when they fought their way into the residency on 25 September, and thus became a member of the defending garrison until the final relief by Sir Colin Campbell on 19 November. A letter to his parents detailing these events was published in 'The Times' on 1 February 1858; it is a candid and engaging description of the fear, exhilaration, and boredom experienced by a young man at war. After the relief of Lucknow, Willock helped escort the women and children from the residency to safety at Allahabad and then, in early 1858, joined Maxwell's movable column watching the banks of the Jumna in the Cawnpore and Etawah districts. He was at the capture of Kalpi by Sir Hugh Rose's central India force in May, and in July joined Berkeley's movable column at Suraon as civil officer and took part in the capture of the forts of Dahain and Tirul in southern Oudh. He thus participated in the suppression of the uprising from first to last. He was the only civilian to receive the medal with the three clasps for the relief of Lucknow, Lucknow 1858, and central India. He was also favoured with a letter of thanks from Queen Victoria. General Sir Mowbray Thomson, last survivor of the Cawnpore entrenchment, wrote that Willock's 'feats of arms were patent to all the force, who asserted that he had mistaken his profession and ought without doubt to have been a soldier' (M. Thomson, 'The Story of Cawnpore', 1859, 253). 
In November 1858 Willock was appointed joint magistrate of Shahjahanpur. In 1859 he returned to Britain on furlough, and in the same year, on 27 October, at Barnes, Surrey, married his cousin Mary Elizabeth, only child of Major Charles L. Boileau of the rifle brigade. In 1860 with his wife he returned to Shahjahanpur, where three of their four children were born. In November 1876, after several intermediate appointments in Bareilly and Bulandshahr, he was appointed magistrate and shortly afterwards judge of Azamgarh, in which position he remained until his retirement in April 1884. He was for some years a major in the Ghazipur volunteer rifles. 
After his retirement Willock lived first at Brighton and then at Tunbridge Wells. In 1902 he published for private circulation a memoir of his career in India entitled 'Notes on the Willock Family'. He died on 26 April 1903 at his home, Western House, Tunbridge Wells, and was buried at Little Bookham, Surrey. In 1906 his elder son, Henry Court, took the additional name of Pollen on succeeding to the manor of Little Bookham. 


@@@@@


doc= 36938


Willoughby, Digby (1845-1901), soldier and adventurer, left England for South Africa in 1871 to seek his fortune. In the Zulu campaign of 1879 Willoughby was with the Natal native contingent, and was in command of the native mounted corps. He then for a time acted as auctioneer's assistant, subsequently becoming partner in the firm of Willoughby and Scoones at Pietermaritzburg. After a brief period with a theatrical company, he raised and commanded a troop of irregulars, Willoughby's Horse, which saw service in the Basuto War in 1880. In January 1884 he went to Madagascar, where, gaining the confidence of Queen Ranavalomanjaka III and her husband, the prime minister, he was appointed general commander of the Hovas or Madagascar forces (18 May). On the outbreak of the war between France and Madagascar next year he mustered a well-drilled army of 20,000 soldiers. The Hovas, however, suffered from a lack of serviceable ammunition, and were severely defeated. At the close of the war in December 1885 he helped in negotiations which established a French protectorate, and went to London charged as minister-plenipotentiary with a special mission on behalf of the Malagasy government. Although he was cordially received in England, the authorities refused to recognize him as an envoy, as he was a British subject. 
Wearing the spurious uniform of a British field marshal, Willoughby conducted a military spectacle at the Chicago Exhibition of 1893. In October of the same year, after the start of the Matabele (Ndebele) campaign, he went to Rhodesia. The war was almost over, but he went up country by way of Kimberley, Vryburg, and Palapye. On the journey he conferred with Rhodes, and reached Bulawayo just before the end of the campaign. On the declaration of peace he helped in the administration of Rhodesia. Next year (1894) he was in London, lecturing on the Matabele campaign, but on the outbreak of the Matabele uprising, in March 1896, he was one of a council of defence at Bulawayo, under the acting administrator of Rhodesia. He revisited South Africa on the outbreak of the war there in 1899, but took no part in the fighting, and soon returned to England. Willoughby, who had made a wealthy second marriage, was then in ill health, and had lost an eye. He died at Goring-on-Thames on 3 June 1901. Willoughby was a popular and lively raconteur. His courage and soldiership were unquestioned, but showmanship and love of adventure were his most salient characteristics. 


@@@@@


doc= 36939


Wills, Sir George Alfred, first baronet (1854-1928), tobacco manufacturer and benefactor, was born at Rusholme Villas, Victoria Road, Kingsdown, Bristol, on 3 June 1854, the eldest son of Henry Overton Wills (1828-1911), tobacco manufacturer, of Kelston Knoll, near Bath, and his wife, Alice Hopkinson, of Manchester. He was educated first at Dr Hudson's private school, Manilla Hall, Clifton, where he was contemporary with (Thomas) Herbert Warren (afterwards president of Magdalen College, Oxford), with whom he retained a lifelong friendship. From about 1868 to 1872 he was at Mill Hill School, London, where he developed an interest in history which was maintained throughout his life. It was not customary at that time to send to university boys who were intended for a business career. Wills always regretted his lack of a university education, a subject in which in later life he took the keenest interest. 
In October 1874, at the age of twenty, Wills entered the Bristol tobacco firm of W. D. and H. O. Wills. This firm had had a continuous history from the early eighteenth century. Wills's father, Henry Overton Wills, had retired from the business and took no further part in the management. Wills quickly proved his capacity. He was trained in every department of the business, and became factory manager in 1875, aged only twenty-one. Together with his brother Henry Herbert (Harry) Wills, George gradually took a dominant role in the day-to-day management of the firm. He became a partner in June 1882, followed by his brother Harry two years later. It was Harry, in charge of the technical aspects of the business, who first came across the Bonsack cigarette-making machine, but it was George who successfully negotiated for Wills to have exclusive patent rights to the machine in Britain for only $4000. This has been described as 'one of the best buys in industrial history' ('DBB'). 
It was not until 1888 that George and Harry were able to persuade the more conservative members of the family to introduce cheap, machine-made cigarettes. However, the first Woodbines, selling for 1died for five, proved phenomenally successful. 'That moment marks the beginning of Wills's transformation from a prosperous manufacturing company into an enormously rich enterprise of international standing. And the Wills family became one of the richest in the land' ('DBB'). 
Wills had enormous drive, as well as a real knack for business. He mastered the intricacies of producing tobacco, and proved to be an expert buyer of the leaf. In 1886 George and Harry persuaded their uncle William Henry Wills of the need to move production to a new purpose-built factory at Bedminster, near Bristol, and in 1888 George became its manager. 
In the early years of the twentieth century the tobacco trade in Great Britain was seriously threatened by a trial of strength between the American Tobacco Company and a combination of British manufacturers. George Wills and his second cousin William Henry Wills (later Baron Winterstoke) were together responsible for conducting the intricate and difficult negotiations which resulted in the foundation of the Imperial Tobacco Company of Great Britain and Ireland in 1901. The Wills family controlled 60 per cent of the new company, and in 1902 an agreement was reached to end the tobacco war, with the American company agreeing to withdraw from the UK market. George played a leading role in the negotiations. He was an original director of Imperial. On Lord Winterstoke's death in 1911 Wills became chairman of the company, and he remained actively in business until 1924, when he retired on account of failing health; he continued, however, to act in an advisory capacity, with the title of president of the company, until his death. 
Wills took no part in politics, and never stood for municipal office, though he was sheriff of Bristol from 1899 to 1900, but throughout his life he took a keen interest in Bristol charitable institutions, particularly the General Hospital. After long association with it he became president of the hospital in 1913. He not merely contributed munificently to its development and maintenance, but was active and constant in its administration and a regular visitor to the wards. He was a generous supporter of other hospitals and institutions. In 1909 he purchased the Leigh Woods on the banks of the Avon and presented them to the National Trust to preserve them for the public. 
Wills's greatest public work was in the cause of the University of Bristol, of which his father was the founder and first chancellor. The University College of Bristol had been opened in 1876. In the early years of the twentieth century a movement was set on foot to erect the college into a university, but little progress was made with the scheme in spite of the labours of an energetic committee under the chairmanship of Lewis Fry. In 1908 Wills was president, for the year, of the Colston Society, a local body for the encouragement of research, and at the annual dinner of the society in that year he announced the gift of $100,000 from his father towards the establishing of a university in Bristol. Wills himself purchased the Coombe Dingle estate, and equipped it as playing fields for the university. A charter for the university was granted in 1909. Four years later, in February 1913, Wills wrote to Lewis Fry, chairman of the council, stating simply that he and his brother Henry Herbert Wills considered the time to be due for extending the university and ensuring to it a building worthy of the city; accordingly, they offered the sum of $150,000. The onset of the First World War, and the enormous increase in costs, slowed progress, but Wills, who always saw through to completion every project he initiated, gave continued support, notwithstanding that the total expenditure on the new building -- great hall, reception and lecture rooms, tower, and offices -- amounted to $600,000. Wills always made it a rule to give funds for maintenance as well as for construction, and thus the university was relieved of very considerable charges in the future. He purchased the Victoria Rooms, Clifton, and equipped them as a university union, with a fund for maintenance. His final gift was to purchase an estate on the downs, at Stoke Bishop, and to build and endow a magnificent hall of residence for men. This was completed in 1929, the year after his death. 
Besides his princely generosity to the University of Bristol, Wills devoted much time and energy to its affairs. He was a governor of the old University College, and treasurer of the university from its foundation in 1909 until 1918. He became a pro-chancellor in 1911, and in 1913 he succeeded Lewis Fry in the onerous position of chairman of the council. 
A man of retiring but lovable nature, George Wills exercised a wide personal influence. Sympathetic, and with a keen sense of humour, he was always approachable. He had strong nonconformist beliefs, and his outlook was marked by a high degree of sobriety, including opposition to all forms of speculation or gambling. He was favourable to his workmen joining a trade union, although he felt that no union could offer them benefits equal to those which they already enjoyed in his works. He was personally well known to very large numbers of the workers in the tobacco factory and was on the best possible terms with them; it was a source of satisfaction to him that there was never a strike in the factory in his time. 
On 12 September 1878 Wills married Susan Britton, daughter of Robert Proctor, of Clifton; they had one son and four daughters. Wills lived chiefly at Burwalls, Leigh Woods, outside Clifton, and at Blagdon, Somerset, but he usually went with his family for three or four weeks each year to Scotland, or to a farm which he owned at Aale, in Ramsdelen, Norway. Fishing and walking were his chief recreations. He was also keenly interested in music and was an accomplished organist. 
George Wills was created a baronet in 1923, and received the honorary degree of DCL from the University of Oxford in 1926: as he was unable to travel, the vice-chancellor visited Bristol and conferred the degree on him in his own house. He died at Burwalls on 11 July 1928, and was succeeded as second baronet by his son, George Vernon Proctor ('b'. 1887). The near monopoly enjoyed by Wills in the UK cigarette market brought enormous rewards, and after his death Sir George's estate was valued at $10 million. 


@@@@@


doc= 36940


Wills, William Henry, first Baron Winterstoke (1830-1911), tobacco manufacturer and philanthropist, was born at Bristol on 1 September 1830, the second son and only surviving child of William Day Wills (1797-1865) ['see under 'Wills family (per. c.1786-1928)], tobacco manufacturer, and his wife, Mary, third daughter of Robert Steven of Glasgow and Camberwell, Surrey. Wills's grandfather, the first Henry Overton Wills (1761-1826) ['see under 'Wills family], became the dominant partner in a small Bristol tobacco business which his sons and grandsons greatly developed. A number of H. O. Wills's grandchildren subsequently became prominent in public affairs in Bristol. They included Sir Edward Payson Wills (1834-1910) of Hazelwood, Stoke Bishop, who gave the Jubilee Convalescent Home to Bristol, and was created a baronet on 19 August 1904, and Sir Frederick Wills (1838-1909) of Northmoor, near Dulverton, who was Unionist MP for North Bristol from 1900 to 1906, and was likewise created a baronet on 15 February 1897. 
The Wills family were Congregationalists, and young William Henry, after early training at home, went to the nonconformist public school at Mill Hill, London, which he left as head of the sixth form and captain. Illness prevented him from completing his studies for a London University degree, or going to the bar. When about eighteen he entered the family tobacco and snuff business at Bristol, of which his father was junior partner. On 11 January 1853 he married Elizabeth (1831/2-1896), daughter of John Stancombe of Trowbridge, Wiltshire; they did not have any children, but adopted two daughters. 
Wills's first position was as a commercial traveller, selling the expanding range of branded smoking tobaccos. He soon acquired a thorough knowledge of the trade and of the growth and treatment of tobacco, and with his first cousins Henry Overton Wills (1828-1911) and Edward Payson Wills he was taken into partnership in 1858 and the firm styled W. D. and H. O. Wills & Sons. 
Wills became the senior partner in the firm by virtue of the fact that he inherited all his father's share in the business in 1865. Together with Henry Overton Wills, he was responsible for establishing Wills's tobacco brands nationally, and also for developing a thriving export trade. The firm was subsequently converted into a limited-liability company and Wills became chairman of the board of directors. 
Wills's technical knowledge and real business ability promoted the success of the firm, and helped to meet such difficulties as the failures of the tobacco-leaf crop and the stoppage of supplies during the American Civil War. He became the recognized head of the tobacco trade in Great Britain. In 1878 he was unanimously elected chairman of the committee organized to resist a threatened increase of duty on tobacco. 
From 1880 Wills ceased to have an active role in the management of the firm. He remained as chairman until his death, however, and continued to play a significant role in the formation of the firm's business strategy. He supported his nephews George Alfred Wills and Henry Herbert Wills in their decision to acquire UK rights to the Bonsack cigarette-making machine in 1883, and also agreed to their introduction of the cheap Woodbine brand in 1888. These innovations proved to be immensely successful and made all the members of the Wills family extremely wealthy. 
In 1900-01 Wills took a leading part in the 'combine' promoted by British tobacco manufacturers to combat the threat to their market share posed by the American Tobacco Company. The resulting new firm was called the Imperial Tobacco Company, and in 1901, at a cost of $11,957,000, it acquired the business of the thirteen major tobacco manufacturing concerns in the United Kingdom. The Wills family, given the size of W. D. and H. O. Wills, subsequently received 60 per cent of the profits of the new company. William Henry Wills served as its chairman until his death. 
Wills was a prominent member of the Liberal Party in Bristol and was president of the Anchor Society in 1866. He entered parliament in 1880 as a member for Coventry, representing that borough until 1885, when it lost one of its members. After contesting South-East Essex twice unsuccessfully, first in 1885 and then as an advocate of home rule in 1886, he also failed in South Bristol in 1892, but he was returned at a by-election in March 1895 for East Bristol, and he represented that constituency until his retirement in 1900. He was created a baronet on 12 August 1893, on Gladstone's recommendation, being the first of his family to receive a titular honour, although baronetcies were also soon bestowed on two first cousins and business colleagues. 
Closely identifying himself with local interests, Wills was for some years on the council of the Bristol chamber of commerce and in 1863 became its chairman. From 1862 to 1880 he served on the municipal council, was chosen one of the charity trustees in 1865, and was high sheriff of the city in 1877-8. To the public institutions of Bristol he was a notable benefactor. He provided organs for Colston Hall and Bristol grammar school. The Bristol Art Gallery and the St George branch of the Bristol public libraries were built at his expense; and he erected on St Augustine's Parade a statue of Edmund Burke, which was unveiled by Lord Rosebery on 30 October 1894. 
Like other members of his family Wills was interested in the University of Bristol, which was incorporated in 1909, and his gifts to it amounted to $35,000. He was appointed pro-chancellor. On 5 July 1904 he was made an honorary freeman of Bristol. In London, where he had a residence in Hyde Park Gardens, he was well known as a director of the Great Western Railway and of the Phoenix Assurance companies and was chairman of the Provincial Companies Association. 
A zealous Congregationalist by personal conviction as well as by family tradition, Wills actively engaged in the affairs of the free churches. He joined the board of the dissenting deputies, was a trustee of the Memorial Hall in London, and took a practical interest in the refoundation of Mansfield College at Oxford in 1886. To the new chapel of Mill Hill School, opened in June 1898, he gave an organ and other substantial help. 
On 1 February 1906 Wills was raised to the peerage on Campbell-Bannerman's nomination as Baron Winterstoke of Blagdon, Somerset. His country seat Coombe Lodge was at Blagdon. There he took a deep interest in agriculture and was a well-known exhibitor of shire horses and shorthorn cattle. He was deputy lieutenant of Somerset, and high sheriff of the county in 1905-6. 
Winterstoke died suddenly at Coombe Lodge on 29 January 1911, and was buried in the churchyard at Blagdon. The peerage became extinct at his death. He left a fortune of almost $2.5 million. 


@@@@@


doc= 36941


Wilmot, John Charles, Baron Wilmot of Selmeston (1893-1964), politician, was born at 36 Garibaldi Street, Woolwich, London, on 2 April 1893, the eldest of the four sons of Charles Samuel Wilmot, a journeyman engraver in metal, originally from East Anglia, and his wife, Marian Newton. After attending Hither Green central school, which he left at the age of fifteen to work as an office boy, he pursued his education at evening classes at the Chelsea Polytechnic and at King's College, London. There he won the Gilbart prize in banking, which enabled him to join the Westminster Bank Piccadilly branch. He rose rapidly, first to the general manager's office and then to the secretaryship of the Anglo-Russian Bank. In the First World War he served as an aircraftsman in the Royal Naval Air Service, and following demobilization he returned to the bank. 
Wilmot took an early interest in politics, and joined both the Independent Labour Party and the Fabian Society at the age of sixteen. Back from the war, he helped to found East Lewisham Labour Party in 1919. By 1933 this had become one of the ten biggest constituency parties in the country, and for this Wilmot, who stood as candidate in the three elections of 1924, 1929, and 1931, deserves much of the credit. It was through his constituency work that he came to know his wife, Elsie May (Elsa) Slate ('b'. 1895/6), who was chairman of the women's section and shared her husband's political concerns. She was the daughter of George Alfred Slate, a civil servant, of Hastings. They married on 18 August 1928. There were no children. 
Wilmot came close to taking East Lewisham in the general election of 1929. But in the unfavourable conditions of the 1930s this was not a seat which could be won, and he was glad to become a candidate in an unexpected by-election at East Fulham in October 1933. Fighting a particularly vigorous campaign and benefiting from a mid-term swing against the government, he won with a majority of 4840, overturning the tory majority (14,521) of the 1931 election. This result gained a significance beyond the improvement in morale and debating strength which it gave to the tiny parliamentary opposition. In his maiden speech, on 13 November 1933, Wilmot described his victory as a symptom of 'a general feeling, a passionate and insistent desire for peace' ('Hansard 5C', 281, col. 613). Rightly or wrongly, this interpretation was widely believed and three years later gave rise to Stanley Baldwin's 'appalling frankness' speech, in which he said that the loss of the Fulham seat 'on no issue but the pacifist' had helped to convince him of the political impossibility of rearmament (K. Middlemas and J. Barnes, 'Baldwin', 1969, 970). In fact Wilmot was not a pacifist -- rather, he was a member of the group which Hugh Dalton called the 'bloody-minded pacifists' who thought that peace could best be preserved through a strong and effective League of Nations. Wilmot lost his seat in the 1935 election, but he remained a national political figure and served for a time on the party executive, first as a runner-up and replacement, and then in 1940 as an elected member in the constituency parties section. In 1939 he returned to parliament at a by-election in Kennington. In 1945 he moved again, this time to Deptford. 
Meanwhile Wilmot had seen much of government from the inside, largely through the patronage of Dalton, who chose him in May 1940 as his parliamentary private secretary at the Ministry of Economic Warfare. Because of his close personal friendship with the minister, Wilmot had great influence both at the ministry and in Dalton's secret empire, the Special Operations Executive, which dealt with propaganda and subversion. His special role was as a personal link with the propaganda staff stationed at Woburn Abbey. 
Dalton valued his parliamentary private secretary highly. Wilmot gave the impression (as another friend put it) of 'a shrewd and eminently jolly abbot'. His minister liked both qualities -- the irrepressible good humour and also the canny understanding of the movement, especially the trade union part of it. When Dalton moved to the Board of Trade in 1942 he took Wilmot with him (still as parliamentary private secretary), and two years later secured the latter's promotion to joint parliamentary secretary at the Ministry of Supply. This crucial step up the ladder led to a further promotion, after Labour's election victory in 1945, to minister of supply and aircraft production. Wilmot was thus put in charge of an immensely important department with a big staff and a huge labour force, with indirect control over raw material industries. It was an 'executive-administrative' ministry, calling for frequent major decisions from its chief. 
Wilmot cut an imposing figure: 'a modern Cockney, a successful child of the pavements', as a 1946 newspaper article put it -- tall, well-built, well-dressed, well-brushed, with polish and without accent, big, bustling, a sophisticated man of the world. But while he radiated bonhomie he lacked self-confidence, and he was badly mauled in the major controversy of his tenure of office. In November 1945 Wilmot circulated a memorandum recommending nationalization of iron and steel. This was opposed not only within the industry itself but also by Wilmot's own officials and, crucially, by Herbert Morrison. A compromise scheme presented in July 1947 by the two ministers, involving public supervision and partial nationalization, was rejected by the prime minister, and the matter was shelved by the cabinet. In the course of complex discussions Wilmot lost almost all his allies. 'He was unlucky', wrote Morrison's biographers: 'being outside the Cabinet, he lacked the power to control the destiny of his ministry' (B. Donoughue and G. W. Jones, 'Herbert Morrison: Portrait of a Politician', 1973, 403). Finally, Stafford Cripps demanded his sacking, and Attlee was told that he was unpopular even among Labour MPs, where his policies found most support. In October 1947 he was dismissed. Having first refused, he accepted a peerage in January 1950. 
After leaving politics Wilmot pursued his business interests, building upon his reputation as a Labour politician with a sympathy for the financial world. He had been seized on early as 'a useful recruit to any company board whose owners or managing-directors saw Labour coming into power' (N. Davenport, 'Memoirs of a City Radical', 1974, 101). By 1949 he was on the board of sixteen companies and served as chairman of six. He also took a keen interest in theatre and opera and was chairman of the governors of the Old Vic and of the trustees of Glyndebourne. Good at public relations and revelling in the limelight, Wilmot was more a communicator and popularizer than a planner or decision taker. He came from the grass roots, and he had an instinctive appreciation of the feelings of the rank and file. In this sense he was a party rather than a government man, and his greatest impact was at elections, in the constituencies, and at the Labour Party conference, rather than in the government in which he held such a crucial but difficult brief. Wilmot died in St George's Hospital, Westminster, on 22 July 1964, and the barony became extinct. He was survived by his wife. 
Ben Pimlott', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 36942


Wilmot, Sir Sainthill Eardley- (1852-1929), forestry officer in India and Burma, was born in Hobart Town, Van Diemen's Land, on 17 July 1852, the third son of Augustus Hillier Eardley-Wilmot, police magistrate in Hobart, and his wife, Matilda Jessie, daughter of John Dunn, banker, of Hobart. His father, who resettled in London in 1855, was the sixth son of Sir John Eardley Eardley-Wilmot, first baronet (1783-1847), governor of Van Diemen's Land. 
Eardley-Wilmot was educated at East Budleigh, Devon, and, from 1870 to 1873, at a German forestry school in the Harz Mountains. In December 1873 he joined the Indian forestry service, and was posted as an assistant conservator to the Trans-Sarda Forest in Oudh abutting the Nepal border. In the next sixteen years he worked as an executive officer in most of the forests of the North-Western Provinces and Oudh (subsequently entitled United Provinces), with postings to the Bharirathi valley, Kumaon, and Garhwal. 
While stationed in Kumaon, Eardley-Wilmot married, on 1 December 1884, Emma Elizabeth (died 1890), daughter of George Casey, of Winterbourne, St Leonards, with whom, in 1886, he had a daughter, Helen Jessie. In 1890, in which year Emma died, Eardley-Wilmot was promoted to conservator, an administrative post, and took charge of the forests of Oudh. Relishing the opportunity to exercise professional initiative, over the next eight years he reorganized the management of Oudh's forests, often numbering and ageing their individual trees, and abolished the long-standing practice of felling only the best trees, a system which tended to deplete the forests' 'capital'. He was often accompanied on tour by his second wife, Mabel Boisragon (died 1958), daughter of William Henry Winter of Tunbridge Wells, who was a fine amateur photographer. With Mabel, whom he had married at Lucknow on 12 December 1891, he had a second daughter, (Mabel) Iris, born on 6 August 1893. 
In January 1900 Eardley-Wilmot was posted to Upper Burma. He was unhappy in the post, complaining that after twenty-seven years in northern India he could understand neither the language and culture nor the animals and trees of Burma. Notwithstanding this unease, his Burmese forestry work was rated highly by his superiors, and in 1902 Sir Frederick Fryer, lieutenant-governor of Burma, recommended him for the CIE as 'one of the best conservators I have known' (Sir Frederick Fryer to Lord Curzon, 14 July 1902, Curzon MSS, OIOC, BL). 
By early 1903 Eardley-Wilmot was prepared to retire from the forestry service if he could not find a more congenial posting than Burma. He was about to ask for the charge of the Forest School at Dehra Dun in the United Provinces, when the inspector-general of Indian forests, H. C. Hill, suddenly died, and Eardley-Wilmot was appointed to the vacancy. He took up his office in Calcutta in February 1903 and was confirmed in the post in the following year. As inspector-general he enhanced both the salaries and status of the forestry service and improved the training of the subordinate executive, establishing elementary forestry schools in each province and initiating a series of educative forestry manuals. In 1906 he set up the Forest Research Institute, with specialist appointments in silviculture, zoology, botany, forest economy and chemistry, and forest working plans. Initially housed in the existing Forest School at Dehra Dun, the institute graduated to prestigious accommodation of its own in 1929. 
Eardley-Wilmot retired as inspector-general in 1908, in which year he was also created CIE. He returned to Britain, and in 1910 was appointed to the newly formed Development Commission. In 1911 he was promoted to KCIE. After five years' service on the commission he became its forestry adviser, a post he retained until 1919, when the new Forestry Commission was formed under the aegis of the 'Forestry Act'. As a commissioner he strove to improve forestry education at British universities and agricultural colleges, and to encourage private proprietors in the work of afforestation. 
During his Indian career, Eardley-Wilmot published a number of professional papers and reports on Indian silviculture. Once back in England, however, he turned his pen to less specialist writings, and in 1910 published his autobiographical 'Forest Life and Sport in India'. In his youth Eardley-Wilmot had been an ardent hunter, and claimed in all to have shot 139 tigers in India, a passion which is amply represented in the early chapters of the book. With age, however, he mellowed, and in his conclusion to 'Forest Life and Sport' he observes that as an older man he preferred living in a state of neighbourliness with the animals of the forest to hunting them. The book, which achieved the status of a minor classic, was illustrated by his wife's photographs. In 1911 he published 'The Life of a Tiger' and in 1912 'The Life of an Elephant', imaginary, but unsentimentalized, biographies of a tiger and an elephant, each one born in the wild but subsequently captured and tamed. Mabel's photographs were again used in the books, which in addition featured numerous sketches by their daughter, Iris. 
Eardley-Wilmot died at his home, Tollgate Cottage, Henley-on-Thames, Berkshire, on 13 November 1929, after a long illness. He was survived by his wife, who died on 18 August 1958, and by his two daughters. Helen Jessie, the daughter of his first marriage, was appointed MBE in 1955. In 1930 his widow published a collection of Eardley-Wilmot's writings, entitled 'Leaves from Indian Forests'. 


@@@@@


doc= 36943


Wilshaw, Sir Edward (1879-1968), company manager and financier, was born on 3 June 1879 at Limehouse, London, the elder son of William George Wilshaw, a clerk with Fletcher's Dry Dock, and later its chairman and managing director, and his wife, Amelia Sewell. 
Wilshaw left school at the age of fourteen. In February 1894 he joined the Eastern Telegraph Company Ltd as a clerk. In 1912 he married Minnie (Myn), the daughter of produce broker William Moar, of Orkney; they had two daughters. Although his marriage certificate described him as a 'director of public companies', he did not reach board level at Eastern until later. In January 1920 he became joint assistant secretary of the Eastern and South African telegraph cable companies. He became secretary of Eastern in September 1922. 
During his years with Eastern, Wilshaw was closely associated with the Pender family, descended from Sir John Pender, who founded British intercontinental submarine telegraph cables on profits from Manchester-based cotton enterprises. From the 1920s, when wireless became a powerful competitor, Wilshaw and the Penders tried to maintain the near-monopoly previously enjoyed by Eastern, in the face of growing political independence in many countries, as well as technological developments which were beyond Eastern's apparent competence, and the significance of which Eastern's management was powerless to recognize. 
Following an Imperial Conference, in 1929 Eastern cable and Marconi wireless telegraph interests were merged, in order to avoid the financial collapse of the telegraph cable companies. The strength of Eastern was demonstrated by its dominance of the merger company in both shareholder control and management allocation. Cutting through several interrelated shareholdings, the new company was first called Imperial and International Communications Ltd, but was renamed Cable and Wireless Ltd, in 1934. Wilshaw, who became general manager and secretary in 1929, was appointed chief general manager in 1933, a director and joint managing director in 1935, and chairman and sole managing director in 1936 -- a truly spectacular progression. 
The new merger company, in common with many others, had a difficult time in the depression years of the 1930s. In 1938, after an Imperial Conference, Wilshaw inaugurated the Empire flat rate scheme -- the first application of a flat rate principle to overseas telegrams. But the continued emphasis of Cable and Wireless on the telegraph and cable field was taking its toll, and more economic problems were threatening when the Second World War broke out. During the war, Wilshaw and the telegraph cable operations made an outstanding contribution, both to the conduct of the war and, through the use of special rate facilities, to the morale of troops overseas. 
Before the end of the war, a Commonwealth conference made recommendations aimed at recognizing and accommodating political and technical developments. As had happened previously, Wilshaw bitterly resented the proposed changes, which would not only encourage expansion of wireless communication but would also break up Cable and Wireless into several separate, locally-owned, operating corporations in the main Commonwealth countries, and leave it with only residual business elsewhere. After a two-year battle with the British government, Wilshaw lost on the acquisition issue, but won good compensation terms for his shareholders. 
This was the parting of the ways. Cable and Wireless became a state-owned public company and Wilshaw founded, with the compensation moneys, an investment trust, which developed into the Electra House Group. He was the first governor of the investment trust from 1947 until 1964, when he relinquished the position and became president. 
Although he lived at Frinton, in Essex, Wilshaw was 'a great and enthusiastic Londoner' ('The Times', 4 March 1968), whose interests were reflected in the various offices and honorary appointments he held. He was a member of the court of assistants (and later prime warden) of the Worshipful Company of Shipwrights, liveryman of the Company of Coopers, master of the Guild of Freemen of the City of London (1920), governor of the City of London College, and member of the City of London Territorial Association. In 1912 he became a member of the Chartered Institute of Secretaries, in which he took a great interest, becoming vice-president and, in 1930-31, president. He commemorated his presidential year of office by giving the institute a stained-glass window for its hall in London Wall (the hall was destroyed in the Second World War). He was also a lieutenant of the City of London, and was very disappointed not to be invited to become lord mayor. London University honoured him with an LLD. In 1939 he was appointed KCMG. 
Wilshaw's love of London did not isolate him from Essex where, in 1932, he was elevated to the county bench and his name was added to the Commission of Peace for the county. He also served as a general commissioner of income tax and land tax for the Havering division of Essex. 
Later in his life Wilshaw lived almost 'on the job', in a flat in Arundel House, Arundel Street, near the Kingsway premises of Electra House. He was in appearance a stocky man. He would pass the time of day with all and sundry; yet he was by nature an autocrat, and it could be said, in retrospect, that his limited technical appreciation and business outlook caused his company some problems. Wilshaw died on 3 March 1968 at 10 Bryanston Square, Marylebone, London. He was cremated. 
A. A. Willett', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 36944


Wilson, Sir Arnold Talbot (1884-1940), colonial administrator and politician, was born on 18 July 1884 at Clifton, Bristol, the eldest child of James Maurice Wilson (1836-1931), headmaster and clergyman, and his second wife, Georgina Mary (died 1926), the eldest daughter of Admiral John Thomas Talbot of Clifton. Sir (James) Steuart Wilson was his brother and Mona Wilson, his half-sister. He was educated at his father's school, Clifton College, and at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, from which he passed out first in his year, with the king's medal and the sword of honour. He was commissioned in 1903 and was soon posted to the 32nd Sikh pioneers. He was transferred to the Indian political department in 1909, and served in Persia, where he established a reputation as a strong, resilient, and resourceful officer. He was over 6 feet tall, with a broad frame and great physical stamina, an extraordinary memory, unusual skills as a linguist, and complete self-confidence. He was consul at Muhammarah in 1909-11 and second assistant at Bushehr from 1912 to 1913. When surveying the districts of Lurestan and Fars, travelling in Persian dress, he was twice captured by local tribesmen but managed to escape. In consequence he was made CMG and awarded the Macgregor memorial medal of the united services of India in 1912. In 1913 he was made deputy British commissioner, and in 1914 commissioner, of the multi-national Turko-Persian Frontier Commission. 
Wilson spent most of the First World War in Mesopotamia. In 1915 he became deputy chief political officer, under Sir Percy Cox, to the Indian expeditionary force occupying Basrah. At Nasiriyyah, as part of his wartime brief of reconnoitring enemy positions, he bravely and successfully swam a long distance along a canal under heavy Turkish fire, an exploit for which he was made DSO in 1916. However, this was also the year in which his military exploits came to an end. Cox formed a civil administration in Mesopotamia, and Wilson served as one of its leading figures. In March 1918, when Cox was transferred to Persia, Wilson took over as acting civil commissioner and political resident in the Persian Gulf. Now, with the ending of the war, the British took a firm administrative grip of Mesopotamia (soon to be called Iraq), which was divided into fourteen divisions, each under a political officer responsible to Wilson in Baghdad. 
Initially Wilson won high praise. In 1919 he was appointed CSI and a knight of the order of St John of Jerusalem, while the following year, at the age of only thirty-five, he became KCIE. A man who never doubted the essential beneficence of the British empire, he seemed destined for a career as a distinguished pro-consul. In May 1920, however, a full-scale insurrection broke out in Iraq. Its causes were complex, including local fears that, despite past promises of liberating the Arabs, Britain was setting up its own form of colonial rule. Wilson said the insurrection was the result of 'anarchy plus fanaticism' (Pearce, 64); but the consensus, in the words of Gertrude Bell, the oriental secretary in Baghdad, was that 'we tried to govern too much'. The chief culprit, she and others decided, was Wilson -- who had 'done as much harm as any individual could do' (Pearce, 67). Lacking flexibility, he had been too reluctant to devolve power upon local notables. 
In August 1920, to allay unrest, Wilson advised setting up an Arab administration under Feisal, son of Sherif Hussein. This was the solution eventually accepted, but for the moment the British cabinet took no decision other than to send back Cox. When he arrived, in October, Wilson decided to resign rather than suffer an effective demotion. His career in government service was over. Perhaps he was too much the individualist, and the man of action, to spend his whole career as a colonial official. Instead he became resident director in Persia of the Anglo-Persian Oil Company. On 29 July 1922 he married Rose Caroline ('b'. 1890/91), daughter of Charles Hensley Henson of Ellesmere in Shropshire and the widow of Robin C. Carver of the RAF. They had a son and a daughter. Wilson continued to work for the company from 1926 to 1932, after his return to Britain. 
Wilson bought a house in Much Hadham in Hertfordshire and in June 1933 won a seat as a National Conservative at a by-election in the Hitchin division of Hertfordshire. He was re-elected in 1935. He was an extremely active MP who undertook typically strenuous walks in order to get to know his constituents. The diaries he kept were published as 'Walks and Talks' (1934), 'Thoughts and Talks' (1938), and 'More Thoughts and Talks' (1939). His aim was 'to present a faithful though, of course, inevitably superficial impression, interspersed with occasional references of my own, of the hopes and fears, work and play of the inhabitants of a large constituency' (Wilson, 'Walks and Talks', vii). In fact there are few more thorough assessments of public opinion in the 1930s. 'Walks and Talks Abroad' (1936) recorded conversations in Germany, Italy, and Spain from May 1934 to June 1936. Wilson was indeed a prolific author, having already written 'The Persian Gulf' (1928); 'Loyalties: Mesopotamia, 1914-1917' (1930); 'Mesopotamia, 1917-1920: a Clash of Loyalties' (1931); 'Persia' (1932); and 'The Suez Canal' (1933). In addition he edited 'The Nineteenth Century and after' in 1934-8 and was joint author, with Professor Hermann Levy, of 'Industrial Assurance' (1937), 'Burial Reform and Funeral Costs' (1938), and 'Workmen's Compensation', 2 vols. (1939-41). 
Though an admirer of Stanley Baldwin, Wilson was no orthodox Conservative back-bencher. He believed that his task was 'to say unpopular things that needed saying' (Griffiths, 159) and urged the government to pass bold legislation. As well as favouring birth control and easier divorce, he called for a comprehensive state system of social insurance, including family allowances. He also served on several parliamentary committees. He was chairman of the Board of Trade advisory committee on cinema films and of the Home Office committee on structural precautions against air attack. 
Yet Wilson admitted that, whereas his instincts led him to the left in domestic policy, they led him to the right in foreign affairs. He called for rearmament from 1934 but he was no Churchillian opponent of appeasement. He met Mussolini in 1935, and was soon arguing that Britain should stand aside from the dispute over Abyssinia. Certainly he was pro-Franco, writing in June 1938: 'I hope to God Franco wins in Spain, and the sooner the better' (Haxey, 214). Of Hitler, whom he met in Germany several times, he wrote in 1935, 'I believe him to be a great instrument of peace in the world' (Haxey, 24). In 1937 he judged that Hitler was destined to become 'a venerable and revered figure' (Wilson, 1938, 105). Yet Wilson, who was a devout Anglican, was also on several occasions critical of the Nazi regime. He defended the Jews in conversations with Germans and admitted that at Dachau 'there was in the atmosphere of the camp something at which my soul revolted' (Wilson, 'Walks and Talks Abroad', 83). He called for a much-needed moderation in German policies. 
Concerned about the threats from the USSR and from Japan, Wilson admired Chamberlain's policy of appeasement, for which he judged that he earned 'the unstinted gratitude of the free States of Europe' (Keith-Shaw, ix). But Wilson was not for peace at any price, and was a patriot. On the outbreak of war he volunteered to serve in the RAF, despite being fifty-five. He became a pilot officer in October and, shortly afterwards, a rear-gunner with a bomber squadron. To his constituents he pledged himself, 'with my own body, with my own muscles, and my own experience, such as it is, to help to bring the war to a successful conclusion' (Marlowe, 369). In his last speech to the Commons, on 7 May 1940, he commended to the house the words carved on its cross benches: 'Numini de patriae adsto' ('I stand by God and my Country'). He died on 31 May 1940 when his plane was shot down over France, and was buried at Eringher, near Dunkirk. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 36945


Arthur Wilson (1836-1909), born on 14 December 1836 at Hull, was educated like him at Kingston College; he was associated with him in the shipowning firm, and on the death of Lord Nunburnholme became its head. He married on 1 July 1862 Mary Emma (1843-1927), daughter of E. J. Smith, postmaster of Leeds; they had three sons and three daughters. The eldest son, Arthur Stanley, was elected Unionist MP for the Holderness division of Yorkshire in 1900. The firm's development of the Norwegian timber trade and the foundation of the Baltic Exchange were largely due to his foresight. A director of the NER, and chairman of the shipping committee of the Hull chamber of commerce, he served in 1891 as high sheriff of Yorkshire. For many years a warm supporter of the Liberal interest in Yorkshire, Arthur Wilson objected to Gladstone's home rule proposal of 1886, joined the Liberal Unionists, and, finally, in 1909 supported tariff reform. He was a generous benefactor to Hull, and among the institutions in which he was specially interested was the Victoria Children's Hospital, of which he was chairman. 


@@@@@


doc= 36946


Wilson, Sir Arthur Knyvet, third baronet (1842-1921), naval officer, was born in Swaffham, Norfolk, on 4 March 1842. He was the third son of Commander (later Rear-Admiral) George Knyvet Wilson RN (1798-1866), and his wife, Agnes Mary, daughter of the Revd William Yonge (died 2 Dec 1845), aged ninety-two, vicar of Swaffham, 1799-1845. Wilson attended Eton College from 1852 to 1855; he entered the navy in 1855, and was immediately employed on active service in the Black Sea during the later stages of the Crimean War. Subsequently he joined his relative Captain Henry Keppel on board the 'Raleigh', destined for the China station. After the 'Raleigh' was wrecked Wilson transferred to the flagship 'Calcutta' and served with distinction through the Second Opium War, notably at the capture of Canton (Guangzhou) in 1858. After service in the Pacific, Wilson passed his examinations for lieutenant in 1863, but with seniority back-dated to December 1861, for his outstanding results. In 1867 he joined a naval mission to Japan, under Commander Richard Tracey, and helped to lay the foundations of a new service. On his return he spent a year on the cadet training ship 'Britannia', before serving as the junior member of a committee appointed to examine the capabilities of the Whitehead, or locomotive, torpedo in 1870. He then served afloat for six years, his professional skill, enthusiasm, and resource coming to the attention of several senior officers, notably Sir Astley Cooper Key (first sea lord, 1879-85). Having been promoted commander in September 1873, Wilson joined a new 'Raleigh' (Captain George Tryon), in the detached squadron from 1874 to 1876. In 1876 he was appointed commander of the 'Vernon', a hulk in Portsmouth harbour recently established as a torpedo school. For the next three years Wilson devoted his great talent and energy to the use of torpedoes and mines, particularly mine counter-measures, a vital task for a sea-control navy that expected to operate in hostile coastal waters. He was promoted captain in April 1880. 
After Wilson had revised the torpedo manual Admiral Key appointed him to the pioneer torpedo depot ship 'Hecla' in 1881. He was present at the bombardment of Alexandria in 1882 and, with John Fisher, played a major part in operations on shore. Two years later he landed with a machine gun detachment at Trinkitat in the Sudan, during the campaign against Mahdists, and won the Victoria Cross (21 May 1884) for his gallantry at the battle of al-Teb on 29 February 1884. When one corner of the infantry square broke Wilson held off the Mahdists with his sword and, when that broke, his fists, until relieved. After a spell commanding the 'Raleigh' on the Cape station, and serving under John Fisher as assistant director of torpedoes, Wilson was appointed to the 'Vernon' in 1889, which had now become a separate command. He developed the submerged torpedo tube, the twin torpedo launcher for torpedo boats, and net-cutters to deal with the protective nets then deployed against torpedoes. 
Wilson commanded the battleship 'Sans Pareil' in the Mediterranean Fleet from 1892 to 1895, being present on 22 June 1893, when the 'Victoria' was rammed and sunk with the loss of his old captain, Sir George Tryon. Wilson had not approved of Tryon's radical ideas on tactics, and had been annoyed when Tryon poached his commander, John Jellicoe, for the flagship. After serving as temporary flag captain to Sir Michael Culme-Seymour, Wilson, as senior captain, worked on cruiser scouting systems and exercised independent command. He was promoted rear-admiral in June 1895, and after conducting important exercises with the new destroyers, served at the Admiralty from 1897 to 1901 as controller of the navy and third sea lord. In 1901, entirely opposed to the first lord's policy on the contentious issue of boilers, he was offered command of the channel squadron, and was promoted vice-admiral. He retained command of ever larger Channel or Home fleets until 1907. These fleets were schools for tactical and evolutionary exercise; he insisted on war readiness, exercises in confined waters and fog, and lengthy periods at sea. His mastery of strategic and tactical manoeuvres reflected long experience, and the mental agility and mathematical skills he had acquired early in his career. 
Wilson laid the foundations of the fleet handling systems used in both world wars; his success in the 1901 annual manoeuvres established the system of cruising in columns and deploying into line just before battle that was used by his disciple Jellicoe at Jutland. In 1903 he conducted the world's first anti-submarine exercises, developing many of the counter-measures used in the world wars, including those involving depth charges and nets. His refusal to come into harbour for Christmas earned him the sobriquet Old 'ard 'eart from the lower deck. Regarded by many, including John Fisher, as the pre-eminent fleet commander of the era, Wilson was an arch centralizer, who allowed his subordinates no latitude. He imposed the highest standards of seamanship, but expected his captains and junior flag officers to obey without question. Even as first sea lord he could not resist using the new wireless telegraph to control the movements of a fleet from Whitehall during the 1910 manoeuvres. Before he hauled down his flag in March 1907 Wilson received the GCVO (1906), the GCB (1906), and promotion to admiral of the fleet. In November 1907, building on experiments he had conducted in 1906 with his gunnery lieutenant, Frederick Dreyer, he directed the trials of Arthur Pollen's innovative computerized fire control system, which he rejected as imperfect, too complicated, and too expensive. Although it came at a time when he had retired, his promotion to admiral of the fleet kept him on the active list until 1912. 
In January 1910 Wilson was appointed first sea lord in an attempt to heal the divisions within the service created by John Fisher's controversial regime. He took the post with reluctance. The complex political demands of the Admiralty were not congenial to a man bred for the quarter-deck, and long used to having the final word. He found Whitehall a severe trial, lacking the interpersonal skills, political sensitivity, and sheer pleasure in strife that marked his predecessor. While he pushed through important work on the war orders, minesweeping, and other technical issues he lacked the breadth of vision to stamp his personality and opinions on the service. Never happy in his new position, Wilson was exposed as unsuitable by his disastrous performance at a meeting of the committee of imperial defence on 23 August 1911. The global blue-water strategic ideas that Wilson expressed at the meeting were based on long experience, and offered the only programme whereby Britain could hope to exert any influence on European politics at a time when the other powers all possessed million-man armies. However, his poor performance in debate gave the upper hand to a more articulate, if devious, Henry Wilson and the army general staff. This led to the effective adoption of a 'continental' military strategy by the Asquith ministry, in defiance of experience, logic, and the national interest. After this failure the first lord (Reginald McKenna) and Sir Arthur Wilson had to be removed. McKenna was replaced by Churchill, who was sent to the Admiralty to introduce a naval staff, push through other reforms, and ensure co-operation with the army. Wilson's position had become impossible, and Churchill dismissed him in December 1911. Although he had the support of several naval officers on the board, Wilson had to go. He left office with little regret; having taken it up without enthusiasm he saw his early retirement as a blessing. Once again he retired to his sister's house in Swaffham. He was awarded the OM in 1912, but declined a peerage. He remained involved with the service, for he had had no other interest in his life, being unmarried and strikingly austere in his personal habits. In late October 1914 Churchill summoned him back to the Admiralty to assist his old colleague, Fisher, who was once again first sea lord. Despite the antagonism of 1911 he accepted the offer, on condition he should have no official position, or salary. Despite his disinterested gesture he inevitably became enmeshed in the vicious political struggle between Churchill and Fisher, being placed on the list of people to be removed from the Admiralty if Fisher was to continue. Wilson's urging of offensive schemes in the North Sea, notably the capture of Heligoland, have been derided by many commentators, but the principles were correct, and with attention to the operational details they were worthwhile measures. When Fisher resigned in late May 1915 Wilson agreed to replace him, but only if Churchill continued in office; in the interval he acted as first sea lord, until Sir Henry Jackson took office. Thereafter Wilson devoted his time to staff duties, notably technical developments concerning submarines and anti-submarine warfare, areas in which he made an important contribution. He remained active until August 1918, when he went back to Beech Cottage, Swaffham, Norfolk. Having declined a baronetcy in 1912, in October 1919 he succeeded his brother as third baronet, a title his uncle had earned in 1857 at the capture of Delhi. After the war Wilson devoted himself to local work for returning former servicemen and other worthy causes, remaining active until a few days before his death from pneumonia at Beech Cottage, Swaffham, on 25 May 1921, still unmarried. He was buried in Swaffham church. 
Arthur Wilson was a great seaman, and a masterly tactician. He, more than any other officer, symbolized the navy in the first decade of the century. His stern, full-bearded face was the popular image of an admiral. His early contribution to the development of the torpedo from a curious device to a serious weapon demonstrated his capacity for sustained technical effort, while his conduct under fire was astonishing, even in an age obsessed with the need for officers to remain 'cool'. Unimpressed by outward show, titles, and possessions he lived and died a servant of the Royal Navy and the nation. While much of this can be attributed to his austere character, the twin influences of the navy and the church in his formative years had a powerful bearing on his development. His term as first sea lord brought an unfortunate end to a great career; it was a post that he was ill-suited to fill, exposing as it did his political naivety, inability to delegate or compromise, and limited administrative ability. He deserves to be remembered in his prime, commanding the great fleets of the Edwardian era, the fleets that upheld British pre-eminence at sea, and secured the world's greatest empire. 


@@@@@


doc= 36947


Wilson, Charles Henry, first Baron Nunburnholme (1833-1907), shipowner, was born at Hull on 22 April 1833, the eldest son of Thomas Wilson (1792-1869) of Hull and Cottingham and his wife, Susannah, daughter of John West of Hull. In 1831 his father formed with others at Hull, a shipowning firm, of which he soon acquired the chief control. A regular line of sailing boats to Swedish ports was established; the import of iron from Russia and Sweden was developed; a service to Dunkirk was added; and with the substitution of steamships for sailing ships Thomas Wilson's firm gained an important place in the shipping industry. 
Charles Wilson was educated at Kingston College, Hull, and then joined the family business, as did his brothers. Its name was changed to Thomas Wilson, Sons & Co. and Charles and his brother Arthur ['see below'] became in 1867 joint managers; it was to their energy that the firm's rapid development was mainly due. The Norwegian and Baltic service for cargo and passengers was greatly extended; Adriatic and Sicilian, Indian and American, and home coasting services were inaugurated from time to time after 1870. In 1891 the concern was turned into a private limited company, with a capital of $2.5 million and a fleet of over 100 vessels. With its acquisition of the fleet of Bailey and Leetham of Hull in 1903, it became the largest owner in Hull and also the largest private fleet owner. In 1908 it took over the fleet of the North Eastern Railway Company (NER). Charles Wilson also became chairman of Earle's Shipbuilding and Engineering Company Ltd, and of the United Shipping Company, and vice-chairman of the Hull Steam Fishing and Ice Company Ltd. 
Wilson played a prominent part in public affairs outside his business, serving as sheriff of Hull. In 1873 he actively promoted the 'Hull, South and West Junction Railway Bill'. In 1874 he entered parliament for Hull as a Liberal, and was an MP until 1905, representing West Hull from 1885. As an ardent Liberal he was a pronounced free-trader and an advocate of temperance reform. An opponent of the South African War of 1899-1901, he yet showed public spirit by placing at the disposal of the government the 'Ariosto', one of his firm's vessels, for the purpose of transporting the newly raised City Imperial Volunteers to the Cape. On 5 October 1871 he married Florence Jane Helen (1853-1932), the eldest daughter of Colonel William Henry Charles Wellesley, nephew of the first duke of Wellington. They had three sons and four daughters. 
In 1899 Wilson received the freedom of his native town, and in 1906 he was made a peer under the title of Baron Nunburnholme. He died at his residence, Warter Priory, Pocklington, Yorkshire, on 27 October 1907, and was buried there on 31 October. His eldest son, Charles Henry Wellesley Wilson ('b'. 1875), succeeded to the peerage. 
The first Lord Nunburnholme's youngest brother, 
Arthur Wilson was a keen sportsman, and was for twenty-five years master of the Holderness hunt. Of genial disposition, he dispensed a lavish hospitality. The prince of Wales, later Edward VII, was his guest at Tranby Croft, in September 1890, when an allegation of cheating at baccarat was made against Sir William Gordon-Cumming, bt, who was also staying at the house. In the prolonged trial of an unsuccessful action of libel which Sir William brought against Wilson's son-in-law and daughter Mr and Mrs Lycett Green, the prince of Wales was a witness. The case was unfortunate, and affected the reputations of all those concerned. 
Wilson died of cancer on 21 October 1909 at Tranby Croft, Anlaby, East Riding of Yorkshire, after a long illness, and was buried at Kirkella. 


@@@@@


doc= 36948


Wilson, Sir Charles Rivers (1831-1916), civil servant and financier, was born in Montagu Square, London, on 19 February 1831, the eldest son of Melvil Wilson ('fl'. 'c'.1800- 'c'.1860), merchant, and of his wife, Louise, daughter of Major-General Sir Benjamin Charles Stephenson GCH (1766-1839). He was educated at Eton College (1845-8) and at Balliol College, Oxford (1850-53), and graduated in law and modern history. 
Wilson was nominated by Palmerston, the prime minister, for the new examination for the Treasury, which he entered as a clerk in February 1856. Within three months he was appointed private secretary to James Wilson (1805-1860), financial secretary to the Treasury. Thereafter he became secretary to G. A. Hamilton (1802-1871), permanent under-secretary to the Treasury from 1858 to 1868, and then secretary to Robert Lowe, chancellor of the exchequer from 1868 to 1873. On 12 May 1860 he married Caroline Coke (1835/6-1888). They had no children. 
After turning down a financial post in Jamaica in 1866, Wilson served for seven months from August 1867 as acting private secretary to Disraeli. In the same year he served as a delegate to the International Monetary Conference in Paris and also as a juror at the Paris Universal Exhibition, an experience which equipped him to become a royal commissioner for the Paris exhibitions of 1878 and 1900. In 1868 he served as secretary to the royal commission appointed to examine the question of an international coinage. In 1869 he prepared, together with his best friend, Charles W. Fremantle (1834-1914), a joint report on the Royal Mint. That report, which was accepted by the Treasury and embodied in the 'Coinage Act' of 1870, launched both its authors upon their lifetime careers. In April 1873 Wilson was appointed by Lowe as comptroller-general of the national debt, a post from which he was subsequently seconded to Egypt. 
Disraeli's purchase in 1875 of the Egyptian khedive's shares in the Suez Canal Company and his dispatch of Sir Stephen Cave to Egypt ushered in an Anglo-French duel for the control of that country which lasted for thirty years. In March 1876 Wilson was sent to Cairo as prospective minister of finance to the khedive Isma'il, in a bid to frustrate French efforts to extend their own financial influence. Wilson was granted leave of absence from his post for a full six months but was denied any authority to commit the British government, because Derby had curbed Disraeli's enthusiasm. Under Isma'il, a veritable 'Egyptian Louis XIV' (Scholch, 308), Egypt had prospered and benefited enormously from the boom induced by the American Civil War. The cultivated area had been expanded by one-sixth; the production of cotton and sugar had increased; exports had soared, and the revenues of the state had swelled by 73 per cent. The extension of sugar cultivation in Upper Egypt encouraged Isma'il to embark on the creation of a vast equatorial empire, christened Isma'iliyyah by Samuel Baker in 1874, which extended 1300 miles south of Khartoum to the sources of the Nile in Lake Albert and Lake Victoria. During the twelve years 1863-75 this expansionist policy had, however, added $87 million to the khedive's foreign debts. Isma'il delighted in playing off one potential lender against another, and he welcomed Wilson as a new participant in the great game of Egyptian finance. Wilson first discussed with him a scheme for the consolidation and management of the debt by a special branch of the administration which would include two Englishmen, but Isma'il wanted only a new loan. Disraeli declined to guarantee such a proposal, which both Rothschilds and Barings therefore refused to entertain. After Isma'il was declared bankrupt (on 8 April 1876) in the wake of Cave's report, Derby flatly opposed the suggestion that Isma'il be pressed to appoint Wilson as his financial agent. The khedive then adopted on 2 May a French scheme for the consolidation of the debt, under the management of four foreign commissioners, and Wilson returned to London. His mission might have appeared fruitless, but it nevertheless proved to be a turning point in his career; he had now established a connection with Egypt which was to last for thirty years. In 1876 he was appointed one of three government directors on the board of the Suez Canal Company, and he became a leading adviser to the British government on Egyptian finance. By 1878 he had expanded his role to include the drafting of diplomatic notes on Egypt. 
After the collapse of the Goschen-Joubert plan of 18 November 1876, which had provided for dual Anglo-French control over Egyptian finances, Wilson on 4 February 1878 recommended to the Foreign Office a new inquiry into Egypt's finances. Derby accepted the proposal and insisted that Wilson should serve as 'de facto' president of the proposed seven-person commission of inquiry; Isma'il also agreed, after some months of resistance. Wilson then spent more than four months in Egypt, from the appointment of the commission in April 1878, and soon came into bitter conflict with Isma'il. Coming under the influence of Nubar Nubarian (1825-1899), an Armenian pasha, Wilson decided to transform the commission into a court wherein Isma'il would be put on trial and found lacking in financial probity. He wished to deny the khedive not merely the privilege of repudiating his debts when they proved too onerous, but even that of reducing the interest thereon to a tolerable level. The immediate cause of conflict lay in his enquiries into the private estates of the ruler. Isma'il sought to win Wilson over by offering him the ministry of finance, but Wilson refused and began to favour the deposition of the khedive. His policy was supported by the British government in the expansionist fervour generated by the Russo-Turkish conflict. Disraeli's aspirations to establish a second India in the Levant, which had precipitated the resignation of Derby and his replacement on 27 March 1878 by Salisbury, envisaged the appointment of military proconsuls in Anatolia, the acquisition of a 'new Gibraltar' in Cyprus, and the establishment of an English chancellor of the exchequer in Egypt in the cabinet of a Christian prime minister. The key agents were to be Nubar and Wilson, each of whom insisted to the khedive upon the appointment of the other to the reformed ministry envisaged by the commission. Isma'il capitulated after six months, being mollified by the promise of a new loan, and promised both to surrender his estates and to accept the report of the commission of inquiry, which embodied Nubar's plans of reform. 
The new ministry was appointed on 28 August 1878, with Nubar as prime minister and Wilson as minister of finance. After much hesitation the British government granted Wilson leave of absence for two and one-third years, and against all precedent, did not require him to resign his office in Britain. His immediate task was to secure a loan from Rothschilds on the security of the khedival estates. This was not sanctioned until 31 October, as Wilson had been ordered, to his chagrin and surprise, to give France an absolutely equal share in all financial appointments. A corollary to the loan was an Anglo-French agreement stipulating that the two European ministers would remain irremovable without the consent of their respective governments. Wilson was forced to pay out in fees 29 per cent of the $8.5 million loan. He then returned to Egypt, to an empty treasury and a declining revenue. His salary was fixed at $E6000, or double that of Nubar, who flattered him that he would become 'virtually Prime Minister' (Wilson, 153). Indeed Wilson's nominal powers far exceeded those of an English chancellor of the exchequer. The new ministry, which also included the Frenchman Ernest Gabriel de Blignieres (1834-1900) as minister of works, hoped to reconstruct the financial administration from top to bottom on the principles of probity and sound economics. In particular the ministers wished to make the full service of the foreign debt feasible. However, the hopes thus raised among foreign bondholders were doomed to disappointment -- the trio of ministers were alien to each other, independent of each other, and responsible to different powers; none was fluent in Arabic and all three were Christians, assigned to administer a predominantly Muslim society in which the demand of 'Egypt for the Egyptians' had first surfaced during the year 1877. Moreover, the economic depression of 1877-8 in Europe and competition from beet sugar suppliers in foreign markets had led to a decline in exports of both raw cotton and sugar, causing Egyptian state revenues to sink by one-fifth during 1878. The ministry also lacked the support of the Turco-Circassian elite, the Egyptian notables, and, above all, the khedive himself. 
Isma'il began to undermine the new ministry within two months of the Rothschild loan, payment of which was held up by difficulties in establishing clear title to the khedival estates. As agents Isma'il employed first the chamber of notables and later the army. The assembled notables expressed on 3 February 1879 their vehement opposition to the new ministers and to Wilson and de Blignieres in particular. The ministry's measures of reform were wide-ranging, ill-considered, and impossible to implement. They included a codification and revision of all laws and ordinances in the administrative and financial spheres (a reform interpreted as one undertaken by Europeans for Europeans), a new land survey (a project interpreted as a prelude to higher land taxes), and the appointment of European inspectors, in order to control the collection of provincial revenues. Wilson twice declined to appear in person before the chamber and contemptuously delayed meeting a delegation in his own offices. He authorized the collection of taxes in advance of the harvest, in total disregard of his own avowed principles, of the objections of Nubar, and of the ravages of famine in Upper Egypt. Measures of retrenchment proved to be ill-advised in the extreme. The retirement of 1616 officers on half pay was intended to deprive the khedive of any military power for possible use against the ministry, but it plunged the whole army into a state of disaffection. Wilson not only refused to meet the just demands of the officers for their large arrears of pay but also denied the existence of any dissatisfaction within the army. Events on the next day, 18 February, proved him to be wrong. Some 500 officers gave public vent to their grievances and handled Nubar and Wilson very roughly, while carefully abstaining from any assault upon the Egyptian minister of war. The officers and Isma'il emerged victorious, proving that 'two pairs of arms are not much use against two thousand' (A. Newton, 'Lord Lyons: a Record of British Diplomacy', 1913, 2.188). Nubar resigned office on the very next day, so rendering the position of Wilson and de Blignieres highly precarious. 
In desperation Wilson pressed for the reinstatement of Nubar and strongly opposed the appointment of Tawfiq as his successor, in an ill-considered bid to reduce Isma'il to a political nullity. However, Wilson had lost the support of the British government and was accused, in parliament on 13 March, of acting as the covert servant of French financial interests. Disraeli, having moderated his original enthusiasm for expansion in the Levant, explained to the queen that her government had always studiously disclaimed any pretence that Wilson was acting as its agent. On 18 March Wilson submitted a proposal for a declaration of insolvency by Egypt, in an abject confession of personal failure. The chamber of notables rejected the suggestion as dishonourable and petitioned the khedive for Wilson's dismissal. Isma'il developed his own counter-plan for a reduction of the interest rate on the unified debt from 7 to 5 per cent. He dismissed Wilson ignominiously from office on 7 April and was congratulated from Constantinople for ending the veiled occupation of Egypt. Wilson, however, declined to accept dismissal from 'that little scoundrel, the Khedive' (Blunt, 48). First he sought to persuade Rothschilds to pay Isma'il the balance of his loan, in the hope of securing his own reinstatement in office; next he refused to go without the permission of the British government. Northcote then ordered him to return to London, but Wilson left Alexandria on 6 May and went straight to Paris, where he recruited Rothschilds to the cause of intervention. The immediate efforts of the firm in Paris and London proving unproductive, Rothschilds apparently turned to Bismarck, who initiated the process leading to the deposition of Isma'il by the sultan on 26 June. Thereafter, Wilson boasted that through Rothschilds 'he had had his full revenge' (Blunt, 65) and that he had even been consulted on the choice of successor to Isma'il. 
In 1880 Wilson was knighted and decorated by the sultan, and his hopes for reinstatement to ministerial office in Cairo were encouraged by his appointment as president of the commission of liquidation. In 1881 he served as a commissioner for the negotiation of a revised Anglo-French treaty of commerce, which was never concluded. Then he spent six weeks in drafting the Dilke-Gambetta note of 8 January 1882, which was interpreted in Egypt as an unprovoked threat and which effectively weakened the position of the new khedive instead of strengthening it. In cabinet on 25 January 1882 Wilson was cited as an authority on Egypt whose flat denial of the existence of 'any real national feeling in the uprising' (D. W. R. Bahlman, 'Diary of Sir Edward Walter Hamilton', 1972, 1.214, 219) could be trusted. Thereafter 'the sudden and complete collapse of the so-called National Party' was deemed to have proven his analysis correct (ibid., 1.342). A year later, according to Gladstone, he remained 'so to speak, in Cabinet' for Egyptian financial matters (A. Ramm, 'The Political Correspondence of Gladstone and Lord Granville', 1962, 2.5), and seemed to be at the very zenith of his fortunes. Thereafter, however, he proved singularly ill-suited to his role as an official director simply because of his irredeemable subservience to French interests and his utter ignorance of the needs of the British clients of the Suez Canal Company. The three British directors had wholly succumbed to the influence of Ferdinand de Lesseps, the former French diplomat who had been the main force in the building of the Suez Canal. They refused to entertain the just claims of British shipowners, and advised the government that no more concessions could be obtained from the company. On 10 July 1883 an agreement was signed with the company by Sir John Stokes and Wilson on behalf of the British government: it provided for no increase in the number of British directors, and was immediately and universally condemned by the mercantile community in whose interest it ostensibly had been made. On 23 July Gladstone announced, without discussion, the withdrawal of the agreement. Four months later the 'London programme' was agreed, on 30 November 1883, between the company and the Association of Steamship Owners Trading to the East, after four days of negotiations from which the British directors were excluded. This altered the balance of power between British interests and the company and between the three official directors and the seven new non-official directors appointed under its provisions. Only with reluctance did a new advisory committee of British directors in London admit the three official directors, on the recommendation of the foreign secretary. 
In 1884 Wilson's hopes were raised anew by the appointment of Nubar as prime minister of Egypt and by his own contribution to a report on the financial situation in Egypt. That report paved the way for the enactment of the law of liquidation in 1885, after which Wilson's official connection with Egypt ended. In 1885 he served as the junior delegate to the International Commission on the Free Navigation of the Suez Canal, which met in Paris. In 1891 he served as a member of the interdepartmental committee of five meeting at the Foreign Office to consider the safety regulations for the new tanker traffic through the canal which were adopted in 1892. There he gave full support to Marcus Samuel for the employment of Shell tankers 'en route' for the markets of Asia, in a modest contribution to the expansion of British trade. In 1892 he was appointed an official commissioner to the International Monetary Congress meeting in Brussels. There he expressed on behalf of the government uncompromising opposition to the adoption of a bimetallic standard of currency and affirmed instead its faith in monometallism ('The Times', 7 Dec 1892, 51). 
Wilson's greatest achievements may have been as comptroller-general of the national debt (1873-94). He served eight different chancellors of the exchequer during a golden age of public finance, during which the influence of Gladstone remained predominant and the national debt was in decline. During his period in office the aggregate gross liabilities of the state were reduced by 14 per cent, the amount of funded debt by 19 per cent, the charge upon the funded debt by 26 per cent, total debt charges by 13 per cent, and the average total debt per capita by 29 per cent. Above all, the ratio of the debt to the gross national capital was reduced by a massive 35 per cent as the wealth of the nation increased. The comptroller's original task of managing the 'sinking fund' was inevitably extended to embrace the administration of a whole range of trustee funds so that the National Debt Office came, in effect, to operate a vast banking business. Wilson became one of the most diligent superintendents in the history of the department, earning the trust and confidence of Gladstone, who defended him against the repeated criticism of MPs. Like Fremantle at the mint, Wilson sought to enlighten both parliament and the people about the mysteries of public finance by the preparation of an immense number of returns and statements of account. In 1887 he published his first historical survey, covering the aggregate gross liabilities of the state for the previous thirty years. Next, in 1891, he published a statistical history, in 329 pages, of the national debt from the creation of the sinking fund by Pitt, in 1786, to 31 March 1890. The latter greatly impressed Gladstone and has proved an invaluable source for historians. 
Wilson's second career, as a company director, had begun in 1876 with the directorship of the Suez Canal Company. It entered a new phase in 1880, when he became a director of the Alliance Assurance Company Ltd, which his own grandfather had helped to found in 1824. Wilson also became, very briefly together with Robert Lowe, Viscount Sherbrooke, the trustee of a speculative American railway undertaking, in flat contravention of the salutary Treasury rule prohibiting government officials from holding any such office ('The Economist', 40, 11 Nov 1882, 1401). Wilson resigned from office as comptroller-general in 1894 and as a government director of the Suez Canal Company in 1896, four years after questions had been asked in the Commons about his directors' fees. In 1895 he had been created a GCMG, and he also became president of the Grand Trunk Railway of Canada (at a salary of $4000 for the part-time post) and made its London office into his new business address. He recruited as a new general manager Charles M. Hays (1856-1912), who undertook a strenuous but effective reorganization of the railroad on the American model. Wilson made no attempt to reduce the heavily 'watered' capital of the company but succeeded in raising the market value of its securities substantially. He also resumed payment of interest between 1898 and 1900 on three tranches of the company's stock, but did not generate enough income to pay a single cent in dividend on the ordinary shares. In 1903 Wilson launched the Grand Trunk Pacific Railway as an ancillary for the construction of the western half of a new transcontinental railway, which was also to build and operate a trans-Pacific steamship line to China and Japan. He nearly ruined the chances of securing government support by his supercilious attitude towards the founders of an indigenous rival, the Canadian Northern Railway, and he seriously underestimated the construction costs. Nevertheless, he raised $16 million of new capital at 4 per cent, including $13.2 million for the new 1200 mile line, $5.2 million of which was secured through Rothschilds in 1905 and 1909. In 1903, at the height of his business career, Wilson was chairman of five companies and a director of three others. Notably, he chaired the British Electric Traction Company (1896), and the Egyptian Syndicate Ltd (1898-1903). 
On 9 November 1895 Wilson married his second wife, Beatrice Violet Mary Mostyn (1862-1925), sister of the seventh Baron Vaux of Harrowden. They had no children. Wilson retired at the age of seventy-eight, in 1909, on a pension of $1500. Two years after the construction of the Grand Trunk Pacific Railway was completed to Port Rupert, Wilson died, on 9 February 1916, at 9 Berkeley Square, Mayfair, London; he had latterly resided at Foxhills, Chertsey, Surrey. He was cremated at Golders Green in London and buried near by at Kensal Green on 12 February 1916. By contemporaries, he was noted for his geniality towards his peers but also for his arrogance towards opponents. He loved animals (especially bulldogs), fine art, and French civilization. His posthumous reputation has proved to be somewhat chequered: the editor of his autobiography, written in 1914-15 at the request of his widow, believed that 'his name will be indelibly connected with modern Egyptian history' (Wilson, v), but no modern dictionary of Egyptian history even mentions him. In Canada his name was bestowed in 1907 upon the new city of Rivers, sited to the north-west of Brandon in south-west Manitoba, though later his reputation in the dominion was marred by the memory of his ignorance of local conditions and his lack of tact in negotiations. His own statistical history of the national debt remains a permanent achievement, however, and it has been made available to a wider public, in summary form, through Dr B. R. Mitchell's 'Abstract of British Historical Statistics' (1962, 1988). 


@@@@@


doc= 36949


Wilson, Charles Robert (1863-1904), historian of India, born at Old Charlton, Kent, on 27 March 1863, was the only son of Charles Wilson, army tutor, and his wife, Charlotte Woodthorpe, 'nee' Childs. Educated at the City of London School, where he gained the Carpenter scholarship on leaving, he was elected to a scholarship at Wadham College, Oxford, in 1881. He graduated BA in 1887, having been placed in the first class in mathematical moderations in 1883 and in the final classical school in 1886. On leaving Oxford he entered the Indian educational service in Bengal, being successively professor at Dacca and at the Presidency College, Calcutta; principal of the Bankipur College, Patna; and inspector of schools. In 1900 he was appointed officer in charge of the records of the government of India, an appointment which carried with it that of assistant secretary in the home department. Soon afterwards his health broke down, and he died in penury, unmarried, at his home, 10 Avenue Mansions, Clapham Common, London, on 24 July 1904 and was buried in Streatham cemetery. 
Wilson was a devoted student of the early history of the English in Bengal, ransacking the documentary evidence in India, at the India Office, at the British Museum, and wherever else it might be found. He was admitted to the degree of DLitt at Oxford in 1902. Apart from several articles in the 'Journal' of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, dealing chiefly with aspects of the Indian mutiny, and a catalogue of the society's paintings (1897) he wrote on the historical tombs of Bengal (1896), on the early history of the British in Bengal (1895-1911) and on Old Fort William in Bengal (2 vols., 1906). 


@@@@@


doc= 36950


Wilson, Charles Thomson Rees (1869-1959), physicist, was born at Glencorse, Midlothian, on 14 February 1869, the youngest son of John Wilson and his second wife, Annie Clark Harper, of Glasgow. His father, a progressive sheep farmer who wrote on various experiments in farming, died when Wilson was four years old and the family moved to Manchester. With the financial help of his half-brother William, a Calcutta businessman, Wilson was educated at Manchester University, where he graduated BSc in 1887. In 1888 he won an entrance scholarship to Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, where he obtained first-class honours in both parts of the natural sciences tripos. The death of his brother three months before he graduated caused Wilson to take up a teaching post at Bradford grammar school to support the family. Recognizing that it was impossible to carry on research in this position, he returned to Cambridge in 1894. 
It was a propitious time to return to Cambridge since new experimental challenges were about to open up with the discoveries of X-rays and radioactivity. J. J. Thomson was beginning the experiments which were to culminate in the discovery of the electron in 1897. In 1895 the university first admitted graduate students from outside Cambridge and the intake that year included Ernest Rutherford from New Zealand and John Townsend from Dublin. Wilson joined an elite group of experimental physicists. The inspiration for his researches resulted from Wilson's experiences as a relief observer at the Ben Nevis observatory. In his own words: 'In September 1894, I spent a few weeks in the Observatory which then existed on the summit of Ben Nevis, the highest of the Scottish Hills. The wonderful optical phenomena shown when the sun shone on the clouds surrounding the hill-top, and especially the coloured rings surrounding the sun (coronas) or surrounding the shadow cast by the hill-top observer on mist and clouds (glories), greatly excited my interest and made me wish to imitate them in the laboratory. (Wilson, 'Nobel Lectures', 194)' In the following year, caught in a thunderstorm on Ben Nevis, he experienced the enormous electrical forces released. 
During the period 1896-9 Wilson held the Clerk Maxwell scholarship at the Cavendish Laboratory and his outstanding gifts as an experimental physicist were revealed. From 1895 to 1899 he carried out a series of brilliant experiments which established the main features of the condensation of water droplets from a supersaturated dust-free gas. An expert glass-blower, he patiently constructed many cloud chambers within which the formation of clouds and raindrops could be studied under perfectly controlled laboratory conditions. He found that once the cloud chamber had been rendered dust-free the formation of small numbers of condensation drops only occurred when the cooled air was exactly 4.2 times supersaturated, that is, the vapour pressure was 4.2 times the equilibrium pressure over a flat surface of water. The numbers of drops increased rather slowly with increasing supersaturation until the value 7.9 was approached when, instead of rain-like clouds, a fog filled the chamber. Wilson studied the effect of irradiating the cloud chamber with X-rays and ultraviolet light and found the key result that, at a supersaturation of 4.2, the fog appeared. He inferred that at a supersaturation of 4.2 water would condense on any charged nuclei present. 
The importance of this work was not lost on Thomson. By 1897 he had shown that the charge-to-mass ratio of the electron was about 2000 times greater than that of the hydrogen ion and so a direct experimental method was needed to measure the charge of the electron to find its mass. In a remarkable experiment of 1899 he used Wilson's cloud chamber technique to determine the number of electrons from the number of water droplets which condensed out. From the current carried by the particles he found a value for the charge of the electron which was within 40 per cent of the present value. This was a key experiment which confirmed beyond any doubt the tiny mass of the electron. In subsequent experiments, Harold Albert Wilson (no relation) improved the estimates by applying an electric field to the cloud chamber, which had the effect of stratifying the cloud into groups of drops with different charges which sank at different speeds. A problem arose because the drops tended to evaporate. Millikan solved this problem by using drops of heavy oil rather than water and this led to the famous Millikan oil-drop experiment in which the charge of the electron was determined to about one part in 1000. 
Wilson's studies of the formation of water droplets by ionizing particles led him to investigate the origin of the ions present in clean air and of the small, but reproducible, electrical conductivity of dust-free air. He devised a gold-leaf electroscope in which surface leakage from the charged leaf to the case of the instrument could not take place. He found that the conductivity of the gas in the electroscope was the same in daylight as in the dark and was independent of the sign of the charge. The ionization was equivalent to that expected from the continuous release of about twenty pairs of ions per second in each cubic centimetre of gas. In 1901 Wilson wrote: 'Experiments were now carried out to test whether the production of ions in dust-free air could be explained as being due to radiation from sources outside our atmosphere' ('PRS', 68, 1901, 151-61). This suggestion, that the ionization of air is caused by cosmic radiation, was followed up by experimental investigations in which the discharge of the electroscope was found to be indistinguishable outside and inside a railway tunnel near Peebles. The result was, however, inconclusive, largely because of the natural radioactivity present in rocks. In 1913 Hess showed that ionizing cosmic radiation is indeed incident upon the top of the atmosphere from high-flying balloon experiments. 
In 1900 Wilson was elected a fellow of Sidney Sussex, at the same time becoming a university demonstrator (1900-01) and subsequently lecturer (1901-19) in experimental physics. In 1908 he married Jessie Fraser (died 1967), daughter of the Revd George Hill Dick, of Glasgow, and for half a century owed much to her sympathy and understanding. They had one son and two daughters. 
From 1903 to 1910 Wilson's main interest was atmospheric electricity and thunderstorms, and this was to remain a major field of interest to him, his last scientific paper (1956) being 'A theory of thundercloud electricity'. His contributions on this subject brought out to the full his extreme skill and insight for physical measurement. Studies ranged from the fine-weather potential gradient in the low atmosphere and the associated earth currents, to measurements of the fields, currents, and field changes under electric discharge conditions. Such measurements allowed the altitude and magnitude of the region of charge separation in thunderclouds to be deduced, while the rate of recovery after discharge enabled the magnitude of the system of charge separation which brought about discharge to be estimated. In 1920 he suggested that the fields and currents in fine-weather conditions could be maintained by the currents in storms and showers, a view which has come to be broadly accepted. In later papers he developed his views on the mechanism of charge separation. While his proposed mechanism, which involved the movement, polarization, and charge collection of water droplets of differing size in a vertical potential gradient, must certainly operate, it is probably inadequate to describe the full magnitude of charge separation which takes place in nature. His contribution to the study of atmospheric electricity rests not upon the success of any particular theory, but rather upon the stimulus which his exceptional insight and experimental skill gave to the whole mode of investigation. 
In 1910 Wilson resumed condensation experiments with the intention of achieving conditions in which the track of a single ionizing particle might be made visible in the supersaturated gas of a cloud chamber. He developed a chamber in the form of a short cylinder in which controlled supersaturation was attained by the mechanical withdrawal of one end of the cylinder, the piston, through a specified distance, while the condensation phenomena were viewed through the front window at the other end. In 1911 the first cloud chamber photographs were published and these were quickly followed in 1912 by photographs with an improved chamber. Although many developments of cloud chamber techniques have led to the application of the method over a greatly extended field, the outstanding quality of the photographs published in 1912 can bear comparison with that of all subsequent work. 
The stimulus provided by these photographs to studies of atomic physics can hardly be overstated. Much of the picture had hitherto been painfully pieced together from indirect observations, but these could now be seen as a whole, often in striking detail. The photographs showed convincingly that ionization by X-rays was due to secondary electrons, while the large-angle scattering of alpha-particles, deduced just a year earlier by Rutherford from counting experiments, was there for all to see. According to Rutherford, the cloud chamber was the most original apparatus in the whole history of physics. As remarked by P. M. S. Blackett: 'Among the many discoveries made by the use of Wilson's cloud chamber, outstanding were those of the positive electron, pair production and cosmic ray shower phenomena, the greekLettermu-meson and its spontaneous decay, the charged and neutral V-particles and the negative cascade hyperon. (Blackett, 293)' Rightly, the development of the cloud chamber is regarded as the pinnacle of Wilson's experimental genius. To quote Blackett again: 'There are many decisive experiments in the history of physics which, if they had not been made when they were made, would surely have been made not much later by someone else. This might not have been true of Wilson's discovery of the cloud method. In spite of its essential simplicity, the road to its final achievement was long and arduous: without C. T. R. Wilson's vision and superb experimental skill, mankind might have had to wait many years before someone else found the way. (ibid., 289)' Wilson was promoted to the post of reader in electrical meteorology in 1919 and in 1925 he was elected Jacksonian professor of natural philosophy. For many years he was in charge of the final-year practical class at the Cavendish Laboratory. The simple but searching exercises he set demanded skill, which could often only be acquired by patient improvement of dexterity, and developed the aptitude for experiment of many of those who worked through this notable phase in the history of the Cavendish. As a lecturer Wilson was hesitant in delivery, his voice little above a whisper, and his blackboard writing almost invisible. Despite these drawbacks his teaching exhibited the outstanding characteristics of the man and the physicist. The simplicity, penetration, and elegance of his approach, above all in the field of physical optics, have been acknowledged by those who themselves were to become lecturers of distinction. 
Wilson was elected FRS in 1900 and received the Hughes medal (1911), a royal medal (1922), and the Copley medal (1935). In 1927 he was awarded the Nobel prize for physics jointly with A. H. Compton, and in 1937 he was appointed a Companion of Honour. He received the honorary ScD from Cambridge in 1947 and held honorary degrees from Aberdeen, Glasgow, Manchester, London, and Liverpool. 
Among the most distinguished physicists of his time, Wilson stands out in his quiet kindliness and modesty. Below average height, and slightly built, Wilson was a man whose interests remained throughout those of the countryman. His keen and continuing interest in the physics of atmospheric phenomena was closely linked with his enthusiasm for the mountains of Scotland, and particularly of Arran. At the age of eighty-six he flew for the first time in flights designed for students of meteorology. His interest was torn between the atmospheric phenomena around him, once so rough as to require a forced landing, and the interest provided by this new viewpoint over country which he had known so long from the ground. He retired from the Jacksonian chair in 1934, remaining in Cambridge for two more years before returning to Scotland. He settled in the village of Carlops near Edinburgh, no great distance from his birthplace, and there he spent the last twenty-three years of his life with his family. He died at Carlops on 15 November 1959. 


@@@@@


doc= 36951


Wilson, Sir Charles William (1836-1905), army officer, born at 8 Wesley Street, Princes Park, Liverpool, on 14 March 1836, was second son of Edward Wilson JP and his wife, Frances, daughter of Thomas Stokes of Hean Castle, Pembrokeshire, which Edward Wilson later bought from his wife's brother. Charles began his education at St David's School, Pembrokeshire, in 1844, then spent seven years at Liverpool Collegiate Institution (1845-52), and two years at Cheltenham College, which he left as head of the military and civil department in June 1854. He then had a year at Bonn University. Because of the Crimean War a special open competitive army examination was held on 1 August 1855; Wilson, youngest of forty-six candidates, passed second to Robert Murdoch Smith. The two obtained the only commissions given in the Royal Engineers, Wilson becoming lieutenant on 24 September 1855. 
After instruction at Chatham, Wilson was posted to Shorncliffe in April 1857. From 16 October 1857 he was employed on the construction of defences at Gosport. In February 1858 he was made secretary and transport officer of the commission to delimitate the boundary between the Canadian colonies and the United States, along the 49th parallel from Boundary Bay to the eastern Rocky Mountains at 114 degree W longitude. With Captain J. S. Hawkins RE, the British commissioner, Wilson arrived, via Colon and Panama at Esquimalt, on Vancouver Island, on 12 July. For the next four years Wilson was engaged in marking a straight boundary through swamp, prairie, and primeval forests, over mountains and in an extreme climate. Astronomical stations were constructed at suitable points. The field work was completed at the end of 1861 in the hardest winter known, with temperatures falling to -30 degree F at night. The commission reached England on 14 July 1862 to draw up the reports and plans. 
After eighteen months on the Thames and Medway defences, and being promoted captain on 20 June 1864, Wilson volunteered to survey Jerusalem and the surrounding country as part of a scheme for provision of pure water. The secretary of state for war had agreed to appoint an engineer officer, without paying his expenses. Several officers refused the post, but Wilson reached Jerusalem on 3 October 1864, and the work progressed steadily. At the request of Colonel Sir Henry James, director of the Ordnance Survey, he ran a line of levels to ascertain the difference in height between the Mediterranean and the Dead Sea. He returned home in July 1865. This survey led Sir George Grove to initiate a scientific exploration of the Holy Land by the formation of the Palestine Exploration Fund. Wilson became its first director and undertook the preliminary work, starting for Palestine on 8 November 1865. A general reconnaissance which he made of the country from Beirut via Damascus to Hebron showed how little was known of the antiquities of Palestine. Elected a member of the executive committee of the fund on his return in June 1866, Wilson continued one of its most energetic supporters, becoming chairman in 1901. 
From October 1866 to October 1868 Wilson was at Inverness in charge of the Ordnance Survey in Scotland. He was also, in the summer of 1867, an assistant commissioner, under the Parliamentary Boundary Commission, in the English west midlands. He married in London on 22 January 1867, Olivia (died 19 May 1911), daughter of Colonel Adam Duffin of the 2nd Bengal cavalry, and they established their home at Blythfield near Inverness. They had four sons and a daughter. Between October 1868 and May 1869 Wilson was surveying the Sinai peninsula, coverage of which was very defective on existing maps. 
On 16 May 1869 Wilson was appointed executive officer of the small and moribund topographical and statistical department (under Sir Henry James of the Ordnance Survey) of the War Office. Appalled at its condition, he recommended change. In 1870 the department was separated from the Ordnance Survey, and he became the former's director. Supported by Cardwell he restructured and revived the department, improving its (non-covert) collection, analysis, and distribution of military intelligence. Following Wilson's suggestion, and the Prussian victory over France, Cardwell in 1873 established the intelligence branch of the War Office. Wilson's department was incorporated in it and Wilson became the deputy, designated an assistant adjutant-general, to its chief (Major-General Sir Patrick MacDougal), and contributed to its improvement. 
From August 1876 until 1879 Wilson was director of the Ordnance Survey in Ireland. Promoted major on 23 May 1873, he was created CB, civil division, in 1877. In 1869 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society, in 1872 became a member of council of the society, and in 1874 was elected FRS. In 1875 he completed a map of Afghanistan for the India Office. The autumn of 1878 Wilson spent in Serbia as British commissioner of the international commission to demarcate the new frontier under the treaty of Berlin, and in February 1879 he was appointed British military consul-general in Anatolia, as part of Disraeli's anti-Russian strategy of military support to Turkey. Wilson was promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel for his services in Serbia (19 April 1879). From headquarters at Sivas, Wilson divided Anatolia into four consulates, each with a military vice-consul. He travelled much in Anatolia, reporting to the Foreign Office through the British ambassador at Constantinople. Much of his data on the area he embodied in handbooks for 'Asia Minor' and 'Constantinople' (1892, 1895). In summer 1880, directed by G. J. Goschen, special ambassador to the Porte, Wilson investigated the situation in Eastern Rumelia, Bulgaria, and Macedonia ('Further correspondence'). He returned to Anatolia in November. In 1881 he was created a KCMG for services in Asia Minor and Eastern Rumelia. 
In August 1882 Wilson was summoned to Egypt to serve under Sir Edward Malet, the British consul-general. He arrived at Alexandria on 3 September 1882, when the British army was in the field against Arabi Pasha. He was next appointed military attache to the British agency in Egypt, and took charge of the Egyptian prisoners of war, including Arabi Pasha. Wilson watched for the British government the trial of Arabi and his associates, and later arranged for sending the exiles to Ceylon. Resuming his duties on 1 April 1883 at the head of the Ordnance Survey in Ireland, he was promoted brevet colonel on the 19th, and was made an honorary DCL of Oxford in June. 
Appointed chief of the intelligence department in the Gordon relief expedition of September 1884, Wilson reached Dongola on 11 October, and on 15 December, accompanied Lord Wolseley to Korti. Later in December he was in the desert column, commanded by Sir Herbert Stewart. After the death of Burnaby, Stewart's designated successor, and the fatal wounding of Stewart on 18 January, command devolved on Wilson, who had never commanded troops in action. He delayed, apparently unnecessarily, sending the steamers, with a small force, upriver to Khartoum. The steamers left on 24 January, Khartoum fell and Gordon was killed on the 26th, and the steamers arrived there on the 28th, then withdrew. 
In the bitter controversy over the failure to save Gordon, Wilson was both blamed and defended. Even before the news of Gordon's death, Wolseley believed 'Wilson has proved a great failure as a soldier' (Preston, 128), and others who blamed him included Evelyn Baring and Charles Williams, the war correspondent (notably in 'How we lost Gordon', 'Fortnightly Review', May 1885). Among those who publicly defended him was Lord Hartington, the war minister, and in 1885 he was made KCB, military division. He published his own version in 'From Korti to Khartum' (1885). A more effective commander might have saved Gordon. However, Wilson's delay was only the last and the shortest in the series of delays caused by Gladstone, Wolseley, Buller, and others: if Wilson was to blame, he was not solely to blame. Queen Victoria, who blamed Gladstone for Gordon's death, summoned Wilson to tell her his story. In the spring of 1886 he was made an honorary LLD of Edinburgh. 
Wilson resumed his Ordnance Survey work in Ireland on 1 July 1885. In November 1886 he was appointed director-general of the Ordnance Survey in the United Kingdom, and saw out his service at Southampton. Normally, as colonel, he would have retired in early 1893, but was retained a further year. He was president of the geographical section of the British Association at Bath in 1888. From November 1889 he served a year on the council of the Royal Society. In 1893 he was given the temporary rank, then on 15 February 1894 the permanent rank, of major-general. From the end of 1894 to 14 March 1898 he was director-general of military education at the War Office. 
In February 1899, and in March 1904, he revisited Palestine and devoted much time to the controversy over the sites of Golgotha and the Holy Sepulchre. He published his arguments in the 'Quarterly Statements of the Palestine Exploration Fund' (1902-4), which he edited, then in 'Golgotha and the Holy Sepulchre' (1906). His other publications included contributions to reference works and the reviews. After an operation he died at his home, 16 Calverley Crescent, Tunbridge Wells, Kent, on 25 October 1905, and was buried at Tunbridge Wells. 


@@@@@


doc= 36952


Wilson, Edward Adrian (1872-1912), Antarctic explorer and naturalist, was born on 23 July 1872 at 6 Montpellier Terrace, Cheltenham, the second son and fifth child of the nine surviving children of Dr Edward Thomas Wilson FRCP (1832-1918), physician, and his wife, Mary Agnes (1841-1930), daughter of Bernhard Whishaw and his wife, Elizabeth. On his father's side he was descended from a long line of Quakers, the last of whom was his grandfather Edward Wilson (1772-1843), of Liverpool and Philadelphia, who acquired great wealth through land in the United States and early railways in Lancashire. His mother's family came from Cheshire, some of whom lived in St Petersburg as traders in the earlier nineteenth century. In September 1874 the family moved from Montpellier Terrace to a larger house, Westal, on Montpellier Parade. 
Edward Wilson showed an early talent for drawing and an interest in the natural world, fostered by long walks in the Cotswold and Malvern hills and life on his mother's small farm near Cheltenham, where she bred poultry and grew apples and pears. He was educated first at home, and then became a pupil at Glengarth preparatory school, Cheltenham, in 1879. In 1884 he went away to Wilkinson's preparatory school at Clifton, Bristol, but entered Cheltenham College as a day boy in 1886, leaving there to go up to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, as an exhibitioner in October 1891. During his schooldays his interest in wildlife grew until he became an observant field naturalist, with an ability to sketch what he saw. 
At Cambridge Wilson read for the natural sciences tripos, gaining a first in part one in 1894, and the medical examinations. He took his BA degree in 1894 and his MB in 1900, after studying at St George's Hospital, London. In 1898 and 1899 Wilson spent some months in Switzerland and Norway to fight off an attack of tuberculosis, probably caused by the strain of his medical studies, his frugal existence, and by his voluntary work for the Caius College mission in the slums of Battersea, London. It was there that he first met Oriana Fanny Souper (1876-1945), daughter of the rector of Hilton, near Huntingdon, whom he married on 16 July 1901. 
Since his election as president of the Royal Geographical Society in 1893, Sir Clements Markham had been promoting the dispatch of an expedition, preferably naval, to resume the exploration of the Antarctic regions, some fifty years after the remarkable discoveries of Sir James Clark Ross. His efforts were eventually successful and resulted in the national Antarctic expedition, 1901-4, commanded by Captain Robert Falcon Scott RN. Wilson was provisionally appointed to serve as second surgeon, artist, and vertebrate zoologist in January 1901, and sailed for the Antarctic in the 'Discovery' in August of that year, three weeks after his marriage. During the months before departure, he learned taxidermy at the British Museum (Natural History) and wrote up part of the zoological results of the 'Southern Cross' Antarctic expedition (1898-1900) from seal skins and skeletons there. 
Wilson was prominent in the national Antarctic expedition, whose main achievements were to make the first extensive inland explorations of Antarctica, and to fulfil a comprehensive scientific programme. Besides collecting, he made drawings and watercolours of the landscape, seals, and birds, many of which were exhibited at the Bruton Galleries, Bond Street, in 1904. He illustrated the 'South Polar Times' and took part in the southern journey (1902-3) with Scott and Shackleton. On his return to England in 1904 he spent some time writing up his observations, and published the reports on birds and mammals in the scientific results of the expedition. His remarkable panoramas of the mountains bordering the Ross Ice Shelf were printed in a portfolio with the results. He had been much impressed in 1904 with the rapidly disappearing native fauna and flora of New Zealand and would have liked an appointment there either to survey and depict New Zealand wildlife or as caretaker of the two sanctuary islands of Kapiti and Little Barrier. Neither of these ideas came to anything and in 1905 he was appointed field observer, physiologist, and anatomist to the newly established grouse disease inquiry, which had been set up by the British Board of Agriculture and Fisheries to ascertain the cause of death of numerous game birds. He spent several years in hard fieldwork on the moors of Scotland and England and in painstaking laboratory work, dissecting nearly 2000 of the diseased birds. He wrote one third of the report and made all its illustrations. He also illustrated a revised edition of Bell's 'British Mammals' and made many plates for a similar volume of Yarrell's 'British Birds', which was never published. 
In June 1910 Wilson sailed again for the Antarctic in the 'Terra Nova', this time as head of the scientific staff of the British Antarctic ('Terra Nova') expedition, also under the command of Captain Scott. The expedition was based as before in McMurdo Sound and was planned to continue and enlarge the studies and explorations begun during the 'Discovery' expedition, including, it was hoped, the attainment of the south pole. In addition to supervising the first-class scientific work, sketching, and collecting, Wilson made a special study of the development of the emperor penguin chick. He led a midwinter sortie to the emperor penguin rookery at Cape Crozier in June 1911, which he had first visited in September 1903. This extraordinary venture was later vividly described by Apsley Cherry-Garrard in 'The Worst Journey in the World', and earlier in Wilson's report, and the 'South Polar Times'. Known on this expedition as 'Uncle Bill', he was held by its members, as in the 'Discovery', in special regard and affection. 
The sledge journey to the south pole began in November 1911. Wilson was one of the five men who made the final push to reach 90 degree S, only to find there the black marker flag of Roald Amundsen, who had earlier achieved the goal. The story of the struggle back (long known from Scott's diaries) has now largely been published in Wilson's own words. Edgar Evans and Lawrence Oates died during the march; Scott, Wilson, and Henry Robertson Bowers died on or about 29 March 1912 in their tent on the Great Ice Barrier, where their bodies were found by a search party eight months later. The burial service was read on 11 November 1912 by Edward Atkinson over the three bodies in the tent, which was left to be covered by the snow. 
In Scott's diary was the following letter to Mrs Wilson: 'If this letter reaches you Bill and I will have gone out together. We are very near it now and I should like you to know how splendid he was at the end -- everlastingly cheerful and ready to sacrifice himself for others, never a word of blame to me for leading him into this mess. He is not suffering, luckily, at least only minor discomforts. 
His eyes have a comfortable blue look of hope and his mind is peaceful with the satisfaction of his faith regarding himself as part of the great scheme of the Almighty. I can do no more to comfort you than to tell you that he died as he lived, a brave, true man -- the best of comrades and staunchest of friends. (quoted in Seaver, 'Edward Wilson of the Antarctic', 291)' Wilson's last letters to Oriana (and to his parents) expressed his faith in God and his regret at causing sorrow by his death: 'God be with you in your trouble, dear, when I have gone... All is for the best to those that love God, and oh, my Ory, we have both loved Him with all our lives. All is well... 
We have struggled to the end and we have nothing to regret. Our whole journey record is clean, and Scott's diary gives the account... The Barrier has beaten us though we got to the Pole. 
My beloved wife, these are small things, life itself is a small thing to me now, but my love for you is for ever and a part of our love for God... All is well. (quoted in Seaver, 'Edward Wilson of the Antarctic', 294)' With the publication of Seaver's three books (1933-48) Wilson acquired many admirers of his life, faith, and work. At the end of the twentieth century he became linked more broadly to the worldwide conservation movement, through his influence on Captain Scott, and indirectly upon Scott's son, Peter Markham Scott, who became a founder of the World Wildlife Fund. 


@@@@@


doc= 36953


Wilson, Frank Percy (1889-1963), literary scholar and bibliographer, was born at Birmingham on 11 October 1889, the youngest of the nine children of John Wilson ('c'.1846-1923), wholesaler, and his wife, Alice Mary While. He was educated in Birmingham, at Camp Hill and King Edward's grammar schools, then at the University of Birmingham, where he took a first class in English (1911) and an MA (1912). He went on to Lincoln College, Oxford, obtaining a BLitt in 1913 for a thesis on Thomas Dekker which laid the foundations for much of his later work, and won him the Charles Oldham scholarship. 
In September 1914 Wilson volunteered for military service and in 1915 was commissioned in the Royal Warwickshire regiment. He was badly wounded on the Somme in July 1916, and after much surgery was left with a permanent limp and was subject to bouts of infection. After over a year in hospital he served briefly in the Ministry of Food. In 1919 he was invited back to Birmingham by Professor Ernest de Selincourt, who remarked of him that 'we have never had a man who showed a more complete instinct (genius it might be called) for the learned handling of books' (Davis, 442). Wilson returned to Oxford two years later as a university lecturer, and was appointed reader in 1927. Among his pupils was Joanna, daughter of Lancelot Perry-Keene, whom he married on 15 March 1924 and with whom he had three sons and a daughter. 
At Oxford Wilson resumed work on Dekker. His edition of Dekker's 'Foure Birds of Noahs Arke' was published in 1924, and the 'Plague Pamphlets of T. Dekker' in 1925: these were to be extended to a four-volume edition of Dekker's prose works, a project never abandoned, but never completed (despite a Leverhulme research fellowship in 1938-40 for this purpose). Wilson's Dekker should have rivalled the edition (1904-10) of Thomas Nashe by R. B. McKerrow, the edition which served as Wilson's model, and to which he made corrections and additions when it was reprinted in 1958. An offshoot of this project, 'The Plague in Shakespeare's London' (1927), proved very successful, and was reprinted in paperback in 1963 with a preface, dated five months before his death, characteristically drawing attention to new source material: to Wilson all work was work in progress. 
From 1929 to 1936 Wilson was professor of English at the University of Leeds. Administrative duties, discharged with the same sense of meticulous responsibility which he brought to his scholarship, and the lack of a convenient research library, slowed up his academic work. Fortunately, the Huntington Library in San Marino, California, offered him a research fellowship in 1933, the first of many transatlantic journeys. He was a visiting fellow at the Huntington again in 1952-3 and 1958; and at the Folger Shakespeare Library, Washington, in 1957. In 1943 he was visiting Carnegie professor at Columbia University, New York, lectured at Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts, and gave the Alexander lectures at the University of Toronto (published as 'Elizabethan and Jacobean' in 1945); in 1952 he was visiting professor at Stanford University, California, and Turnbull lecturer at Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland; and in 1958 he gave the Ewing lectures in the University of California at Los Angeles (published in his 'Seventeenth Century Prose' in 1960). 
In 1935 Wilson accepted, together with Bonamy Dobree, the general editorship of the 'Oxford History of English Literature'. This task consumed a great deal of his time, and he himself undertook the volume on English drama from 1485 to 1642. His British Academy lecture entitled 'Shakespeare and the Diction of Common Life' (1941) and his Clark lectures at Trinity College, Cambridge (1951), published as 'Marlowe and the Early Shakespeare' (1953), are a foretaste of this volume; what he had completed at his death was published as 'English Drama, 1485-1585' (ed. G. K. Hunter, 1968). Two chapters, 'The English history play' and 'Shakespeare's comedies' were also salvaged in 'Shakespearian and other Studies' (ed. Helen Gardner, 1969). 
The chief merits of Wilson's dramatic criticism were his constant alertness to the exigencies of the stage (he was a promising amateur actor in his early days); and, most remarkably, his unrivalled knowledge of contemporary word usage and phraseology, derived from years of reading and research, which also informed his work on proverbs, mock-prognostications, and jest-books. 'The Proverbial Wisdom of Shakespeare' (1961) was one of Wilson's many published papers on proverbs. He spent years preparing the third edition of the 'Oxford Dictionary of English Proverbs', with the assistance of his wife; it appeared with her introduction in 1970. Wilson would refer defensively to his hobby of collecting proverbs as his tatting, to be done when too tired to write; but he valued proverbs for establishing texts and meanings in Elizabethan authors, and often invoked them himself for explanatory or illustrative purposes. 
In 1936 Wilson was elected Hildred Carlile professor of English literature at Bedford College, London. The congenial combination of college life with reading in the British Museum was interrupted by war and evacuation to Cambridge, where, despite his lameness, he joined the Home Guard. In early 1943 he wrote a long essay, 'Shakespeare and the new bibliography' for 'The Bibliographical Society, 1892-1942: Studies in Retrospect' (1945), a jubilee volume. Wilson's personal copy, as revised in 1948, was edited by Helen Gardner in 1970. In it the work of E. K. Chambers, R. B. McKerrow, and A. W. Pollard is duly appraised. The real hero, however, is W. W. Greg, whom Wilson regarded as his 'master', and whose notice he contributed to the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. Their friendship dated from early collaboration on an edition for the Malone Society of 'Every Man out of his Humour' (1920) by Ben Jonson. In 1948 Wilson followed Greg as general editor of the Malone Society; the regular flow of Malone reprints, including works by John Fletcher, Samuel Rowley, and Thomas Middleton, either edited or checked by Wilson, bears witness to the many hours which he devoted to the society and its editors. He did not relinquish this task until 1960, yet also found time to edit three pamphlets for the Luttrell Society. 
In 1947 Wilson succeeded David Nichol Smith as Merton professor of English literature at Oxford. Much of the literary work already referred to was done during the next decade, which proved happy and productive; he enjoyed the proximity of the Bodleian and the society of other Elizabethan scholars. His forceful lectures and attractive reading voice were much appreciated, and many research students profited from his advice. On retirement in 1957 he was made a senior research fellow of Merton College for three years. Wilson was always disappointed by his failure to complete his 'magnum opus' on Shakespeare and Elizabethan drama, and towards the end of his life his work was frequently interrupted by bouts of ill health. Yet he was remembered as the most learned Elizabethan scholar of his generation, as well as a master of social graces and a witty conversationalist. 
Wilson was made a trustee of Dove Cottage in 1939; he was elected FBA in 1943; made honorary LLD of the University of Birmingham in 1947 and honorary fellow of Lincoln College, Oxford in 1948; and was president of the Bibliographical Society, 1950-52, and of the Oxford Bibliographical Society, 1956-7. 'Elizabethan and Jacobean Studies: Presented to F. P. Wilson in Honour of his 70th Birthday', edited by H. J. Davis and H. Gardner (1959), contains 'A select list of the writings of F. P. Wilson' by H. S. Bennett. Wilson was president of the Malone Society, 1960-63, and of the Modern Humanities Research Association, 1961. He died at his home, 30 Cumnor Hill, Berkshire, on 29 May 1963. 


@@@@@


doc= 36954


Wilson, George Fergusson (1822-1902), industrial chemist, was born on 25 March 1822 in Wandsworth, Surrey, the sixth son in a family of thirteen children of William Wilson (1772-1860) and his wife, Margaret Nimmo Dickson, both of Scottish extraction. William Wilson had gone to London in 1812 after the failure of the ironworks of his own father in Lanarkshire. Building on previous experience in Russia, he and his partner, Benjamin Lancaster, started a brokering business for the Russia trade, which within ten years became extremely profitable. One of the principal Russian exports was tallow, and it is likely that their familiarity with its uses led them in 1830 to buy a patent granted to James Soames in 1829 for the processing of coconut oil, to yield a solid fat which would substitute for tallow in candle manufacture, and an oil for burning in lamps. The partners did not wish to engage in industry under their own names, so called their venture E. Price & Co., apparently because Lancaster had an aunt named Price, albeit she was not connected with the business in any way. They built a factory at Battersea to process the coconut oil, and soon discovered that they could adopt a French method to obtain a superior product from tallow. By 1840 their 'composite' candles, made from a blend of tallow and coconut fats moulded on plaited wicks, found a ready market. 
George Wilson, meanwhile, was educated in Wandsworth and placed in a solicitor's office. He joined Prices in 1840, in place of his elder brother James, who had gone to Ceylon to assist his brother David in managing the firm's recently acquired coconut plantations. George soon showed a flair for developing the technical side of the business. He bought or licensed many domestic and foreign patents, and hired experts to investigate the chemistry of fats and oils, so that the quality and range of products was continually improved and expanded. A key discovery was the benefit of treating fatty materials by steam distillation, one stage in the process whereby a range of industrial wastes could be rendered into colourless, odourless material for candles. In 1847, needing to raise more capital, Price's Patent Candle Company was registered as a joint-stock company with a capital of $500,000. It was still very much a family affair; William Wilson remained as chairman of the directors, with his sons as managers: David in Ceylon, James looking after the commercial side, George the technical side, and Robert as company solicitor. 
In 1854 a process was devised for the commercial manufacture of pure glycerine, a product with important medicinal and industrial uses. This encouraged the company to build a new factory at Bromborough Pool, near Liverpool, the port where its tropical oils were unloaded. The company was always concerned with the welfare of its workforce, and provided educational, cultural, and sporting facilities both there and at Battersea. George Wilson, in a search for less expensive raw materials, asked Sir William Hooker, director of the Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew, to assist in identifying suitable vegetables fats, but without success. However, in 1857 the company took out a licence to process Burmese petroleum, obtaining burning oil, lubricating oil, and paraffin wax, which turned out to be the sought-after cheap candle-making material. Candles and lamp oil were then only part of a range of domestic, medical, and industrial products, including toilet and industrial soaps, textile and other industrial oils and lubricants, petroleum jelly, and glycerine. 
In 1845 Wilson was made a member of the Society of Arts. He contributed frequently to its 'Journal', was a member of its council from 1854 to 1859 and again from 1864 to 1867, and its treasurer from 1861 to 1863. In 1855 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society and a fellow of the Chemical Society, and he read at the meeting of the British Association at Glasgow a paper on 'A new mode of obtaining pure glycerine'. 
On 13 August 1862 Wilson married Ellen, eldest daughter of Robert Wildman Barchard, a merchant of Wandsworth; they had two sons and a daughter. In 1863 he retired, but continued to act as a manufacturing adviser to Prices for five years; he was then elected as one of the directors and served as such until his death. In his retirement he was an enthusiastic and scientific gardener, and the insecticide Gishurst Compound and the leather preservative Gishurstine derived their names from his residence, Gishurst Cottage, Weybridge. 
In later life Wilson lived at Heatherbank, Weybridge Heath, Surrey, where he devoted himself to experimental gardening on a wide scale, which he carried on at another, larger site, Oakwood, near Wisley, which he acquired in 1878. There he experimented with a range of plants in a variety of soil conditions, but was best known for creating a wild garden, which included a miniature bog garden. He was particularly successful as a cultivator of lilies, gaining between 1867 and 1883 twenty-five first-class certificates for species exhibited. Elected a fellow of the Royal Horticultural Society, he served on various of its committees, and was at one time vice-president. At his suggestion the society introduced guinea subscriptions, and in the controversies within the society between the so-called Chiswick and Kensington factions he published a pamphlet entitled 'The Royal Horticultural Society: as it Is and as it Might Be' (1874). The society awarded him its Victoria medal of honour in 1897. In 1875 he was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society. He died at Heatherbank, on 28 March 1902. His wife survived him. In 1903 his garden at Wisley was purchased by Sir Thomas Hanbury and presented to the Royal Horticultural Society. 


@@@@@


doc= 36955


Wilson, Sir Henry Hughes, baronet (1864-1922), army officer and politician, was born on 5 May 1864 at the family home of Currygrane, near Edgeworthstown, co. Longford, Ireland, the second son of the seven children of James Wilson (1832-1907), a landowner, and his wife, Constance Grace Martha, eldest daughter of James Freeman Hughes of Stillorgan, co. Dublin. Wilson came from a modestly prosperous protestant family who had settled in co. Antrim in the seventeenth century, made money in the Belfast shipping trade, and by the early nineteenth century had become established as landowners in co. Dublin, co. Westmeath, and co. Longford. He was educated at home by a succession of French governesses before attending Marlborough College from 1877 to 1880. 
Although he was set on soldiering Wilson failed the entrance exams for both the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, and eventually entered the army through the Longford militia. He passed the examination for the regular army in 1884 and secured a commission in the prestigious rifle brigade; the following year he joined the 1st battalion in India. He was a strikingly tall figure, about 6 feet 4 inches in height, lean, and fit, who took much pleasure in the hunting-shooting-fishing pleasures of his age and class. As a subaltern he gained a reputation for cleverness and quick wit. He was also inclined to bursts of buffoonery which both entertained and unsettled his more straight-laced colleagues. In May 1887, while engaged in policing duties along the Irrawaddy River in Burma, he was seriously wounded over his right eye, and towards the end of the year he was invalided home. The scar from this injury added to his craggy features which led his rifle brigade colleague John Cowans to name him 'the ugliest officer in the Army' (Callwell, 2.10). While on sick leave in Ireland he became engaged to Cecil Mary Wray (1862-1930) of Kingstown (later Dun Laoghaire), co. Dublin, daughter of the late George Gore Wray, who had been a land agent and modest landowner. Wilson spent much of his sick leave and subsequent service with the 2nd battalion working for the Staff College entrance exam, which he passed in May 1891; and on 3 October he married Cecil Wray, who for the rest of his life remained a constant support and inspiration in both his army career and his Irish Unionist political sympathies. They had no children. 
Wilson's successful completion of the two-year Staff College course in 1893 set him on an army career which was mostly spent in staff appointments. Indeed he emerged as one of the ablest staff officers of his generation. For three years from 1894 he served in the intelligence department of the War Office as the army's youngest staff officer. From 1897 to 1899 he held the coveted brigade majorship of the 3rd infantry brigade at Aldershot which became the 4th light brigade in the force dispatched to South Africa following the outbreak of the South African War in 1899. Wilson saw action at the disastrous battle of Colenso during 'black week' in December 1899, and also the defeat at Spion Kop in January 1900. By all accounts he did well, and certainly impressed his brigade commander, Major-General Neville Lyttelton. After the relief of Ladysmith (at which he was present), Lord Roberts, the commander-in-chief in South Africa, a fellow Irishman who was to prove a valuable patron, took Wilson onto his staff, eventually as assistant military secretary. Wilson accompanied Roberts home at the end of 1900 and remained with him for a further year. 
After a year of regimental duty commanding the 9th provisional battalion at Colchester (February 1902 to February 1903), Wilson returned to the War Office, where he served as assistant adjutant-general for military education and training and assistant director of staff duties (1903-6). Here he was part of a group of army officers who had experienced the manifest staff deficiencies exposed by the South African War and who were pressing for administrative reform in the British army, particularly the establishment of a general staff, more or less on the German model. By 1906 this had been achieved as part of the army reforms introduced by the new secretary for war, Richard Burdon Haldane. Within the War Office, Wilson's responsibilities covered military education, which fitted him well for his next appointment: as commandant of the Staff College with the rank of brigadier-general. From 1907 to 1910 he was an inspiring and notably successful commandant. The post admirably suited his gifts as a teacher: his infectious enthusiasm, his ready wit, and his genius for lecturing. Reflecting his own penchant for sweeping political and strategic analysis, he encouraged his students to think expansively. One recalled how he 'fascinated us by his sparkling brilliance, his interest in outside affairs, his personality. He lifted us bodily out of the rut of everyday soldiering' (Nicholson, 169). Wilson also stressed practical exercises, such as staff tours and battlefield visits, though a thoroughgoing emphasis on pure practical staff work was left to his successor as commandant, William Robertson. 
One of Wilson's greatest concerns during these years was to prepare the British army for what he regarded as the inevitable war between France and Germany. A life-long Francophile, Wilson believed -- like many other soldiers -- that Britain's place was at France's side. He spent a number of holidays cycling along the Franco-German frontier to familiarize himself with the territory threatened by a German invasion. His unusually close friendship with the French general Ferdinand Foch, whom he first met in 1909, did much to facilitate close Anglo-French co-operation, then and later. His command of the French language, which he spoke willingly and enthusiastically, if not always absolutely accurately, also marked him out from most other senior British officers. 
Wilson became director of military operations (DMO) in the War Office in August 1910. Here his devotion to the French alliance had its impact on British strategic policy making. Military conversations, approved by the army's political masters, about the possibility of the British providing direct assistance to the French had begun in 1905, but only under Wilson did they assume real substance. Despite the growing strength of the entente with France, opinions in London were divided as to the action Britain should take in the event of a Franco-German conflict. A strong lobby, naturally well represented in the Admiralty, held to the traditional 'blue-water' strategy, by which military intervention on the continent was to be avoided and Britain's naval strength deployed to enforce a blockade on the enemy. For the navalists, not to mention those attracted to isolationism, a direct 'continental commitment' such as that proposed by Wilson was anathema. 
These differences came to a head at a celebrated meeting of the committee of imperial defence on 23 August 1911 prompted by the Agadir crisis. Here Wilson deployed all his brilliance as a lecturer lucidly to explain the War Office plans to send British forces to help the French repel a German advance. He completely outshone the first sea lord, Sir Arthur Wilson, whose exposition of the Admiralty's apparently inchoate plans for blockade and possible amphibious operations against Germany signally failed to impress the politicians, who decided in favour of the War Office. Armed with this support Wilson devoted his energies to perfecting the detailed arrangements for deploying the British expeditionary force (BEF) in northern France. In April 1913 he observed that his two immediate predecessors as DMO had secured permission 'to 'work out all the details' of a scheme of combined operations with the French against the Germans. When I became D.M.O. I conceived it to be my most important duty to continue this work and so far as human foresight was possible to complete a scheme which would be at once useful and practical. (Wilson MSS, HHW 3/7/2)' In this he succeeded.During these years Wilson, who was promoted major-general in November 1913, began to dabble in political matters. He actively supported the campaign for compulsory national service headed by his old chief Lord Roberts. A widening circle of acquaintances included a number of key Conservative opinion makers. Leopold Amery and Lord Derby, old friends from South African days, were joined by H. A. Gwynne (editor of the 'Morning Post'), Bonar Law, Lord Milner, Geoffrey Robinson (editor of 'The Times'), and back-bench MPs such as Sir Charles Hunter. Wilson was passionately committed to the political union between Ireland and Great Britain. Along with Roberts he was very sympathetic to the armed resistance to home rule being planned by Ulster Unionists in the years immediately preceding the First World War, and he played a central (if ultimately somewhat equivocal) role in the 'Curragh incident' of March 1914, when a number of army officers with Unionist convictions resigned their commissions rather than follow orders which they believed were aimed at coercing Ulster into a home rule Ireland. Throughout the crisis Wilson worked behind the scenes in support of the Ulster cause (though he stopped short of resigning) and kept leading opposition politicians fully informed of developments. 
On the outbreak of war in August 1914 Wilson became sub-chief of the general staff of the BEF under Sir Archibald Murray. The successful mobilization of the force and its deployment to France was perhaps his greatest military achievement. Murray's health soon broke down and Wilson effectively took charge of the BEF headquarters staff. Although he was occasionally pessimistic, during the nightmare retreat from Mons his cheerfulness and good spirits are said to have played a crucial role in keeping up morale at the British headquarters. He also maintained very close communication with Foch, who by this time was deputy to the French commander-in-chief. Although Sir John French, the commander of the BEF, was keen to replace Murray with Wilson, both Lord Kitchener (secretary for war) and Asquith (prime minister) objected to the move. Wilson's activities during the Curragh incident had earned him a reputation for intrigue which blackened him in the eyes of Liberal politicians and some army colleagues (including Sir Douglas Haig, who succeeded Sir John French in December 1915). 
In January 1915 Sir William Robertson became chief of staff and Wilson was appointed chief liaison officer to the French headquarters. This was an important job which Wilson did well, but it did not fully stretch his capabilities, nor did it provide much of an outlet for his restless intelligence. He remained in close touch with many military colleagues and politicians at home, to whom he indiscriminately expressed his trenchant views about the deficiencies of the higher direction of the war. He felt that Asquith was an insufficiently vigorous prime minister and increasingly came to believe that Lloyd George would make a much better war leader. 
Like many others Wilson did not foresee that the conflict would turn into a long war of attrition. Having persistently pressed for conscription in Britain before the war, he at first ridiculed Lord Kitchener's drive to raise a mass volunteer army, fearing that the concentration on raising 'shadow armies' at home would 'prevent a lot of good officers, N.C.O.s and men from coming out' to France (Callwell, 1.178). It soon became clear, even to Wilson, that there would be no quick conclusion to the war, though he continued to believe that conscription (eventually enforced in 1916) was the only fair and effective means to raise the manpower required. During 1915 his relations with both Kitchener and Asquith improved. Kitchener began to consult him regularly, and on the day Wilson was knighted (KCB) Asquith gave him a private interview -- 'He listened very attentively, & in the end was very civil' (Wilson, diary, 1 July 1915). In August Wilson was offered the command of a corps, but turned it down after French told him that both he and Kitchener particularly valued his liaison work and preferred him to stay in his existing position. 
At the end of 1915 Sir John French was replaced as commander-in-chief of the BEF by Sir Douglas Haig, who in December gave Wilson command of 4th corps, a formation based around Bethune which saw little action during his command, as all energies were concentrated on the Somme to the south. It was the only time, apart from his service as a subaltern in Burma, when he commanded troops in the field. Wilson worked hard at training and his celebrated talks came to be much in demand. One officer noted a lecture on ''Days before the war'... extraordinarily funny with many dirty stories!' (diary of Captain L. Beaumont Tansley, 17 April 1916). In May when his immediate superior, General Monro, went on leave Wilson temporarily took charge of the First Army. His reputation suffered when an enemy attack captured three-quarters of a mile of his line near Vimy Ridge and a planned counter-attack was vetoed by Monro on the grounds that it would be too costly. Haig seems to have counted this -- among other things -- against Wilson, for when Monro was posted to Mesopotamia in August, Wilson was passed over for the command of the First Army. In October, moreover, the corps was reduced to a headquarters and put into the reserve. 
On 1 December 1916 Wilson was selected to be the British military representative on a full-scale Anglo-French mission to Russia, a belated attempt to shore up the eastern ally. The mission stayed in Russia for only a short time during January and February 1917 and in retrospect the exercise was almost completely futile. Any arrangements were quickly overtaken by revolution, which Wilson anticipated. 'According to all the accounts I get', he wrote in his diary on 31 January, the emperor and the empress 'are heading straight for ruin' (Wilson, diary). 
After Lloyd George became prime minister in December 1916 Wilson's fortunes rose. Although by no means blind to his faults, Lloyd George thought Wilson 'had undoubtedly the nimblest intelligence amongst the soldiers of high degree'. Because of 'his lucidity of mind and therefore of expression', which was denied to his military colleagues, 'he was specially helpful in a council of civilians' (Lloyd George, 5.2818). The prime minister used Wilson as an alternative source of military advice to either Haig or Robertson, who had been chief of the Imperial General Staff (CIGS) since December 1915. On his return from Russia, Wilson, with the rank of lieutenant-general, once again became chief liaison officer at the French headquarters (March 1917). Here he did much to improve relations between Haig and General Nivelle, but when the French spring offensive in Champagne failed badly Nivelle was replaced by Petain, who mistrusted Wilson as a Nivellite and declared him 'persona non grata'. In June Wilson resigned the appointment and returned to London. For the next two months he was unemployed and even toyed with the notion, raised by some of his Conservative friends, of going into parliament. This option was put to one side when at the beginning of September he accepted the eastern command, with its headquarters in London, from Robertson. Wilson remained at the centre of affairs. 
All through 1917 Wilson pressed Lloyd George -- and anyone else he could buttonhole -- to improve the co-ordination of allied policy making. Lloyd George was attracted to the idea of some sort of high level inter-allied body, not only because it might make the prosecution of the war more efficient, but also as a mechanism for restricting the powers of Robertson and Haig whom he personally held responsible for the inconclusive and costly progress of the war in the West. In October the serious Italian reverse at Caporetto brought the matter of allied co-ordination to a head, and early the following month the prime minister secured French and Italian consent to the creation of a supreme war council which would supervise policy at a high level. Wilson, with the temporary rank of general, became the British permanent military representative (1 December 1917), a position in which he now challenged Robertson as the government's chief military adviser. 
Over the next two months the supreme war council completed much useful, mostly prosaic, work in the co-ordination of the allied war effort. Little of this was particularly contentious, but in January 1918 Wilson developed a scheme for a combined general reserve of troops for the western and Italian fronts which provoked a fierce debate as to who should control it. Against Robertson's strenuous objections the council accepted Wilson's plan (backed by Lloyd George) for an executive war board, comprising the permanent military representatives, to control the proposed reserve. Robertson refused to work under the new arrangement and Lloyd George took the opportunity to manoeuvre him out of his position and replace him with Wilson, who became CIGS with effect from 18 February 1918. 
For the next year or so Henry Wilson was at the centre of British military and strategic policy making, in a position 'vis-a-vis' Lloyd George akin to that of the cabinet secretary, Sir Maurice Hankey. He saw the prime minister virtually every day, and attended cabinet meetings on a regular basis. Much has been made (not least by Lloyd George himself) about the struggles in the First World War between the 'Frocks' (politicians) and the 'Brasshats' (soldiers), particularly over strategic matters. In fact Robertson and Wilson did not differ markedly in their strategic analysis. Both men knew that the western front was the crucial theatre of operations for the defeat of Germany; both also appreciated that Britain's imperial interests required the commitment of troops in other places, especially in the Middle East. The main difference between them lay in their relations with the prime minister and his colleagues. Robertson believed that war strategy should be left entirely to the military and he was most reluctant to share the views of the general staff with civilians. Wilson had fewer such scruples and possessing 'a talent for explicit statement rare among tongue-tied soldiers' was able to 'hold his own in debate with any politician' (Buchan, 4.174). The supersession of Robertson by Wilson also marked the increasing truth of the adage, as Clemenceau was fond of quoting, that 'war is too serious a business to be left to soldiers'. In circumstances approaching 'total war', where all national resources, civil as well as military, have to be mobilized the civilian leaders have unequivocally to take charge and to employ military leaders able and willing to work with them. For these individuals military skills were less important than the sort of political skills at which Sir Henry Wilson excelled. 
The main crisis of Wilson's time as CIGS -- the great German push which began on 21 March 1918 -- at last, with the appointment of Foch as 'generalissimo', prompted the unification of allied military command for which Wilson had long been pressing. When the offensive ran out of steam, and even after the allies began to advance in August, the speedy collapse of the enemy caught many by surprise. As late as mid-October Wilson thought that the German army was ''not' beaten' ('Military Correspondence', 56). Following the armistice of November 1918 he spent much time in Paris heading the military section of the British delegation to the peace conference. Lloyd George continued to consult him on a very frequent basis, for example when drawing up the 'Fontainebleau memorandum' (March 1919), which laid down important guidelines for the peace treaty with Germany. In July 1919 Wilson was promoted field marshal, and in August he was created a baronet, receiving the thanks of parliament and a grant of $10,000. 
Wilson's status as an intimate prime ministerial adviser, however, did not very long survive the end of the peace conference in mid-1919. Once Lloyd George turned to wider questions of domestic and foreign reconstruction, Wilson's value as a confidant began to decline. Faced with an overextended empire in the aftermath of the war, and an upsurge of internal dissent, all Wilson could recommend was 'get out of those places which do not belong to you and cling on like hell to those which do' (Jeffery, 50). Although he was uncompromisingly anti-communist, he did not, like his political master Winston Churchill (secretary for war, 1919-21), support direct British intervention on the anti-Bolshevik side in the Russian civil war. Nor did he favour committing British troops to propping up client regimes in the Middle East, or (as Lloyd George favoured) to underpin Greek hegemony around the Aegean Sea. He became increasingly gloomy about the prospects for Britain and the empire. 'And so we are off into the New Year', he confided to his diary on 1 January 1920, '& if L.G. & his wretched Cabinet do not take up the reins and 'whip' of Government we shall be in a worse mess this day year' (Wilson, diary). 
Wilson was especially exercised about the fate of Ireland. He would contemplate no policy there other than the forcible crushing of Sinn Fein and the IRA, though he heartily deplored the indiscipline and excesses of the paramilitary 'Black and Tans' who were brought in to reinforce the Royal Irish Constabulary. He was disgusted when Lloyd George decided to negotiate with the Irish nationalist leaders in mid-1921 and he simply refused to speak to the prime minister for the rest of his time as CIGS. When Sir Henry retired in February 1922 he became a member of the United Kingdom parliament for the Northern Ireland constituency of North Down, but had scarcely begun his new political career when he was assassinated (22 June 1922) by two Irish republicans on his doorstep at 36 Eaton Place, London. He was given a state funeral and was buried in St Paul's Cathedral, London, on 26 June. Irish concerns suffused most of Wilson's activities towards the end of his life. His appointment as security adviser to the new Northern Ireland government reflected the regard in which he was held by Ulster Unionists. For all his militant unionism, however, he retained a strongly held opinion -- not always welcome in Belfast -- that the maintenance of security in the province should be as non-sectarian and as disciplined as possible. 
The shocking circumstances of Wilson's death served to inflate his reputation, which remained high until the injudicious publication in 1927 of numerous extracts from his diaries in C. E. Callwell's official biography, 'Field-Marshal Sir Henry Wilson, his Life and Diaries'. The impression given by the quotations was that of an overambitious, self-serving monster, with such violent passions and prejudices as to appear at times actually unbalanced. Subsequent assessments have generally dismissed Wilson as little more than Lloyd George's willing and pliant pawn, though Bernard Ash's biography, 'The Lost Dictator' (1968), proposed that had he lived Wilson might have emerged as a quasi-fascist political leader. At the end of his career Sir Henry Wilson was a disappointed man. In the army he had, perhaps, been a frustrated politician and as it turned out he had little chance to prove himself in the House of Commons. Reporting on Wilson speaking in parliament, Austen Chamberlain noted that the field marshal, 'as always, was incisive, dangerous and mischievous' (Chamberlain to Winston Churchill, 11 May 1922, Chamberlain MSS, AC 35/1/11). It seems that these qualities both contributed to his achievements and undermined them. Although a very able and articulate man, he was too mercurial -- and too obsessed with Irish affairs -- to inspire wholehearted trust among all his military and political colleagues. 


@@@@@


doc= 36956


Wilson, Henry Maitland, first Baron Wilson (1881-1964), army officer, was born on 5 September 1881, the eldest of the three sons of Captain Arthur Maitland Wilson OBE (1857-1934) of Stowlangtoft Hall, Suffolk, and his wife, (Harriet Maude) Isabella (died 14 March 1906), eldest daughter of Colonel Sir Nigel Robert Fitzhardinge Kingscote (1830-1908) GCVO, KCB, of Kingscote, Gloucestershire, paymaster to the household of Edward VII. On his mother's side Wilson was descended from Admiral Lord Howe and Lord Raglan, commander in the Crimea. Wilson went to Eton College (1895-8) and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, and on 10 March 1900 he was commissioned into the rifle brigade (lieutenant 1901), with which he had family connections: his uncle (later Lieutenant-General Sir Henry Fuller Maitland), became colonel commandant, 2nd battalion. Wilson joined the 2nd battalion in South Africa, after the relief of Ladysmith (28 February 1900), and served with it until the end of the South African War, before moving with the battalion to Cairo in 1902. 
Loyalty to his regiment and devotion to Eton were two prominent strands in Wilson's life. When he became a general most officers on his personal staff wore black buttons, and he took an abiding interest in regimental matters, especially when colonel commandant. He was to be president of the Old Etonian Association (1948-9) and chairman of the committee (1950-64). He was also a field sports enthusiast, particularly where horses were concerned, though his physical bulk, which caused him to be known as Jumbo and contributed to his impressive presence, did not make it easy to find him a suitable horse. 
Wilson went with the 2nd battalion to India in 1907, was promoted captain in 1908, served with the 3rd battalion in Bordon and Tipperary, and in 1911 was posted adjutant to the Oxford University officer training corps; here he had much to do with the flow of good young officers into the 'Green Jackets' (the rifle brigade and 60th rifles) when war broke out in 1914. 
Wilson's own service in the First World War, which kept him continuously in France from 1915, was on the staff, almost certainly because he was too good a staff officer to be allowed back to the regimental duty he preferred. He went out as brigade major in the 16th (Irish) division (General Sir James Steele later said he was the best brigade major he ever knew) and was successively GSO2 of 41st division on the Somme and of 19th corps in the third battle of Ypres before going, in October 1917, as GSO1 to the New Zealand division, with which he stayed until the war's end. 
Wilson was appointed DSO in 1917, and mentioned in dispatches; he was promoted major on 1 September 1915 and brevet lieutenant-colonel on 1 January 1919; and later that year he went to the Staff College, Camberley, in the hand-picked group which made up the first post-war staff course. Wilson married on 15 December 1914 Hester Mary, youngest daughter of Philip James Digby Wykeham, of Tythrop House, Oxfordshire, and they had a son, Patrick Maitland, born on 14 September 1915, and a daughter. 
After time at Sandhurst, Wilson returned to the regiment (the first time for twelve years) as second-in-command of the 2nd battalion at Aldershot; he then spent three years (1930-33) as GSO1 Staff College (in the rank of colonel) -- where he reportedly only had time for leading members of the drag hunt -- and as chief umpire to the 2nd division under Strickland, when the general officer commanding-in-chief was that professionally exacting officer, General Sir Philip Chetwode. This episode played a significant part in Wilson's professional development and made him more widely known. He commanded the 1st battalion (1927-30) on the north-west frontier, and enjoyed racing, shooting and pigsticking. Wilson had nine months on half pay before taking over the 16th infantry brigade, in January 1934, from Wavell. This was a time of experiment in mechanization and on motorized infantry operating with armour. The concept of the motor battalion -- a type of unit in which riflemen were before long to distinguish themselves -- was emerging. 
Having been promoted major-general on 30 April 1935, at a time when commands were hard to come by, Wilson was again on half pay -- this time for nearly two years -- until taking over the 2nd division, again from his old friend Wavell, in August 1937. 
In the summer of 1939, in the threatening international situation, Wilson was appointed general officer commanding-in-chief, British troops in Egypt, in the rank of lieutenant-general, and left England on 15 June (noting it was Ascot gold cup day) to spend the next eight years, including the Second World War, overseas. 
Wilson was already high in the confidence of Anthony Eden, secretary of state for war: they had served together as Green Jackets in the First World War. He was soon to win Churchill's confidence, and never lost it. The operations of the army of the Nile (as it came to be called) under Wilson's command, with Wavell commander-in-chief, Middle East, resulted in spectacular successes in late 1940 and early 1941 in the western desert of Egypt and Libya against numerically superior Italian forces -- operations in which motorized infantry working with tanks were prominent. In 1941, after the capture of Tobruk (22 January), while Lieutenant-General Sir Richard O'Connor continued the desert campaign to further successes, Wilson was appointed by Wavell military governor of Cyrenaica. The war cabinet had decided, with grave misgivings on the part of its military advisers, to send an expeditionary force to help Greece against German invasion. The British and imperial forces available were too weak to be of much help. Eden, in Cairo, cabled (21 February 1941) that the expeditionary force required the best available commander and that he, Sir J. G. Dill, chief of the Imperial General Staff, and Wavell all agreed this was Wilson. His quiet authority was certainly useful in a time of high political sensitivity, while his tactical skill was evident in the conduct of the withdrawal, which ended with British evacuation of mainland Greece. Wavell met Wilson in Crete and told him he wanted him to go to Jerusalem and relieve Baghdad. Wilson became general officer commanding British forces in Palestine and Transjordan (1941). The successful relief of Baghdad, under siege by pro-axis Iraqis, was followed by the move of British and imperial forces into Vichy-held Syria and Lebanon, where the use by German aircraft of French airfields had invited a British ultimatum. The inclusion of a Free French contingent in this force was, in spite of the low availability of other troops and political pressure from de Gaulle, almost certainly a mistake. British officers with much experience in the Levant knew that what might be only token resistance from the Vichy side, offered as a matter of professional honour, would almost certainly develop into savage fighting if the Free French came in, which is just what happened. Some tended to blame Wilson (now designated commander-in-chief, allied forces in Syria) for an error of judgement but the decision (against which Wavell had argued) was taken in London. 
Tension between Churchill and Wavell was growing and in July 1941 the latter was replaced as commander-in-chief, Middle East, by General Sir Claude Auchinleck, with whom Churchill was going to find it no easier to agree. On 2 July Churchill urged Auchinleck to consider Wilson for command in the western desert. 'It is much to be regretted', Churchill wrote, 'that this advice, subsequently repeated, was not taken'. Auchinleck preferred General Sir Alan G. Cunningham, after his success in Abyssinia, but the appointment did nothing to improve British performance in the field and under Cunningham's successor, General N. M. Ritchie, results were even worse and retreat towards the Nile delta continued. Only when Auchinleck did what Churchill had latterly been urging and took command himself did the position stabilize, almost in the delta. 
Wilson, who had been appointed general officer commanding-in-chief Ninth Army (1941), with his headquarters in Lebanon, had been brought down to Egypt to command troops in the delta against a possible breakthrough by Rommel. In August 1942 he was ordered personally by Churchill, whom he met for the first time, to take over the new command being set up in Persia and Iraq, on the Russians' southern flank and, with its communications and oil, of growing importance. He was commander-in-chief Persia-Iraq command from 1942 to 1943. From 23 September 1942 he spent eighteen months, based in Baghdad, in complex work which was more political, administrative, and diplomatic than strictly military: work he was well suited to and did well. The transfer of General Alexander from the post of commander-in-chief, Middle East, to that of deputy commander-in-chief to Eisenhower in January 1943, to assume direction of the last stages of the campaign by allied land forces in north Africa, left the position of commander-in-chief, Middle East, vacant. Churchill, again in Cairo, had Wilson moved into the post. Since the highest allied priority in the Mediterranean was the support of Eisenhower's command, Wilson's position was soon to become, in Churchill's hyperbole, that of a general 'with responsibilities but no troops'. 
On the collapse of Italy later in 1943 Churchill saw an opportunity to establish a dominant position in the eastern Mediterranean before the Germans could prevent it. He cabled Wilson from Washington (9 September 1943): 'This is the time to play high. Improvise and dare.' There was little more that Wilson could do, since virtually all resources were earmarked for the central Mediterranean, than launch some ill-supported, and in the end unsuccessful and wasteful, small operations in the Dodecanese on Cos, Leros, and Samos. Roosevelt consistently refused to allow any forces to be diverted from Eisenhower except for the Far East and would hear of nothing that suggested the slightest possibility of delaying 'Overlord', and the second front in north-west Europe. However, there was enthusiastic American support for a landing in southern France (Operation 'Anvil', later renamed 'Dragoon'), in which neither Wilson nor the prime minister saw any merit. Wilson would dearly have liked to carry out Churchill's cherished wish to capture Rhodes but Roosevelt was adamant. Churchill submitted to his decision but, as he wrote, 'with one of the sharpest pangs I suffered in the war'. 
The 'bleeding of the Eastern Mediterranean' also brought Churchill into the acutest differences he ever had with Eisenhower, but at the same time it brought him even closer to Wilson, and when Eisenhower was moved from the theatre to take charge of the preparations for 'Overlord', Wilson was from 8 January 1944, on Churchill's suggestion and with Roosevelt's approval, appointed supreme commander in the Mediterranean. There followed the further operations in Italy, under Alexander's command of the land forces, including the Anzio landing with its disappointingly weak command and slow gains, the steady grind northwards, and the continuing difference of emphasis between the allies on the relative importance of a landing in the south of France, firmly opposed by Wilson and seen by Churchill only as an extravagant and unnecessary diversion. Churchill and Wilson, would have much preferred strengthening allied forces in Italy, instead of reducing them, and pressing on up through Austria into Hungary, while exploiting Tito's successes along the Adriatic. Under very strong pressure from the Americans (suspicious of British intentions in the Balkans) the Riviera landings eventually took place, against almost negligible opposition, and were acclaimed a resounding, if scarcely relevant, success. 
Trouble in Greece as the Germans withdrew in the autumn of 1944 and the communists attempted to seize power, required British military intervention but Wilson was again on the move. Field Marshal Sir John Dill, head of the joint staff mission in Washington, died there on 4 November 1944. The good personal relations he had established, and above all Dill's firm friendship with General Marshall, had been of the utmost value to the alliance and it was imperative to put in the best available successor. On 21 November Churchill told Wilson, 'I can find only one officer with the necessary credentials and qualities, namely, yourself.' Wilson, promoted field marshal in 1944, took up the appointment in January 1945 and held it until it lapsed early in 1947. On 23 April 1947 he left for home. He had to accustom himself to holding a very high-ranking post with no command responsibilities. He was fully occupied as trusted intermediary on military matters between the British prime minister and the president, a position which did not essentially change when Roosevelt was succeeded by Truman. Wilson attended the Yalta and Potsdam conferences and was kept informed on the delicate manoeuvring which led to Hiroshima and Nagasaki. A dedicated professional soldier, Wilson had also a flair for diplomacy which possibly played a more important part in what he achieved than military talent. 
An impressive figure, Wilson had an appearance and manner which compelled attention and inspired confidence. He usually spoke little but what he said was to the point. He had 'shrewd little steely eyes', and when he looked at you closely over his half-moon spectacles it could be uncomfortable. He made no pretence to be an intellectual and was rather better in direct confrontation than on paper. His judgement was on the whole sound, though some of his arrangements for operations in the Dodecanese, admittedly at a time of frustration and some confusion, have been criticized. He was loved by some and was held in deep affection and respect by young officers who came close to him. At the same time he occasionally gave perhaps insufficient attention to personal hardship if he considered it necessary to disregard it, possibly from occasional lapses in imagination. 
Wilson was made CB (1937), KCB (1940), GBE (1941), and GCB (1944), and received foreign honours. On 12 March 1946 he was made Baron Wilson of Libya and of Stowlangtoft. He chose as supporters to his coat of arms 'Dexter, a Rifleman, and Sinister, a Bugler, both of the rifle brigade in full dress proper'. 
In the House of Lords, Wilson sat on the cross-benches, as befitted a field marshal, and took part in defence debates. He was active in the Royal United Service Institution, the Mounted Infantry Club, and especially the South African War Veterans' Association. He was colonel commandant of the rifle brigade (1939-51), and constable of the Tower of London (1955-60). As president of the Army Cadet Force Association from 1947, he devoted much time and affectionate attention to army cadets. For some years he lived quietly in the Chilterns and seemed lonely. Wherever he lived, his heart remained in Suffolk. 
His last appearance in public was at Eton on St Andrew's day, 1964. On 31 December 1964 he was taken ill and died peacefully at his home, Wheelwrights, Chilton, Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire. He was buried with his family at Stowlangtoft, Suffolk, and a memorial service was held in Westminster Abbey. 
Wilson's son Patrick succeeded him as second Baron Wilson. 
J. W. Hackett', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 36957


Wilson, Henry Schutz (1824-1902), literary scholar, born in London on 15 September 1824, was a son of Effingham Wilson (1785-1868) and his second wife, Maria, a daughter of Thomas James of The Brownings, Chigwell, Essex. His father, a native of Kirkby Ravensworth, Yorkshire, was a bookseller and publisher with radical political views. 
After education at a private school at Highgate, Middlesex, Wilson worked for ten years in a commercial house in London and mastered French, German, and Italian. Subsequently assistant secretary of the Electric and International Telegraph Company, he retired on a pension when the business was taken over by the Post Office in 1870. He edited the 'Journal of the Society of Telegraph Engineers' from 1872. 
Wilson's real interests lay in foreign travel, mountaineering, and study of foreign literature and history. A profound admirer of Goethe's work, he published 'Count Egmont as Depicted in Fancy, Poetry, and History' in 1863. In later years he contributed frequently to London magazines, and reissued his articles in 'Studies and Romances' (1873), 'Studies in History, Legend, and Literature' (1884), and 'History and Criticism' (1886). He was an early admirer of the poet Edward FitzGerald's long-neglected translations from the Persian, and FitzGerald welcomed Wilson's encouragement. He also wrote studies of the Conciergerie, Bianca Capello, and Albrecht von Wallenstein, as well as criticism of the works of Tennyson and Arthur Wing Pinero. His novels 'The Three Paths', 'The Voyage of the Lady' (1860), and 'Philip Mannington' (1874) were translated into German. 
Wilson, who was a member of the Alpine Club from 1871 to 1898, ascended the Matterhorn in the Alps on 26-27 August 1875 with Frederic Morshead and A. D. Prickard, and on 15 August 1876 with Morshead. Melchior Anderegg was one of Wilson's guides, and Wilson wrote 'Anderegg as a sculptor' for the 'Alpine Journal' (November 1873) as well as descriptions of his experiences in 'Alpine Ascents and Adventures' (1878). 
Interested in both the English and the German stage, Wilson was popular in literary and artistic society. He was a capable fencer and a zealous volunteer, becoming captain in the Artists' corps. He died, unmarried, at the house of his nephew, John Schutz Sharman, 2 Avenue Gate, Norwood, London, on 7 May 1902. His body was cremated, and the ashes were placed in the Sharman vault at Norwood cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 36958


Wilson, Herbert Wrigley (1866-1940), writer and journalist, was born on 25 October 1866 at Linthwaite, near Huddersfield, Yorkshire, the eldest son of the eleven children of the vicar of Linthwaite, George Edwin Wilson, and his wife, Cecilia Wrigley. He was educated at Durham School and at Trinity College, Oxford. He graduated with first-class honours in classical moderations (1887), and second-class in 'literae humaniores' (1889). 
Of a mild, retiring, unassuming character, Wilson combined a scholarly disposition with a prodigious capacity for work. He possessed an encyclopaedic knowledge and enthusiasm for the navy, and this was reflected in the first major book he published, 'Ironclads in Action' (1896). This two-volume study, in its many different editions and surviving a change of title to 'Battleships in Action', for more than thirty years remained a standard work of reference. With Admiral Lord Charles Beresford, he wrote 'Nelson and his Times' (1898). He also contributed a substantial share to Sir William Laird Clowes's history, 'The Royal Navy' (1897-1903), and several chapters on naval subjects to the 'Cambridge Modern History'. All Wilson's naval writings were designed to promote public awareness of the need to maintain British naval supremacy. He was a founder member of the Navy League, and the honorary editor of its 'Journal' (1895-1908). Wilson's capacities as a military commentator were demonstrated in his perceptive and deservedly popular two-volume history of the South African War, 'With the Flag to Pretoria' (1900-01). 
Meanwhile, Wilson had begun a successful career as a journalist, contributing leading articles on military and naval topics and foreign affairs to 'The Times' and 'The Standard'. Most significantly, he caught the attention and became the friend of Alfred Harmsworth (later Viscount Northcliffe). Shortly after the launch of the 'Daily Mail', Wilson was appointed its chief leader writer and assistant editor, posts that he held for the remainder of his life. Wilson revelled in this new venture in popular journalism, fondly recalling in later years, 'those days of youth, full of romance, which live in the memory of all who shared those early triumphs' (Pound and Harmsworth, 218). 
Both Northcliffe and his brother Rothermere, for all their generosity, were not always easy taskmasters. Technically, Wilson was responsible to his editor, Thomas Marlowe, but the newspaper's proprietor was the ultimate arbiter. Whatever his true feelings, whenever Northcliffe or later Rothermere commanded, Wilson acquiesced. Yet Wilson was always eager to defend Northcliffe against any critic who claimed the proprietor interfered too much in editorial matters. 'Alfred', he assured Leo Maxse, 'is often attacked and blamed unfairly... A newspaper proprietor has difficulties which critics overlook' (Wilson to Maxse, 22 July 1911, Maxse MSS). Wilson's unfailing, admiring loyalty was rewarded in 1916 when he was appointed to the board of Associated Newspapers. His resignation in 1920 was accompanied with a characteristic affirmation of attachment to Northcliffe. 'Who could help being devoted to you? Who cannot but be proud to serve under you?' (Wilson to Northcliffe, 2 Jan 1920, Northcliffe MSS). The words were inspired by affection not sycophancy. In 1926, when the editor, Thomas Marlowe, and the managing director, Sir Andrew Caird, resigned from the 'Daily Mail' because they were unable any longer to tolerate Rothermere's attachment either to Lloyd George or Beaverbrook, Wilson, who had been reappointed a director in 1925 and shared Marlowe's and Caird's disapprobation, chose to stay. He was determined to do what he might to guide Rothermere's wayward steps back into the official tory fold. Wilson remained a director of Associated Newspapers until 1939. 
Joseph Chamberlain was the first prominent politician to cultivate Wilson's friendship as a useful ally. With his brother, J. B. Wilson, and R. D. Blumenfeld, Wilson was recruited to persuade Sir Arthur Pearson, then owner of the 'Daily Express', to accept the chairmanship of the Tariff Reform League. As Northcliffe's confidant and adviser, Wilson frequently tempered the proprietor's over-enthusiastic, rumbustious involvement in party political matters. He served the interests of the Unionists well, exercising an important influence in the reform of the party's electoral machinery in 1910. 
With his easy and privileged access to Unionist politicians and senior service personnel, Wilson was kept exceptionally well informed. Though a friend of Beresford, his attack on Admiral Fisher's inadequacies as a strategist was entirely justified. Later censures of the first sea lord, who denounced Wilson as an 'idiot' and 'eunuch' (A. J. Marder, ed. 'Years of Power, 1904-14', vol. 2 of 'Fear God and Dread Nought', 1956, 86 and 244), were silenced by his editor on Northcliffe's instructions. Northcliffe fully shared Wilson's fearful apprehension concerning Germany's ambitions. He applauded Wilson's campaign of 'Two Keels for one' begun in the 'National Review', backed up by the 'Daily Mail'. Wilson constantly insisted, 'that the supremacy of our fleet... must be regarded as a permanent feature of our national policy' ('Daily Mail', 29 July 1910). But Wilson was never a wild scaremonger about the threat Germany posed to Britain. In August 1911 he refused to join the chorus warning of imminent war. He was convinced that Germany would strike only when her deficit in modern battleships had been repaired. He did, however, ally himself with the radical tories in their unreasoned opposition to R. B. Haldane and the army reforms he promoted. And he was angry with Ralph Lane (Norman Angell) for writing his admired and influential pacifist polemic, 'Europe's Optical Illusion' (1909). This was not so much because he supposed its message to be fundamentally flawed as that he considered it an act of apostasy to have been written by an employee of Northcliffe's. 
Wilson, who never married, died at his home, Birchfield, 18 Verulam Road, Hitchin, on 12 July 1940. He was buried in Hitchin cemetery on 15 July. For more than forty years his signed articles and leaders in the 'Daily Mail', written with 'admirable style and balanced judgment', had contributed 'much to build up the prestige' of his newspaper 'with the best type of reader' (Ward-Price, 74). Sir John Hammerton, Wilson's colleague and co-editor on a number of serial publications, considered Wilson to be undoubtedly the best scholar among contemporary journalists (see J. A. Hammerton, 'Books and Myself', n.d., 260). Thomas Marlowe, for almost thirty years Wilson's editor, with neither condescension nor irony, acknowledged to Northcliffe that it was Wilson who was 'the brains of the 'Daily Mail'' (Marlowe, n.d., Northcliffe MSS). Colleagues at Carmelite House all acknowledged and admired Wilson's unfailing generosity and kindliness of spirit. The memoir in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' by his brother, J. B. Wilson, is of particular interest and importance as a source. 


@@@@@


doc= 36959


Wilson, Sir Jacob (1836-1905), agriculturist, was born at Crackenthorpe Hall, Westmorland, on 16 November 1836, the elder son of Joseph Wilson, a farmer. His mother, Ann, was the daughter of Joseph Bowstead of Beck Bank, Cumberland. Wilson received his early education at Long Marton, Westmorland, and he studied land agency for a short time in London. In 1854 he entered the Royal Agricultural College at Cirencester, where he was highly successful; he gained his agricultural diploma after eighteen months' study. He then remained at Cirencester for a further six months as honorary farm bailiff (a post of distinction for students), after which he was commissioned to remodel a Swiss estate on the English system. He returned home in 1857 to assist his father in the management of Woodhorn Manor, a large farm near Newbiggin on the Northumberland coast. Here Wilson took a close interest in agricultural mechanics, especially the new reaping machines which were then coming into vogue, and in steam cultivation which received a great deal of attention in the farming community of the late 1850s. In 1859 he was awarded the first agricultural diploma to be given by the Highland and Agricultural Society, and four years later the same body gave him a special prize for a report on mechanical harvesting. 
In the 1860s Wilson developed his profession of land agency and in 1866 he was appointed by the earl of Tankerville to be agent for his Chillingham estates. Here Wilson instigated a series of experiments in crossing selected specimens from the famous Chillingham herd of wild white cattle with pure-bred shorthorns. This led to some successes at stock shows, although the cross-bred progeny suffered from temperamental defects derived from their wild ancestry. Wilson's experience of land management at Chillingham, augmented by that gained from various other estates with which he became associated throughout England, led to his being much sought after as a witness or arbitrator in valuation cases. His professional interests also influenced his campaign for legislation to repress the spread of animal diseases. The 'Contagious Diseases (Animals) Act' of 1878, and a further 'Animals Act' of 1884, which provided for safeguards against the introduction of animal diseases from abroad (especially foot-and-mouth disease), owed much to Wilson's efforts. In 1888 Wilson presided over a departmental committee of the privy council which investigated pleuropneumonia in cattle; as a result, in 1890 the newly formed Board of Agriculture acquired important powers to control animal diseases. Two years later Wilson succeeded Sir James Caird in the important position of director of the land department and agricultural adviser to the Board of Agriculture, a post that he occupied until 1902. Wilson was also a member of the royal commissions on agricultural depression (1879-82) and on horse breeding (1887). 
Wilson is best known for his long association with the Royal Agricultural Society of England, which he joined in 1860. He was elected to the society's council in 1865 at the unprecedentedly young age of twenty-nine. He acted as a steward or judge in various capacities at many royal shows and in 1876 he succeeded Brandreth Gibbs as the honorary show director, an office which he kept for eighteen years. Between 1868 and 1878 he was also secretary of the Northumberland Agricultural Society, during which time he did much to revitalize and extend its proceedings. 
Wilson was highly esteemed within the Victorian agricultural community. His work received recognition on 23 April 1874 on the occasion of his marriage to Margaret, daughter of Thomas Hedley of Cox Lodge Hall, Newcastle upon Tyne, when the Northumberland Agricultural Society gave him silver plate to the value of $500. Ten years later, a subscription in recognition of his public service generated a purse of 3000 guineas, which was presented to him at a banquet presided over by the duke of Richmond and Gordon. He was knighted on 29 June 1889 at the conclusion of the fiftieth royal show, which was held in Windsor Great Park, and the distinction of KCVO was conferred upon him in 1905. 
Wilson had a commanding presence and mixed in wide social circles; Edward VII was godfather to his elder son, Albert Edward Jacob, and the duke of Richmond and Gordon was godfather to his second son, Gordon Jacob. Wilson also had two daughters, Beatrice and Mildred. He had extensive interests in field sports and was for a time secretary to the Morpeth hunt; while at Woodhorn Manor he was closely involved with coursing. 
In 1881 Wilson moved to Chillingham Barns Farm on the Tankerville estate, which he occupied until his death. Impaired health caused him to restrict his many professional and sporting activities during the last years of his life, but in 1905 he came out of retirement to act again as honorary director of the royal show. This was to be the last of the three shows held at Park Royal, west London, which the society had intended to establish as a permanent showground -- a policy which Wilson had strongly opposed. Despite Wilson's immense efforts the event was a financial failure, and his contemporaries considered that his exertions on the showground precipitated the heart failure which caused his death at Chillingham Barns Farm on 11 July 1905, shortly after his return to Northumberland. He was buried at Chillingham on 14 July 1905 and a memorial service was held on the same day at St George's, Hanover Square, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 36960


Wilson, James Maurice (1836-1931), headmaster and Church of England clergyman, was born at King William's College, Isle of Man, on 6 November 1836, the younger of twin sons of Edward Wilson (1802-1876), first principal, from 1833 to 1838, of King William's College and later vicar of Nocton, Lincolnshire, and his first wife, Elizabeth (died 1842), eldest daughter of James Pears, rector of Charlcombe and headmaster of Bath grammar school. Steuart Adolphus Pears, the headmaster of Repton, was his uncle. He was educated first by an incompetent governess and then by his father, before being sent in 1848 to King William's College, where he suffered bullying, cruelty, and neglect. He then spent two years at Sedbergh. When in 1855 he went up to St John's College, Cambridge, he had read a good deal of Latin and Greek, but little else, except that his early training in an evangelical household had given him a very thorough knowledge of the 'Bible'. 
In March 1856 Wilson was bracketed second with Henry Sidgwick for the Bell university scholarship: in the following term, in order to compete for a college scholarship in which advanced mathematics were required, he took a short but intensive course in that subject, and showed so much promise that he was pressed to read for the mathematical tripos, in which he came out senior wrangler (1859). A nervous breakdown followed, the result of overwork, which erased from his mind all the advanced mathematics so triumphantly acquired. Recovering this knowledge required him to learn again from scratch. He stood for a fellowship at his college a year later and was elected on his classics. 
Wilson had already in 1859 been appointed to a mathematical mastership at Rugby by Frederick Temple. His chief duty was to organize the teaching of science there. The subject was new to him and new to the school's curriculum, but he tackled the problem with enthusiasm. A chemistry laboratory was built in 1861 and an astronomical observatory was added in 1877. He was soon engaged in schemes for developing science teaching throughout the country, and served with T. H. Huxley and John Tyndall on a committee of the British Association appointed to study the question. His contribution on teaching natural science in schools to 'Essays on a Liberal Education' (1867), edited by F. W. Farrar, argued that its development depended on encouragement from the universities. He was also interested in modernizing the teaching of mathematics and, in particular, breaking away from the traditional teaching of geometry based on Euclid. His textbooks on 'Elementary Geometry' (1869-78) were criticized by C. L. Dodgson (1879). He was one of the original promoters of the Association for the Improvement of Geometrical Teaching which eventually (1897) became the Mathematical Association; he was president in 1921. 
In 1863 Wilson succeeded to a boarding-house, and five years later (18 December 1868) he married Annie Elizabeth (died 1878), daughter of Edward Moore, bank clerk, of Douglas, Isle of Man. He was devoted to Temple, but was not happy under his two successors. With his brother-in-law, Arthur Sidgwick, Wilson opposed the Conservative Henry Hayman, and he found the easy-going T. W. Jex-Blake too lacking in moral and spiritual fervour. Unusually for a public-school housemaster of this period he was a layman, and about 1875, wanting to teach Christianity in the broad-church spirit of Temple, he applied to Henry Philpott, bishop of Worcester, to enter holy orders. Philpott refused to ordain him on learning that he no longer accepted the verbal inspiration of scripture, rejected 'Old Testament' miracles, and doubted the virgin birth. On the sudden death of his wife in July 1878 Wilson decided to give up schoolmastering, but in October 1878 his plans changed when John Percival, also a former Rugby master, liberal, and broad-churchman, recommended Wilson as his successor as headmaster of Clifton College, Bristol. Wilson was reluctant, but pressure was brought from various quarters, and Temple, when consulted, urged him to accept. He finally agreed. Before he took office as head he was ordained deacon and priest by Temple, 'the first time, so far as is known, a bishop accepted for ordination an Anglican who held a suspended judgment about all physical miracles' (Chadwick, 145), though on the understanding that he should not publicize his controversial views. 
Twenty years at Rugby were followed by eleven years (1879-90) as headmaster of Clifton. These were perhaps the happiest years of Wilson's life. He had been deeply influenced by one great headmaster, Temple, and was following another, Percival, the maker of Clifton, and found there an unusually able staff, including his old friend the poet T. E. Brown. He returned to his old love, the classics, and his lessons in Plato and Thucydides were an inspiration and revelation to his sixth form. He was a born teacher and preacher, and his influence on the school was probably exerted more through his sermons (published in 1883) than by any other means. Simple, direct, and stimulating, they came home to boys of every age and temperament. His address to teachers on 'Morality in public schools' was one of the first attempts publicly to address the sexual problems arising in boys' boarding-schools, and marked the beginning of concerted action by headmasters to uphold the ideal of purity. 
The busy life of a school did not monopolize Wilson's energies: he was active in civic affairs in Bristol. Percival had started a school mission in the poorest part of the city and this work was greatly extended by Wilson, who felt that education which ignored social duties and responsibilities was of little value. He was the first headmaster to introduce a summer camp for working-class boys, run by members of the school. His second wife, Georgina Mary (1853/4-1926), daughter of Admiral J. T. Talbot, whom he married on 26 March 1883, took part in social work among girls in Bristol after the example of Josephine Butler. Wilson himself gave public lectures to answer secularists (see his 'Essays and Addresses', 1887), and continued his interest in biblical criticism. His paper to the church congress in 1888 on 'Old Testament' criticism (published in his 'Some Contributions to the Religious Thought of our Time', 1888) brought him wider notice as a liberal theologian. 
In 1890 the bishop of Manchester, James Moorhouse, who was sympathetic to his broad-churchmanship, offered Wilson the living of Rochdale with the archdeaconry of Manchester, and his growing interest in social work decided him to accept the invitation. Fifteen years of strenuous service followed. There was bitter rivalry between church and chapel, and his efforts to introduce more charity and to secure co-operation were regarded with suspicion by die-hards in both camps. Although Wilson was a liberal in outlook, and determined to work with nonconformists, he was an uncompromising advocate of the national church and its role in education, and was in conflict with the nonconformist-dominated school board. He went ahead with building and extending church schools in the parish, in the face of the opposition marshalled by J. Hirst Hollowell; he also supported the 1902 'Education Act', which abolished the school boards. The principles of his work in stimulating church life in a growing industrial district by such means as the formation of a strong Lay Helpers Association were discussed in his 'Six Lectures on Pastoral Theology' (1903). In spite of exacting duties he found time for lectures on many subjects, and nearly fifty sermons, addresses, and other papers appeared in print during these years, including his Hulsean lectures delivered at Cambridge in 1898-9 and published in the latter year as 'The Gospel of the Atonement'. 
In 1905 Wilson was offered and accepted a canonry at Worcester, which gave him leisure from parochial work. He became governor of the Worcester College for the Blind; as receiver-general he took over the accounts of the chapter, and as cathedral librarian he discovered a new field of activity. There were scores of old manuscripts which had never been properly examined, and he learned how to decipher the abbreviations and medieval script. Nearly 6000 items were catalogued and a series of publications followed, until failing eyesight put an end to his study of manuscripts. In 1908 he stepped in temporarily as headmaster of the King's School, Worcester. He also became president of a committee formed to find a remedy for the high infantile death rate in the city, and in six years' time the rate was halved. Another cause which he championed was that of playgrounds and open spaces. 
In 1926 growing deafness and blindness forced Wilson to resign his canonry. His second wife died later in the same year. But neither loneliness nor physical infirmities could quench his mental vigour or his interest in life. His tastes were frugal and his chief recreations card playing and solving chess problems. Wilson died at his home, Hither Northfield, Steep, near Petersfield, Hampshire, on 15 April 1931. He was buried in the churchyard at Steep. With his first wife he had two sons, of whom the elder was killed in action in 1915 and the younger was killed by an accident in youth, and two daughters, the elder of whom was the author Mona Wilson; with his second wife he had one daughter and three sons, of whom the eldest was Sir Arnold Talbot Wilson of the Indian political service, the second was killed in action in 1916, and the youngest was Sir James Steuart Wilson, the singer. 
'No scientific discovery can be contrary to religion. The mere apprehension that this could be so is itself a deep infidelity.' These words give the key to much of Wilson's theological writings, for to him one of the tasks of the age in which he lived was to present the underlying truth in terms not inconsistent with the new knowledge, and to separate the essential from the inessential in traditional theology. 'The essence of Christianity is the individual experience of Christ, but God reveals himself in the physical laws of the universe as well as in the voice of conscience, so that any contradiction between them is impossible.' On such problems Wilson tried to throw light, and many, even if they could not agree with his conclusions, would recognize in him not only a fearless, honest, and deeply earnest thinker, but a warm-hearted human being to whom religion was the great reality of life. Wilson's intellectual gifts and inexhaustible energy, his intuition and imagination, his omnivorous curiosity and swift power of mastering the essentials of a problem would have made him a prominent figure in any profession; had he confined himself to any one field, he might have been remembered as one of the greatest thinkers or discoverers of his times. 


@@@@@


doc= 36961


Wilson, Sir (James) Steuart (1889-1966), singer and musical administrator, was born on 21 July 1889 at Bristol, the youngest child of the Revd James Maurice Wilson (1836-1931), headmaster of Clifton College and later a canon of Worcester Cathedral, and his second wife, Georgina Mary Talbot (died 1926), daughter of Admiral John Talbot of Bristol. He had a sister and two brothers, one of whom was the soldier and administrator Sir Arnold Talbot Wilson (1884-1940). He also had four half-brothers and sisters from his father's first marriage, including Mona Wilson. Wilson's education, like his background, was conventional. He went to a preparatory school, Grove House, when he was ten. From there he went to Winchester College, where he was a scholar, and then to King's College, Cambridge, as an honorary exhibitioner reading classics. His gifts as a musician became apparent at an early age. He took piano lessons and sang regularly in Winchester College and Cathedral, but it was not until the Cambridge period that music -- and more particularly singing -- emerged as his central interest. He was fortunate there in having the encouragement of Professor Edward J. Dent and Ralph Vaughan Williams, and in meeting and working with musicians like Gervase Elwes and Clive Carey, but at no time in his life did he follow any musical course in the orthodox sense. Not surprisingly, he got only a third in the classical tripos at Cambridge (1909). 
His first public appearance as a singer was as a soloist and member of the choir in the incidental music written by Vaughan Williams for 'The Wasps' of Aristophanes, at the New Theatre, Cambridge, in 1909. The composer was so much impressed by his voice that he wrote a special series, 'Four Hymns', dedicated to 'J. S. W.', for the Worcester Three Choirs festival in 1914, an event which was cancelled on the outbreak of war. Wilson had in the meantime succeeded Elwes (killed tragically while on tour in America) as the best-known interpreter of the song cycle 'On Wenlock Edge', Vaughan Williams's setting of 'A Shropshire Lad', by A. E. Housman. He made his first appearance in opera as Tamino in Mozart's 'Magic Flute', also at the New Theatre, Cambridge, in 1911; but opera was never to be his special field. 
When war broke out Wilson joined the 6th battalion of the King's Royal Rifle Corps on 22 September 1914. As a captain he was twice wounded, the second time seriously; he lost a kidney and a large part of one lung, and ended his military service in Whitehall. Incredibly, his voice was unaffected by his physical condition (it was a high tenor voice, not in itself of outstanding beauty), and in 1917, while still working at the War Office, he joined Cuthbert Kelly, singing in recitals of madrigals at St Martin-in-the-Fields. This led to the founding of the English Singers as a sextet in 1920. The group did not become self-supporting until 1921, but from that date they went from strength to strength, with successful tours at home and abroad. 
From 1921 to 1923 Wilson taught music at Bedales School. With his own school and family education based on traditional classical values, he found himself out of sympathy with the headmaster's advanced views; but this particular job of music director was not over-exacting and left him free to take professional engagements up and down the country. It also established his connection with what was to become the family centre at Petersfield: Canon Wilson lived at Steep, on the outskirts of the town, in his retirement, and Steuart made it his base off and on for the rest of his life. During the Bedales period he worked from Steep, cycling between home, school, and the railway station whence he travelled from one concert fixture to another. He worked hard and under some strain, so developed a duodenal ulcer for which he had more than one operation in later years. In 1925 he went to live in Notting Hill Gate, London, which remained his home until after the Second World War. 
Meanwhile, in 1922-3 an offer of material help came from Sir Alexander Butterworth, who had set up a fund in memory of his son George, the composer, killed in the First World War. Wilson was persuaded to accept, and spent two periods in Nice with the Polish operatic tenor Jean de Reszke: six months in 1923-4, and another four in 1924-5. This time of study, with singing lessons from a respected tutor, was the nearest he came to any formal musical training. 
English song, English folk-song, German lieder in English (from translations made with his friend Arthur Fox Strangways), and oratorios in English are the lasting memorials to this most English of singers. Wilson's greatest contribution to the performance of music was the painstaking, scholarly attention he gave to the declamation of the role of the evangelist in the passions of 'St Matthew' and 'St John' by Bach. He sang them in the language of the Authorized Version of the 'Bible', with impeccable timing, subtle vocal colour, and uncanny clarity of diction. In addition to his translations of German lieder he produced new English texts for Haydn's 'Creation', Brahms's 'German Requiem', and the vocal finale of Mahler's fourth symphony. With Dent he did much to revive the music of Henry Purcell. Always revelling in a good fight, Wilson embarked, in 1933, on a libel case against the BBC. Dubbed the 'Case of the Intrusive H', the action was the result of a letter published in the BBC's weekly paper, 'The Listener', in which the writer complained of his pronunciation in a broadcast performance of the 'St Matthew passion'. Wilson fought and won, and his belligerency was saved from malice by the wit and gaiety of his testimony in court. He used most of the $2000 awarded to him in damages to help his friend Rutland Boughton, whose opera 'The Lily Maid' he brought to London. His was not a permanent rupture with the BBC: ten years later he joined the BBC staff. 
From 1939 to 1942 Wilson had a short spell in America, at the Curtis Institute of Music in Philadelphia and elsewhere. At the age of fifty-three he embraced a new career, and he brought to the work of an administrator all the vigour he had previously expended as a performer. In 1943 he was appointed overseas music director to the BBC, and then in 1945 he became music director of the Council for the Encouragement of Music and the Arts, which became the Arts Council in 1945. Wilson stayed with it until January 1948, then returned to the BBC as music director, in succession to Victor Hely-Hutchinson. He was knighted in the same year. Thereafter he held several other appointments, including that of deputy to David Webster, the general administrator of the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, from 1950 to 1955 -- Wilson had been one of the original trustees of the newly founded Opera House in 1946. Unfortunately an antipathy developed between Wilson and Webster, and Wilson left Covent Garden. His final, and also unhappy, appointment was as principal of the Birmingham School of Music. He travelled much, at home and abroad, adjudicating and examining, and gradually drifted towards retirement at Petersfield, where he died at his home, Fenn's, Reservoir Lane, on 18 December 1966. 
Wilson was married three times, first, in 1917, to Ann Mary Grace, younger daughter of Captain Francis Alan Richard Bowles RN, retired, of Sittingbourne, Kent; this marriage was dissolved in 1932: In the following year his former wife married the conductor Adrian Boult. Second, in 1937, Wilson married Mary Daisy Goodchild (who died in 1960 in India, where Wilson was examining for the Trinity College of Music). In 1962 he married Margaret Stewart, widow of Leslie Hunter of Brockham Green, Surrey, a friend of Cambridge days. He had four children with his first wife, one of whom, Jonathan, was killed in the Second World War. It was in memory of Jonathan that he helped to finance the Council for Music in Hospitals: he also served as one of its vice-presidents. In addition, Wilson consistently championed the cause of the amateur music-makers and their sponsors; bodies like the English Folk Dance and Song Society, the International Folk Music Council, and the Rural Music Schools Council owed much to his support. 
Steuart Wilson was a difficult man. Colleagues found him stimulating, generous, always exciting, but he was also prickly and impatient of authority. As a public servant he hated hiding behind the anonymity of office. If anything went wrong he wanted to take the full blame himself; it might almost be said that he courted it. His life was a series of confrontations, but in spite of stress, sometimes causing actual illness, he thrived on them. He overflowed with original ideas, many of them impossible to realize. He also listened to other people's ideas, and if convinced by any of them, was the first to demand immediate action. He cared for the success of all who worked alongside, and there are many who remember his thoughtfulness. He could be a loyal friend, but he was also an implacable enemy. 
Wilson was excellent company. His friends remember that the singer of Bach passion music could also be a wholeheartedly bawdy entertainer in the home, with, among other delights, his inimitable rendering of the apparently innocent folk-song 'The Foggy, Foggy Dew'. He enjoyed entertaining, and was no mean cook, often receiving his guests in the kitchen, clad in his French chef's apron. He was always a good-looking man, and in older age aristocratically impressive. He was not unaware of it and, though far from vain, dressed distinctively. For example, he owned a collection of embroidered waistcoats with elaborate buttons of porcelain and enamel to go with them. In the later 1940s he could be seen on summer days in a pale blue and white striped seersucker suit. In the summer of 1966, six months before his death, he attended the opera at Glyndebourne wearing sponge-bag trousers, a morning coat, a resplendent waistcoat, and a pair of espadrilles. 
Mary Glasgow Ian MacPhail', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 36962


Wilson, John Cook (1849-1915), philosopher and classical scholar, was born on 6 June 1849 at Mount Horton, Nottingham, the only son of the three children of the Revd James Wilson (1814-1902), a Methodist minister, and his wife, Hannah (1818-1902), daughter of John Cook, of Newcastle under Lyme. He was educated at Shireland Hall, near Birmingham, Derby grammar school, and Balliol College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 27 January 1868, having been drawn there by the reputation of T. H. Green as well as by an exhibition scholarship. He gained first-class honours in classics and mathematics, both in moderations and in the final examinations. He graduated in 1873 and was elected to a fellowship at Oriel College in 1874. He also won the chancellor's Latin essay prize in 1873, and the Conington prize in 1882. After graduating he continued his studies at Gottingen, Germany. He became proficient in German but developed no great love of the literature or philosophy. 
While in Germany, Wilson met Charlotte, daughter of A. D. Schneider, of Gifhorn, Hanover, whom he married in 1876. She died in January 1914 after a long illness, the strain of which also took its toll on the health of her husband. They had one son, who after graduating emigrated to South Africa. After holding a tutorship at Oriel, Wilson was elected Wykeham professor of logic in 1889, and a fellow of New College in 1901. He retained the chair until his death and, with the exception of his brief stay in Germany, he spent all his adult life in Oxford. 
Wilson's talent as a philosopher was rare. He was at once a good mathematician and a good scholar. An intensive study in his earlier years of the great philosophers, and especially of Plato and Aristotle, gave him an unrivalled background for his own enquiries. He had a great feeling for facts. His mind was independent, cautious, and intensely critical. There was every reason to believe that he would publish the most outstanding work of his generation. Yet he published little during his lifetime beyond a number of well regarded papers on the text, interpretation, and doctrine of Plato and Aristotle. His most famous work, 'Statement and Inference' (2 vols., 1926), was published posthumously, and is a compilation of lectures and papers in various stages of completion, exhibiting very little coherence or consistency. His failure to publish may be attributable to the multiplicity of his interests, which were a continual source of distraction. A chance statement to which he objected would set him researching, and once this process had begun, no one could say when it would stop, for, to him, all critical problems were equally fascinating. He had a passion for detail, and a hatred of error. He considered writing on philosophy, when young, mere presumption, and cleverness a snare. 
Wilson was greatly influenced by the reaction in Germany against the idealism of Kant and Hegel, and took a special interest in the work of Hermann Lotze, whose lectures he had attended while in Germany. Wilson's intellectual development thereafter was characterized by a reaction against the philosophers to whom he had been initially attracted, the British idealists Green, Bernard Bosanquet, and F. H. Bradley, but he also moved away from the quasi-idealism of Lotze. This distancing instilled in him a peculiar reticence to commit himself in print to any philosophical conclusions until he was absolutely certain that his views would not subsequently alter. This proved to be an insurmountable obstacle to publication. It was not surprising, therefore, that he threw his energies mainly into teaching, as the best means of developing his own thought. 
Although somewhat pugnacious in his style of argument, Wilson lacked none of the tender compassionate humane qualities, and his warmth of personality was capable of inspiring admiration and loyalty in students from all walks of life. Among them was Cecil Rhodes, who delayed his departure to South Africa in order to attend a farewell dinner at Oriel in honour of his teacher. His talents as a teacher and critical thinker were widely acknowledged, and some of his devoted followers -- H. A. Prichard, W. D. Ross, and H. W. B. Joseph -- became pre-eminent Oxford 'realists'. Even pupils who rejected Wilson's philosophical 'realism' were profoundly moved by his presence. R. G. Collingwood remarks in his 'Autobiography' that he was 'an inspiring teacher, whose enthusiasm for philosophical thought I still remember with admiration and gratitude' (Collingwood, 19). His lectures, though not unrelieved by humour, were apt to seem abstract and rather dry. His real powers stood out in informal discussions. There he cast aside reserve, and his audience could watch his mind at work. His acuteness seemed a revelation, and there was infection in his conviction that the truth was a matter of high importance. 
The starting point of Wilson's views lay in his unwavering conviction of the truth of mathematics. The possibility of knowledge cannot be defined, proved, or justified, but it can be exemplified. For him mathematics was objective knowledge which needed no defence or justification. In mathematics we 'know'. Hence the scepticism inherent in the philosophy of those who followed the metageometricians was wholly alien to him. So also was the position represented in F. H. Bradley's 'Appearance and Reality' (1893). Reflection on our experience, he held, doubtless gives rise to puzzles in plenty, but where contradictions are alleged to be involved in our fundamental notions of the world, the cause lies in some fallacy, usually simple and often merely verbal, in which we have been involved. Wilson's attitude to ordinary language and 'linguistic analysis' ('Statement and Inference', 2.759) is similar to that of J. L. Austin. Although he did not give the same authority to ordinary language as Austin, Wilson nevertheless thought that it could give support to philosophical conclusions. Like G. E. Moore, his Cambridge 'realist' counterpart, Wilson had a great deal of time for claims to knowledge based on common sense. He was at the same time contemptuous of Bertrand Russell's logic. He never tired of insisting on the impossibility of general criteria, whether of knowledge, of beauty, or of morality. The key to particular problems lay in consideration of their particular subject matter. Yet the knowability of single facts by themselves, and the existence of irresolvable differences, were compatible with the unity of reality; they only showed that reality had not that unity which some philosophers expected it to have. Further, as Wilson came more and more to maintain, much that is ultimate in our experience is in itself intelligible to us, and our difficulties about such realities only arise because we treat them as if they were, or try to express them in terms of, or to explain them by, something else. In particular he became convinced that this was true of knowledge itself, and that for that reason the teaching of the idealists, which for long he had accepted, was based on a fallacy. In opposition to the idealist view that logic is about thought, he argued that statements express different types of thought -- opinion, supposition, inference -- and that it was absurd to conflate them in the idea of judgement. 
Wilson was an energetic man who combined a passion for cycling with an interest in war games and military matters by becoming the head of the university volunteer cyclist corps, from which he retired with the honorary rank of major in 1904. He was awarded the volunteer long service medal in 1905. During the last year of his life he was a regular writer in the correspondence columns of 'The Times', offering advice on military matters, including the establishment of an army cyclist corps to fight in Belgium. He was awarded an honorary doctorate of laws at St Andrews University, and was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1907. He died of cardiac failure and pernicious anaemia at his home, 12 Fyfield Road, Oxford, on 11 August 1915 and was buried three days later in Islip churchyard, near Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 36963


Wilson, John Dove (1833-1908), legal writer, was born at Linton, Roxburghshire, on 21 July 1833 and baptized (in an Episcopal chapel) on 7 October that year, the son of Charles Wilson, doctor, of Kelso (afterwards of Edinburgh), and his wife, Elizabeth Dove. He was educated at the grammar school, Kelso, and Edinburgh University, he studied law at Edinburgh, spent a session at Berlin University and was called to the Scottish bar in 1857. He married, on 12 June 1863 (according to Presbyterian rites) Anna Campbell (died 1901), daughter of John Carnegie of Redhall. They had two sons and one daughter. He was appointed sheriff-substitute of Kincardineshire, taking up his residence at Stonehaven until 1870, when he was transferred to Aberdeen. This position he held with distinction for twenty years, establishing his reputation as an able lawyer and a conscientious judge. 
Wilson, who wrote much in legal periodicals, had a profound knowledge of jurisprudence, and also revised and wrote a number of standard legal texts on Scots law, notably 'The Practice of the Sheriff Courts of Scotland in Civil Causes', which went to four editions (1869, 1875, 1883, 1891). He was an enthusiastic advocate of legal reform, especially in the matter of codification and the simplification of procedure. 
Some of the reforms Wilson proposed were realized at a later date. He gave evidence before parliamentary committees on bills of sale and civil imprisonment, and aided various lord-advocates in the drafting of bills, particularly the 'Sheriff Court Act' of 1876 and the 'Bills of Exchange Act' of 1882. He took a prominent part in the movement for the codification of commercial law which began in 1884. In that year he received the degree of LLD from Aberdeen University. 
On resigning his judicial office in 1890 Wilson was from 1891 to 1901 professor of law at Aberdeen. After studying Roman law for a season at Leipzig he revived the study at Aberdeen. He helped to found a lectureship on conveyancing, and to form a law library. In 1895-6 he served as Storr's lecturer on municipal law at Yale University. 
Wilson had a wide knowledge of French, German, and Italian, and published some verse translations. He was active in philanthropic work in Aberdeen and was president of the Aberdeen Philosophical Society. He died at San Remo, Italy, on 24 January 1908, and was buried at Allenvale cemetery, Aberdeen. 


@@@@@


doc= 36964


Wilson, John Dover (1881-1969), literary scholar and educationist, was born at Mortlake, Surrey, on 13 July 1881, the eldest of the six children of Edwin Wilson, engraver and scientific illustrator, and his wife, Elizabeth Dover. He won scholarships to Lancing College, where his uncle was headmaster, and to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he took the historical tripos with a second class in each part (1902-3). 
In 1904 Dover Wilson won the Harness prize for an essay published as 'John Lyly' (1905), which brought him to the attention of A. W. Ward, who assigned him two chapters of the 'Cambridge History of English Literature', and through whom, after a year's teaching at Whitgift Grammar School, Croydon, he became English lektor at Helsingfors (Helsinki) in 1906. In that year he married Dorothy Mary (died 1961), daughter of Canon Edward Curtis Baldwin, vicar of Harston, near Cambridge. The couple went on to have one son, Godfrey Baldwin Wilson (1908-1944) ['see under 'Wilson, Monica], and three daughters. The political climate in Finland also gave Dover Wilson the opportunity to work as a foreign correspondent for the 'Manchester Guardian', but in 1909 he relinquished his teaching post to become lecturer in English literature at Goldsmiths' College, London. His Elizabethan researches, especially on the Marprelate tracts, had brought him into the orbit of three scholars closely associated with the 'new bibliography': A. W. Pollard, W. W. Greg, and R. B. McKerrow. With Pollard there developed an intimate friendship which became one of the principal influences in his life. 
Alongside scholarly articles (from 1907) and reprints Dover Wilson produced the successful anthology 'Life in Shakespeare's England' (1911, 1956, 1976). But in 1912 an invitation to become an inspector for the Board of Education meant that for over twenty years literary scholarship had to accommodate itself to the demands of another career. During his first six years as an inspector, while he lived in Leeds and did a perpetual round of evening schools throughout the northern counties, his Arnoldian ideal of culture for industrial workers was strengthened by often gruelling experience. He was involved in the Workers' Educational Association, and wrote a commissioned memorandum on 'Humanism in the Continuation School' (1921), on which he was warmly congratulated by Albert Mansbridge; and when the scheme for such schools in the 1918 'Education Act' was ultimately dropped he felt this a betrayal of the nation's youth. He also served on the committee on the teaching of English set up in 1919 under Sir Henry Newbolt, and wrote part of its report, which proved an influential defence of English literature as the basis of national education. Dover Wilson was appointed professor of education at King's College, London, in 1924. He began the 'Journal of Adult Education' in 1926 and, with more enthusiasm, a series called 'Landmarks in the History of Education', for which in 1932 he produced a notable edition of Matthew Arnold's 'Culture and Anarchy'. 
The professor of education was, however, overshadowed by the Shakespeare scholar he had now become. Dover Wilson vividly recounted how he was 'converted' to Shakespeare on a late-night railway journey in 1917 by reading Greg's 'Modern Language Review' article entitled 'Hamlet's hallucination', which provoked him to a rejoinder. He became 'possessed' with 'Hamlet', and confronted with the problems of its text, was led on to those of Shakespeare's text in general -- just when the work of Pollard had suggested that the printed versions might be closer to Shakespeare's manuscripts than had been supposed. He seized on the clues contained in spellings, misprints, or mislineations, collecting evidence for 'Shakespeare's Hand in the Play of 'Sir Thomas More'' (edited by Pollard, 1923). His notes and articles caught the attention of the Cambridge University Press, which in 1919 invited him to join Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch as a textual expert in editing the 'New Cambridge Shakespeare'. This edition (1921-66) henceforth dominated his life. 
It was Dover Wilson's analysis and treatment of the text which caused the remarkable impact of the early volumes on the academic world. He also prepared a strongly innovative text for the 'Cranach 'Hamlet'' (1930), and his long absorption in the problems of this play had its outcome in the appearance of the 'New Cambridge 'Hamlet'' (1934), together with 'The Manuscript of Shakespeare's 'Hamlet'' (1934), and 'What Happens in 'Hamlet'' (1935). With the last of these and his 'biographical adventure', 'The Essential Shakespeare' (1932), he captured the imagination of the general public to a degree probably unequalled by any other Shakespearian scholar. Quiller-Couch withdrew from the 'New Cambridge' edition on the completion of the comedies, and with the histories Dover Wilson was able to range beyond the text to an ambitious critical reappraisal, which resulted in 'The Fortunes of Falstaff' (1943). He derived satisfaction from his appointment to the regius chair of rhetoric and English literature at Edinburgh in 1935, but in 1945 the claims of his edition, still only half-way through, prompted an early retirement. With steady progress, and presently the aid of younger collaborators (Alice Walker, his pupil G. I. Duthie, and especially J. C. Maxwell) he saw the last play out just after reaching the age of eighty. Then, after the long-projected 'Shakespeare's Happy Comedies' (1962), he was able to add the sonnets, before at length becoming blind. His wife died in 1961, and in 1963 Dover Wilson married his widowed cousin, Dr Elizabeth Wintringham, daughter of Sir Joseph Arkwright (1864-1944). 
In his determination to fulfil a task undertaken Dover Wilson never lost the spirit of adventure and optimism which characterized his attitude to scholarship as to life. Command of detail was accompanied by a boldness in hypothesis which occasionally struck Quiller-Couch as reckless. Certainly, not all his explanations of particular textual phenomena won, or held, assent, and his enthusiasm for critical innovation was tempered by the self-professedly provisional nature of his arguments. The importance of his edition lies rather in its demonstration of new possibilities and methods; he more than anyone established the editorial practice of investigating the nature of the 'copy' through which Shakespeare's plays reached print. As a teacher and lecturer he enjoyed lifelong popularity, and remained a fervent defender of the humanistic mission of Shakespeare studies. 
Dover Wilson was elected FBA in 1931 and appointed CH in 1936. In 1936 his Cambridge college made him an honorary fellow. He had taken his Cambridge doctorate in 1926, and subsequently received honorary doctorates from Durham, Edinburgh, Leicester, Lille, London, Natal, and Cambridge. He was a trustee of the Shakespeare Birthplace Trust from 1931, and of the National Library of Scotland from 1946. He died at his home, Three Beeches, Balerno, near Edinburgh, on 15 January 1969. 


@@@@@


doc= 36965


Wilson, John Gideon (1876-1963), bookseller, was born in Glasgow on 9 January 1876, the third of the eight children of James Wilson, a journeyman bookbinder, and his wife, Margaret Miller, who worked as a sheet-folder in the same workshop. He was educated at a board school in Glasgow until his thirteenth year, when he was apprenticed to the bookselling firm of John Smith & Son, Glasgow, an excellent training ground for young booksellers. Here he began the practice of his immense reading, choosing with independent judgement the best of English prose and poetry. 
On 9 January 1908 Wilson married Catherine Smart Provan (they had a son and four daughters), after which he went south for the rest of his life. For two years he worked with the publishing firm of Constable & Co., London, and then returned to bookselling with the City firm of Jones and Evans. From 1916 to 1919 he served as a soldier in France, winning the medal for meritorious service. He returned to Jones and Evans until 1923, when at the invitation of the proprietors, Messrs Debenham and Freebody, he went to manage the bookshop of J. and E. Bumpus Ltd. 
Wilson's years at Jones and Evans were perhaps the happiest in his experience. The modest premises in the City served as a rendezvous for leading figures in the literary world and Wilson followed the tradition of Evans in regarding bookselling not so much as a matter of retail trade as a service in which bookseller and customer met and shared the experience of contact with the precious manifestations of the spirit of man. It was essentially an affair of individuals, and he became the friend and counsellor of many of the finest creative writers of the time. 
In the gracious Old Court House at the corner of Marylebone Lane in Oxford Street, Wilson was to work on a larger stage with growing fame and growing responsibilities. John Wilson of Bumpus emerged as the most famous English bookseller of his time. Presently a fine room was added to the shop in which he organized notable book exhibitions. 
In 1935 the lease of the premises expired and was not renewed, the Court House was demolished, and, Debenhams having lost interest in the bookshop, Wilson resolved to re-establish Bumpus as his own enterprise. Helped with capital by his friends he acquired the business, and as chairman and managing director moved to a site in Oxford Street near Marble Arch. The move did not benefit the business, and Wilson had taken on administrative and financial responsibilities which were uncongenial. He maintained his belief in exact attention to detail and, after the shop was closed, might be found for two hours in a small room writing orders for books, notes, and, it was said, addressing labels. This practice obscured his vision of more important aspects of management, and latterly perhaps afforded a refuge from the pressure of financial cares. He found it hard to delegate responsibility, discouraging it in members of his staff; and his generosity in granting credit was abused. 
The practice of bookselling was changing: mass production, bulk selling, self-service, and the shadow of the oncoming computer era were warnings that the traditional personal relations of bookseller and customer were 'not for the fashion of these times'. The business dwindled; no provision had been made to meet the renewal of the lease on more arduous terms, there were difficulties which the removal of the shop to Baker Street did not resolve, and in 1959, when approaches were being made for the purchase of the firm, the Oracle of the Book Trade in his eighty-third year retired and went home to his books at Pinner, Middlesex, where, shortly before his death, his sight failed him. 
Described as 'massively wise and unassumedly learned', this lovable man was endowed with a rare simplicity. In his shop Wilson might be found conversing with the poet laureate or wrapping up the purchase of a schoolboy. His assessment of authors and their books was quick and sure, and his advice, always valid, was freely given to authors, publishers, and his fellow booksellers. 
As chairman of the educational board of the Associated Booksellers of Great Britain and Ireland, Wilson designed the training syllabus for young booksellers, and his manual 'The Business of Bookselling' (1930) remains a treasury of good counsel. For some years he edited 'The Odd Volume', an annual miscellany published in support of the Book Trade Provident Society. In 1948 he was appointed CBE. Wilson died at his home, 29 West End Avenue, Pinner, on 6 September 1963. 
Basil Blackwell', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 36966


Wilson, (John) Leonard (1897-1970), bishop of Birmingham, was born at Gateshead Fell, co. Durham, on 23 November 1897, the second child in the family of one daughter and four sons of John Wilson, curate of Gateshead Fell, and his wife, Mary Adelaide, daughter of Thomas Halliday, secretary to the firm of Armstrong Whitworth. He was educated at Newcastle grammar school and St John's School, Leatherhead. In 1916 he enlisted in the Durham light infantry, and saw service in France. 
In 1919 Wilson joined the Knutsford Training School, an experiment to equip clergy for the post-war world, and subsequently took a shortened course in theology at the Queen's College, Oxford, where he was influenced by the social and ecumenical thinking of the Student Christian Movement and the theological liberalism of B. H. Streeter. He graduated BA in 1922. After a brief appointment in 1922-3 to the staff of the Stuart Memorial College, Esfahan, he completed his training in 1923-4 at Wycliffe Hall, Oxford, and was ordained in 1924 to serve the cathedral parish of St Michael, Coventry. In 1927 he joined the Church Missionary Society, in the expectation that he would become principal of the Old Cairo Boys' School, but his secular manner of life and his Christological opinions offended the society, and he returned from Egypt in 1929 as curate of St Margaret's, Durham, with charge of St John's, Neville Cross. In 1930 he married Doris Ruby (Mary) Phillips, the daughter of a merchant trading in Egypt; they had four sons, one of whom died in childhood, and one daughter. As vicar of Eighton Banks (1930-35) and of Roker (1935-8) he threw himself into the congenial task of presenting a social gospel in a time of severe deprivation in the north of England. 
In 1938 Wilson became archdeacon of Hong Kong, and in 1941 was consecrated bishop of Singapore. He had no time to make an impression on the diocese in normal conditions, since the Japanese conquest involved his internment in the notorious Changi gaol in 1943. He was repeatedly tortured, on suspicion that the gaol was a centre of espionage, but his endurance, and the courage his ministry inspired in others, convinced him of the reality of the Christian faith, and raised him to an international figure. His tenure of the deanery of Manchester, to which he was appointed in 1949, was unhappy. He saw opportunities for unconventional experiment, while the cathedral authorities wished to re-establish cherished traditions, and it was with general relief that he was nominated bishop of Birmingham in 1953. 
Wilson's succession to the controversial Ernest William Barnes was intended to be eirenic, and to concentrate episcopal attention on diocesan and civic, rather than national and theological, issues. He avoided dispute, made few statements on secular affairs, and discouraged his clergy from political action. He faced a diocese seriously understaffed, in which urban replanning, the building of vast housing estates, and the settlement of overspill communities meant the redistribution of churches and the provision of new centres of worship and social life. An appeal launched in 1956 eventually met most needs, and Wilson's liberal and evangelical reputation began to attract more clergy. His cast of mind, and his missionary experience, made him, in his own words, 'almost a fanatic about church unity', and he powerfully supported the Birmingham Council of Churches, founded in 1951, and its local agencies. His episcopate saw a great influx of black and Asian immigrants into the midlands, and his example, with the establishment of a special chaplaincy, assured the initial amicable reception which was perhaps the greatest post-war social achievement of the Birmingham churches. He resigned his see in 1969. 
Wilson was appointed CMG in 1946 and KCMG in 1968; from 1963 he was prelate of the order. He was awarded a Lambeth DD in 1953, and an honorary DSc of the University of Aston in Birmingham in 1969; he was elected an honorary fellow of the Queen's College, Oxford, in 1954. He had an imposing presence and a fine voice. Conscious of his lack of scholarship, he distrusted intellectuals; he was autocratic and impatient of committees; his temper was quick and uncertain; but in personal and pastoral relationships he was generous and gracious. His episcopate in Birmingham cemented a divided diocese, and strengthened the influence of the church on civic and social life: his understanding of his experience in Singapore stimulated faith in a sceptical and disillusioned age. In 1959 he published 'Marriage, Sex, and the Family'. 
Wilson died in retirement at Bainbridge, near Leyburn, Yorkshire, on 18 August 1970. His memorial in Birmingham Cathedral described him as 'Confessor for the Faith', in the sense used in the ages of persecution. 
J. C. H. Tompkins', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 36967


Wilson, Joseph Havelock (1858-1929), trade unionist and politician, was born in Sunderland on 16 August 1858, the son of John Blenkin Wilson, a foreman draper, and his wife, Hannah Robson. After intermittent attendance at a local school and various short-term jobs, Wilson went to sea in 1870, remaining in the merchant marine until 1882. On 30 March 1879 he married Jane Ann Whatham from South Shields; they had two sons and one daughter. Together they ran a temperance hotel in Sunderland from 1884. This establishment became the meeting-place of a local seamen's trade society, of which Wilson assumed the presidency. In 1887, however, impatient with the failure of his fellow officials to expand the organization, he set up the National Amalgamated Sailors' and Firemen's Union. In 1889-90, amid the rash of strikes accompanying the emergence of the 'new unions', he briefly achieved his ambition of forming branches in all major ports. 
Wilson hoped to secure recognition for the union from shipowners across the country, in order to regulate employment (restricting that of foreign seamen) and to fix uniform standards of pay and conditions. His belligerent rhetoric and indiscriminate advocacy of sympathetic strikes served only to reinforce the hostility of employers, the great majority of whom were attached, after 1890, to the Shipping Federation. This body conducted a counter-attack which destroyed Wilson's union by 1894, and rendered its successor, the National Sailors' and Firemen's Union (NSFU), almost nugatory. The limited improvements which Wilson secured in the safety and comfort of seamen over the next fifteen years were due primarily to the part which he played, in association with Samuel Plimsoll MP, in amending the merchant shipping bills of 1894 and 1906, and extending other industrial legislation to seamen. His faith in a combative tactic was partly justified by the successful waterfront strikes of 1911. But it was not until 1917 that, thanks to the artificial labour shortages resulting from the First World War, centralized collective bargaining was introduced through the National Maritime Board. 
After the war, Wilson determined to preserve these gains. He endeared himself to the shipowners by his denunciations of unofficial strikes, by keeping his organization out of the general strike in 1926, and by insisting that wages and working hours must take account of economic depression and international competition. In return, he was allowed negotiating rights and closed-shop arrangements which largely extinguished opposition from small rival unions and rank-and-file dissidents. His control over his own society was strengthened by an arbitrary personal power to hire and fire officials. His policies, however, entailed a growing isolation within the labour movement, culminating in the disaffiliation of the NSFU by the Trades Union Congress in 1928. 
Even in his militant years, Wilson remained a Liberal in politics. He gained a parliamentary seat at Middlesbrough in 1892 as an 'independent labour' candidate, and held the seat from 1892 to 1895 and from 1906 to 1910 against Conservative and socialist opponents. His dislike of the Labour Party seems to have reflected distaste for the discipline imposed on its adherents. If later Wilson moved to the right, it was because he thought Labour was shifting leftwards. During the war he expressed antipathy for 'defeatist' politicians, instructing his members to arrest the passage of Ramsay MacDonald and Fred Jowett, of the Independent Labour Party, to meet foreign socialists, including Germans, in 1917. He was one of the principal supporters of the pro-war British Workers' League, and joined in the attempt to prise the TUC away from the Labour Party in 1917-18. His attachment to Lloyd George enabled him to represent South Shields as a Coalition Liberal from 1918 to 1922. He attributed much of the industrial unrest of the post-war years to Bolshevik influence, refused to assist the miners' lock-out of 1921, and gave financial support to the 'non-political' unions in the coalfields after 1926. 
Throughout the 1920s Wilson behaved more like an American union boss than a British labour leader. This should not be allowed to obscure the high reputation he had enjoyed in labour circles before 1914, when he had for long championed the cause of combination among seamen almost unaided. His resolute spirit, forensic talent, energy, and adaptability were widely acknowledged. Wilson was appointed CBE in 1917, and became CH in 1922. He retained a seat on the TUC parliamentary committee between 1890 and 1898 despite his union's weakness. His experiences fostered the belief, however, that organization among seamen was intrinsically fragile, and he had little capacity for co-operating closely with anyone who was not a client or a protege. His growing ill health increased his remoteness, yet he never relinquished his position of command. He died at his home, 5 Westminster Bridge Road, Southwark, London, on 16 April 1929. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 36968


Wilson, Samuel Alexander Kinnier (1874-1937), neurologist, was born at Cedarville, New Jersey, USA, on 6 December 1874, the only son of the Revd James Kinnier Wilson, of co. Monaghan, Ireland, and his first wife, Agnes Legerwood Hately. At an early age he was taken to live in Great Britain and was educated in Edinburgh at George Watson's College and the university. He graduated MA in 1897, MB in 1902, and BSc (with first-class honours in physiology) in 1903. After serving (1902-3) as house physician to Byrom Bramwell at the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary he obtained a Carnegie fellowship and studied at the Salpetriere in Paris, then regarded as the Mecca of neurology, under Pierre Marie and J. F. F. Babinski. After a few months in Leipzig in 1904 he became a resident medical officer at the National Hospital for the Paralysed and Epileptic, Queen Square, London. Thus began a thirty-three years' association which was ended only by death, for in turn he was house officer, registrar, pathologist, and honorary physician. At this period Wilson formed a friendship with the elderly J. Hughlings Jackson, and he also came under the influence of Sir William Gowers, C. E. Beevor, Henry Charlton Bastian, and other great figures in neurology. 
Wilson's monograph on what he termed progressive lenticular degeneration, a genetically inherited copper toxic disease, which damaged the liver, was contributed to 'Brain' (1912). It gained him not only the degree of MD with gold medal of Edinburgh University, but also international repute. The term Wilson's disease became -- and still often is -- applied to what came later to be generally known as hepato-lenticular degeneration. 
Elected in 1912 to the honorary staff of the Westminster Hospital, Wilson left in 1919 in order to join King's College Hospital as junior neurologist; he became senior neurologist in 1928. He married, in 1913, Annie Louisa, daughter of Alexander Bruce MD of Edinburgh, and had two sons and a daughter. In 1920 Wilson founded the 'Journal of Neurology and Psychopathology' and became its first editor. He delivered the Croonian lectures of the Royal College of Physicians of London in 1925 on disorders of motility and muscle tone, and in 1930 the Morrison lecture of the sister college in Edinburgh. He was president of the neurological section of the Royal Society of Medicine for the two years 1933-5, and was secretary-general of the second International Congress of Neurology (1935). 
Wilson's neurological studies were diverse but particularly concerned with epilepsy, narcolepsy, affections of speech, and apraxia. He published a concise account of aphasia (1926) and a collection of papers in his 'Modern Problems in Neurology' (1928). His 'Neurology', edited by Alexander Ninian Bruce, appeared posthumously in two volumes in 1940. 
Wilson's strength as a neurologist lay in his philosophical clinical approach to a vexed problem, and in his brilliance as a teacher and writer. He had an unusual capacity for pointing out concepts and ideas which were always stimulating and arresting, and often provocative. In this way he appealed to the imagination of a great number of pupils, and fired in them the zeal for original investigation. His mind was of a highly speculative order and he was not interested in mere descriptive approaches to neurology, although himself a keen observer. He had little opportunity for experimental and laboratory research, but his scientific training enabled him to assess and to criticize the work of others. 
Unusually fluent in speech and with his pen, Wilson was in demand as a lecturer and speaker, and as a medical writer, critic, and contributor to periodicals. His clinics at Queen Square were popular with students from all over the world, and abroad his name was probably the best known among British neurologists. Worldwide academic honours were accorded him. He was made 'officier de l'instruction publique' (France), an honorary fellow of the medical academies of Italy and Belgium, and an honorary member of the neurological societies of most European countries as well as of the United States of America and of Japan. Wilson died at his home, 14 Harley Street, London, after a short illness, on 12 May 1937. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 36969


Wilson, Sir Samuel Herbert (1873-1950), colonial governor and civil servant, was born on 31 October 1873 in Dublin, the third son of James Wilson, barrister, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Joseph Holmes, landowner, of co. Sligo. He was educated privately and later at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, from where he was commissioned into the corps of Royal Engineers. 
After regimental tours of duty in Chatham, Aldershot, and Gibraltar, Wilson was sent to South Africa in 1899. He served there first in a front-line engineer unit and, later, in the Railway Pioneer regiment, charged with the repair of wrecked railway bridges. He returned home in 1901 after a severe attack of enteric fever. In 1902 he married (Marie) Ida Gabarino, daughter of F. H. A. T. Gervers, a London diamond merchant; it was a marriage of lasting happiness. They had a son and a daughter. After a period at Chatham, Wilson passed the staff college entrance examination -- second out of 200 competitors -- and following the college course he served at Aldershot, in the War Office, and then at Sandhurst. 
The turning point in Wilson's career came in 1911 when he was appointed assistant secretary to the committee of imperial defence (CID) and secretary to one of its most important standing subcommittees, the overseas defence committee. The Agadir crisis had heightened fears over German ambitions, and defensive preparations received increasing attention. Wilson's duties were those of guiding and co-ordinating the defence organizations of Britain's numerous colonies, and assisting the secretary of the full CID in trying to ensure that these colonial preparations were co-ordinated with those of the Indian empire and the dominions. In this work Wilson was very largely successful, one exception being any readiness for war in the East Africa Protectorate where the governor hoped to arrange a local 'no war' agreement with the governor of German East Africa and the territory was totally unprepared for a war against a small but efficient German colonial force. For his work in the years 1911 to 1914, Wilson was appointed CMG. 
After the outbreak of war the secretary of the CID, Maurice Hankey, appointed Wilson to be secretary of a special committee tasked to plan and co-ordinate operations against the German colonies so as to prevent their use against the allies. As a soldier, however, Wilson felt he should serve more actively and, when the committee's work was done, Hankey and the prime minister, Herbert Asquith, reluctantly granted his request for release. Wilson served successively as a major and then a lieutenant-colonel on the staff of the First Army, heavily committed in the battles of Neuve Chapelle, Festubert, Aubers, and Loos. In 1916 he was appointed to the staff of the 2nd corps, rising from colonel to brigadier-general and participating in the Somme, Ancre, third Ypres, and Escaut operations. For his services, he was made a CB and mentioned six times in dispatches. He was also made a member of the French Legion d'honneur and awarded the Croix de Guerre, together with the Belgian order of the Crown and Croix de Guerre. 
After the armistice, Wilson returned to the secretariat of the CID as senior assistant secretary and once again secretary of the overseas defence committee as well as the home ports defence committee and the imperial communications committee. He played a key role in the post-war reorganization of the CID, frequently deputizing for Hankey, who was now additionally serving as cabinet secretary. In practice, and at the request of the prime minister, Lloyd George, he took day-to-day charge of the CID's work. In 1920 Wilson also accompanied the prime minister to the first meeting of the League of Nations in Geneva, acting as secretary to the British empire delegation, which included dominion prime ministers. Hankey described Wilson as his 'guide, philosopher and friend' ('Royal Engineers Journal', 481). 
In 1921, on the recommendation of the then colonial secretary, Winston Churchill, Wilson was appointed governor of the colony of Trinidad and Tobago, and at the same time appointed KBE. The colony was at the time enjoying a period of political calm and relative prosperity. Wilson's governorship was marked by preparations for constitutional change to provide for the election, under a limited franchise, of seven members to the legislative council, hitherto entirely nominated, a change that only came into effect after Wilson's departure. A football enthusiast, Wilson offered a 'Wilson cup' for a competition which proved hotly contested and did much to improve the standard of Trinidad football in the second half of the 1920s. He was a popular governor and on his departure the local bishop preached a sermon of which the text was 'the smile of the Governor'. He was appointed KCMG in 1923. 
In 1924, following political and social unrest in Jamaica, Wilson was transferred to Kingston as governor but before he was able to make much impression he was obliged to return to Britain for medical reasons. Back in London in 1925 Wilson was given the post of permanent under-secretary of state in the Colonial Office, and as such returned to be chairman of his former committee, the overseas defence committee. Wilson was selected to head the Colonial Office staff following the government's decision to separate to a new ministry work connected with the self-governing dominions, so enabling the Colonial Office to concentrate on the emerging political and economic needs of the dependent territories. The work of the office was extended by the development of the 'subject' side matters affecting the territories as a whole, such as personnel and recruiting of the colonial service, the creation of expert advisory services for particular fields of development, and the fostering of a better relationship, in a concept of trust and partnership, between the office's officials in London and the service officials at work in the colonies. As permanent under-secretary Wilson visited the four British east African territories in the context of the debate about a possible federation, the west African colonies, and in 1933 also Malaya, here again in the context of the possibilities of a federation of the federated and unfederated Malay states and the Straits Settlements. No decision was, however, reached in Wilson's time. He was appointed KCB in 1927 and GCMG in 1929. 
Wilson's successful career owed much to his own personality, soldierly but genial, dignified and self-effacing, with, nevertheless, a strong and tenacious power of assertion when needed. He was good-humoured and easy to work with, and was known generally as Sammy by his colleagues. He had a clear vision for his aims in office: these he could outline for subordinates better versed in civil service practices to carry out, he himself having a dislike of excessive paperwork. He was receptive to ideas from younger subordinates, and had a marked dislike of pretence and unnecessary caution. His life's work represented a significant contribution to the unity of purpose with which the British empire later went to war against fascism in September 1939. He was one of only a handful of colonial governors also to serve as permanent under-secretary of the Colonial Office. 
In 1933 Wilson retired, stating his belief that from a national point of view a change should be made. In his retirement he interested himself in his several commercial directorships, which included the Standard Bank of South Africa and Consolidated Gold Fields. In his last years he became crippled by ill health and he felt keenly the loss of his only son, killed in action in 1943. He died at Thames Bank Nursing Home, Goring, on 5 August 1950, leaving his widow and one daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 36970


Wilson, Walter Gordon (1874-1957), mechanical engineer, was born in Blackrock, co. Dublin, on 21 April 1874, the fifth son of George Orr Wilson, barrister, and his wife, Annie Shaw. Wilson started his career as a naval cadet in the 'Britannia'. In 1894 he entered King's College, Cambridge, where he was elected to an honorary exhibition in 1896, and in 1897 was placed in the first class in part one of the mechanical sciences tripos. 
The inventive genius that characterized the engineering achievements for which Wilson later became known was demonstrated in his first engineering venture. Through Lord Braye, Wilson was introduced to Percy Pilcher, a lecturer in naval architecture and a keen glider. Wilson observed Pilcher's gliding activities with a profound technical interest and soon became enthused with the possibilities of powered flight. In 1898 the three formed the firm of Wilson and Pilcher with the primary objective of building what might have been the world's first internal combustion aero-engine. One year later Wilson had designed a prototype engine which Pilcher was to test, but before it was built Pilcher was killed in a gliding accident in 1899. The shock put an end to Wilson's plans for powered flight and he looked instead at the 'horseless carriage'. In new premises in Westminster he created the Wilson-Pilcher motor car embodying epicyclic gears and some remarkable new features which in later years came to be regarded as the hallmark of good design in motor cars of quality. 
On 1 June 1904 Wilson married Ethel Crommelin (died 1963), daughter of Samuel Octavius Gray, chief accountant to the Bank of England; they had three sons. In the same year he joined the firm of Armstrong, Whitworth & Co., where he designed the Armstrong Whitworth car. From 1908 to 1914 he worked with J. and E. Hall of Dartford and designed for them the Hallford lorry, which was extensively used by the army during the First World War. 
When war broke out Wilson rejoined the navy and served as a lieutenant with the Royal Naval armoured car division, which at that time was defending naval air bases on the coasts of France and Belgium. Already well known as an engineer he was soon engaged in the construction of armoured vehicles. When Winston Churchill set up the landships committee under Eustace Tennyson-d'Eyncourt at the Admiralty in early 1915 to investigate the possibility of building an armoured fighting vehicle capable of resisting rifle and machine-gun fire, destroying barbed wire entanglements, and crossing trenches, squadron 20 of the armoured car division was placed at the committee's disposal. Wilson was posted to squadron 20 and placed in charge of the first experiments at Burton upon Trent. So he came to play a leading role in the birth of the tank. 
Wilson and his colleague in design, William Tritton, created a machine capable of the tasks required of it; the speedy success of the tank was chiefly due to the inventive genius and engineering skill of these two men. In August 1915 the design of the Tritton vehicle, or 'Little Willie', was already well advanced when fresh and more stringent requirements were laid down by the War Office. To meet them, Tritton and Wilson concentrated on a new design, on which they were already working, in which the tracks, at Wilson's suggestion, were carried all round the vehicle. This design, known first as the Wilson, then the Centipede, next 'Big Willie', was ready for official trials early in 1916. On 2 February in Lord Salisbury's park at Hatfield, before a company that included Kitchener, Balfour, Lloyd George, and General Robertson, it successfully demonstrated its ability to fulfil not only the official requirements but also far more exacting tests. Production orders were placed immediately and 'Big Willie', now named 'Mother', became the prototype of the Mark I tank which went into action on the Somme in September 1916. Other designs followed, and Wilson's development of epicyclic transmissions for these vehicles was an achievement of outstanding importance, culminating in 1937 with his design for a new epicyclic steering which provided a larger turning radius at high speeds than at low speeds. 
Wilson transferred to the army in March 1916 with the rank of major in the heavy branch, machine-gun corps, renamed in 1917 the Royal Tank Corps. He served as chief of design in the mechanical warfare department of the War Office until the war ended. He was twice mentioned in dispatches and was appointed CMG in 1917. 
After the war he invented the well-known Wilson self-changing gearbox, used in many cars, and founded the firm of Self-Changing Gears Ltd, of Coventry. He was an honorary member of the Institution of Automobile Engineers, the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, and the Junior Institution of Engineers, and a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers. A man of strong character and shrewd judgement, he was a great lover of the countryside, a fine shot and an expert fly fisher. 
Wilson died at his home, The Elms, Itchen Abbas, near Winchester, on 30 June 1957. 
A. A. Miller', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 36971


Wilson, William (1875-1965), physicist, was born on 1 March 1875 at Goody Hills, near the village of Mawbray on the Solway coast of Cumberland, the eldest in the family of seven sons and four daughters of W. O. Wilson, a farmer, and his wife, Isabella Ewart. His ancestors for some generations had also been farmers. His education began in the village school of Holme St Cuthbert where he had a master of outstanding ability, John Routledge. Although his reading at that time was mainly in scientific literature, his intention was to take up a career in agriculture. He gained the Longcake scholarship of $40 a year for three years when he was not quite fourteen years of age, and in 1889 went to the Agricultural College at Aspatria, west Cumberland, as a weekly boarder. 
Wilson became a free life member of the Highland and Agricultural Society at the age of seventeen and a year later, in 1893, was awarded a studentship at the Royal College of Science in London. Here he studied agriculture and geology, and pursued mathematics privately in the museum library. The most valuable parts of his studies were the lectures on astronomy by J. Norman Lockyer and Alfred Fowler, and those on physics by Arthur Rucker and William Watson. Unfortunately he did not attend sufficient lectures to qualify for the associateship, having spent the autumn of 1895 ploughing in the Lowenghyll. 
Wilson left the Royal College of Science in 1896 without a degree and took teaching posts at a Towcester school, at Beccles College in Suffolk in 1898, and for two terms, at Craven College in Highgate. During this period he determined to study in a German university and, after teaching at the Berlitz Schools of Languages at Elberfeld, Dortmund, Munster, Barmen, and Cologne, he matriculated as a student of mathematics in the University of Leipzig in 1902, where he studied under Carl Neumann and Otto Weiner. His earliest research was an experimental study of the photoelectric effect, for which he was awarded the degree of doctor of philosophy 'summa cum laude' in 1906. While at Leipzig, Wilson met his future wife, Rose Blanche Lucy, the daughter of Henry Heathfield of Stoke Canon in Devon. They married in 1909 and later had one son, W. F. H. F. Wilson, who subsequently practised as a solicitor in Hereford. 
On his return from Germany in 1906 Wilson was appointed an assistant lecturer in the Wheatstone Laboratory at King's College, London, under Professor H. A. Wilson. William Wilson experimented on the emission of electrons from hot bodies until 1917, but his interests began to move towards the new theoretical developments in relativity and quantum theory. His studies of Hamiltonian mechanics under Carl Neumann had prepared him to appreciate the quantum theory of spectra introduced by Niels Bohr and to put forward a considerable generalization of the quantum conditions. Wilson's famous formula, &int;'pi'd'qi' = 'nih' was published in the 'Philosophical Magazine' in 1915 and 1916. Encouraged by J. W. Nicholson (then professor of mathematics in King's College), he applied this formula to the elliptic orbits of the hydrogen atom. The same results were arrived at shortly afterwards, and independently, by Professor Sommerfeld. In 1922 Wilson generalized his earlier formula by modifying the mechanical momentum 'pi' by adding the electromagnetic momentum 'eAi', where 'e' is the electronic charge and 'Ai' a component of the electromagnetic vector potential. This result is the foundation of the quantum theory of the emission and absorption of radiation. 
In 1917 Wilson was awarded the degree of DSc in the University of London. In 1920 he was appointed to a readership in the physics department of King's College and in 1921 to the Hildred Carlile chair of physics at Bedford College, London. His later writings were on the relation between the general theory of relativity and wave mechanics, but his most important contribution to science in this period was a three-volume work, 'Theoretical Physics' (1931-40), which embodies many original and profound insights. He was elected FRS in 1923. He retired in 1944 and died at home, 60 Aylestone Hill, Hereford, on 14 October 1965. 
Wilson was a tall, broad shouldered man with a large brown moustache. He walked and moved with a striking and unusual manner, almost as if he were about to draw and flourish a rapier. His bright and piercing eyes would shine with enthusiasm as he expounded his scientific theories. He ever conveyed an immense vitality and friendliness. He was patient and sympathetic and always ready to find time to elucidate difficulties. 


@@@@@


doc= 36972


Wilson, William Edward (1851-1908), astronomer and physicist, born at Belfast on 19 July 1851, was the only son of John Wilson (died 1906), of Daramona, Streete, co. Westmeath, and his wife, Frances Patience, daughter of the Revd Edward Nangle. Because of delicate health he was educated privately, and showed great interest in astronomy while still a boy. In 1870 he joined the British party under the pioneer astrophysicist William Huggins, which went to Oran in Algeria to observe the total eclipse of the sun in that year, and on his return he set up a private observatory on his father's estate at Daramona, equipped with a 12 inch refractor by Grubb. 
In 1881 Wilson built a new observatory with a 24 inch silver on glass Cassegrain reflector, also by Grubb; in 1889 he added a physical laboratory, and in 1891-2 added a clock drive and electric control to the telescope. Thus equipped, and despite the climate, Wilson took photographs of nebulae and clusters that were among the best obtained in the nineteenth century. These, and important papers, were published privately as 'Astronomical and Physical Researches Made at Mr Wilson's Observatory, Daramona, Westmeath' (1900). 
Wilson is best known for research, begun in 1884, on solar heat and the radiation from sunspots. Like E. B. Frost, who had powerful equipment at Yerkes Observatory, Chicago, Wilson wrongly concluded that sunspots were raised features, and hotter than the solar surface. But that investigation led him to remarkable pioneering work. Wilson and Philip L. Gray, a physicist from Mason College at Birmingham, in 1894 determined the solar constant (total energy radiated by the sun per second) by using one of C. V. Boys's radio-micrometers which measures energy received; they applied Stefan-Boltzmann's law of 1884 (energy output, relating surface area to effective temperature), then allowed for atmospheric absorption of one third 'per' Wilson's own calculation with Arthur Alcock Rambaut in 1892. In 1901 Wilson derived the temperature of the sun to be 6590 degree C. Wilson also achieved a significant measurement of the decrease in radiation received from the limb. 
In collaboration with G. F. FitzGerald, a professor of Trinity College, Dublin, and G. M. Minchin, Wilson also worked on the temperature of stars. Between 1892 and 1895 he pioneered replacing visual photometric observations of stellar magnitudes by attaching to his 9 inch refractor a photometer with a selenium cell; crystalline selenium changes its resistance when exposed to light, producing a very small linear electrical response. The response was unstable with time, and although the technique was independently conceived and developed after 1906 by Joel Stebbings at the University of Illinois, it was superseded by the photoelectric cell about 1912. Other work included an examination of the effect of great pressure on radioactive substances and an expedition to Plasencia to observe the solar eclipse of 1900. He was elected fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1875, FRS in 1896, and was made honorary DS of Dublin University in 1901. 
Wilson had a fertile and original mind, was careful and persevering in his research, charming, and sincere. He married, on 10 November 1886, Caroline Ada, third daughter of Captain R. C. Granville of Grand Pre, Biarritz; they had at least one son, John Granville, and two daughters. Wilson mainly lived on his estate, and was high sheriff of co. Westmeath in 1901. He died at Daramona on 6 March 1908, and was buried in the family burying-ground attached to the parish church of Streete, the village adjoining his demesne. He was survived by his wife. 
In 1925 John G. Wilson offered the Daramona telescope to London University, which established the Mill Hill observatory to utilize it; in 1974 the instrument was transferred to the Liverpool Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 36973


Wimperis, Harry Egerton (1876-1960), government scientist, was born on 27 August 1876 at 47 Brighton Road, South Hornsey, London, the only son of Joseph Price Wimperis, a mercantile clerk, later a timber merchant, and his wife, Jemima Samuel, or Wood-Samuel. After his father's early death his mother struggled to educate him. He was apprenticed at the locomotive works of the London, Brighton and South Coast Railway, but subsequently was able to enter the Royal College of Science (RCS) as a Tyndall prizeman, gaining a Whitworth scholarship to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he became a Salomon's scholar. He graduated with first-class honours in the mechanical sciences tripos in 1900 and, after declining a fellowship for financial reasons, spent a year at the Elswick works of Armstrong Whitworth before entering government service as engineering adviser to the crown agents for the colonies. On 28 September 1907 in Goring, Wimperis married Grace d'Avray (1881/2-1960), third daughter of George Parkin, a Canadian educationist who became first organizing secretary of the Rhodes Trust, and his wife, Annie Connell. They settled in Goring and had three daughters. 
Wimperis became an external examiner for the Royal College of Science and in 1909 published 'The Internal Combustion Engine'. The same year, with Keith Elphinstone of Elliott Brothers, he patented a simple but ingenious accelerometer for rail and road transport which was unaffected by directional change or track gradient, Wimperis writing 'Application of Power to Road Transport' (1913) to publicize its use. During this period he and Elphinstone also patented an aircraft rate of roll indicator and a bombsight, and Elliott Brothers later manufactured many other Wimperis instruments. 
At the beginning of the First World War, in addition to his work with the crown agents, Wimperis assisted the Royal Aircraft Factory at Farnborough and the Royal Naval Air Service (RNAS) with bombsight design. However, to secure his services exclusively the Admiralty offered him a commission as lieutenant RNVR at the Admiralty air department, where he started in August 1915. Sent to Calshot Air Station to gain air experience he soon discovered that there was no scientific basis to naval bomb aiming. On return to London he negotiated the free use of the physics department workshop at Imperial College as the Royal Naval Air Service laboratory for bombsight design and with a small team successfully developed the drift, negative lens, and course setting bombsights. He was promoted lieutenant-commander when the laboratory expanded to include engine and wireless research. When the Air Ministry was formed in 1918 Imperial College agreed to continue the laboratory arrangements providing Wimperis remained in charge, and over the next seven years the 'Air Ministry laboratory' developed numerous navigational instruments. Wimperis lectured on navigation at Imperial College and published his 'Primer of Air Navigation' in 1920. A. P. Rowe joined the laboratory in 1922 to work on compass development. 
From 1916 all scientific research for the Air Board was under the leadership of Professor Bertram Hopkinson and his assistants, Henry Tizard, Bertram Melvill Jones, and Robert H. Mayo. This organization disappeared at the end of the war, but in 1924 Tizard on the Aeronautical Research Council convinced the Air Ministry to co-ordinate research anew. In anticipation of Tizard accepting the new post of director of scientific research Wimperis was appointed assistant director. However, when Tizard declined the post Wimperis became director the following year with David Pye as deputy director. Wimperis appointed Rowe as his personal assistant. As director, this was his great opportunity to plan, co-ordinate, and fund all ministry sponsored research, including that at aircraft manufacturers or universities. The primary aim over the next ten years was to improve the operational performance and safety of service aircraft, particularly by more use of wind tunnels. Wimperis believed in finding scientific solutions to technical problems, and he had learned to work with the military, and to administer well. 
The 1934 summer air exercises, simulating bombing attacks on London and Coventry, showed that standing patrols of fighters along the coast were inadequate to detect an approaching enemy bomber force and that the bomber would always get through. While the RAF formed a special committee to improve the defence of London, Rowe alerted Wimperis to the fact that no scientific approach to improving air defence had been considered in some fifty Air Ministry files he had examined. Instead of another departmental committee Wimperis proposed to the secretary of state for air the formation of a small committee of specialist independent scientists consisting of Tizard, Professor A. V. Hill, Professor P. M. S. Blackett, and R. Watson-Watt to take a fresh look at the problem. Tizard was appointed chairman of the scientific survey of air defence with Rowe as secretary. By the first meeting on 28 October 1935 Watson-Watt's assistant A. F. Wilkins had confirmed Wimperis's view that 'death rays' were not feasible, but suggested that an aeroplane might be located by radio waves, allowing Wimperis to persuade Air Marshall Dowding to spend $10,000 to investigate the idea. The subsequent history of the Tizard committee and the birth of radio location, later renamed radar, is well documented, but Wimperis's foresight to initiate the committee and select its members is overlooked. 
Wimperis turned next to the parallel problem of air offence and in 1936 set up the committee of air offence to consider how far recent advances in scientific and technical knowledge could strengthen methods of attacking enemy targets. Tizard again accepted the chairmanship with Wimperis, Pye, Rowe, and Professor Melvill Jones as members. Pye became director in 1937 when Wimperis retired, but Bomber Command were never convinced that any advice from the committee would benefit them and were poorly prepared when war started in 1939. 
After retiring Wimperis was invited to visit Australia to advise the government on aeronautical research, which resulted in the establishment of the Aeronautical Research Laboratory in Melbourne and a chair of aeronautics at Sidney University. Melbourne University later awarded him an honorary doctorate. During the first year of the Second World War he returned in an advisory capacity to the Air Ministry at Harrogate, later undertaking other duties at Australia House. In 1941 he published a booklet 'Defeating the Bomber', and 'Aviation' in 1945. 
Wimperis was appointed OBE in 1918, CBE in 1928, and CB in 1935. Over many years he served on various committees of the Aeronautical Research Council, and was on the executive committee of the National Physical Laboratory, 1931-7. Wimperis was stern and remote to junior staff, but to colleagues and proteges he was a good friend with great strength of character, integrity, and a whimsical humour. In 1918 he topped the elections to the Athenaeum. He was a fellow of the Royal Aeronautical Society, giving the 1932 Wilbur Wright lecture on 'New methods of research in aeronautics', and was the society's president in 1936-8. In 1939 he was president of the engineering section of the British Association and a council member from 1948 to 1954. He was a fellow of the Institution of Civil Engineers, a member of the Institution of Electrical Engineers, and on their council 1911-14; he gave the 1944 Hawksley lecture, 'Research and development in aeronautics', to the Mechanical Engineers, was an honorary member of the American Institute of Aeronautical Sciences, and was an honorary fellow and crown governor of Imperial College. From 1946 to 1950 he was a member of the atomic energy study group at Chatham House, and published 'World Power and Atomic Energy' in 1946. For the last few years of his life Wimperis lived at 46A Inverleith Place, Edinburgh, where he died on 16 July 1960, his wife surviving him by only a few weeks; she died on 9 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 36974


Wimshurst, James (1832-1903), electrical engineer and shipwright, was born at Poplar, London, on 13 April 1832, the second son of the four sons and a daughter of Henry Wimshurst (1804-1884), engineer, and his wife, Rebecca (1802-1863). Henry Wimshurst's engineering practice was in steamships: he was one of those who built the 'Archimedes' (launched 1838) and 'Iris', the first two screw-propelled ships. After education at Steabonheath House, a private school in London, Wimshurst was apprenticed at the Thames ironworks to James Mare. In 1853, on the completion of his apprenticeship, he obtained an appointment in London as a surveyor at Lloyds. On 28 November 1865 he married Clara Tribble, daughter of William Frederick Tribble, a builder; they had two sons and a daughter. Wimshurst was transferred to Liverpool in the same year to become chief of the Liverpool Underwriters' Registry, then a rival establishment to Lloyd's, but since incorporated with it. In 1874 he joined the Board of Trade as chief shipwright surveyor in the consultative department. He attended as its representative the international conference at Washington in 1890, and retired on reaching the age limit in 1899. 
Through life Wimshurst devoted his leisure to experimental work, erecting at his house in Clapham large workshops, which he fitted up with various engineering appliances and where he also built electric lighting machinery. About 1878 he became interested in electrical influence machines, that is to say, machines which, through the turning of a winch, were made to amass static electricity. These machines were widely employed to produce sparks of up to 15 inches long. The sparks were not only the subject of scientific investigations, their bright colours (capable of lighting a room) also provided entertainment. Wimshurst himself organized regular meetings in his home where feasting was followed by dancing, cards, science, and smoking. The most efficient influence machines were painful to work but very powerful, sometimes altering the atmosphere of the room so that visitors left the room with pain in the ears and head. From 1860 onwards a number of new designs of influence machines were introduced. They all had a rotating insulated plate with conductors such as metal strips on which an electrical charge was induced and then given up by contact with an external conductor. Through the rotation of the plate this process could be repeated with comparative ease and speed. Several designs became associated with the name of the inventor such as the Varley, the Holtz, the Toepler, or the Carre. 
From the early 1880s onwards, Wimshurst introduced modifications of a practical kind to the existing types and then he designed a new type which subsequently became known as the Wimshurst. It consisted of two circular plates rotating in opposite directions having metallic sectors on the outer faces of each. It was self-charging and more robust under all conditions of atmosphere. Wimshurst donated machines to Silvanus P. Thompson, electrical engineer and principal of the City and Guilds Central Technical College, the Charing Cross Hospital, the Royal Institution, and the Royal Society. In all he built more than ninety machines himself. Instrument makers such as Harvey and Peak also developed and sold Wimshurst machines. Wimshurst never took out a patent which he came to regret only, as he insisted, because he was consequently precluded from exercising control over the design or construction of inferior machines put upon the market in his name. 
In 1896 Wimshurst found his machines to be an admirable means of exciting X-rays, and showed that for screen observation, where a steady illumination was desired, the steady discharge from one of his eight-plate influence machines was preferable to the intermittent discharge of the usual induction coil. His machines were also used in hospitals at the turn of the century for the production of powerful brush discharges, efficacious in the treatment of lupus and cancer. 
Wimshurst also invented a vacuum pump using oil rather than mercury, an improved method for connecting lightships electrically with the shore station, and an instrument for ascertaining the stability of vessels. In 1898, in the wake of the Wimshurst machines' new-found importance in X-ray work, he was elected FRS. After his death, however, influence machines fell out of favour in X-ray work. He was a member of the Institution of Electrical Engineers, the Physical Society, the Rontgen Society, and the Institution of Naval Architects, and was a manager of the Royal Institution. He died at his home, 7 Crescent Grove, Clapham, London, on 3 January 1903. 


@@@@@


doc= 36975


Windus, William Lindsay (1822-1907), painter, was born in Liverpool on 8 July 1822, the grandson of William Windus, vicar of Halsall, near Ormskirk, and the son of John Windus and Agnes Meek, a Scotswoman. He is said to have received his early education at Mr MacMorran's private school in Liverpool. When he was about sixteen he received some lessons from William Daniels, who painted his stepfather's portrait. He studied at the Liverpool Academy and attended a life class run by a brother of John Rogers Herbert; the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool, holds several life studies dating from the early 1840s. Among his earliest pictures were 'The Black Boy' (1844) and a self-portrait (both Walker Art Gallery); other early works are at the Williamson Art Gallery, Birkenhead. Windus painted mainly romantic historical paintings or illustrations of the works of Sir Walter Scott and Shakespeare, with religious or moralistic overtones. His first exhibited work, 'Falstaff Acting King Henry IV', was shown at the Liverpool Academy in 1845. 
In 1847 Windus was elected an associate of the Liverpool Academy, and in 1848 he became a full member. He exhibited there until 1864, but was partially responsible for its demise in 1867. As a member of the Liverpool Academy he initiated the invitation to the Pre-Raphaelites to exhibit their works in Liverpool in the 1850s. They won successive annual prizes (1851-3 and 1856-7), provoking an outcry from other artists, the press, and the public, and precipitating a split into rival factions, financial loss, and eventual collapse. Windus became acquainted with the Pre-Raphaelites in 1850 when he visited London to study new trends in painting at the suggestion of John Miller, an art collector and one of his chief patrons. He was particularly influenced by Millais's 'Christ in the House of his Parents' ('The Carpenter's Shop'; 1849-50; Tate collection), exhibited that year at the Royal Academy. Windus was a member of the Pre-Raphaelites' short-lived Hogarth Club in London and exhibited with them in 1857. 
In 1856 Windus exhibited 'Burd Helen' (1855-6; Walker Art Gallery) at the Royal Academy. It was his first painting with a landscape background. The work, though 'skied', attracted the attention of Dante Gabriel Rossetti, who thought it the 'finest thing of all in the place' ('Letters of Dante Gabriel Rossetti', 187), and 'forced Ruskin to go with him in a cab instanter because he had not noticed it in his pamphlet & extorted the promise of a postscrip ['sic'] on its behalf' ('Diary of Ford Madox Brown', 173). In the postscript to his 1856 'Academy Notes', Ruskin called it 'the second picture of the year; its aim being higher, and its reserved strength greater than those of any other work except [Millais's] ''Autumn Leaves'''. He continued: 'the work is thoughtful and intense to the highest degree' and 'of the grandest imaginative power', and cited only 'quite minor defects' in the horse's bearing and pebbles in the water (Ruskin, 86-7). In a letter to the Edinburgh 'Witness' on 27 March 1858, he wrote: 'The worst Pre-Raphaelite picture has something 'in' it; and the great ones, such as Windus's ''Burd Helen'', will hold their own with the most noble pictures of all time' (ibid., 330). On 30 July 1856 Windus wrote to Rossetti in 'the knowledge of the kindness you have done me', asking him to approve a drawing on wood of 'Burd Helen' that was to be engraved for the 'National Magazine'. Rossetti apparently did, for Windus thanked him on 3 August, adding: 'I assure you that you and Mr. Ruskin were the two persons in the world whose approbation I most ardently wished and scarcely dared to hope for' (Rossetti, 138). 
Windus's other major Pre-Raphaelite work, 'Too Late' (1857-8; Tate collection), was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1859. He regarded this painting as his masterpiece, but Ruskin considered it unfinished and condemned it, saying, 'Something wrong here; either the painter has been ill, or his picture has been sent in to the Academy in a hurry;... There is great grandeur in the work; but it cannot for a moment be compared with ''Burd Helen''' (Ruskin, 233-4). He acknowledged in a postscript that he may have hurt 'the artist's feelings deeply, just when all discouragement is most dangerous to him' and assured him of his 'conviction that, with returning strength, he may one day take highest rank among masters of expression' (ibid., 239). Ruskin's criticism had a devastating effect on Windus, who was prone to depression, and he never submitted another work to the Royal Academy. 
In 1858 Windus married a sister of Robert Tonge, a fellow artist. A son, Robert, was the subject of 'Study of a Dead Child, the Artist's Son' (1860; Tate collection). On 2 August 1862 his wife died, after a long illness, leaving a fifteen-month-old daughter. The deaths, the strain on Windus's health and nerves, and Ruskin's criticism are the traditional explanations why Windus gave up painting, but there is also a domestic explanation alluded to by William Michael Rossetti: 'he promised his late wife that he would never part from their daughter, which prevents his entering into any arrangement that would allow of his pursuing his profession advantageously. He has lost all power of setting to work, or of resolving to do so; yet whenever he does attempt anything he finds he paints better than ever. (Ruskin, 87)' He was fortunate to have an independent income, which enabled him to give up painting except for pleasure and to leave Liverpool with his daughter to live quietly with his wife's parents at Walton-le-Dale, near Preston. 
During the early 1860s Windus spent summers with the artist Daniel Alexander Williamson, painting in the Lake District, and while there probably painted 'The Baa Lamb: View on a Tributary of the River Duddon' ('The Stray Lamb'; 'c'.1864; Walker Art Gallery). In 1862 he sent 'The Outlaw' (1861; Manchester City Galleries) to the Liverpool Academy. These two paintings are in the Pre-Raphaelite style, with the focus primarily on the landscape setting. In 1879 or 1880 Windus left Lancashire for London, and is said to have destroyed most of his sketches and studies. In 1888 Ford Madox Brown wrote, 'I saw him a few months ago at Hampstead, where he lives almost wholly by himself. He will not paint: he sometimes begins to do so in the morning, but he invariably rubs out his work in the evening' ('Progress of art', 122). Windus lived in Hampstead for nearly twenty years before moving to Denmark Hill, where he died, at 13 Champion Park, on 9 October 1907. 
Windus was practically forgotten until the spring exhibition of the New English Art Club of 1896, which included three watercolours by him: 'The Flight of Henry VI from Towton' ('c'.1860-70; Tate collection), 'The Second Duchess' (before 1866; Tate collection), and 'A Roman Patrician, AD 60' ('c'.1865-86; Walker Art Gallery); two untraced paintings were exhibited in 1899. They excited great interest among artists and connoisseurs. His work, which is relatively scarce, was greatly valued as that of one of Liverpool's most poetical and imaginative figure painters. The year after his death forty-five of his pictures were exhibited at the Historical Exhibition of Liverpool Art at the Walker Art Gallery. 


@@@@@


doc= 36976


Winfield, Sir Percy Henry (1878-1953), lawyer and jurist, was born at Stoke Ferry, Norfolk, on 16 September 1878, the fifth child and youngest son of Frederick Charles Winfield, corn merchant, and his wife, Mary Flatt. He was educated at King's Lynn grammar school (later King Edward VII School) and at St John's College, Cambridge, where in his first year he took a first class in the college examinations in law (1897) and was elected an exhibitioner and proper sizar. In 1898 he was senior in part one of the law tripos and was elected a foundation scholar, and in part two (1899) was again at the head of the first class. In 1900 he was awarded a Whewell scholarship in international law and his college elected him to a McMahon scholarship founded for graduates intending to prepare themselves for the legal profession. 
Called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1903, Winfield joined the south-eastern circuit; but he soon returned to Cambridge to teach, both privately and (from 1911) in lecture and problem classes recommended by the special board for law. He married in 1909 Helena Chapman (died 1954), daughter of William Thomas Scruby, estate agent, of Cambridge. They had two sons and one daughter. 
After the First World War, during which Winfield was commissioned in the Cambridgeshire regiment (1915), was approved in absence for the LLD degree, and was wounded in action (August 1918), he lectured (Roman law, torts, criminal law) under the auspices of two colleges, Trinity and St John's. St John's soon elected him into an official fellowship (1921). In 1926 he became a university lecturer and in 1928 he was elected to the new Rouse Ball professorship of English law. 
Winfield's lectures were well attended and appreciated. One recalls the elegant handwriting upon the blackboard before his lecture-hour began, the lecturer's spare athletic figure and lean judicial face, his flashes of dry humour, and the problem classes in which all in turn must act as counsel. His success as author and scholar owed much to his habit of thoroughly investigating the history of a legal topic before tackling its subtleties in the modern law. Early in 1914 the 'Law Quarterly Review' published the first of his many legal articles, 'Some bibliographical difficulties of English law', exposing the deficiencies which then handicapped that method of approach. Then followed two monographs, both published in 1921, 'The History of Conspiracy and Abuse of Legal Procedure' and (the largely post-war work) 'The Present Law of Abuse of Legal Procedure', in which that method was employed. Next, in 1925, his admirable 'Chief Sources of English Legal History' (based on a course of lectures he had delivered at Harvard) more than remedied the bibliographical deficiencies which his first legal article had deplored. 
Winfield's writings then turned to the history and development of various aspects of the law of torts, which had become his chief concern, and in 1931 he published his 'Province of the Law of Tort', examining its shadowy boundaries, past and present, and those of its neighbours, such as quasi-contract. The book, originally his Tagore lectures in Calcutta (1930), did much to stimulate academic discussion -- asking, for example, is there a general law of tort? -- and enabled him to proceed to a detailed analysis of the modern law. This he did in his 'Textbook of the Law of Tort' (1937). 'Intended primarily for students', the textbook rapidly attained an outstanding reputation both in the academic world and among practitioners and judges wherever English common law is known. A critical review of it ('Law Quarterly Review', January 1938) foresaw this, emphasizing its infectious enthusiasm, unusual charm of style, and brilliant analysis of the more difficult problems. Before Winfield died it had reached its fifth edition. It has been a formative influence in English law, going through at least fourteen editions. 
Winfield's other publications included 'Salmond and Winfield on Contracts' (1927), in which, punctiliously enclosing his own contributions within square brackets, he preserved and completed Sir John Salmond's unfinished work; three editions of 'Pollock on Contracts' (1942-50); and a little book on the 'Foundations and Future of International Law' (1941), the fruit of wartime lectures to groups of army officers. His 'Select Legal Essays' (1952) contained fifteen of his numerous legal articles, reprinted from the learned journals of this country and overseas, including some of his later work on that arduous topic quasi-contract ('unjust enrichment') to which a chapter of his 'Province' had already made notable contributions. He edited the 'Cambridge Law Journal' for twenty years (1927-47). 
As reader in common law to the Council of Legal Education (1938-49) Winfield lectured also at the inns of court. He was elected an honorary bencher of the Inner Temple in 1938, served on the lord chancellor's law revision and law reporting committees, was for many years a borough magistrate and at one time a deputy county court judge. He took silk in 1943, the year in which his tenure of the Rouse Ball chair expired. He was elected FBA in 1934, was an honorary LLD of Harvard (1929), Leeds (1944), and London (1949), and was president of the Society of Public Teachers of Law for 1929-30, and a vice-president of the Selden Society from 1944 to 1946. He was knighted in 1949. 
Winfield had a great capacity for friendship and hospitality, delighting in the company of old and young alike and ever ready to spend time and trouble on their problems. His chief recreation was lawn tennis, in which he had gained college and 'Grasshopper' university colours and had captained the county (1912-14). He was also a keen supporter, latterly president, of the rugby football clubs of his college and university. Winfield died at his home, 13 Cranmer Road, Cambridge, on 7 July 1953. 
S. J. Bailey', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 36977


Wingate, Sir (Francis) Reginald, first baronet (1861-1953), army officer and colonial governor, was born on 25 June 1861 at Port Glasgow, Renfrewshire, the seventh son and last of eleven children of Andrew Wingate (1813-1862) and his wife, Bessie Turner. His father, a textile merchant, died a year later, leaving a large family in straitened circumstances. Wingate spent his childhood mainly in Jersey, and was educated there at St James's Collegiate School and at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich. He was commissioned a lieutenant in the Royal Artillery in 1880, and was posted to India in March 1881. After two years there and at Aden, Wingate secured a transfer to Egypt, and it was there and in Sudan that he spent almost his entire professional career. 
Britain had occupied Egypt in 1882, and although early evacuation was an oft-stated goal, the conditions that had brought about the occupation tended to prolong it. One of these was the state of the Egyptian army, which had rebelled and been defeated and disbanded by the British. It was to the nascent new Egyptian army, under British officers, that Wingate was seconded in 1883. He was aide-de-camp to the sirdar (commander-in-chief), Sir Evelyn Wood (a lifelong patron) in 1883-4, and when Wood resigned in the aftermath of General Gordon's debacle at Khartoum in 1885, Wingate too left Egypt. After an unsatisfactory year in Britain, however, spent at Fort Rowner, Gosport, and as aide-de-camp to Wood at Colchester, Wingate returned to the Egyptian army in 1886 as assistant military secretary to the new sirdar, Sir Francis Grenfell. 
Wingate spent the next twelve years as an increasingly prominent figure in the Anglo-Egyptian campaign against the Sudanese Mahdist state. The Mahdi himself had died in June 1885, but his successor, the khalifa 'Abdallahi, proved formidable. While Britain eschewed responsibility for Sudan, as the occupying power in Egypt she could not ignore a militant threat to Egypt's borders. But while British civilian authorities on the scene (most notably Sir Evelyn Baring, who was the chief British representative in Egypt from 1883 to 1907) and in London would not countenance an expensive 'reconquest', British soldiers in Egypt saw it as their mission to 'avenge Gordon' and conquer Sudan. For years the civilians had their way; border skirmishes were the rule, and after August 1889, when an invading Mahdist army was easily annihilated at Tushki in the Nubian Desert, there seemed little practical reason for an advance. This came only in 1896, when, mindful of French movements towards the upper Nile and wishing to divert the Sudanese from the embattled Italians in Eritrea, the British government authorized a limited Anglo-Egyptian advance into Sudan. 
Wingate had played an important official and personal role in planning, co-ordinating, and indeed in winning approval for that advance. As successively (or, in the understaffed Egyptian army, simultaneously) assistant military secretary, assistant adjutant-general for recruiting, and, most notably, from 1888 as assistant adjutant-general for intelligence and from 1892 as director of military intelligence, Wingate became not only the chief collector of information on Mahdist Sudan, but ironically also its chief disseminator to the British public. In October 1891 the first of three books of which he shared authorship appeared, 'Mahdiism and the Egyptian Sudan'. Largely a military history of the period 1883-9, the book won appreciation in specialist military and political circles, but produced little public response (or income). Learning from this experience, Wingate published in October 1892 'Ten Years' Captivity in the Mahdi's Camp', an account of the adventures of an escaped priest, Josef Ohrwalder, which was an instant critical and commercial success. This was followed finally, and most notably, in February 1896, by 'Fire and Sword in the Sudan', an account of the experiences of the Austrian Rudolf Slatin, an Egyptian official who had absconded from Sudan the previous year. All of these works brought Wingate to the favourable notice of the British military and political establishment, and brought the lurid details of alleged Mahdist barbarism to the attention of the British public. 
The campaign that began tentatively in March 1896 concluded in September 1898 with the battle of Omdurman, where, in Wingate's presence, an Anglo-Egyptian army defeated the khalifa 'Abdallahi and overthrew his regime. With Kitchener, Wingate thereupon went to Fashoda, where the famous meeting with Major Marchand occurred. Marchand was persuaded that he could not hoist the French flag in the khedive's dominions and Wingate played an important role in the negotiations. Sudan was made a condominium of the conquering powers, and Kitchener became its governor-general. But it was Wingate who, in November 1899, commanded the force that finally tracked down, brought to battle, and killed the refugee khalifa, and in December, when Kitchener was called urgently to South Africa, Wingate succeeded him as sirdar of the Egyptian army and governor-general of Sudan. 
For the next sixteen years, from 1899 to 1916, Wingate administered Sudan. It was under him that pacification and resettlement of the tribes took place, that the rebuilding of Khartoum (started by Kitchener) occurred, that the modern infrastructure of railways, telegraphs, Nile steamers, and Port Sudan was put in place, and that medical, educational, and other social services were inaugurated. Law codes were enacted, a civil service (soon famous for its excellence) was recruited, and the important and vast Gezira irrigation scheme for cotton begun. The policies and programmes adopted under Wingate (with Cromer's involvement, Egypt's critical financial support, and on bases established during the old Egyptian and Mahdist periods) became the institutional foundations of the modern Sudanese republic. Living in state at an address unequalled in the British empire -- The Palace, Khartoum -- Wingate ruled Sudan as a colony in all but name, while lessening the control of both Cairo and London. As a soldier-administrator Wingate indeed came to epitomize a type of pragmatism and moderation that seemed to ebb as the administration became demilitarized after the First World War. 
During that war Wingate was fully involved, but largely behind the scenes. The Sudanese ignored the Ottoman call to jihad. But in 1916, after long planning and careful calculation, Anglo-Egyptian forces invaded and conquered Darfur, the autonomous sultanate whose ruler, Ali Dinar, had shown disaffection. More important, as far as Wingate was concerned, were the byzantine negotiations between the sherif of Mecca and the British that ended finally in the outbreak of the Arab revolt against the Turks. In those negotiations, as in supplying the sherif and co-ordinating Anglo-Arab activities, Wingate played a leading role; his appointment to command operations in Hejaz was in fact never made public, in deference to the sherif, and he reaped little credit for their success. 
In October 1916 Wingate accepted the Foreign Office's offer of the high-commissionership of Egypt. Although the title had changed since Cromer's day, this had remained (and indeed, in wartime, was perhaps more than ever) one of the most important posts in the British empire. Wingate brought to Egypt vast experience of her affairs, but at a time when, partly because of the war, control of those affairs had largely passed to others. Nor was he adept in the personal politics that had infected British administration there. His tenure in Egypt is therefore largely remembered for the incipient revolution that brought him down. On 13 November 1918, two days after the European armistice, Wingate received at the residency Sa'd Zaghlul and two associates, a 'wafd' (delegation) that would prove to be the seed and eponym of Egypt's most important political party. That he met them at all, and then perspicaciously endorsed their request to put their views (about Egyptian independence) to the British government in London, was subsequently seized upon by the Foreign Office and Wingate's personal enemies; the Foreign Office rejected his advice, and he was made a scapegoat for violent disorders that broke out throughout Egypt after his return to London for consultations in January 1919. The real reason for the 'Egyptian revolution' was the incompatibility of British strategic interests and Egyptian nationalist aspirations which, in 1919 no less than in 1956, revolved around sovereignty over and control of the Suez Canal. 
After a period of intense frustration and bitter recrimination Wingate was forced to realize that his public career was over. His attempts to win another high appointment, or at least official recognition through a peerage, failed. (He had refused to resign as high commissioner and remained 'on leave' even after his successor, Allenby, had taken up his duties in Cairo; and he had privately threatened to embarrass the government.) He turned instead to business and took up several company directorships. He was made a baronet in 1920. Dividing his time between a London flat and Knockenhair, the house he had built at Dunbar, and travelling frequently abroad (though never again, after 1919, to the Near East), Wingate was active well into his eighties. He died at Dunbar on 29 January 1953, and was buried at St Anne's Church, Dunbar. 
Wingate had married, on 18 June 1888, Catherine Leslie Rundle (1858-1946), the only daughter of Captain Joseph Sparkhall Rundle RN, who was the sister of his fellow officer in Egypt the future General Sir Leslie Rundle. She died in 1946. There were four children of the marriage: the eldest, Ronald Evelyn Leslie Wingate, succeeded to the baronetcy; the second, Graham, died in infancy; the third, Malcolm Roy Wingate, was killed in action on the western front in 1918. The birth of Wingate's daughter, Victoria, in 1899 coincided with the battle of Umm Diwaykarat, and she was named for Queen Victoria, her godmother. 
Wingate was the recipient of many honours and awards. He was appointed KCMG in 1898, KCB in 1900, GCVO in 1912, GCB in 1914, and GBE in 1918, and held Austrian, Ottoman, Egyptian, and Ethiopian orders. At the time of his death he had long been the senior general in the British army. 


@@@@@


doc= 36978


Wingate, Orde Charles (1903-1944), army officer, was born on 26 February 1903 at Naini Tal in the United Provinces, India. He was the third child, and eldest son, of Colonel George Wingate (1852-1936), an officer in the Indian army, and his wife, (Mary) Ethel (1867-1943), daughter of Captain Charles Orde-Browne, of the British army. The Wingate and Orde-Browne families were Plymouth Brethren. In this tradition Wingate would become a career soldier of an unusual sort. Having been educated at Charterhouse School, he went to the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich. His time there was not happy. His background had prepared him not to conform -- nor did he. As a result he was treated very roughly by his classmates. The strong-mindedness that marked his time at Woolwich, and which impelled him to follow his own path at an age when unity with one's peers is usually the strongest instinct, never weakened. 
Having been commissioned in the Royal Artillery in August 1923, Wingate spent the next five years in a series of routine postings -- the longest interval of orthodox soldiering in his career. Hoping to escape to more stimulating overseas service he began to study Arabic in 1926. Two years later, aided by a relative, General Sir Reginald Wingate (once Kitchener's intelligence chief), Orde Wingate got an appointment with the Sudan defence force with which he spent the next five years. During his voyage home in 1933 he met Lorna Elizabeth Paterson, daughter of Walter Moncrieff Paterson; Wingate married her on 24 January 1935 (having in the interim broken an earlier engagement). In 1936 he successfully applied for an intelligence post in Palestine where an Arab revolt had broken out directed at both the British mandatory authorities and the growing numbers of Jewish settlers. His time in Palestine was the turning point in Wingate's career. He found there a cause -- Zionism -- to which he became passionately attached, and a patron, Major-General Archibald Wavell, the general officer commanding (GOC) in Palestine in 1937-8, who saved him from the professional consequences of that attachment. He also discovered a type of soldiering with which he was henceforth to be associated -- later to be known as special operations. The Arab irregulars were difficult targets for conventional British infantry units. Wingate proposed new formations which became known as special night squads (SNS). Commanded by British subalterns and NCOs, these units drew their rank and file from among the Jewish settlers. Like the Sudan defence force, also a British-officered local formation, the SNS depended on careful training and high morale as well as the willingness and ability of junior officers to show initiative. Flexibility, mobility, and tactics that deprived the enemy of what had previously been a safe environment -- the darkness -- were SNS hallmarks. Wavell, whose conventional exterior masked a complex personality with much sympathy for the unorthodox, cast a protecting mantle over Wingate. Once Wavell's tour as GOC ended, however, Wingate's prickly nature ('Wingate was never an easy subordinate', Wavell would later write; 'DNB') and his outspoken commitment to Zionism, made him, in many eyes, a liability. He left Palestine in 1938 with a DSO, a wound suffered in an SNS action, and a professional future which was somewhat overshadowed by doubts in the small army world about his attitudes and behaviour. 
Wingate began the Second World War as brigade major of a light anti-aircraft brigade. He had been out of the military mainstream for fully half of his sixteen-year career. This, and his recent problems in Palestine, might have permanently sidetracked him, but for Wavell, who, now a full general, had become commander-in-chief, Middle East, at the outbreak of the war. When Italy entered the conflict in June 1940 Wavell resolved to turn to account the smouldering unrest in the highlands of recently occupied, but incompletely pacified, Abyssinia. Wingate's experience on the Abyssinian border while with the Sudan defence force and recent exploits in Palestine made him a natural choice for this type of work. Now a major, he arrived in Khartoum in November 1940. Over the next few months he gathered and trained a force that would accompany the emperor Haile Selassie back into Abyssinia, part of a three-pronged assault on the shaky Italian position there. Wingate's brigade-sized command, an amalgam of British-officered Sudanese regulars and British-trained Abyssinian levies -- and christened 'Gideon force' -- went into action in January 1941. Over the next five months, culminating in the emperor's re-entry into his capital on 5 May, Gideon force fought, manoeuvred, and bluffed much larger enemy forces into retreat, defeat, and surrender. Although the Italian forces were mostly local levies of dubious (and eroding) loyalty, and the main burden of the campaign was carried by the regular forces under generals Platt and Cunningham, Gideon force had shown many of the characteristics Wingate had inculcated in the SNS -- flexibility, mobility, and an aggressive determination to hit the enemy. During the campaign, however, Wingate also displayed a quarrelsomeness with superiors, an occasionally overbearing way with subordinates, and some uncertainty in handling larger formations that arose from the fact that his previous experience had been with small units. Moreover, his embrace of the emperor's cause was so intense that it raised again the issue, lingering from Palestine, of his reliability. The campaign over, he was awarded a bar to his DSO, and sent quickly back to Cairo. There his career nearly ended in tragedy. Exhausted, depressed by his removal from command, ill with malaria, and overusing an early anti-malarial drug, he attempted suicide in his hotel room. Although he was found rapidly enough to be saved, it seemed the end of his army career. Wavell was gone, sacked by Churchill and rusticated to India. Wingate returned to England, a convalescent officer with a very uncertain future. 
Wingate's career was salvaged by his own determination, Wavell, and the Japanese. Wingate persuaded a medical board that he was fit for active service. Wavell, whose Indian command suddenly faced a Japanese attack for which it was almost entirely unprepared, remembered the aggressive, unorthodox soldier he had known (and occasionally rebuked) in Palestine and Cairo. The British collapse in Malaya and Burma made the need for talented commanders so urgent that it overrode any concerns that Wingate's past history might have aroused. By the time he reached India, however, he had time for only a hasty reconnaissance of central and north Burma, much of it conducted from the air as the British retreated. To these impressions of the country, he added his earlier experiences and the result was the theory of long range penetration (LRP). 
LRP married light infantry tactics to the availability of air transport and radio communication. Wingate's 'columns' -- each basically an infantry company with attached personnel -- would enter Burma through the gaps in the thin Japanese forward defences, and manoeuvre deep in the enemy rear, co-ordinated by radio, disrupting communications, especially the north-south railway in the Irrawaddy valley that was the spinal cord of Japanese logistics in Burma. 
Wingate's idea appealed to Wavell, a believer in the offensive and unorthodox approaches to it. Wavell also, throughout his time as a theatre commander in the East, rather oddly underestimated the Japanese and what their defeat would require. From his scarce stock of reasonably good infantry battalions in India, he gave Wingate two, one British and one Gurkha. After intensive training they were ready early in 1943 but the major offensive by regular formations that Wingate was to facilitate had been postponed. Wingate pleaded with Wavell to launch the operation anyway as an experiment in LRP tactics. Wavell agreed and in February 1943 Wingate led his Chindits, some 3000 strong (their name derived from a mythical Burmese temple guardian), across the River Chindwin. The columns penetrated easily into lightly occupied north Burma and cut the railway at a number of points. Wingate then extended his original plan into a crossing of the Irrawaddy. Once east of the great river, in nearly waterless country with the aroused Japanese closing in, he was forced to break his columns into smaller 'dispersal groups' which filtered back to India over the next several months. Casualties were high (a quarter of the force was lost) and the damage done to the Japanese transient. The consequences of the raid were, however, inversely proportional to its actual results. The Japanese began to think of a pre-emptive strike against the growing British base area around Imphal -- Wingate's jumping-off point. It was the first step towards their disastrous 1944 offensives. Wingate's impact on his own high command was even more dramatic. 
The prime minister, long dissatisfied with Wavell, had decided to replace him. Wingate emerged from combat to confront -- again -- the loss of a patron, but quickly found a potent replacement. In a theatre scarred by repeated defeats, the Chindits were a success story avidly seized upon by publicists in New Delhi and London. Wingate, who had always shown skill in using personal contacts to circumvent official channels, sent a copy of his official report to Leopold Amery, the secretary of state for India and Burma, whom he had met before the war (Amery was a keen supporter of Zionism). Amery gave it to Churchill, who suddenly saw a gleam of light in what he had characterized as a 'welter of lassitude and inefficiency' (Churchill to Ismay, 24 July 1943, TNA: PRO, PREM 3, 143/8). Wingate was flown home, met Churchill, and was added to his entourage for the voyage to the Anglo-American summit at Quebec in August 1943 (the 'quadrant' conference). 
The remaining eight months of Wingate's life generated controversy that reverberated for half a century after his death. Churchill, under American pressure to restore land communications with China by reconquering at least north Burma, found in Wingate an irresistible trump card. Wingate's own passionate advocacy won him crucial American material support. In a few short weeks he had been awarded a second bar to his DSO, and transformed by the media, the needs of alliance politics, and his own persuasive skills from a largely unknown brigadier to the commander (as an acting major-general) of a corps-sized special force, supported by a dedicated air component, the American 'air commando', and expected to play a major role in offensive operations in 1944-5. He had also the right of direct appeal to the prime minister and the support of the newly designated allied supreme commander in the theatre, Vice-Admiral Lord Louis Mountbatten. 
By October Wingate's much expanded force was actively training. The will and determination that had always driven Wingate on were never so marked as during this period when, despite a severe bout of typhoid, he conjured the special force into existence, racing against time. His charisma impressed itself on many, but his high-handedness, noted in Abyssinia, became more pronounced, and bred lasting animosities. He was slighting about the quality of the Indian army and heedless of the disruption his demands entailed for other commanders and formations. He demonstrated to the full his intolerance of those who stood between him and his goal. Moreover, as on the eve of the first Chindit expedition, the operational context was changing adversely. The Japanese operation taking shape against the British forward positions in Assam led the brilliant Lieutenant-General W. J. Slim to switch his Fourteenth Army from an offensive to a defensive posture, planning to absorb and crush the Japanese attack before launching his counter-thrust. There was now no main force advance for the special force to aid -- or to aid it. None the less, the momentum which had built up behind Wingate -- Churchill's patronage, American expectations, and the assembly and training of over 20,000 high-quality troops -- was too great to stop. With the Japanese offensive against Imphal about to open, Wingate's second Chindit expedition (codenamed Thursday) was launched on 5 March 1944. It rivalled in complexity any British-American airborne operation in the European theatre. Less than three weeks after its successful beginning, Wingate was killed on 24 March in the crash of an American bomber in which he was travelling. Thereafter, without his drive, vision, and leverage at the top, the Chindits, although marching and fighting with epic courage, and suffering considerable misuse at the hands of the American commander, Lieutenant-General Joseph W. Stilwell, played a role very different from that envisioned by Wingate. On 6 July 1944 Wingate's remains, and those of the others who died with him, were buried at the crash site in Assam. In 1950 they were exhumed and, under the terms of a British-American agreement covering such cases, reinterred (on 10 November) at Arlington national cemetery in Washington, DC. Wingate was survived by his wife, Lorna, and a son, Orde Jonathan Wingate ['see below'], born posthumously. 
Wingate's military thought involved the use of widely separated light infantry formations whose mobility would be enhanced by air transport and resupply while the cohesion of their operations would be ensured by a sophisticated radio network. Although he did not invent these concepts he carried their development rapidly forward. The weakness of the special force was the weakness of all 'light' formations. Without rapid support from heavier units they lacked sustainability in prolonged operations. Wingate set the limit of their operational commitment as twelve weeks. Even this may have been optimistic. After his death it was cruelly exceeded. His gifts were a courage, dynamism, vision, and fire that evoked in many a lasting devotion. His imperiousness, uncompromising ruthlessness, and failure to recognize the limitations of the formations and tactics he espoused were the defects of these qualities. Churchill and Wavell used the word 'genius' in describing his abilities. The explorer Wilfred Thesiger, who served under him in Abyssinia, may have best captured his contradictions, picturing him as a crusader 'fighting with a mad gleam in his eye to liberate the Holy City, but equally determined, when it fell, to be crowned King of Jerusalem' (Thesiger, 351). 
Wingate's only child, 


@@@@@


doc= 36979


Ingram, Arthur Foley Winnington- (1858-1946), bishop of London, was born on 26 January 1858 at the rectory, Stanford-on-Teme, Worcestershire, the fourth of the ten children of the rector, the Revd Edward Winnington-Ingram, and his wife, Maria Louisa, daughter of Henry Pepys, bishop of Worcester. His father was also lord of the manor of Ribbesford. Through both parents he possessed connections with leading county families. 
Winnington-Ingram was educated at Marlborough College and at Keble College, Oxford, where he gained first-class honours in classical moderations in 1879 and a second class in 'literae humaniores' in 1881. Though he was to adhere broadly to the Tractarian principles he imbibed at Keble, he disavowed party labels and even described himself as an evangelical 'at heart'. Unspecified doubts about the truth of Christian doctrines at school and university delayed his ordination for three years, while he worked as a travelling tutor on the continent. Ordained deacon and priest in 1884, he served his title as assistant curate at St Mary's, Shrewsbury. The faith he now professed changed, on his own admission, not at all during the course of his long ministry. In 1885 he was appointed as domestic chaplain to W. D. Maclagan, bishop of Lichfield, whom he served for three years. 
In 1888 Winnington-Ingram was appointed head of the recently founded Oxford House in Bethnal Green. This was a fortunate appointment. His uncomplicated character and sense of humour at once made him popular with people of the East End, and he transformed the work of the house within a few years by his energy and adroit use of his personal charm and social connections. By 1892 he had rebuilt the house, increased the number of residents from three to thirty, and trebled its annual income. His regular visits to Oxford colleges encouraged a stream of undergraduates to take up work in the East End. In addition to leading the clubs and charitable activities the house supported, he devoted considerable time to Christian apologetics, speaking against the secularists at open-air meetings in Victoria Park. From 1895 to 1897 he held the position of head of the house jointly with the rectory of St Matthew's, Bethnal Green. 
Winnington-Ingram's success in the East End made him the obvious choice when, in 1897, Mandell Creighton, bishop of London, sought a suffragan bishop of Stepney, to be also a canon of St Paul's. He was consecrated on St Andrew's day, 30 November 1897. His chief work as bishop was to begin a fund-raising campaign for the East London Church Fund. But his responsibilities here were short-lived: Mandell Creighton's death in 1901 gave Lord Salisbury the chance to nominate Winnington-Ingram to the see of London, and he was enthroned in St Paul's Cathedral on 30 April 1901. He held the see for thirty-eight years. He approached diocesan responsibility with characteristic energy, resisting pressure for the division of the diocese. An exacting weekly routine helped him to master a substantial volume of business. When in residence in London he visited four parishes every week to preach and meet his parish clergy. During his tenure of the see nearly 100 new parishes were created and 94 churches built. He prided himself on having ordained some 2205 men to the ministry by the time he resigned. Despite his energy he was ill at ease with matters of ecclesiastical discipline, and faced particular difficulties over militant protestant hostility to ritualist clergy. His policy of tolerating most innovations in ritual, and yet prohibiting certain practices, failed to satisfy either extreme. 
The range of Winnington-Ingram's public concern was considerable. In 1917 he led the National Mission of Repentance and Hope, touring every diocese to stir up renewed zeal for the war effort, and then in 1919 led a national campaign to re-establish the Church of England Temperance Society. In London he chaired the Public Morality Council, working closely with police to close down brothels, clean up public parks, and oppose 'offensive' plays and birth control propaganda; in this work there was a somewhat rigid adherence to the values of his late Victorian upbringing. In the House of Lords he took a particular interest in the housing of the poor and in unemployment; his natural conservatism did not prevent him from speaking out against what he perceived to be social injustices, as when he attacked slum conditions in Paddington in the mid-1930s. 
By far the most controversial aspect of Winnington-Ingram's episcopate was his tireless (and never modified) public advocacy of Britain's cause during the First World War. He saw the war as a 'great crusade to defend the weak against the strong' (Winnington-Ingram, 111), and accepted uncritically stories of atrocities perpetrated by German troops. In 1915 he toured the western front, in 1916 the Grand Fleet at Rosyth and Scapa Flow, and in 1918 Salonica. His skill at public speaking made him a successful recruiter of volunteers early in the war, and he took great delight in his position as chaplain to the London rifle brigade; later in the war he encouraged his own younger clergy to enlist as combatants. He had an unquestioning trust in the civilizing mission of the British empire, and freely used language about the German people which verged on xenophobia. H. H. Asquith considered that he had preached 'jingoism of the shallowest kind' throughout the war (Wilkinson, 70). 
Winnington-Ingram travelled widely during his episcopate, making five trips in all to Canada and two to America. Through various official duties he built up links between the Anglican church in these countries and the Church of England. He was president of the British Columbia Association for over thirty years; his strong advocacy of English-speaking settlements in Canada, in response to immigration there from eastern Europe, was tactless and unfortunate. He extended his second visit to America, in 1926, to a tour of the Far East and Australasia the following year. 
Winnington-Ingram's public reputation stood at its highest before 1918. A handsome, charismatic man, he had an ebullient, open, and straightforward personality which helped to make him a persuasive speaker. His Marlborough nickname, Chuckles, clung to him as an undergraduate and was entirely appropriate. His simplicity and boundless optimism put him at his best in situations where he was called upon to act as advocate of a particular cause, but they were positive handicaps when it came to appreciating the complexities of political and religious affairs. His failure to understand the depth of divisions within his own diocese meant that he was unable to develop a concerted policy for managing it; the discipline of the diocese seemed ever more unstable as the years passed by. He was unable to understand the mood of pessimism and disillusionment which set in after the First World War, and this, along with his essentially Victorian moral character, made him seem increasingly an anachronism in the inter-war years. 
Winnington-Ingram was an enthusiastic sportsman, priding himself on his prowess at tennis and hockey, which he played into his seventies, and golf, which he played to the end of his life. His personal life was marked by moderation and simplicity. He was a teetotaller. He did not marry, though he was briefly engaged while bishop of Stepney. He resigned his see in 1939 and retired to Bournemouth, though he spent six months of the year at The Boynes, Upton upon Severn, where he died on 26 May 1946. A private funeral service at Upton church was followed by a public one on 7 June 1946 at St Paul's Cathedral, where his remains were interred. 


@@@@@


doc= 36980


Winstanley, Denys Arthur (1877-1947), historian, was born on 5 December 1877 at 31 Woburn Square, London, the son of Howard Winstanley, auctioneer, and his wife, Katharine Skilbeck. Educated at Merchant Taylors' School, London, he went up to Trinity College, Cambridge, as a sub-sizar in 1897. He graduated with first-class honours in history in 1899 and 1900, and in 1901 he was Lightfoot scholar. From 1903 to 1906 he was an assistant school inspector in Durham, but he did not like either his tasks or the place. Characteristically informing the Board of Education that he was leaving their service to take up educational work, he returned to Trinity as a fellow and college lecturer in 1906. 
For the rest of his life Winstanley lived in Trinity, with an interval in the First World War in military intelligence in Egypt. He did not marry. Nurturing the collegiate community was habitual. He would take long brisk walks with undergraduate friends. Although a high-church Anglican, he did not allow differences to affect friendship; nor did he 'readily tolerate blatancy or self-assertion' ('Manchester Guardian', 21 March 1947). In 1919 he became a tutor, and between 1925 and 1931 he was senior tutor. From 1935 onwards he served as vice-master, a burden he carried brilliantly during the declining years of Sir Joseph John Thomson, master until 1940. His firmness of decision fitted him for administration, and his imagination and moral power enabled him to respond nobly to events in the Second World War; his speech bidding farewell to officer-students, given on the day in June 1940 that Paris fell, was thought by one obituarist to be perhaps his best (Duff, 33-5). 
In teaching or counselling pupils Winstanley 'combined great efficiency with extraordinary charm and sympathy' ('Manchester Guardian'), while his delight in the human comedy and talent for epigrammatic summary made history enticing. Certain lectures were dramatic set pieces. 'Who sent Charles Yorke to the levee on that morning of January 17th, 1770?' he would ask in stentorian tones, as he concluded one such performance with the sudden and mysterious death of the lord chancellor: 'with that question I shall go on next time' ('Trinity Magazine', March 1922, 44-5). 
Winstanley always had a taste for the light-hearted. In his early thirties two comic melodramas by him, 'Fellow or Felon?' and 'The Shame of the Shelfords', were performed in the theatre of the amateur dramatic club at Cambridge. He would entertain undergraduates on many evenings in his college rooms, just as during the Second World War he made welcome young American and Canadian officers briefly accommodated in college. Winstanley 'kept the ball of conversation moving with skill' ('DNB') and in his frequent tall stories he would 'desert the Way of Truth for the paths of Wit and Fancy': telling of a missionary who made only one convert in seven years, whom he then shot, mistaking him for a baboon (Duff, 33-5). But at 10 p.m. the party dispersed, for he kept to a strict regime to protect his life as an unremitting scholar. 
Winstanley started his day at 4.30 a.m. His first two books, published before the First World War, concern British eighteenth-century history, and though now superseded they retain interest because of what was then their novel emphasis on the importance of patronage and family connection, and so remind readers of the work of L. B. Namier a generation later. During the quarter century before his death Winstanley wrote four volumes on the history of Cambridge University, from about 1750 to the new statutes of 1882. His approach changed halfway through the quartet. The delight in human character and oddity, so displayed in his earlier writing and Winstanley's life elsewhere, dwindles to occasional aphorisms in the two long Victorian volumes: it is replaced by a detailed account of the process of constitutional change, as charted in flysheet and statute. Though the complex story is often interpreted from the standpoint of Trinity, it is told with authority and faultless accuracy, which guarantee the lasting value of these four works. On the other hand, even in its day the chronicle seemed incomplete because of its almost total neglect of Cambridge's intellectual life in teaching and scholarship, a surprising gap in view of Winstanley's contribution to this essential function of the university. 
Winstanley was lively and active until a few years before his death, but after an operation late in 1945 he did not truly recover. He died in Trinity College on 20 March 1947; there was a service in the chapel of Trinity College, and he was buried in the cemetery of St Giles's Church on 24 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 36981


Winstedt, Sir Richard Olaf (1878-1966), civil servant and Malay scholar, was born in North Parade, Oxford, on 2 August 1878, one of at least two sons of a naturalized Swede, Isaac Olof Winstedt, tailor and outfitter, and his wife, Sarah Mary Castell, who belonged to an old-established Oxford family. He was originally named Richard Olof but changed the spelling of his second name to Olaf. His younger brother Eric became a don. Winstedt was educated at Magdalen College School and at New College, Oxford. Goitre barred him from athletics. After getting a second in honour moderations (1899) and 'literae humaniores' (1901) and taking the civil service examination, he was in 1902 appointed to the Federated Malay States civil service (later to be merged into the Malayan civil service) and was posted to Perak, a state which had come under British protection only twenty-eight years previously and in which he was to spend ten years. With encouragement from the British resident, Sir Ernest Birch, and his secretary, R. J. Wilkinson, a distinguished Malay scholar, Winstedt made himself familiar with the charming and interesting Malay people and wrote four books in a government-published series called 'Papers on Malay Subjects': 'Folk Literature' (1907), 'The Circumstances of Malay Life' (1909), 'Arts and Crafts' (1909), and 'Fishing, Hunting and Trapping' (1911). Of these subjects folk literature was the one which was to engage his interest most. 
A little later, in collaboration with A. J. Sturrock, Winstedt went on to publish four Malay texts collected from an old traditional story-teller named Pawang Ana; a collection of farcical tales from other Perak story-tellers; and some articles in the 'Journal' of the Straits branch (later Malayan branch) of the Royal Asiatic Society, a publication to which he was to contribute many times in the course of his life. At this point Winstedt fell ill and was for a long time in a primitive hospital cut off from all books of reference except a few Malay classics which he found it an amusement to parse and analyse. On release from hospital he obtained his first home leave and took his notes to Europe for consultation with the established authorities, most of whom were Dutch. The result was the publication in 1913 of Winstedt's 'Malay Grammar', which established his reputation as a scholar. He returned to Malaya and was appointed district officer in Kuala Pilah, an interesting district which contained the court of the Yangdipertuan Besar of the Negri Sembilan and also five little states which followed the local version of Minangkabau matrilineal law. He studied customary law; published more texts and, with Wilkinson, a collection of Malay quatrains, 'Pantun Melayu' (1914); and also carried his language work further in writing 'Colloquial Malay: a Simple Grammar with Conversations' (1916) and 'An English-Malay Dictionary' (3 vols., 1914-17). 
In 1916 Winstedt, one of whose appointments in Perak had been as inspector of schools, returned to the education department, and was stationed in Singapore for fifteen years. His first title was assistant director of education, Straits Settlements and Federated Malay States, and his task was to improve the existing system of education in Malay. He visited Java and the Philippines to study educational systems there and later submitted a report which resulted in 1922 in the closing of two older teacher-training colleges and the founding of the Sultan Idris Training College at Tanjong Malim. Attached to this college was the Malay Translation Bureau, designed not only to prepare textbooks but also to provide literature for the graduates of schools which taught only in Malay. Through the college and the bureau Winstedt was later able not only to improve school education but also to guide the development of the language to cope with modern needs. The education he introduced was based on the traditional values and virtues of Malay rural life. After the independence of Malaya he was attacked for failing to try to direct Malay attitudes towards economic competition with the Chinese and Indians of Malaya, but there are two sides to this question. 
Winstedt's sojourn in Singapore led to one of his most productive periods of spare-time writing. In 1920 alone he published two books -- 'A Dictionary of Colloquial Malay' and a Malay text -- and no fewer than twenty-three articles covering history, folklore, ethnology, philosophy, literature, and bibliography. He obtained his DLitt, Oxford, in that year. In 1921 he started a ten-year period as first president of Raffles College, Singapore, an institution which, with the King Edward VII College of Medicine, was to grow into the University of Malaya. On 2 March the same year Winstedt married Dr Sarah Mary Josephine O'Flynn (1886-1972), of the Malayan medical service, the daughter of a wool-miller of co. Clare ['see 'Winstadt, Sarah]. There were no children. 
From 1924 to 1931 Winstedt was director of education, Straits Settlements and Federated Malay States, and a member of the legislative council of the Straits Settlements. In 1925 he published 'Shaman, Saiva and Sufi', a study of the evolution of Malay magic. In 1926 he was appointed CMG. In 1931 he was promoted to be general adviser to the unfederated state of Johore, an appointment which he held for the last four years of his service in Malaya. This seems to have stimulated his interest in history and, in addition to many shorter writings, he published 'A Malay History of Riau and Johore', Raja Haji Ali's 'Tuhfat al-Nafis' -- Malay text with English summary (1932); his own original 'History of Johore, 1365-1895' (1932); histories of Selangor and Negri Sembilan (1934), and 'The History of Malaya' (1935). 
In 1935 Winstedt retired from the Malayan civil service and was appointed KBE. He then took up an appointment as lecturer in Malay at the School of Oriental Studies, University of London. In 1937 he was promoted to a readership which he held until he retired in 1946, having been elected fellow of the British Academy the previous year. 
London brought Winstedt into contact with original Malay manuscripts, especially those in the Raffles collection of the Royal Asiatic Society. In 1938 he published in the 'Journal' of the Malay branch of the Royal Asiatic Society a romanized and annotated text of the Raffles manuscript of the 'Malay Annals', which differed in important respects from versions previously published and opened up interesting possibilities. The following year he published 'A History of Malay Literature', which co-ordinated the research of a lifetime in this field. Then came the war and its aftermath. During the Japanese occupation of Malaya Winstedt's Malay language broadcasts helped to keep hope alive in that country; and just after the re-occupation his letter to 'The Times', written in conjunction with Sir Cecil Clementi and Sir Frank Swettenham, led to the reversal of the British government's Malayan union policy and the institution of a federal government which was to guide Malaya to independence twelve years later. 
Between 1947 and his death nineteen years later Winstedt published 'The Malays: a Cultural History' (Singapore, 1947), six new dictionaries, several new editions of his more important books, and many articles and reviews. In 1951 he received an honorary LLD degree from the University of Malaya. During the last years of his life he devoted himself wholeheartedly to the service of the Royal Asiatic Society, of which he was either director or president from 1940 to 1964 and a regular voluntary helper even after that. His eighty-fifth birthday was honoured with no fewer than three Festschriften. His great contribution to scholarship was the unearthing and fostering of the cultural heritage of the Malays of Malaya, but he left later scholars to deal with his subjects in greater detail. His publications numbered more than 340. Winstedt died in Putney Hospital, south-west London, on 2 June 1966. 
E. C. G. Barrett', rev. ' 


