@@@@@


doc= 36982


Winter, Sir James Spearman (1845-1911), lawyer and politician in Newfoundland, born at Lamaline, Newfoundland, on 1 January 1845, was the son of James Winter, of the customs service at St John's, Newfoundland. Educated at St John's at the General Protestant and Church of England academies, he went in 1859 into a merchant's office, where he remained until in 1861 he was articled to Hugh Hoyles, afterwards chief justice of Newfoundland. He was enrolled a solicitor in 1866, was called to the bar in 1867, became QC in 1880, and at his death was the senior member of the Newfoundland bar and president of the Newfoundland Law Society. 
Winter entered the legislature as member for the Burin district in 1874. In 1877-8 he was speaker of the house of assembly. He was solicitor-general from 1882 to 1885 in Sir William Whiteway's first administration and attorney-general from 1885 to 1889 in the Thorburn administration. In 1893 he was appointed judge of the supreme court of Newfoundland, but resigned in 1896, returned to politics as leader of the opposition, and in 1897 became premier of Newfoundland. He held the premiership, combining it with the post of attorney-general and later that of minister of justice, until 1900. Winter's government in 1898 agreed a contract with Sir Robert Gillespie Reid, giving Reid unprecedented rights and privileges over Newfoundland's rail network, docks, and vast tracts of land and their associated mineral resources. Winter's government felt forced into such an agreement by the huge scale of the public debt in Newfoundland, but it was hotly contested and led to his fall from power and the replacement of his government by a Liberal administration, which substantially revised the Reid contract in 1901. 
Winter represented Newfoundland at the fisheries conference at Washington in 1887-8, and, although the United States failed to ratify the treaty, for his services he was made a KCMG. In 1890 he went to London as one of the unofficial representatives of the Patriotic Association in connection with the French fishery question, and that year published 'French Treaty Rights in Newfoundland' on the subject; in 1898, when premier, he visited London again on the same errand, and in the same year represented Newfoundland at the Anglo-American conference at Quebec. In 1910 he was one of the counsel on the British side before The Hague tribunal on the occasion of the north Atlantic fisheries arbitration between Great Britain and the United States. 
Winter married in 1881 Emily Julia, the daughter of Captain William J. Coen, governor of the Newfoundland penitentiary. She died in 1908, leaving four sons and four daughters. Winter died at Toronto, while on a visit to a married daughter, at midnight on 6-7 October 1911. 


@@@@@


doc= 36983


Wise, Thomas James (1859-1937), book collector and forger, was born on 7 October 1859 at 52 Wrotham Road, Gravesend, Kent, the eldest of four children, all sons, of Thomas Wise (1828-1902) and Julia Victoria Dauncy (1838-1881). The father, described by his son as 'manufacturing traveller', gave his occupation on the birth certificate of his youngest son as 'tobacconist'. After Thomas's birth the family returned to live in a drab part of Holloway, first at 37 and later at 127 Devonshire Road, an address at which Wise lived until the age of thirty. He claimed variously to have been educated privately and at the City of London School. There is no corroborative evidence in either case, and the origin of his interest in English literature is not known. Wise himself ascribed it to reading poetry, especially that of Shelley, to his invalid mother. His own first writings were published in 'Pen and Pencil', the manuscript magazine of his immediate social circle. This included Walter Brindley Slater, a book collector, and he it may have been who pointed Wise in a similar direction; Slater outlived Wise and became his executor. By his own account (of which one must be wary), Wise began collecting books seriously in 1877 at the age of eighteen, buying uncut copies of Shelley's 'The Cenci' (1819) and Moore's 'The Epicurean' (1827) for 20's'. the pair. 
In 1875 Wise, then aged sixteen, joined Herman Rubeck & Co. as office boy. The firm was a dealer in essential oils, as used in perfumes and food flavourings. Wise evidently showed a head for business: he became chief clerk and cashier before he was thirty. He also became friendly with his employer's son Otto Rubeck, who was later involved with Wise in other business enterprises. Wise seems to have had a part in expanding Rubecks from being mainly a mercantile concern into manufacturing. During the First World War the firm did particularly well, virtually cornering the market in vanillin, a flavouring with many applications. By this time Wise had become a partner, and he retired from business about 1920 -- somewhat later than he occasionally claimed. 
Wise began his career as a publisher with his own writings before turning to the works of others. His 'Verses' (1882-3) is notable mainly for the variety of its issues, being printed on vellum and on five different kinds of paper. Similar multiple formats were used for his next publication, Keats's 'Ode to a Nightingale' (1884). He then wrote an introduction to a photolithographic facsimile of Dickens's 'Sunday, under Three Heads' (also 1884), which may have given him the idea for comparable enterprises; it contained an advertisement for a 'complete bibliography' of Keats, which if it had appeared would have been his first attempt at such a publication. He joined the Browning Society at its inception in 1881, and became a member of its committee in 1884 as well as editing a facsimile of 'Pauline' (1838). This for the first time brought him into contact with Richard Clay & Sons, and accustomed the firm to producing for him works with antedated imprints. Wise joined the Shelley Society when it was founded in 1885, and became its secretary two years later. This enabled him to produce a series of publications, partly in the society's name and partly on his own account (but using the society's funds), which bankrupted it in 1892. He was encouraged in this extravagance by F. J. Furnivall, the mainspring of both societies; they may have lost money by it, but Wise did not. 
In January 1886, also at Furnivall's suggestion, Wise met his future accomplice Henry (known as Harry) Buxton Forman. The latter had already embarked on the fraudulent misdating of books, apparently not with thoughts of gain, but aiming rather to create what ought to have existed. How soon their plans matured will never be known, but Buxton Forman may have alerted Wise to the possibilities of 'facsimile' printing, and Wise made Buxton Forman aware of the potential profits. In 1886 Buxton Forman printed a facsimile, from his own recently acquired copy, of Byron's 'Fugitive Pieces' (1806), and in 1887 Wise produced Shelley's 'Poems and Sonnets', the texts pirated from Edward Dowden's 'Life of Shelley', with a false Philadelphia imprint. Undeterred by Dowden's polite but unwavering condemnation of it, the two became bolder. Editions of Swinburne's 'Cleopatra', Elizabeth Barrett Browning's 'The Runaway Slave', and George Eliot's 'Brother and Sister' were all produced within the year, modelled with various degrees of accuracy on genuine works by the same authors. Their distribution was small outside the market, still limited, for rare works by contemporary authors; and Swinburne and Browning, to whom Wise boldly sent copies, were not suspicious. More Swinburne pamphlets followed, with others by Ruskin and Browning. The Browning pamphlets were listed in the bibliography of William Sharp's 'Life of Browning' (1890), which was circulated to the Browning Society; thus were sown the seeds of the fictitious 'Reading' edition of 'Sonnets from the Portuguese', the partnership's best-known and most expensive creation. The forgers' originality lay in progressing from attempts to reproduce genuine first editions, a procedure relatively easy to detect, to producing pamphlets which had no resemblance to the true first edition, but which fraudulently bore an earlier date. This conception, together with establishing and marketing the pamphlets, was a remarkable contribution to the history of forgery. 
The freedom of Wise and Buxton Forman from detection was due to a number of factors. The books were small, their alleged genesis obscure; they might well have escaped the notice even of specialist collectors. Forgotten batches of genuine pamphlets did exist (Buxton Forman himself had found a quantity of the Brownings' 'Two Poems', 1854). If the forgeries looked new, they could be explained as 'remainders', the forgers' euphemism for them in the handful of references that survive in their correspondence. The market was a relatively small and restricted one: buyers were few, but they were prepared to pay high prices, especially in the nascent trade in modern first editions in America, where the forgeries were first put on public sale. Wise was expert in marketing them, utilizing, for example, J. P. Smart's bibliography of Ruskin (1889-93), and writing sale notes for 'The Bookman'. He made a new and influential friend in Edmund Gosse, who publicized the legend of the 'Reading' 'Sonnets'. The publication of 'Literary Anecdotes of the Nineteenth Century' (1896), nominally 'edited' by Wise and Robertson Nicoll but in fact mostly by Buxton Forman, further established the forgeries. The deaths of Tennyson (1892), Robert Louis Stevenson (1894), and William Morris (1896) encouraged the forgers to step up their activities, although the forgeries of Morris alerted his vigilant secretary S. C. Cockerell, and awkward questions were posed in the New York trade press. The forgers prudently ceased their productions after the turn of the century. 
Wise now moved into other activities in the book trade. Sales to collectors and selected booksellers brought in substantial sums, but individual forgeries could also be exchanged to improve his collection. Arundell Esdaile's verdict that 'in the sixteenth and early seventeenth century writers his library... was of moderate, in the late seventeenth and the eighteenth of very great, and in the nineteenth of unapproached completeness' ('DNB') resulted from Wise's market sense and preference for buying cheap. As the market for Shakespeare and his contemporaries was strong, Wise bought imperfect quarto plays which he 'improved' by stealing replacements for the missing or damaged leaves from copies in the British Museum (these thefts were not discovered until the 1950s). He did this not only for his own collection but also for the copies that he sold to his American clients, notably J. H. Wrenn, whose collection is now held by the University of Texas. Wise was initially not interested in the bibliographical or textual importance of original condition, but came to appreciate it more as he published his catalogues and bibliographies, beginning in 1901. If a book was not in pristine condition, or did not possess desirable 'points', he ensured that these features were supplied. 
In 1890 Wise had left the family home to marry Selina Fanny Smith ('b'. 1868), and moved to 52 Ashley Road, Crouch End, where he was first able to fit out a room for his collection, now dignified by the name of the road as 'The Ashley Library'. His wife left him in 1895 (they were divorced in 1897), and he moved to Hampstead in 1896. On 27 June 1900 he married his second wife, Frances Louise (1872-1939), daughter of Francis Greenhalgh, of Bolton. She gave him affection and support, but there is no reason to believe that she was involved in his nefarious activities. He had no children by either marriage. They moved to 23 Downside Crescent, Belsize Park, in 1900, and then to 25 Heath Drive, Hampstead, in 1910. Publishing the treasures of the Ashley Library became Wise's principal occupation -- and a lucrative one, though by this time he was already well off. He had issued short lists in 1893 and 1895; the first specimen of a catalogue in 1901 was followed by a trial edition in two volumes (1905-8). The full-dress 'Catalogue of the Ashley Library' ran to eleven volumes (1922-36), each with an introduction by a well-established literary figure. It became, as its compiler intended, a standard reference work for the bibliography of English literature. 
The 'Catalogue' was supported by a series of author bibliographies: Browning (1897), Swinburne (1897, 1919-20), Tennyson (1908), Coleridge (1913, 1919), Borrow (1914), Wordsworth (1916), the Brontes (1917), Elizabeth Barrett Browning (1918), Landor (1919), Conrad (1920), Keats (1921), and Byron (1932-3). He also published nine separate catalogues of his own collection, each devoted to a single author, beginning with 'A Shelley Library' (1924). Privately published and expensive, they were seen as essential items by other collectors, libraries, and booksellers. Still more profitable were editions, including many 'limited editions', of minor pieces by major authors. The example of Shelley was applied to the Swinburne material that he obtained, by doubtful means, from Theodore Watts-Dunton after the poet's death in 1909, and invited Gosse to edit. The Borrow and Bronte manuscripts collected by his friend Clement Shorter were similarly issued. In all, Wise published over 400 items. 
By the 1920s Wise had become respectable as well as rich. He was president of the Bibliographical Society (1922-4), honorary fellow (owing to the friendship of the collector C. H. Wilkinson) of Worcester College, Oxford, honorary MA of Oxford University (1926), and a member of the Roxburghe Club. The Oxford honorifics may have stemmed from an interest in the future of his collection; Wise was prepared to discuss the matter, but without committing himself. Socially, he was known to be 'very genial, if unrefined, in character as in aspect' ('DNB'). In the book trade, for which he sometimes expressed contempt despite dealing unobtrusively himself, he was not much liked; the trade had its own suspicions of his character and marketing methods. It was this that ultimately betrayed him. Instead of destroying the unsold copies of the forgeries (as urged to do by Buxton Forman), Wise sold them in 1910-12 to Herbert Gorfin, a former protege who had set up as a bookseller. Gorfin sold them in modest quantities throughout the 1920s, and it was his evidence that led the two young scholarly booksellers John Carter and Graham Pollard -- already aware, thanks to their bibliographic and forensic researches, of the suspect nature of the pamphlets -- to Wise as their source and manufacturer. The nature of their evidence was beyond Wise's comprehension, but experience had taught him that attack was the best form of defence. Carter and Pollard were not deterred, however, and 'An Enquiry into the Nature of Certain Nineteenth Century Pamphlets' (the title a conscious echo of Edmond Malone's demolition of William Henry Ireland's forgeries) came out in June 1934. It pointed to Wise, though for legal reasons it did not name him. He was not without apologists, including an amused George Bernard Shaw, who saw the forgeries as a prank on collectors. Wise, however, offered no convincing refutation of the charges; privately, he was persuaded to resign from the Roxburghe Club on the grounds of ill health. This excuse, at least, was genuine; his wife, his doctors, and his lawyers protected him from further harassment, and he died at his home in Hampstead on 13 May 1937. Wise's will was proved at over $138,000; the Ashley Library, strong in nineteenth-century literary manuscripts as well as printed items, was sold by his executors to the British Museum for $66,000. 
The full tale of Wise's deceit, including the involvement of Buxton Forman (the evidence for which was inexplicably suppressed by the American collector Carl H. Pforzheimer), has taken many years to emerge. More, doubtless, remains to be discovered. The story goes beyond the forgeries and the damage to the British Museum's rare books: many of his reprints would now be regarded as piracies. It may be some small excuse for his forgeries that 'reprinting' (a lax term) was then considered a venial infringement of copyright, but none can be offered for his thefts from the British Museum, nor for the inaccuracies, whether deliberate or negligent, that appear in his works of reference. Wise was both a careless and a dishonest bibliographer, and the errors in these works, and the many more in the five-volume catalogue (1920) of the Wrenn collection that he also compiled, mean that they are now merely of historic interest. On the other hand, Carter and Pollard's 'Enquiry' is now seen as a seminal work in bibliography. In order to complete their case against the forgers they made pioneering use of techniques such as the close analysis of typographical design, and of successive methods of making paper, thus proving that the pamphlets could not have been printed at the dates given in the false imprints. Ironically, this has turned out to be Wise's most important contribution to bibliography. Apart from that, his own hope of immortality rests in the books and manuscripts shelf-marked 'Ashley', preserved in the British Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 36984


Withers, Hartley (1867-1950), financial journalist, was born at Aigburth, Liverpool, on 15 July 1867, the fourth son of Henry Hartley Withers, gentleman, and his wife, Jane Livingston, daughter of Matthew Dobson Lowndes, also of Liverpool. One of his elder brothers, Harry Livingston Withers (1864-1902), became the first professor of education at Manchester University. He was educated at Westminster School, where he was a queen's scholar and captain of the school, and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he was a junior student, achieving a first class in classical moderations (1888) and a third in 'literae humaniores' (1890). He was briefly a temporary assistant master at Clifton College, and then became a clerk in a firm of City stockbrokers, contributing meanwhile occasional articles to the 'Pall Mall Gazette', the 'Westminster Gazette', 'The Economist', and 'The Spectator'. 
In 1894 Withers joined the City office of 'The Times'. He married on 8 August 1895 Letitia, daughter of Robert James Tennent MP, of Rush Park, Belfast, and widow of Henry Harrison, of Holywood House, Ardkeen. She was the mother of a schoolfriend. He served as City editor of 'The Times' from 1905 to 1910, although Wynnard Hooper at Printing House Square retained a general responsibility for financial matters. After a spell as City editor of the 'Morning Post' from 1910 to 1911, he returned to the City with Seligman Brothers, the merchant bankers. During 1915-16 he was at the Treasury as director of financial inquiries, a post which he abandoned with some relief in order to take the editor's chair at 'The Economist', where he remained until 1921. In that year he was married a second time, to Alice, daughter of J. R. Elliott, with whom he had one daughter. He was connected with the 'Saturday Review' from 1921 to 1928, when he abandoned financial journalism. 
Withers possessed a sharp mind and a sardonic sense of humour. He had no time for slipshod thinking, and always went to great lengths to ensure the accuracy of points of detail. Northcliffe, who wanted him to return to 'The Times', was advised that Withers 'is a very distant man and does not beat about bushes' (Chisholm to Northcliffe, 5 Dec 1910, Times Archive, News International Record Office). 
As editor of 'The Economist', Withers supplied a steadying influence after the departure of the flamboyant Francis Hirst. One insider recalled that Withers just plodded on from week to week writing one and sometimes two critical leaders (Edwards, 577). These often focused on the need to eliminate 'waste' in both the public and the private sphere and on the idea that the war should be paid for by taxation rather than excessive borrowing which, he believed, would cause inflation. Withers was an advocate of sound money. 'Inflation', he once remarked, 'is the tree up which I bark' (ibid., 580). Though Withers is not rated one of the great editors of 'The Economist', the paper was in reasonable health when he made way for Walter Layton in 1921. 
By this time Withers had gained a considerable reputation as an author specializing in financial subjects. His first book, 'The Meaning of Money', published in 1909, was widely acclaimed; some critics compared him to Bagehot, whose work he much admired. It has been described as 'a great book, epochal in finance' ('The Times', 22 March 1950). A year later, to the delight of Bagehot's widow, he wrote an introduction for a new edition of 'Lombard Street'. He wrote forty-two books in all between 1909 and 1942. His style was lucid and direct, and he had the capacity to surprise seekers after economic wisdom with some enlightening literary reference. His particular strength was an ability to make complex financial questions comprehensible to the lay reader. 
Withers had a great influence on the generation of financial journalists and writers who came after him. During his professional lifetime the characteristic arid, technical City article at the turn of the century was replaced by a broader view. He was, as one distinguished fellow professional later observed, 'the first of a new kind of British financial journalist'. His thoughts were invariably expressed 'in plain forceful English... independent of business and City jargon' (Fry, 16). He died at his home, Copford Place, Marks Tey, near Colchester, Essex, on 21 March 1950. 


@@@@@


doc= 36985


Witt, Sir Robert Clermont (1872-1952), art collector, was born at Champion Hill, Camberwell, London, on 16 January 1872, the eldest of the six children of Gustavus Andreas Witt ('b'. 1840), wool merchant, and his wife, Johanna Frederiko Helene de Clermont. His father was born in Hamburg of a merchant family; his mother was of Huguenot descent. He was educated at Clifton College, Bristol, and New College, Oxford, where he obtained a second-class degree in history in 1894; he became an honorary fellow in 1942. He served in the army during the Matabele (Ndebele) uprising in 1896 and acted as war correspondent with Cecil Rhodes. After returning to London he qualified as a solicitor and eventually became senior partner in the firm of Stephenson, Harwood, and Tatham, making it one of the most prominent firms of solicitors in London. 
Witt was a man of great energy who contrived to combine with his professional career a lifetime of intense activity in the cause of art, which was his governing passion. He made no claim to be an authoritative critic, but as early as 1902 he published the critically acute 'How to Look at Pictures', which was several times reprinted during his lifetime. In 1903 he co-operated with Lord Balcarres (afterwards the earl of Crawford), Claude Phillips, D. S. MacColl, and Roger Fry in founding the National Art Collections Fund. He was the first honorary secretary of the fund (1903-20), then chairman (1920-45), and saw it grow into an organization of great national importance. When he retired from the chairmanship in 1945 he was made its first president and in his honour a special exhibition of the principal acquisitions made for the nation by the fund was organized at the National Gallery. Witt was also a trustee of the National Gallery (1916-23, 1924-31, 1933-40); trustee of the Tate Gallery (1916-31); and of the Watts Gallery, Compton, Surrey. In 1932 he collaborated with Samuel Courtauld and Lord Lee of Fareham in founding the Courtauld Institute of Art, University of London, and remained a member of its committee of management until his death. In October 1933 the university conferred on him an honorary DLit. 
When still undergraduates both Witt and his future wife, Mary Helene (1871-1952), daughter of Charles Marten, stockbroker, began collecting photographs and reproductions. They were married on 15 April 1899. Their hobby led during their long married life to the formation of the vast Witt library of photographs numbering at that time three-quarters of a million. On 28 November 1944 Witt executed a deed of gift making over this library to the Courtauld Institute, but continued to administer it himself at his home, 32 Portman Square, where he had turned his spacious house into a reference library; all the walls in the rooms, passages, and even the bedrooms were crowded with shelves containing dark green boxes of photographs always readily available to students and collectors. At Witt's death the library was transferred to the premises of the institute (then at 19 and 20 Portman Square) which also benefited by the bequest of his large collection (4000) of old master drawings, planned as a complement to the Library of Reproductions, and making the whole 'an incomparable weapon of scholarship'. Witt concentrated his relatively limited resources on buying works by lesser-known or unfashionable, and therefore less expensive, artists. In this way he built up a formidable group of drawings by Guercino and Gainsborough, as well as many others of great beauty and rarity. The collection has since been extensively enlarged through a fund which came to the institute as his residuary legatee. 
Witt published a catalogue of painters and draughtsmen represented in his library in 1920 and a supplement in 1925. His conception was copied abroad, notably in the United States where he personally helped Helen Frick to create on the same lines what is now the Frick Art Reference Library, New York, and in Tokyo by Professor Yukio Yashiro. 
In the course of forming his library and collection Witt acquired an encyclopaedic knowledge of art and of the whereabouts of art treasures throughout the world. This knowledge he placed freely at the disposal of students and collectors, the value of his contribution being enhanced by his quality as a speaker and lecturer. He was an active controversialist on art subjects, and in the dispute over the pictures of Sir Hugh Lane his solicitor's training made him an outspoken defender of the strictly legal interpretation of the rival claims of London and Dublin. He played a prominent part in the organization of the annual winter exhibitions of foreign art at Burlington House in the 1930s, writing the introduction to the souvenir catalogue of the Italian exhibition of 1930. 
Witt found time to show himself a devoted son of his school and college and to serve as the vice-president of the Institute of Industrial Psychology. A man of spartan habits, he never wore an overcoat and uncomplainingly bore many years of severe arthritis which compelled him to use crutches. He loved young people and in his old age and in great pain would go swimming with them when on holiday. He died at his home in Portman Square, London, on 26 March 1952, having retained to the end his interest and vigour. He was appointed CBE in 1918 and knighted in 1922, as well as receiving honours from Belgium, Holland, Italy, and Spain. 
In the formation of his vast reference library Witt had the enthusiastic help of his wife, Mary Helene, who survived him by only a few months. Their only child, a son, John ('b'. 1907), followed his father as senior partner in his firm of solicitors and also on the board of the trustees of the National Gallery, of which he was chairman when the arrangements were completed with the Irish government for the exhibition of the Hugh Lane pictures in Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 36986


Wittgenstein, Ludwig Josef Johann (1889-1951), philosopher, was born in Neuwaldeggerstrasse, Neuwaldegg, Vienna, on 26 April 1889, the youngest of eight children of Karl and Leopoldine Wittgenstein. He studied philosophy at Cambridge from 1911 until 1913, and taught there from 1930 onwards, holding a chair in philosophy from 1939 until his premature retirement in 1947. He was the author of two philosophical masterpieces of the twentieth century, the 'Tractatus logico-philosophicus' (1921) and the posthumous 'Philosophical Investigations' (1953). Both changed the course of philosophy. The first was the inspiration for the Cambridge school of analysis of the inter-war years and of the logical positivism of the Vienna circle, which spread from Vienna to Berlin, Warsaw, Britain, the Scandinavian lands, and the USA. The second was a primary influence upon the form of analytic philosophy which sprang up in Oxford after 1945, whence it spread all over the English-speaking world and beyond, dominating analytic philosophy until the 1970s. 
Wittgenstein's 'haut bourgeois' family was of Jewish extraction. The name Wittgenstein was adopted by Ludwig's paternal great-grandfather, Moses Maier, who was a land agent of the princely family of Sayn-Wittgenstein. With the Napoleonic decree of 1808 requiring Jews to adopt a surname, the family took the name of the county of Wittgenstein. Moses' son, Ludwig's grandfather, Herman Christian Wittgenstein (1802-1878), was converted to protestantism, as was his wife, Franziska (Fanny), 'nee' Figdor (1814-1890), daughter of an eminent Viennese Jewish family. In the 1850s they moved from Leipzig, where Herman had established a prosperous wool business, to Vienna. Karl Otto Clemens Wittgenstein (1847-1913), Ludwig's father, was the sixth child among the eleven children of Herman and Franziska. Ludwig's mother, Leopoldine Maria Josefa 
(Poldi; 1850-1926)
, was the daughter of Jakob Kalmus ('b'. 1814), who, although brought up a Catholic, was descended from a prominent Jewish family, and of Maria Stallner (1825-1921), of an Austrian Catholic landowning family. All eight children of Karl and Leopoldine Wittgenstein were baptized into the Catholic faith, although there was little churchgoing in the family. 
Karl Wittgenstein was the leading steel baron of Austria. Of powerful personality and intellect, quick-witted and decisive, he was an entirely self-made man. His career began at the age of twenty-five, when he was employed as a draughtsman at the Teplitz rolling mill in Bohemia. Within five years he was managing director of the firm in Vienna. Over the next decade he proved himself to be an outstanding industrialist, who came to dominate the Austrian steel industry as Carnegie did the American. By the 1890s he was one of the wealthiest men in the Austro-Hungarian empire. In 1898, at the age of fifty-one, he retired from business with a huge personal fortune sapiently invested in the USA, a decision which was to secure the fortune for his children after the First World War despite the hyperinflation in Austria. He was a renowned patron of the arts, financing the Sezession building in Vienna and amassing a distinguished collection of paintings and sculpture. The family lived in aristocratic style in a large mansion (commonly known as the Palais Wittgenstein) in the Alleegasse, with an additional house on the outskirts of Vienna in the Neuwaldeggergasse and a country estate, the Hochreit, where they spent the summers. 
Leopoldine Wittgenstein was a devoted wife, but an inattentive mother. The children were brought up largely by nursemaids and tutors, idolizing their domineering father from a distance. The ethos of this remarkable family was demanding, both culturally and socially, with an acute sense of the obligations of their station and wealth. Leopoldine was exceptionally musical, a pianist of outstanding sensitivity and expressiveness. Music was integral to the life of the family. Brahms, Bruno Walter, Mahler, and Josef Labor were friends of the family and frequented the musical evenings at the Alleegasse. The violinist Joseph Joachim, a cousin of Fanny Wittgenstein, performed there, as did the young Casals, Marie Soldat-Roeger (Brahms's favourite violinist), and Marie Baumayer. The eight children, Hermine, Hans, Rudolf, Kurt, Margarete, Helene, Paul, and Ludwig, all inherited their parents' love of, and talent for, music -- indeed, in some cases, much more than talent. 
Karl intended his sons to follow him into business. They were to be educated privately at home, and trained in engineering and entrepreneurship. The effect on two of the elder sons was tragic. Hans was a musical prodigy, who had no desire to inherit his father's business empire. Forced against the grain to try to learn the business skills his father demanded, he fled to America. A year later, the family was informed that he had disappeared from a boat in Chesapeake Bay in 1902, and was presumed to have committed suicide. Rudolf, submitted to a similar educational regime, rebelled too. He went to Berlin in 1903, in pursuit of a career in the theatre. In 1904 he committed suicide, probably because of an inability to come to terms with his supposed homosexuality. The third brother, Kurt, a much more stable personality, was later to commit suicide too, although in quite different circumstances. A cavalry officer in the First World War, he shot himself during the retreat on the Italian front in 1918, apparently through shame at his unit's refusal to fight on. This sequence of suicides haunted Ludwig for the whole of his life. He was often tempted by suicide, but simultaneously held it contemptible. 
As a result of the tragic deaths of the two elder brothers, the younger sons were differently treated. Paul, two years older than Ludwig, was sent to a 'Gymnasium' in Vienna, which provided a classical education. Thereafter he was allowed to pursue his chosen career as a pianist. He made his debut in 1913. Early in the war, he lost his right arm in action. Subsequently learning to play with his left hand alone, he commissioned works from Richard Strauss, Ravel (concerto for the left hand), Prokofiev, Britten, Josef Labor, Erich Korngold, Franz Schmidt, and others, and continued his career as a concert pianist and teacher. Ludwig, a delicate and sensitive child, showed none of the rebelliousness of his elder brothers. As a child he was above all eager to please, and fell in with his father's engineering ambitions for him. He was taught at home by private tutors until the age of fourteen, when he was sent as a boarder to a 'Realschule' in Linz, which offered an education in scientific and technical subjects. The young Adolf Hitler was at the same school, although in a lower class; there is no evidence that they ever met. Given Ludwig's retiring nature and his social and cultural fastidiousness, he found school a painful and unhappy experience, beset with loneliness and alienation. He was an undistinguished pupil and his grades were mediocre. It was during his school years that he lost his childhood religious faith. 
Ludwig's moral and cultural formation was determined by his home and family. His sister Margarete (Gretl), seven years his elder and the acknowledged intellectual of the family, with a passion for literature, art, and, like all the Wittgensteins, music, as well as an interest in psychoanalysis (she was psychoanalysed by Freud, later befriended him, and assisted his escape from the Nazis), was a major influence upon the boy. Like the rest of the family, he was intensely musical, although he did not learn to play an instrument in his childhood (later he taught himself the clarinet). Nevertheless, he mastered the technicalities of music with ease, and learned to whistle whole compositions with great accuracy and expression. His taste in music was, and remained, strictly classical -- from Haydn to Brahms. His preferences in literature were similarly conservative -- Goethe, Schiller, Lichtenberg, Morike, Lessing, Gottfried Keller, Kleist, Grillparzer, and Nestroy were part of his cultural heritage. Later he was to find inspiration in the works of Tolstoy and Dostoyevsky, St Augustine and Kierkegaard. He had little interest in the modernist literature of Young Vienna, with the exception of the writings of Karl Kraus, to whose journal 'Die Fackel' Gretl introduced him. Kraus's ruthless moral criticism, his passion for integrity and detestation of humbug, his concern for clarity of language and honesty of expression, left a lasting mark on young Ludwig. Other early, more philosophical, influences upon him were Schopenhauer, and the philosopher scientists Hertz (in particular the introduction to his 'Principles of Mechanics') and Boltzmann (especially his 'Populare Schriften'). A more pernicious influence was Weininger's hysterical 'Sex and Character', seemingly because of its insistence upon the duties of genius, the characterization of logic and ethics as duties to oneself, the demands of honesty, and the separation of love from sexual desire. 
After leaving school, Wittgenstein was sent to study mechanical engineering at the Technische Hochschule in Charlottenburg, Berlin. He matriculated in October 1906, and was awarded the diploma in May 1908. While there, he developed an interest in the budding science of aeronautics, and after graduation he went to the University of Manchester to pursue studies in aeronautics. He began by experimenting on the design of kites at a meteorological observation centre near Glossop. In the autumn of 1908 he registered as a research student at the department of engineering. He attended lectures by E. J. Littlewood on the theory of mathematical analysis and was led into questions concerning the foundations of mathematics. He read Russell's 'The Principles of Mathematics', and was attracted by the problems. Russell's book led him to read Frege's 'Grundgesetze der Arithmetik', and in April 1909 he wrote to the mathematician Phillip Jourdain, Russell's friend, proposing a solution to the set theoretic paradoxes which Russell had detected in Frege's attempt to prove that arithmetic is derivable from pure logic alone. Jourdain, after consulting Russell, rejected the proposed solution. Wittgenstein continued his researches at Manchester until 1911, working on the design of a jet-reaction propeller, which he patented in August 1911. However, his interest in fundamental problems in logic and the foundations of mathematics continued to obsess him, and at the end of the vacation he travelled to Jena to meet Frege and discuss the problems with him. As he later related, Frege 'wiped the floor' with him, but encouraged him to go to Cambridge to study with Russell (Drury, 'Conversations', 124). 
Although still registered at Manchester, Wittgenstein went to Cambridge in Michaelmas term 1911, and introduced himself to Russell on 18 October. He attended Russell's lectures throughout the term, at the end of which he asked Russell's advice on whether to continue with philosophy or to resume aeronautic engineering. Russell told him to write something over the vacation. In January 1912 Wittgenstein showed Russell what he had written. After reading the first page, Russell told him that he must continue with philosophy. He was admitted to Trinity College on 1 February as an undergraduate. Over the next months, Wittgenstein rapidly assimilated what Russell could teach him. In June he was admitted as an advanced student to a course of research, under Russell's supervision. Russell later described him at this period as being 'perhaps the most perfect example I have known of genius as traditionally conceived, passionate, profound, intense and dominating' (Russell, 2.98-9). Within six months the two men were discussing philosophy as equals, and Russell looked upon Wittgenstein as his successor in philosophical research (H. Wittgenstein, 'My brother', 3). A year later Wittgenstein was criticizing Russell and reducing his thought to paralysis. His criticism of Russell's 1913 manuscript 'Theory of knowledge' led to the latter's suppression (it was published only posthumously, and provides valuable insights into the ideas Wittgenstein rejected). While Wittgenstein had been attracted to the subject by problems in the foundations of mathematics generated by the logicist project of reducing arithmetic to pure logic, his interests quickly led him to investigations into the nature of logic itself. The new logic which Frege and Russell had invented for the purpose of their logicist project gave logic a philosophical prominence it had not had for many centuries. The question of the relation of logic to natural languages was pressing, as were the questions of the subject matter of logic and the nature of logical truths. Wittgenstein's investigations of these matters matured over the next seven years into his first masterwork, the 'Tractatus'. 
At Trinity, Wittgenstein became acquainted with the leading figures associated with Cambridge philosophy, including A. N. Whitehead, G. E. Moore, W. E. Johnson, and John Maynard Keynes (who was then working on the theory of probability). Although he was elected to the Apostles, he found the group distasteful and left it within a term. He made one close personal friend while at Cambridge, David Pinsent, a second-year undergraduate mathematician, who shared his passion for music. Together they spent a vacation in Iceland in September 1912. Apart from philosophy, Wittgenstein also conducted psychological experiments on the role of rhythm in the appreciation of music with the psychologist C. S. Myers. In January 1913 his father Karl died of cancer, leaving Wittgenstein a huge personal fortune. By the end of the academic year he was evidently feeling that there was nothing further that Russell could teach him. Moreover, there was personal friction between the two, stemming apparently from Wittgenstein's disapproval of Russell's outlook on life in general and his attitude towards philosophical work in particular. Together with Pinsent he went on holiday to Norway for August and September, where he continued to work on the problems of logic. One consequence was the decision to leave Cambridge in order to work in solitude in Norway, free from the distractions of personal relationships and of Cambridge, which adversely stimulated his morbid sensitivity and irritable disposition. He returned to Cambridge briefly in October, and while there dictated to Russell a paper, 'Notes on logic' -- the first surviving result of his work. It contains fundamental criticisms of Frege's and Russell's conception of the nature of logic, which were later incorporated into the 'Tractatus'. Immediately thereafter he returned to Norway, and settled in Skjolden, north of Bergen, on the Sognefjord, taking rooms with a local family. He was evidently eager to communicate his new results in logic to Frege, and on his way home for Christmas he spent some days of intensive conversation with him. He later remarked that on this occasion he 'wiped the floor' with Frege (R. L. Goodstein, 'Wittgenstein's philosophy of mathematics', in 'Ludwig Wittgenstein: Philosophy and Language', ed. A. Ambrose and M. Lazerowitz, 1972, 271-86, 272). His criticisms turned on Frege's conception of the sense of a sentence as the mode of presentation of a truth-value as the value of a function for an argument and on Frege's conception of the determination of a function. He rejected Frege's notion that propositions such as 'A believes that 'p'' signify a relation between a person and a thought, on the grounds that when we think truly that 'p', what we think is precisely what is the case and not some object -- a thought -- which is somehow related to what is the case. Contra Frege, he denied that sentences are names of truth-values, that truth and falsehood are logical objects of equal status, insisting instead that a sentence with a sense is essentially capable of being true and capable of being false, that truth has priority, and that a proposition and its negation jointly exhaust logical space. He held that Frege's conception of the unasserted sentence was incoherent, since it does not tell us under what circumstances such an 'assumption' is to be called 'true' or 'false'. Consequently he held that Frege's conception of the assertion sign in his concept-script is likewise confused. And, as we shall see, he subsequently argued that Frege's conception of logic and of the propositions of logic was mistaken. These criticisms are deep, but it is doubtful whether Frege understood them. 
After his vacation in Vienna, Wittgenstein returned to Skjolden. Moore visited him for a fortnight in March-April, and he too took a dictation from Wittgenstein. 'Notes dictated to G. E. Moore in Norway, April 1914' reveals vividly the progress Wittgenstein was making as his ideas on the nature of logical propositions evolved and the distinction between what a proposition 'says' and what it 'shows' occurred to him (see below). After Moore's departure, Wittgenstein had a small wooden house built for himself a mile from the village on the shores of a small lake, evidently envisaging a yet longer and even more private sojourn. To avoid the impending tourist season, he left Norway in June 1914 for a visit to Vienna. He was not to return until 1921. 
On his return to Vienna, Wittgenstein contacted Ludwig von Ficker, editor of the literary journal 'Der Brenner', offering him 100,000 crowns ($4167) to distribute to needy artists of merit. Among the beneficiaries were Rilke, Trakl, Dallago, Kokoschka, and the architect Adolph Loos, to whom Ficker introduced him. Wittgenstein admired Loos's spare, unadorned modernist architecture, which was later to influence him in his own architectural endeavours. On 28 July Austria declared war on Serbia. Although not liable to military service owing to a double hernia, Wittgenstein volunteered for service on 7 August and was assigned to an artillery regiment in Cracow. He found the company of common soldiers excruciating. He viewed the war as a personal test, believing that he would only discover his worth by facing death. Consequently, he spent much effort endeavouring to get to the front lines and seeking maximal danger. He participated in the Galician campaign of 1914. From February 1915 his skills as an engineer were called upon, and he worked in an artillery workshop in Cracow. It was not until March 1916 that he was posted to the Russian front. Throughout this period he continued working on philosophy. His method of work, then as later, was to enter insights into notebooks in the form of consecutive remarks. These were often no more than a sentence or two of highly condensed reflection, the trajectory of which was indicated but not elaborated. 
At the front, Wittgenstein typically volunteered for service at the artillery observation post at night, the place and time of maximal risk. During this period his philosophical work moved from logical considerations to reflections on ethics, death, and the meaning of life, which show a marked Schopenhauerian influence, perhaps also the impact of the writings of Emerson and Nietzsche, which he was reading at the time, and a distinctive solipsistic drift. These were integrated into his more general logico-metaphysical ideas via the distinction between what can be said and what cannot be said but only shown. Everything that belongs to the domain of value, all that is 'higher', he held, cannot be stated by means of language, but only shown. In the summer of 1916 he was involved in the heavy fighting of the Austrian retreat in the Brusilov offensive. He was decorated for bravery, and at the end of the summer was sent to Olmutz for an officer's training course. 
In Olmutz, in October 1916, Wittgenstein met Paul Engelmann, a young architect and pupil of Loos, as well as a disciple of Kraus. They became close friends, and Wittgenstein's time in Olmutz was a happy one, in which he could share his ideas with a sympathetic listener and participate in his social circle. Before returning to active service, he donated 1 million crowns to the state for the funding of a 12 inch howitzer. In January 1917 he returned to the Russian front as an officer. He was awarded the silver medal for valour for his conduct in the defence at Ldziany. In February 1918 he was promoted lieutenant, and in March was transferred to the Italian front. In the June offensive he was recommended for the gold medal for valour (the Austrian equivalent of the Victoria Cross), but was awarded instead the band of military service medal with swords, since his action, though outstandingly brave, was held to have had insufficient consequences to merit the higher honour. On leave in the summer, he completed the 'Logisch-philosophische Abhandlung' (the German title of the 'Tractatus'), and gave a copy to Engelmann. At the same time he was heartbroken to hear of the death of his closest friend, David Pinsent, to whose memory he dedicated the book. He submitted the typescript of his book to Jahoda, Kraus's publisher, before returning to the front at the end of September. At the end of October the Austrian army disintegrated, and Wittgenstein was taken prisoner by the Italians. He was in a prisoner-of-war camp, first in Como and later in Cassino. While prisoner, he managed to contact Russell and, through the good offices of Keynes, was able to send him the manuscript of his book. A copy was also sent to Frege. 
Wittgenstein was released from prisoner-of-war camp on 21 August 1919. Adaptation to civilian life was painful. Five years in the army had wrought fundamental changes in him, including a religious awakening under the influence of Tolstoy's 'Gospel in Brief', which throughout the war he had carried with him everywhere. (In later life his belief faded, leaving him with a religious view of life, craving perfection and purity, beset with religious angst and guilt, but without religious faith.) The first thing he did on his return was to unburden himself of the huge inherited fortune which he now possessed, turning his entire estate over to his siblings. In addition, he decided to abandon philosophy, believing himself to have solved the fundamental problems, and to become a primary school teacher. He enrolled in a teachers' training college, and refused to live at home in the wealthy surroundings of his family. Indeed, henceforth his lifestyle was simple and frugal. He dressed in the simplest way possible, rejecting altogether the role of the cultured, wealthy young man of high society. He went through a long period of suicidal depression, which was exacerbated by the difficulties encountered in getting his book published. Jahoda rejected it, and other publishers whom he approached likewise turned it down or offered to publish it under unacceptable terms. Frege's response to the book showed total incomprehension; indeed, it seems that he read no more than the opening pages. When asked for assistance in getting it published in a philosophical journal, he suggested that it be split up into a number of articles. Russell's response, however, was enthusiastic, although there was much about it that he could not understand. They resolved to meet in The Hague in December in order that Wittgenstein might explain his work to Russell, finance for the trip coming from Russell's sale of the books and furniture Wittgenstein had left in storage in Cambridge in 1913. They spent a week in The Hague going over the book in detail, and Russell offered to write an introduction which would explain its main ideas. As a consequence, Reclam agreed to publish it. But when Russell's introduction arrived in March, Wittgenstein was so disappointed with Russell's remaining misunderstandings that he refused to let it be published with the book, and Reclam accordingly withdrew their offer. Russell generously volunteered to try to get it published himself. On completing the teachers' training course, Wittgenstein spent the summer working as a gardener at the Klosterneuburg monastery outside Vienna; in the autumn of 1920 he took up a teaching post in the village of Trattenbach in the mountains of Lower Austria. This retreat from society was motivated by a Tolstoyan craving for a pure and simple life of service among simple people -- an ambition that was to be no more successful than Tolstoy's. 
While Russell was in China, his friend Dorothy Wrinch secured the publication of Wittgenstein's work in Wilhelm Ostwald's journal 'Annalen der Naturphilosophie' (1921), with the introduction by Russell. This edition was defective, and Wittgenstein considered it to be in effect pirated. But in 1922 Russell engineered its publication in English, translated by the young Frank Ramsey, together with the original German text, in the Routledge and Kegan Paul series of monographs the 'International Library of Psychology, Philosophy and Scientific Method', edited by C. K. Ogden. Wittgenstein was sent the draft translation by Ogden, and made numerous corrections and elucidations. The title, 'Tractatus logico-philosophicus', with its deliberate Spinozistic echo, was suggested by Moore. 
The 'Tractatus' is a highly compressed work of a mere seventy-five pages, dense with technical terminology and apparatus of formal logic, and not easily penetrable without familiarity with the logic and philosophy of Frege and Russell, which are a critical target. Here only a sketch of its contours can be essayed. It is a logico-metaphysical treatise on representation in general and propositional representation in particular, with specific concern for the nature of logic. It ranges over metaphysics, logic and logical truth, the nature of the proposition, the status of mathematics and of scientific theory, solipsism and the self, ethics and the mystical. It is written in marmoreal sentences, beginning with 'The world is everything which is the case' and ending with the sibylline 'Whereof one cannot speak, thereof one must be silent'. 
According to the 'Tractatus', the world is the totality of facts, not things. The substance of all possible worlds consists of the totality of sempiternal simple objects, such as spatio-temporal points, and simple, unanalysable properties and relations. The form of a simple object consists in its combinatorial possibilities with other objects. The possible concatenation of objects constitutes a state of affairs, the obtaining of which is a fact. A representation of a state of affairs is a model or picture. It must possess the same logical multiplicity as, and be isomorphic with, what it represents. Propositions, no less than literal models and pictures, are logical pictures. They are essentially bipolar, that is, capable of being true and capable of being false, thus reflecting the essence of states of affairs thus represented, whose nature it is to obtain or not to obtain. An elementary proposition depicts an (atomic) state of affairs. Its constituent simple, unanalysable, names go proxy for the objects in reality which are what they mean. The logico-syntactical form of a name, that is, its syntactical combinatorial possibilities, must mirror the form (the metaphysical combinatorial possibilities) of the object which is its meaning. A proposition is a sentence in its projective relation to reality. What represents in a propositional representation is the fact that the names in the propositional sign are arranged as they are, in accordance with logical syntax -- for it is this which says that things are arranged thus-and-so in reality. So just as only simple names can represent simple objects, only facts can represent facts. Language, therefore, mirrors the logico-metaphysical forms of the world. The method of projection is thinking the sense of the propositional sign, that is, meaning by the constituent names such and such objects, thereby connecting language and reality, and meaning by the sentence the state of affairs in question. The sense of a proposition consists in its agreement and disagreement with possibilities of the obtaining and non-obtaining of states of affairs. For the proposition that 'p' agrees with the obtaining of the state of affairs that 'p' and disagrees with its non-obtaining. A proposition is true if things in reality are as it depicts them as being. The essence of the proposition is given by the general propositional form 'This is how things are', that is, the general form of a description of how things stand in reality. 
The new logic invented by Frege and Russell is not, as they thought, an ideal language, superior to natural languages, but a fragment of an ideally perspicuous notation, which will disclose the hidden depth-grammar of every possible language. The logical analysis of propositions must yield elementary propositions which are mutually logically independent, that is, have no logical implications and the truth of which depends only on the obtaining or non-obtaining of states of affairs. By means of truth-functional operators (namely the logical connectives 'not', 'and', 'or', 'if... then...'), one can form molecular propositions (for example, 'Not- 'p'', 'Either 'p' or 'q'', ''p' and 'q'', 'If 'p' then 'q''). Contrary to Frege and Russell, the logical connectives are not names of anything (for example, of logical objects or functions), but are merely truth-functional combinatorial devices, which generate truth-dependencies among propositions. All logical relations between propositions turn on the composition of molecular propositions, that is, on the truth-functional combination of the constituent elementary propositions. Two limiting cases of truth-functional combination are senseless (not nonsense): tautologies (for example, 'Either 'p' or not- 'p''), which are unconditionally true, and contradictions (for example, ''p' and not- 'p''), which are unconditionally false. The necessary truths of logic, that is, tautologies, are not, as Russell thought, descriptions of the most general features of the universe, nor are they descriptions of relations between logical objects, as Frege thought. Propositions of logic, that is, molecular propositions the constituent propositions of which are so combined that bipolarity, and hence all content, cancels out, all say the same thing, namely nothing. So, although well-formed, they are senseless. But different tautologies are internally related to distinct forms of proof, that is, distinct rules of logical inference. So logic is not a domain in which pure reason alone can attain knowledge about reality, since to know the truth of a tautology, for example, to know that it is either raining or not raining, is to know nothing about the world. Logic is not a genuine science with a subject matter. It is rather a transcendental condition of thinking and reasoning. 
The only expressible necessity is logical necessity. Non-logical, metaphysical necessities cannot be stated in language. For metaphysical utterances, such as 'red is a colour', 'one is a number', by contrast with the senseless propositions of logic, are nonsense -- transgressions of the bounds of sense. For the apparent categorial concepts that occur in them, for example, 'proposition', 'fact', 'object', 'number', 'relation', 'colour', are not genuine concepts at all, but in effect forms of concepts which cannot occur in a fully analysed proposition. Moreover, such pseudo-propositions do not satisfy the bipolarity requirement on propositions with a sense, since their negation is inconceivable (for example, red could not be anything other than a colour). But what one tries to say by means of the pseudo-propositions of metaphysics is 'shown' by syntactical features (forms) of genuine propositions containing substitution-instances of these formal concepts (for example, 'This is red', 'I have one apple'). What is shown by a notation cannot be stated by it. The 'Tractatus' delimits language in order to make room for ineffable metaphysics, ethics, aesthetics, and religion, the truths of which can be shown by language, but not said. 
Hence too there are no philosophical propositions, that is, propositions describing the essential natures of things or the metaphysical structure of the world. So the very propositions of the 'Tractatus' itself are finally condemned as nonsense -- futile attempts to say what can only be shown. The task of the 'Tractatus' is to lead one to a correct logical point of view. Once that is achieved, one can throw away the ladder up which one has climbed. Philosophy is not a science; nor is it in competition with the sciences. It does not lay the foundation of the sciences. It is not a cognitive pursuit and cannot add to the sum of human knowledge. Given the (strictly ineffable) insights already achieved by the 'Tractatus', the sole task for future philosophy is to monitor the bounds of sense, to elucidate by depth-analysis the hidden logical forms of philosophically problematic sentences, and to show that attempts to transgress the bounds of sense in order to make metaphysical pronouncements about the nature of things are futile. 
The 'Tractatus' marked a decisive break with the conception of analysis advocated by Moore and Russell. 'All philosophy', it declared, 'is a critique of language', in effect initiating the 'linguistic turn' that was to characterize analytic philosophy over the next fifty years. It reorientated philosophy from the investigation of phenomena that are seemingly its concern to the investigation of the language employed in describing phenomena. This linguistic orientation was to take many different forms, from the invention of ideally perspicuous languages for the purposes of science to the description of natural language -- these differences marking fundamental divides between styles of analytic philosophy. As noted above, the 'Tractatus' also marked a decisive break with the conceptions of logic advocated by Frege and Russell. For the propositions of logic are not generalizations that describe anything -- they say nothing and have no genuine subject matter. 
The most important impact of the 'Tractatus' was upon the Vienna circle, a group of scientifically and mathematically trained philosophers gathered around Moritz Schlick in Vienna from 1924 onwards. These philosophers, partly through their dispersal in the mid- and late thirties due to the rise of Nazism, were to change the face of analytic philosophy, especially in the USA. The circle spent two years reading the 'Tractatus' line by line in their meetings. They viewed it as making 'consistent empiricism' for the first time possible, because of its elucidation of the nature of logical truth. On their mistaken assumption that the 'Tractatus' agreed with the logicist reduction of arithmetic to logic, this seemed to show that there was no domain of synthetic a priori truth and that all knowledge was derived from experience. Accordingly, in their manifesto 'The Scientific Conception of the World: the Vienna Circle' (1929), they hailed Wittgenstein, together with Einstein and Russell, as a leading representative of the scientific world-view. 
This was misconceived. The members of the Vienna circle were self-conscious heirs to the spirit of the Enlightenment, with faith in social and intellectual progress, the engine of which was held to be human rationality and the science and technology which are its fruits. They viewed metaphysics as a residue of theology and religious superstition, which was accordingly to be eradicated. Hence they welcomed Wittgenstein's condemnation of metaphysics, while rejecting its rationale and objective. Their repudiation of metaphysics rested on the argument that the propositions of metaphysics are not verifiable in experience and that its concepts are not reducible to immediate experience. By contrast, the 'Tractatus' in effect delimited the sphere of science in order to make room for ineffable metaphysics. While the Vienna circle reduced ethical value to the mere expression of emotion, the 'Tractatus' conceived of ethics as the domain of absolute, although ineffable, value. Far from embracing the scientific world-view, Wittgenstein, both then and later, had a Spenglerian world-view, holding the emerging scientific-technological societies of the twentieth century to be co-ordinate with the decay of high culture and the decline of western civilization. In spirit and attitude, Wittgenstein had closer affinities with the nineteenth-century German counter-Enlightenment than with the optimism and faith in progress of Voltaire and Condorcet. 
Where the 'Tractatus' did accord with the scientific spirit of the circle was in its account of the propositions of logic as vacuous tautologies, in its programme of reducing all propositions to truth-functions of elementary propositions -- on the assumption that these are conceived to be 'protocol sentences' describing immediate experience -- and in its delimitation of the role of philosophy to the analytic clarification of thought. This paved the way for the circle's conception of philosophy as the analysis of the logical syntax of the language of science. Unsurprisingly, the logical positivists rejected the doctrine of saying and showing, and the mysticism of ineffabilia that went with it; they repudiated the atomistic ontology of simple objects and states of affairs, and they gave an unwarranted conventionalist twist to Wittgenstein's account of the propositions of logic, conceiving of them as true in virtue of conventions of symbolism (whereas Wittgenstein viewed them as flowing from the essential nature of the proposition as such). It was through contact with Wittgenstein from 1928 onwards that they derived the hallmark of their logical positivism, the principle of verification. It is noteworthy that, although Wittgenstein mooted this at the time, he rapidly came to reject verificationism. 
The other main influence of the book was upon the Cambridge school of analysis. Shortly after its publication, on 29 March 1924, Keynes wrote to Wittgenstein: 'I still don't know what to say about your book, except that I feel it is a work of extraordinary importance and genius. Right or wrong, it dominates all fundamental discussions at Cambridge since it was written' ('Cambridge Letters', 201). Among the younger generation of philosophers in Cambridge, who were thus influenced by the book, were Frank Ramsey, Richard Braithwaite, and John Wisdom. But at the end of the twenties its impact was superseded by Wittgenstein's own teaching there. 
Wittgenstein's years as an elementary school teacher were not happy. He was revolted by the peasant society in which he found himself, and the dislike was reciprocated. He demanded high standards from his pupils and was willing to give them time and attention without stint if they seemed promising. On the other hand, he was irascible and prone to inflict corporal punishment upon them not only for misbehaviour but also for what seemed to him to be stupidity. He spent a miserable two years teaching at Trattenbach, followed by two years at Puchberg, and two years at Otterthal. While at Otterthal, he compiled and published a spelling dictionary for elementary school children. Young Frank Ramsey, who had translated the 'Tractatus' and written a perceptive review of it ('Mind', 32, 1923), visited him at Puchberg in September 1923, spending every afternoon for a fortnight going over the 'Tractatus' with him. It was through Ramsey and Keynes that Wittgenstein, eager to renew pre-war friendships, was persuaded to visit England in August 1925, where he re-established his friendship with Keynes, with Johnson, and with W. Eccles, a friend from his Manchester days. 
Wittgenstein's career as schoolteacher came to an abrupt end in April 1926, as a result of excessive corporal punishment inflicted on a child. He resigned, but had to face the humiliation of a public trial. He was cleared of misconduct, but guilt about the incident haunted him for many years thereafter. He worked for three months as a gardener for the monks at Hutteldorf, before returning to live in Vienna in the summer. His sister Margarete Stonborough (Gretl) had commissioned his friend Engelmann to design and build a mansion for her on the Kundmanngasse. Wittgenstein was invited to join Engelmann in the project, and quickly came to dominate it. This occupied him until the end of 1928. The house, which still stands, is monumental, austerely beautiful in its severe proportions and symmetry, and, like Loos's architecture, entirely without ornament. 
It was while he was working on the house that Wittgenstein met Marguerite Respinger, a young Swiss from a well-to-do background, who was attending art school in Vienna. He fell in love with her, and wished to marry her, but envisaged a childless marriage, for he could see no justification for bringing children into a world of sorrow. He sculpted a bust inspired by her (or possibly by his cousin Steffe von Brucke) in the studio of his sculptor friend Michael Drobil, and gave it to Gretl, who displayed it in the Kundmanngasse house. Wittgenstein courted Marguerite for the next three years, but after a holiday together in Norway in the summer of 1931, she decided that he could not give her the life she wished for. 
In the autumn of 1927, through Gretl, Wittgenstein met Moritz Schlick and started discussing philosophy again. Unwilling to attend meetings of the Vienna circle, he did, however, meet regularly with Schlick, Friedrich Waismann, Rudolf Carnap, and Herbert Feigl for conversations, of which Waismann later began to keep a record (published as 'Wittgenstein and the Vienna Circle', 1979). In March 1928 he attended two lectures by the originator of intuitionist mathematics, L. E. J. Brower, which stimulated his thought, both positively and negatively. Schlick persuaded Wittgenstein to co-operate with Waismann in a joint project of writing a more accessible account of his philosophy than the 'Tractatus'. The ideas were to be Wittgenstein's, dictated to and ordered by Waismann. Entitled 'Logik, Sprache, Philosophie', it was advertised as the first volume of the Vienna circle's series of publications 'Schriften zur Wissenschaftlichen Weltauffassung', and was to outline the fundamental orientation of the circle. The project ran into endless difficulties as Wittgenstein's views changed rapidly throughout the early thirties, and collapsed after Schlick's murder in 1936. The book, found in Waismann's 'Nachlass', was published only in 1965 in English translation as 'The Principles of Linguistic Philosophy', under Waismann's name. It gives a perspicuous introduction to Wittgenstein's philosophy of language in the mid-thirties. In January 1929 Wittgenstein returned to Cambridge to resume work on philosophy. 
Wittgenstein was readmitted to Trinity on 18 January, and kept residence during the Lent and Easter terms. He needed a degree to qualify for a grant and to apply for a teaching position. Ramsey was formally appointed his supervisor, and on 18 June, having submitted the 'Tractatus' in lieu of a thesis, Wittgenstein was examined by Moore and Russell, and granted the PhD. The viva consisted of an amicable chat between old friends, which was brought to an end by Wittgenstein's clapping Moore and Russell on their shoulders and exclaiming 'Don't worry, I know you'll never understand it.' 
Wittgenstein's immediate objective was to begin investigations into the analysis of propositions concerning the visual field, that is, upon what, in the 'Tractatus', he had called 'the application of logic'. But over the next few months the philosophy of the 'Tractatus' started to crumble in his hands. This is evident in the paper 'Some remarks on logical form', which he wrote for the joint session of the Aristotelian Society and Mind Association in Nottingham in July 1929. (In the event, he did not deliver it, but spoke on infinity in mathematics; it was, however, published -- and is indeed his only post- 'Tractatus' publication during his lifetime.) The root of the trouble was the realization that there are logical relations between 'elementary' propositions, exemplified by any attribution of a determinate of a determinable to an object, such as 'This is red', which are not consequences of truth-functional composition, but of the 'inner' character of the relevant elementary proposition. Thus 'This is red' entails 'This is not green (or yellow, etc.)', although this logical exclusion is not a consequence of the first proposition's being a molecular one. But the logical theory of the 'Tractatus' stood four square on the thought that the whole of logic flows from the bipolar and logically independent nature of the elementary proposition. As he probed deeper, the central theses of the 'Tractatus' collapsed like a row of dominoes. He was to spend much of the next three years dismantling and criticizing his earlier views and forging the central ideas of his later philosophy. His method changed, as he put it, 'from the question of truth to the question of meaning'. In destroying the supporting pillars of the philosophy of the 'Tractatus', he also saw himself as undermining the great tradition of Western philosophy, destroying the very conception of metaphysics (effable or ineffable) as traditionally conceived and depriving philosophy of its nimbus. With him, he declared, there occurs a kink in the evolution of philosophy, as occurred in physics with Galileo's dynamics. What he was doing was the heir to what used to be called 'philosophy'. The task of philosophy, as he now conceived it, was not to disclose the language-independent essential nature of all things, nor to elicit the transcendental conditions of reasoning and of experience, but to clarify our thought by describing the language in which it is expressed and to disentangle the knots in our thinking generated by misunderstandings of language and by false analogies with scientific theories and scientific forms of explanation. 
For the first year his main philosophical companion was Ramsey, whose criticisms provided a stimulus to his thinking, as did those of the economist Piero Sraffa, both then and later. Discussions with Ramsey came to an end with his tragically early death at the age of twenty-six in January 1930. During the academic year 1929-30, Wittgenstein was paid a small grant to lecture on philosophical logic at the invitation of the moral sciences faculty board. He was appointed to a faculty lectureship in October 1930. He submitted a typescript of his current work as a fellowship dissertation (posthumously published as 'Philosophical Remarks', 1964), which was approved by Russell and the mathematician, G. H. Hardy, and he was elected to a five-year fellowship, under Title B, at Trinity on 5 December 1930. 
Wittgenstein's first lectures were delivered in Lent term 1930. Pupils who attended his lectures from 1930 to 1935 included A. Ambrose, Max Black, Richard Braithwaite, K. Britton, M. Cornforth, Reuben Goodstein, A. Duncan-Jones, M. Macdonald, G. E. Moore, C. L. Stevenson, and John Wisdom. Among his students from 1935 to 1939 were J. N. Findlay, D. A. T. Gasking, Casimir Lewy, Norman Malcolm, G. A. Paul, Rush Rhees, Alan Turing, and G. H. von Wright. All were to become distinguished academic philosophers or mathematicians. It was through these pupils that Wittgenstein's new ideas were transmitted to the rest of Britain, and to the USA, Australia, and the Scandinavian lands. 
The period up to 1932 was spent dismantling the 'Tractatus' and replacing it with a quite different conception of thought, language, and representation. This transitional period contains the seeds of Wittgenstein's later philosophy. He briefly toyed with a form of phenomenalism, with methodological solipsism, and with verificationism, but rapidly came to reject these doctrines. Wittgenstein is unique in the history of philosophy in having produced two complete powerful philosophical world pictures, which stand in diametric contrast to each other, the one characterized by a striving for a sublime 'Wesensschau', the other by 'a quiet weighing of linguistic facts'; the one informed by a vision of the crystalline purity of the logical forms of thought, language, and the world, the other imbued with a heightened awareness of the motley of the phenomena of language, the deceptive forms of which lead us into confusion; the one placing its faith in depth analysis to reveal the hidden essence of things, the other demanding no more than the description and arrangement of what is simple and familiar, 'hidden' only because it is always before our eyes and so goes unnoticed. Whereas the 'Tractatus' has its roots in the philosophical and logical tradition of Western philosophy, Wittgenstein's later work is autonomous. It challenges the most fundamental presuppositions of traditional philosophical thought. There are, to be sure, continuities between Wittgenstein's early and later philosophies -- most notably of theme and of negative doctrine. Controversy persists over the extent of continuity and of change. 
Wittgenstein's mode of composition was to enter remarks in notebooks, to rework these in more polished notes in large manuscript ledgers, and to extract and order the best of them in dictation to a typist. The fruits of his work from 1929 to 1932 were embodied in a 762 page typescript, known as the 'Big Typescript', dictated at the Hochreit in the summer of 1932, and evidently intended as a draft of a major book. A third of it is concerned with philosophy of mathematics. Like the 'Philosophical Remarks', it represents an intermediate phase in the development of his thought. He rapidly became dissatisfied with the Big Typescript (a version of which has posthumously been published as 'Philosophical Grammar', 1974). He attempted to redraft it at least three times, but finally abandoned it, although many of its remarks were incorporated in his final masterwork. In 1933 he dictated the 'blue book' to five of his pupils, and copies of it were circulated among his students. In 1935 he again attempted a dictation, the 'brown book', which likewise entered circulation (the two were published in 1958). 
Wittgenstein's classes at Cambridge became legendary. They were typically held in his rooms in Whewell's Court, Trinity College, or in the rooms of a friend, and lasted for two hours. He spoke without notes, thinking on his feet with intense concentration. Questions were invited, and his classes often consisted of dialogue. His discourses, like his writings, were illustrated with a wealth of vivid imaginary examples, wonderful metaphors and similes. His themes throughout the 1930s ranged over philosophy and its nature, the philosophy of logic and language, the intentionality of thought and language, the critique of metaphysics, solipsism and idealism, the philosophy of mathematics, and, later in the decade, sense data and private experience, cause and effect, aesthetics, religious belief, and Freudian psychology. Extensive student notes of some of these classes have been published. They convey well the intellectual passion, high seriousness, and profundity of Wittgenstein's teaching. He detested Cambridge academic life, and held professional academic philosophy, with its temptations of pretentiousness, charlatanry, and humbug, in contempt. Consequently, he commonly urged his pupils not to become academic philosophers, but to do something decent with their lives. He befriended many of his pupils, and established an intimate relationship with Francis Skinner and close friendships with Maurice Drury and Rush Rhees. His friendship was demanding, requiring high standards of allegiance and tolerance of his irascibility. He inspired love and loyalty, as well as fear. His intensity, ruthless honesty, and charisma left a permanent mark on many of them, not always to their benefit -- for the impact of his powerful personality sometimes distorted theirs. He was jealous of his ideas, and pupils, acquaintances, or friends (for example, Carnap, Braithwaite, Waismann, Ambrose, Ayer, Wisdom, and Ryle) who attempted to publish anything that bore the marks of his thought incurred his wrath, irrespective of their acknowledgements. 
Throughout the thirties, aware of the rising tide of Nazism and of the mass unemployment, and convinced of the decline of European civilization, Wittgenstein was sympathetic to Soviet communism, viewing Russia as a new experiment in human and social relations. He learned Russian from Fania Pascal, and in 1935 formed the tentative decision to abandon philosophy, entertained the thought of taking up medicine, and contemplated settling in Russia either as a medical assistant or as a manual labourer on a collective farm. He spent a fortnight in Leningrad and Moscow in September, where he was offered academic posts as a philosopher at Moscow and Kazan. It was, however, made clear to him that his services as a labourer or medical assistant were not needed. 
At the end of the academic year of 1935/6, Wittgenstein's fellowship, already extended for one year, expired. He left England for Norway in September, resolved to spend the next year in isolation in Skjolden to try yet again to compose his book. He first reworked the dictations of the 'brown book', translating it into German and adding further remarks, but abandoned the project as worthless (it was posthumously published as 'Eine philosophische Betrachtung', 1970). He started afresh, and composed what was to be the first draft of the 'Philosophical Investigations', up to SS189(a), and a continuation, which concerns the philosophy of mathematics, which he later cut out (posthumously published as part 1 of 'Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics', 1964). Apart from visits to Vienna and Cambridge, he stayed in Norway until Christmas 1937, when he again visited his family in Vienna, before returning to Britain. 
With the 'Anschluss' on 12 March 1938, Wittgenstein decided to apply for British citizenship. On Sraffa's advice he first sought permanent employment. With Keynes's assistance, he was appointed to a university lectureship at Cambridge, and then applied for naturalization. In the meantime his brother Paul fled Austria, first to Switzerland and thence to America. Gretl was an American citizen by marriage, but the rest of his family was in dire danger owing to the Nuremberg laws. Wittgenstein's application was granted only on 2 June 1939. Immediately thereafter, he travelled to Berlin, Vienna, and New York, helping Gretl in complex negotiations with the Nazis to have the family declared Aryans (on the spurious grounds that their grandfather Herman Christian Wittgenstein was not Jewish) in exchange for a large part of the family fortune. This was successfully achieved in August 1939, and Hermine, Helene and her children, and other members of the Wittgenstein family were not molested by the Nazis. 
In the summer of 1938 Wittgenstein prepared the material he had written in Norway for publication, and offered it to Cambridge University Press in September, under the title 'Philosophical Remarks'. A month later he withdrew the offer, perhaps partly because of dissatisfaction with the draft translation made by his friend and pupil Rush Rhees. In early 1939 Wittgenstein applied for the chair in philosophy recently vacated by Moore, and submitted the draft translation as a token of his work. He was doubtful about whether he would be elected, but, as C. D. Broad remarked at the time, 'To refuse the chair to Wittgenstein would be like refusing Einstein a chair of physics' (Drury, 'Conversations', 156). He was elected professor on 11 February 1939. 
Wittgenstein's first course of lectures as professor was on the foundations of mathematics. These are exceptionally well documented ('Lectures on the Foundations of Mathematics, Cambridge, 1939', 1976), and are of special interest, not only because of their lucidity, but also because of the exchanges with the great mathematician Alan Turing, whose conception of mathematics was under constant challenge. With the outbreak of war, Wittgenstein was eager to be involved in war work of some kind, and to be, as he put it, 'where the bombs are falling'. This, however, was not achieved until 1941, and he reluctantly continued teaching in Cambridge. 
Wittgenstein had met the Oxford philosopher Gilbert Ryle in 1929 at the Mind and Aristotelian Society meeting, and established a friendship with him. Through him he met Ryle's brother, Professor John Ryle, and it was he who in September 1941 arranged for Wittgenstein to take up a job, first as a dispensary porter and then as a pharmacy technician, at Guy's Hospital in London. Throughout this period he returned to Cambridge at weekends and lectured on Saturday afternoons. At Guy's, he met Dr E. B. Reeve and Dr. R. T. Grant, who were working at the Medical Research Council clinical research unit on wound shock. Wittgenstein showed interest in the project. The unit moved to Newcastle, and he was invited to join it as a laboratory assistant in April 1943. He stayed there until February 1944, and his hand is evident in conceptual distinctions drawn in the report on wound shock that was the final fruit of the research project in 1951. He also invented an improved apparatus for recording pulse pressure and its relation to breathing depth and rate. 
Although Wittgenstein had little time for philosophical work in Newcastle, he had evidently continued working on his book in the early war years. In September 1943 he had again approached Cambridge University Press with a different version of his book, now called 'Philosophical Investigations'. This he envisaged publishing together with the 'Tractatus' in a single volume, since his new thoughts 'could be seen in the right light only by contrast with and against the background of my old way of thinking' ('Preface', 'Philosophical Investigations'). The offer was accepted by the syndics on 14 January 1944. However, he again drew back from publication. 
When he left Newcastle, Wittgenstein's purpose was to complete the book. After spending some weeks in Cambridge, he was given leave of absence until the beginning of the next academic year. He went to Swansea, partly in order to be able to discuss his ideas with his friend Rhees, then teaching in the philosophy department there. For the first few months he worked on the continuation of the mathematical part of the existing draft, but during the summer his conception of the form of the book changed. He excised the material on mathematics, and continued in the direction of reflections on the nature of subjective experience and the impossibility of a 'private' language (see below). He never again resumed work on the philosophy of mathematics, although there is some reason for thinking that he envisaged a sequel to the 'Investigations' with the title 'Beginnings of mathematics', which would incorporate the results of his labours. By the end of the summer much of the material for the 'intermediate version' of the 'Investigations' (that is, up to SS421) existed in draft. 
Wittgenstein returned to Cambridge in October 1944 and resumed lecturing. Thenceforth, until his retirement, his lectures were primarily on the philosophy of psychology. Among his students during these last years were G. E. M. Anscombe, P. T. Geach, A. C. Jackson, G. Kreisel, Norman Malcolm, S. Toulmin, and G. H. von Wright. During the Christmas vacation of 1944-5, which he spent in Swansea, he must have felt that he was nearing the end of his labours, for he drafted the final preface to the still incomplete book. It is, he wrote, 'the precipitate of philosophical investigations which have occupied me for the last sixteen years', adding grimly: 'It is not impossible that it should fall to the lot of this work, in its poverty and in the darkness of this time, to bring light into one brain or another -- but, of course, it is not likely.' However, he was still not satisfied with what he had done, and spent much of the next year trawling yet again through his numerous manuscript notebooks from 1931 onwards, selecting further remarks and expanding the intermediate version with them, as well as with new material. The final typescript of what we now call 'part 1' was completed in 1945-6, but even then Wittgenstein could not bring himself to publish it, and minor emendations were added in manuscript over the next years. 
Wittgenstein now found teaching at Cambridge increasingly intolerable. In one of his lectures he remarked, 'The only seed I am likely to sow is a certain jargon', and expressed the fear that he was doing more harm than good by his teaching. His distaste for Cambridge academic life grew even stronger, and he resolved to retire. He visited his family in Vienna in the autumn of 1947, and was shocked and depressed by the devastation and the Russian occupation. On his return, he resigned his chair as from December, but was told that he could take a sabbatical leave over the Michaelmas term. A month later he left Cambridge for Ireland. 
The 'Investigations' is written in a different style from the 'Tractatus'. Like the 'Tractatus' it is a permanent contribution to German letters. Unlike the 'Tractatus', it avoids all technical terminology and logical notation. The prose is limpid, the sentences short and strong. There is no division into chapters. The 693 numbered sections range in length from single sentences to a few paragraphs. Some consist of imaginary dialogues between a wayward interlocutor (often, as it were, the voice of the young Wittgenstein) and a wiser respondent. Literary ornamentation is eschewed, but aphorisms, striking metaphors, and imaginative similes abound. There is an affinity, not merely of style but also of cast of mind, with Lichtenberg. Like the great aphorists, Wittgenstein often gives one only the seed of a thought. 
The book opens with a quotation from Augustine's 'Confessions', in which he delineates how he takes himself to have learned to speak. In this philosophically unselfconscious sketch, Wittgenstein found a pre-theoretical picture of the nature of language, which, he thought, perniciously informs a multitude of philosophical theories (including the 'Tractatus'). From this picture he extracts three theses: that the essential function of words is to name objects, which are their meanings; that words are connected to the objects they represent by ostensive definition (that is, pointing to the object and saying 'That is A'); and that the essential function of sentences is to describe. The criticism of these doctrines and their ramified elaboration in sophisticated philosophical theories of thought and language is a leitmotif running through the book (as well as his writings on the philosophy of mathematics). The central themes of the book are the nature and relation of language and thought, but the investigation of these leads deep into questions in the philosophy of mind which bear on them. 
In his philosophy of language Wittgenstein now rejected the assumption that the meaning of a word is a thing it stands for. That involves a misuse of the word 'meaning' (for the destruction of the bearer of a name does not deprive a name of its meaning) and vacuous use of 'stands for' (for although one can say that 'N.N.' stands for N.N., 'red' stands for the colour red, and 'three' stands for the number three, this obscures the distinctively different uses of proper names, colour predicates, and number words). Words are not connected to reality by meaning-endowing links. That supposition misconstrues ostensive definition (see below). It is not objects in the world that endow words with meaning, but their rule-governed use in a practice. The very ideal of analysis, inherited from the post-Cartesian tradition and reinstated by Moore and Russell, is misconceived. The terms 'simple' and 'complex', which are relative, were misused as a result of philosophical analysts' assuming that there is such a thing as absolute simplicity, and confusing the absence of criteria of complexity for the presence of criteria of simplicity. Many concepts, especially philosophically crucial ones, such as 'proposition', 'language', 'number', are united by family resemblance, that is, by overlapping similarities, rather than by common characteristics. Propositions do not share an essential nature and there is no such thing as the general propositional form. Not all propositions are descriptions. For example, 'I have a pain' is typically an expression of pain, not a description of anything; 'I'm going to leave' is an expression of intent; and 'I believe A is at home' is a tentative assertion of A's location, not an autobiographical description. Even among those propositions that are descriptions, there are many logically distinct kinds of description -- compare describing a scene and describing one's impression of a scene, describing how something has been done and describing how it should be done. The institution of language can only be elucidated by attending to the use of words and sentences in the stream of life. For speaking a language is an activity, part of a form of life. Language does not have foundations in the sensory data of experience, but, in a different sense of 'foundations', in the training and teaching involved in acculturation in a human community. What are 'given' are not the raw data of experience (as empiricists suppose) but forms of life. They are what has to be accepted, and it is they that constitute the unquestioned framework of thought and action. 
In opposition to the conception that makes truth pivotal to the elucidation of meaning, letting understanding take care of itself, Wittgenstein argues that meaning is what is given by explanations of meaning, which are rules for the use of words. It is what is understood when one understands what an utterance means and knows how to use a word. Understanding is an ability, the mastery of the technique of using an expression, exhibited in its correct use, giving or recognizing correct explanations of what it means, and responding appropriately to its use, which are severally criteria of understanding. Forms of explanation are diverse, analytic definition being only one among many, such as ostension, paraphrase, exemplification, and explanation by examples. Ostensive definition, which looks as if it connects word and world, in fact introduces a sample, providing a standard for correct applications of the definiendum. The sample belongs to the method of representation, not to what is represented; hence no link is forged with reality, that is, with what is represented. 
Consequently, the central thought of the 'Tractatus', that any form of representation is answerable to reality, that it must, in its formal structure, mirror the metaphysical form of the world, is misconceived. Concepts are not correct or incorrect, only more or less useful. Rules for the use of words are not true or false. They are answerable neither to reality, nor to antecedently given meanings. Rather they determine the meanings of words. Grammar is autonomous. Conceptual clarification is not to be conducted by depth-analysis, for nothing is hidden. The 'logical geology' of the 'Tractatus' is replaced by 'grammatical topography', that is, by the painstaking description of the use of words, of their modes of context-dependence, and of their roles in action and interaction. 
Hence a new critique of metaphysics emerged. Rather than allocating metaphysics to the domain of the ineffable, the truths of which are shown by language but cannot be stated, Wittgenstein now condemned metaphysics without qualification. What appear to be objective, language-independent necessities in reality are merely the shadows cast by grammar on the world. Non-logical necessary truths are actually merely rules of language in the misleading guise of statements about things. The necessary truth that red is darker than pink is no more than the expression of a rule, which is constitutive of the meanings of the colour words, licensing the inference from 'A is red and B is pink' to the conclusion 'A is darker than B'. What seemed in the 'Tractatus' to be a metaphysical co-ordination between language and reality, for example, between the proposition that 'p' and the fact that 'p' which makes it true, is merely an intragrammatical articulation, namely that in appropriate contexts the expression 'the proposition that 'p'' can be replaced by the expression 'the proposition which is true if it is a fact that 'p''. Grand metaphysical theories, such as idealism or solipsism, are at best confused recommendations to adopt a new form of representation -- a form which is typically incoherently articulated, and inconsistently incorporates elements of our existing one. The main source of metaphysical nonsense in the modern world is science, when it overreaches its proper domain, and scientism in philosophy, which tries to emulate the methods of science in philosophical investigation. 
Running through the mainstream tradition of philosophy, Cartesian and empiricist alike, is the thought that what is given is subjective experience, which was conceived not only as the foundation of empirical knowledge, but also as the foundation of language. For it seemed as if all definable words must ultimately be reducible to names of indefinables given in experience. The meanings of these words, the ostensible building blocks of language, are then readily conceived to be fixed by naming subjective impressions by private ostensive definition (for example, 'pain' means 'this', which I now have). Wittgenstein's private-language arguments mount a comprehensive assault on the presuppositions of this conception. If things were so, Wittgenstein now argued, then everyone's language would be private to himself, and no one else would be able to understand it. Worse still, the speaker himself could not understand the words of language thus conceived. Indeed, it is an illusion of reason that there can be any such thing as a language the words of which are defined by private ostensive definition referring to subjective experiences. The roots of language lie in the public domain, in the form of life of a culture. 
Wittgenstein's investigations into the mythology of a private language led him deep into issues in the philosophy of mind. Here he strove to undermine the received conception of the 'inner', subjective experience, and of its relation to the 'outer', its behavioural manifestation. Empiricists and rationalists alike held that a person knows indubitably how things currently are with him (that he is experiencing this or that), but must problematically infer how things are 'outside' him. So the private is better known than the public, mind is better known than matter. But, Wittgenstein argued, conceiving of one's current experience as an object of subjective knowledge is misleading, since the ability to avow one's pain, for example, does not rest on evidence and there is no such thing as satisfying oneself or verifying that one is in pain. Being ignorant of, or doubting, one's pain makes no sense, nor therefore does knowing or being certain that one is in pain. To say 'I know I am in pain' is either an emphatic avowal of pain or nonsense, and 'I am in pain' is typically an expression of pain -- a learned partial substitute for a groan, not a description of anything. So too 'I want...' and 'I am going to...' are not typically descriptions of how things are with the speaker, but severally expressions of desire, learned as a substitute for trying to get, and of intent, learned as an utterance heralding an action. The speaker does not learn to identify something in himself and then to describe it for the benefit of others. Rather, he learns a new form of expressive behaviour. The received conception of the 'outer' is likewise distorted. We often do know how things are with others. Their behaviour is neither inductive nor analogical evidence, but a logical criterion for their subjective condition. Although such criteria are defeasible, in the absence of defeating conditions it is senseless to doubt whether, for example, a person exhibiting pain behaviour is in pain. The behavioural criteria for the application of a psychological predicate are partly constitutive of its meaning, although it is mistaken to suppose that the inner is reducible to behaviour. Cartesian mentalism and logical behaviourism are two sides of the same counterfeit coin. 
Wittgenstein held that language is misrepresented as a vehicle for the communication of language-independent thoughts. Speaking is not the translating of wordless thoughts into language, and understanding speech is not interpreting dead signs into living thoughts. It is not thought that breathes life into the signs of language, but the use of signs in the stream of human life. The limits of thought are the limits of the possible expression of thoughts. So a mere animal can think only what can be expressed in its limited non-linguistic behavioural repertory. The possession of a language not only expands the intellect, but also the will, which is why a dog can want a bone now, but only a language user can now want something next week. 
Wittgenstein's investigations extended into the analysis of volition and action. Here he opposed the empiricist conception of action as caused by inner acts of will. He distinguished sharply between reasons and causes, and held that explaining action by reference to agential reasons is not a form of causal explanation. Here he in effect revived and gave sharper form to the nineteenth-century German hermeneutic tradition, opposing the received methodological monism, which held that explanation of human behaviour in psychology and the humanistic disciplines is logically of a piece with, or even reducible to, explanation in the natural sciences. 
The revolutionary conception of future philosophy sketched in the 'Tractatus' has an even more radical counterpart in the 'Investigations'. Philosophy, Wittgenstein continued to argue, is not a cognitive discipline. There are no philosophical propositions, and there is no philosophical knowledge. If there were theses in philosophy, everybody would agree with them, for they would be mere grammatical truisms (for example, that we know that someone is in pain by observing what he says and does). The 'therapeutic' task of philosophy is to clear away conceptual confusions that stand in the way of accepting these rule-governed articulations in our language. Philosophical problems stem from entanglement in linguistic rules, for example, projecting the grammar of one kind of expression onto another, or projecting norms of representation onto reality and then thinking that we are confronted by metaphysical necessities in the world. The methods of philosophy are purely descriptive. Unlike science, there are no theories or hypotheses in philosophy, for in philosophy we are moving around in the grammar of our language, dissolving philosophical problems by examining rules for the use of words with which we are perfectly familiar. The connective analytic task of philosophy is to give an overview, a perspicuous representation, of the rules of our language, entanglement in which gives rise to philosophical confusion. It aims at a form of understanding unlike that of the sciences, a form of understanding which consists in seeing conceptual connections. Wittgenstein associated this 'Weltanschauung' with other thinkers of his times, in particular, Spengler, Freud, and Loos, all of whom aim to further understanding not by hypothetico-deductive explanation but by sharpening our eye to formal connections. 
Wittgenstein departed for Ireland in disgust. He thought English civilization to be 'disintegrating and putrefying' and felt himself to be an alien in the world. As in his earlier flights to Norway, he again needed solitude, both for his own stability and for his work. He remained in Ireland from late 1947 until June 1949, often in poor health. He spent most of this period in co. Wicklow, Connemara, and Dublin, where he continued working on the philosophy of psychology. He visited Vienna in September 1948 and again in April 1949, where his sister Hermine had been diagnosed as having cancer. 
In 1949, his old pupil Norman Malcolm, then professor of philosophy at Cornell University, invited Wittgenstein to visit the USA. Before his departure in July, he dictated from his recent manuscript notebooks what is now part 2 of the 'Philosophical Investigations'. It is not evident that this was intended to be part of the same book or to be incorporated in it. An alternative possibility is that his voluminous writings on these themes (published as 'Remarks on the Philosophy of Psychology', 2 vols., 1980, and 'Last Writings on the Philosophy of Psychology', 2 vols., 1982-92), although perhaps originally envisaged as additional material for the 'Investigations', came to be seen as forming the basis for a book on the philosophy of psychology. 
Wittgenstein stayed with Malcolm at Cornell from July until late October 1949. It was as a result of discussions with Malcolm about Moore's papers 'Proof of an external world' and 'A defence of common sense' that he was subsequently stimulated into writing for the first time on the subject of knowledge and certainty. His notes on these themes, which continued to preoccupy him until his death, have been published as 'On Certainty' (1969). Unfinished as they are, they plough up the field of traditional epistemology no less thoroughly than his other writings did the philosophy of language, mathematics, and psychology. 
On his return to England, Wittgenstein was diagnosed as having prostate cancer. He flew to Vienna for Christmas, concealing the nature of his illness, to be with Hermine, who was now dying. She died on 11 February 1950. He returned to England in March. He stayed for a while with G. H. von Wright, the successor to his chair in Cambridge, and then with Elizabeth Anscombe in Oxford, from late April until October. During this period he wrote on epistemological themes, and also on the subject of colour. In October he travelled for the last time to Norway, together with his friend Ben Richards. By January 1951 his health was declining rapidly. His doctor was Edward Bevan at Cambridge, who, knowing of Wittgenstein's horror of dying in hospital, invited him to stay with his family for his last days. He died on 29 April 1951 in Dr Bevan's home at 76 Storeys Way, Cambridge. His last words before he lost consciousness were 'Tell them I've had a wonderful life.' On the decision of his Catholic friends, he was given a Catholic burial at St Giles's cemetery, Cambridge, the following day. 
Wittgenstein left the task of editing and publishing his 'Nachlass' of more than 20,000 pages to his literary executors, Anscombe, Rhees, and von Wright. The 'Investigations' was published in 1953, and was immediately hailed by many leading philosophers as a work of genius, although others reacted with bafflement, incomprehension, and negative criticism. Over the next forty years another fifteen volumes of his writings, six volumes of notes of his lectures and conversations, and a substantial part of his correspondence were published. 
For the quarter century after his death, Wittgenstein's influence upon the development of philosophy was paramount, especially in Oxford, the fountainhead of post-war analytic philosophy, where Elizabeth Anscombe, George Paul, Stephen Toulmin, and Friedrich Waismann transmitted his ideas to what was the largest philosophy faculty in Britain. In Cambridge he was succeeded in his chair first by G. H. von Wright and in 1952, when von Wright returned to Finland, by John Wisdom, who was in turn followed in 1970 by Anscombe. His influence spread from Britain to the rest of the English-speaking world. In the United States his pupils Max Black and Norman Malcolm transformed the Cornell University philosophy faculty into one of the leading departments in the land and the main centre for Wittgenstein-inspired philosophy. Stenius, von Wright, and Hintikka ensured the transmission of his ideas in Finland. His work was well received in Norway, but its impact in Sweden and Denmark was later and lesser. Awakening of interest in the Germanic lands was surprisingly slow, although by the last two decades of the twentieth century it was manifest. French philosophers, with a few exceptions (for example, Jacques Bouverresse), held aloof. There was hardly any branch of philosophy which was not profoundly affected by Wittgenstein's writings, including some about which he had written little if anything, such as philosophical aesthetics, the philosophy of religion, the philosophy of the social sciences, and moral, legal, and political philosophy. This influence was not always beneficial, and often involved misunderstandings. His thought was revolutionary, and did not fit into existing preconceptions of what is philosophically possible. Hence misinterpretations abounded, and the process of eradicating them and offering plausible interpretations of his philosophy is taking many years. The writings about his work are legion -- some 10,000 books and articles by the end of the twentieth century. 
Wittgenstein's impact on analytic philosophy up to the mid-1970s is manifest in five respects. First, in the linguistic turn which characterized the methodology of the subject, in the abandonment of formal analysis of language with the tools of mathematical logic, and in the replacement of the reductive analysis of the 1920s and 1930s by connective and therapeutic analysis. Second, in the conception of philosophy as the elucidation of conceptual structures by description of the use of words, the goal of which is an understanding of the conceptual forms in which our thought takes shape rather than knowledge about mental, physical, or metaphysical reality. Third, in the anti-foundationalism in the philosophy of language and epistemology. Fourth, in the analytic philosophy of mind which flourished during this period. Following Wittgenstein, it rejected Cartesian dualism and behaviourist reductionism alike, repudiated the classical conception of the 'inner' as prior to and logically independent of the 'outer'. Fifth, in the philosophy of action, a hermeneutic orientation prevailed for a while, which insisted upon the methodological autonomy of explanation of human action. This had profound implications not only for psychology, but for the social sciences and humanities, emphasizing the distinctiveness of forms of understanding and explanation appropriate to the study of man as a cultural, social, and historical being. 
However, by the 1980s, while Wittgenstein scholarship flourished, Wittgensteinian philosophy declined. It was submerged by the rising tide of scientifically inspired philosophy, in particular in philosophy of language and of psychology. Such scientism would not have surprised Wittgenstein. He would have viewed it as symptomatic of the malaise of modern culture. 
Wittgenstein's impact, however, reached far beyond the confines of academic philosophy. Gnomic remarks from the 'Tractatus' and striking, but opaque, aphorisms from his later works were widely quoted in belletristics -- commonly with little understanding. A motet based on the 'Tractatus' was composed (by Elizabeth Lutyens), a film about him was made (by Derek Jarman), a set of prints entitled 'Wittgenstein in New York' was etched (by Eduardo Paolozzi). Wittgenstein became, as a television programme about his life put it, 'the thinking man's hero'. This phenomenon is partially explained by the fact that he became a legend in his own lifetime, before the publication of his later writings. His philosophy, therefore, acquired an alluring hermetic reputation. A deeper explanation, however, might be ventured. From time to time in our culture, literary and artistic figures become objects of veneration in circles far wider than the reach of their works. Their lives are held to be of deeper significance than the mere fascination of their biography. Their travails and their intellectual and spiritual strivings are inchoately sensed to incorporate and to represent the deepest tensions and conflicts within the culture of their times. So, perhaps, it has been with Ludwig Wittgenstein. 
Wittgenstein was small of stature, and of slender build. As a young man he was unusually good-looking. After the war years, his features were gaunt, bearing the marks of his ordeals. He had a shock of dark brown hair and piercing blue eyes. His face was mobile and expressive. He spoke English without any German accent, although with occasional Germanisms. In discussion he would gesture expressively with his hands. His personal charisma was overwhelming and remarked on by all who met him. A sculptured head of him was made by his friend Michael Drobil. Numerous black and white photographs of him exist, but there are no recordings of his speech. 


@@@@@


doc= 36987


Wodehouse, John, first earl of Kimberley (1826-1902), politician, was born on 7 January 1826 in Baker Street, London, the first of four children of Henry Wodehouse (1799-1834), heir from 1819 to the Kimberley estate in Norfolk, and his wife, Anne, only daughter of Theophilus Thornhagh Gurdon of Letton, Norfolk. Between November 1833 and February 1835 four members of his family died, including a twin sister, a younger sister, his father, and his paternal great-grandfather. By the age of ten John Wodehouse was noticeably self-contained, stoically coping with his losses. 
After her husband's death, Anne Wodehouse devoted herself to the education of her sons, which included lessons in French and early trips to the cultural centres of Europe. In 1835 Wodehouse was sent to Lyndon, Rutland, where he studied under the Revd Thomas Kirchever Arnold, an accomplished scholar who was often ill, irritable, and severe. Wodehouse nevertheless credited him with extirpating a 'vile habit of falsehood' and compelling accuracy in lessons (journal, Kimberley MSS, Bodl. Oxf). In 1838 Wodehouse went to Eton College, where he distinguished himself by being sent up for good work more than twenty times, earned the reputation as a clever and well-mannered boy, and honed his powers of debate in the Eton Society (Pop). He nevertheless disliked the imperatives of collective society and came to hate life at Eton. After passing a 'very good' examination, he spent several months on the continent with the Revd Constantine Frere, preparing for Christ Church, Oxford. 
Wodehouse arrived in Oxford in 1843, healthy, well travelled, well read in the classics, and fluent in French. Athletically built, just under 6 feet tall and weighing some 13 stone, he excelled in strenuous pursuits: he rode regularly with the Bicester pack, shot, stalked, and played tennis. His unusual success in combining scholarship and sport may be attributed to a combination of innate intelligence, discipline, ambition, and a strong sense of responsibility to family, county, and country. A self-avowed liberal leaning toward philosophic radicalism, he was dismayed at the inadequate instruction at Oxford, and read privately with the philosopher Henry Longueville Mansel in preparation for his examinations. In 1847 he took a first in classics, reputedly one of the best in years. 
Wodehouse succeeded his grandfather as third Baron Wodehouse on 29 May 1846, and inherited almost 10,000 acres in Norfolk and several hundred in Cornwall, including virtually the whole of Falmouth parish. Disappointed at missing his chance in the House of Commons, he did not immediately embrace politics, but instead completed his university degree, read privately, and began the restoration of his estate, which he had inherited with encumbrances of more than $140,000. With the assistance of his uncle, the city banker Raikes Currie, he leased and sold land in and around Falmouth as the arrival of the railway spurred development, and by 1864 had paid all creditors. 
Kimberley married, on 16 August 1847, Lady Florence Fitzgibbon (1825-1895), of Dublin, eldest daughter of Richard Fitzgibbon, third and last earl of Clare. They had three sons and two daughters. Kimberley's successor, John (1848-1932), was a Liberal Party organizer in Norfolk, who joined the Labour Party after the First World War; Alice (1850-1937) married Hussey Packe of Prestwold, Loughborough; Constance (1852-1923) remained single and lived at Kimberley; Alfred (1856-1858) died in infancy while in Russia; Armine (1860-1901) served as his father's private secretary (1880-95) and as member of parliament for the Saffron Walden division of Essex from 1900. The marriage appeared to some as less than ideal. However, Kimberley expressed both publicly and privately, throughout their 47-year marriage, complete devotion and a deep emotional attachment to his wife. Similarly, his heir and his unmarried daughter sometimes appeared to give more trouble than comfort to their father. Relatively unconcerned with appearances, he had encouraged individuality in his children, and members of the Wodehouse family remained exceedingly close to one another. All the children were present at their father's death. 
From his days at Eton, Kimberley considered himself a pragmatic, undoctrinaire liberal, with a pronounced interest in fiscal responsibility and limited central government. The origins of his political philosophy were mixed, with Burke's appeal to judgement according to circumstances serving throughout his career as a touchstone. His ancestors had been tory since the seventeenth century, and his wife's great-grandfather was the arch-tory John Fitzgibbon, first earl of Clare and prime mover of the Irish 'Act of Union' (1800). During the 1840s his grandfather had followed Peel, foreshadowing Kimberley's lifelong commitment to free trade. His principal political mentor, Raikes Currie, was a reform-minded City banker who had married into the gentry and served as Liberal MP for Northampton (1837-57). Many of Kimberley's earliest political associations, however, were with radicals. 
Recognizing the inadequacy of his classical education for a career in government, between 1848 and 1852 Kimberley systematically studied history, law, philosophy, and political economy, while Raikes Currie promoted his career in London. In 1851 he was elected to the Political Economy Club, and he regularly attended their meetings throughout the 1850s and 1860s. Kimberley's first political cause was the promotion of self-government in the settlement colonies. From the late 1840s he was a contributing member of the Canterbury Association, and served with Joseph Hume on the finance committee of the short-lived Society for the Reform of Colonial Government. There he worked closely with Francis Baring, C. B. Adderley, Richard Cobden, J. A. Roebuck, and Sir William Molesworth, the last of whom he considered to be his most valuable acquaintance. He delivered a maiden speech of 'great promise' on 12 April 1850, opposing the imposition of convicts on the Australian colonies (Currie, 1.355). Diffident about the leadership of Lord Grey and Lord John Russell, he waited until 1852 before 'throwing himself into the Whig ranks' (ibid., 1.501). With the formation of Aberdeen's ministry in December of that year, Kimberley was surprised to be appointed under-secretary of state for foreign affairs, having little studied the subject; he had wished for the vice-presidency of the Board of Trade. 
One of the few members of the House of Lords who were both young and active, Kimberley was committed to public service, and established in the 1850s a regular pattern of participation in government, high and low, that would last throughout his life. He was active in county affairs, and often served as chairman of the quarter sessions, as trustee to various school and parish boards, and on many local committees. A member of the Church of England, a believer, and a regular church attender when in the country, he nevertheless spoke little about religion, thus causing some to question his faith. Strongly anti-Catholic, he was active in the anti-papal agitation of 1850-51, though he came to regret this on Liberal political grounds. He served as high steward of Norwich Cathedral (1867-1902). At the instance of the local gentry, from the mid-1850s he played a leading role in reviving Liberal fortunes in east Norfolk, culminating, in 1857, in the election of a Liberal for the first time since 1832. 
Lord Clarendon, the foreign secretary, appreciated Kimberley's discretion, hard work, and quick perception at the Foreign Office, and offered him the delicate position of minister-plenipotentiary to St Petersburg (4 May 1856-31 March 1858) after the Crimean War. Thoroughly English in temperament, Kimberley was Clarendon's model diplomat for the circumstance, able to meet Russian 'hauteur' and cosmopolitan guile with tact, imperturbability, and resolution. After resigning in the wake of the Conservative victory of February 1858, he was reappointed as under-secretary to the Foreign Office with Palmerston's election in June 1859. With Lord John Russell's elevation to the peerage in July 1861, Kimberley resigned, refusing to serve subordinately to a minister in the same house. Palmerston unsuccessfully tried to arrange a transfer to the India Office, and during the following seventeen months offered governorships of Bombay and Canada, which Kimberley refused, preferring to take his chance in the 'sea of home politics'. In December 1863 he was entrusted with the forlorn mission of negotiating a peaceful resolution to the Schleswig-Holstein crisis. After a brief tenure as under-secretary at the India Office (25 April-1 November 1864), he was appointed lord lieutenant of Ireland in succession to Lord Carlisle, a position that ambition rather than inclination obliged him to accept. Although personally desiring the abolition of the office, he determined to administer affairs vigorously, and promoted public grants and loans for land drainage, reform of the universities, and disestablishment of the Irish church. He staunchly opposed home rule, however, and his tenure as viceroy was principally remembered for the timely suppression of an imminent Fenian uprising in September 1865, which earned him the earldom of Kimberley (1 June 1866). 
Following the Liberal victory of December 1868, Gladstone brought Kimberley into the cabinet as lord privy seal, principally to further Irish legislation. With Lord Clarendon's death and Granville's transfer to the Foreign Office in July 1870, Kimberley took up the seals of the Colonial Office, where he continued Granville's policy of troop withdrawal from the settlement colonies, approved the annexation of the Griqualand West diamond fields which later took his name, and granted full responsible government to Cape Colony. In the tropical colonies, he rejected Cardwell's policy of retrenchment, laying the groundwork for the annexation of Fiji (1874) and the extension of British influence in Malaya and the Gold Coast. 
During Gladstone's first ministry, Kimberley was beset with personal problems, including the extended and serious illness of his youngest son and the bankruptcy of his heir. These and heavy work at the Colonial Office made welcome the rest afforded by the Liberal defeat of February 1874, and cooled the earlier ardour of his ambition. During Disraeli's ministry he was active in opposition: he spoke against the 'Royal Titles Bill' and the 'thorough' pro-Turkish policy of the government, but supported the acquisition of the Suez Canal shares as valuable to the defence of India. When parliament was out of session, he devoted much of his time to family and estate affairs, including the dedication of the carefully landscaped 71/2 acre Kimberley Park in the heart of Falmouth, his gift to the city and the centrepiece of plans for further property development. He took Gladstone's retirement at face value, and warmly supported Hartington's leadership, but welcomed Gladstone's return in 1880. 
Kimberley surprised Gladstone by refusing the Indian viceroyalty, but agreed to resume administration of the Colonial Office (28 April 1880-16 December 1882). The cabinet immediately determined to reverse Lord Lytton's forward policy in India, but to persevere with confederation in southern Africa, begun under Carnarvon in 1877. Boer opposition led to war (December 1880-March 1881), in which British troops attempting to seize the high ground of Majuba Hill were defeated (27 February 1881), while British peace overtures were being studied by the Transvaal government. Kimberley endured much criticism in the press, and the only threat during his career from within the cabinet, but stiffened by Gladstone he stood firm against renewal of hostilities when it was learned that Kruger, immediately upon receiving British offers (28 February 1881), had responded favourably. This pragmatic policy led to the convention of Pretoria (3 August 1881), which restored self-government to the Transvaal state under the 'suzerainty' of Britain. Domestically, Kimberley helped to shape the prevention of crime and Irish land bills. 
With the fifteenth earl of Derby's entry into the cabinet, Kimberley accepted the seals of the India Office, which he held during Gladstone's final three administrations for a little more than four and a half years (16 December 1882-9 June 1885; 6 February-20 July 1886; 18 August 1892-2 March 1894). Throughout this time he impressed the long-time permanent under-secretary Arthur Godley as second only to Gladstone as an administrative official, and earned the general respect of both parties by conducting Indian business along non-partisan lines. Though he supported in principle Lord Ripon's potentially radical measures for local self-government and extension of judicial jurisdiction over Europeans to native judges, he modified ambitious details in the interest of sound administration, thereby proving that, despite campaign rhetoric, the Liberal Party had not been radicalized. Kimberley urged Ripon to retire early, in 1884, then pursued a more conservative social policy in conjunction with subsequent viceroys, Lord Dufferin (1884-8), and Lord Lansdowne (1888-94). The predominant foreign question facing India was Russian expansion in central Asia, which led to the brink of war with their occupation of Panjdeh on 30 March 1885, just 40 miles from the strategically important Afghan town of Herat. The cabinet followed Kimberley in agreeing that British troops should be committed in the event of further encroachments. By the time the Liberal government left office in June, Russia had accepted the principle of arbitration and the differences between the two governments had been narrowed to the disposition of Zulfikar Pass. Formal resolution of the issue came on 18 June 1886, in a settlement that defined over 300 miles of border between Russia and Afghanistan. 
The press of colonial and Indian business after 1880 precluded Kimberley's daily involvement in Irish and domestic policy, but Gladstone continued to consult him as one who had successfully dealt with Irish problems, who understood the complexity of the issues, but who nevertheless remained thoroughly Liberal in his sympathies. From 1860 he had studied systematically the Irish nationalist movement and the political response to it in England, clipping thousands of press articles for reference, reading relevant books and pamphlets, and regularly communicating with his friend Lord Spencer, who served as Irish viceroy (1868-74; 1882-5). By the time Gladstone's intentions regarding home rule became known in December 1885, Kimberley was convinced that some transaction with the Irish nationalists was unavoidable, but he wished to force the Conservatives to declare their policy. From December he was much involved in discussions with Gladstone, Spencer, and Morley, which led to the drafting of a home-rule measure, and he remained a staunch supporter throughout his career, though opposing full Irish representation at Westminster as unjust to English and Scottish voters. 
During the long Salisbury ministry (1886-92), Kimberley was politically active, speaking in the Lords on the widest variety of subjects, maintaining contact with Gladstone and Spencer regarding the Irish policy of a prospective Liberal government, and handling much of the Liberal business in the Lords before Granville's death in 1891. As Granville's successor, he was an efficient Liberal leader (1891-4, 1897-1902), well liked on both sides. After Gladstone's tumultuous third ministry he retreated to his muniment room to write his only publication, the privately printed 'The Wodehouses of Kimberley' (1887). He played an active part in the affairs of the Norfolk county council, established by the 'Local Government Act' (1888), and served on the council's first finance and joint committees. During 1889 Armine married Eleanor Arnold, daughter of Matthew Arnold. Also in that year, Florence's chronic rheumatism became more acute, leading Kimberley to decline Gladstone's invitation to speak more often out of parliament. 
During Kimberley's third tenure at the India Office, the decline of the rupee was the most troublesome issue, leading to depression and a decline of capital investment. In an attempt to bolster the value of the currency, he adopted the recommendations of the Herschell committee (1893), including the controversial plan for closing mints to the coinage of silver, an early step in the drive toward establishing a gold exchange standard. Being especially hard pressed with Indian economic questions, Kimberley resolutely refused to countenance motions in the House of Commons that might have led to the reduction of opium revenues, at one point politely threatening to resign if Gladstone persisted in supporting such a motion. Within his own departments, Kimberley was virtually unassailable. Slow to act, careful to weigh all arguments, and thorough in preparation, he seldom wavered once a course was determined, and he was seldom challenged. 
This pattern was somewhat modified when Kimberley succeeded Rosebery at the Foreign Office (11 March 1894-21 June 1895) upon Gladstone's resignation. Rosebery's administration of foreign affairs in 1886 and between 1892 and 1894 had been widely admired for treating international affairs as an arena distinct from politics to the advantage of the country, a view with which Kimberley heartily agreed. In addition, Rosebery was widely perceived as the natural party leader because of his influence in the country. For the first time since 1880, Kimberley entered administrative office without having the presumptive last word. As a result, he was inclined, during the first months in office, to seek Rosebery's advice and to rely upon it. This seemed to matter little, as they had worked cordially together during Gladstone's second and third ministries and were both committed to a broadly consolidationist policy, hoping to improve relations with Germany, France, and Russia without entangling the country through alliances. However, Kimberley came to mistrust Rosebery's penchant for secrecy and communicated more freely with the cabinet than Rosebery would have wished. 
Kimberley's first major act as foreign secretary was to conclude the controversial Anglo-Belgian treaty of 12 April 1894, largely negotiated under Rosebery's direction in 1893 and early 1894, by which Britain leased a strip of Congolese territory bordering German East Africa. German and French protests led to the withdrawal of that portion of the treaty, and much of Kimberley's energy at the Foreign Office thereafter was directed toward improving strained relations with Germany. Talks with German and French representatives smoothed immediate difficulties but proved inconclusive in settling broader international tensions. He agreed to allow German recruitment of labourers at Singapore and discussed a potential future division of the Portuguese empire in east Africa, but adamantly opposed their overtures to the Transvaal and resisted attempts to embroil Britain in Franco-Italian disputes in east Africa. After some early success in bringing Russia and France into a plan for jointly enforcing reforms on the Ottoman empire following the Armenian massacres of 1894, in May 1895 Russia and France stopped short of joining Britain in the proposed coercive measures. During April 1895 Kimberley declined to join Russia, Germany, and France in forcing Japan to moderate its settlement of the Sino-Japanese War. 
As a result of Kimberley's administration of foreign affairs, Britain maintained her diplomatic freedom on generally good terms with the other powers, though major outstanding international questions remained unresolved. He was responsible for maintaining Britain's traditional policy of isolation, while laying the foundation for Anglo-Japanese co-operation, having overseen the negotiation of a new commercial treaty in which British extraterritoriality was renounced (1894), and having refused to join the powers in coercing Japan's revision of the treaty of Shimoneseki. On the whole, Kimberley and Rosebery were inelegantly successful in protecting British interests, though the fall of the government on 21 June 1895 makes it difficult to assess the long-term effectiveness of their policies. 
From 1895 Kimberley played the role of elder statesman, 'Uncle Kim' to the younger generation of Liberals. He had since Gladstone's resignation mediated various disputes as the Liberal Party sought to establish a new identity. During Rosebery's administration he served as a regular channel of communication between Harcourt and Rosebery, combating the impulsiveness of the former and the sensitivity of the latter. By 1898, with both Rosebery and Harcourt having resigned leadership positions in their respective houses, Kimberley led the small Liberal band in the House of Lords, where he worked closely with Campbell-Bannerman to repair the fortunes of the Liberal Party. Kimberley consistently occupied the narrow middle ground between Campbell-Bannerman and the Gladstonians, who generally sought to maintain Liberal orthodoxy, and Liberal Imperialists such as Rosebery, Edward Grey, Richard Haldane, and H. H. Asquith, who favoured substantial party reform. Though a thorough Gladstonian in his commitment to Irish home rule, free trade, and individualism, Kimberley consistently backed the Conservative government during the South African War; although he criticized the government's lack of foresight, he supported the fundamental principle that the Boers must be militarily subdued before negotiations could begin. His stolid conservatism on this point, in conjunction with staunch support for Liberal domestic measures, minimized the negative impact of 'pro-Boer' activity within the party, and provided a patriotic shield as Liberals began to reorganize under Campbell-Bannerman. Though he had neither the temperament nor the skill for rousing Liberal enthusiasm among a mass electorate, he was regularly consulted by MPs for advice and information on imperial and foreign issues. 
Kimberley's role in the Liberal Party was principally that of a consummate administrator. Because he never skimped his work, he seldom made mistakes and was relied upon implicitly by members of the cabinet to handle departmental business. He had, however, in unique conjunction, a variety of political skills. In the 1850s and 1860s, he was widely praised as a gifted debater who could hold his own in the coolly intellectual atmosphere of the Lords. He was less effective as the democratic element in British politics grew, though even at the end of his life he was sought in certain situations by party strategists as a safe speaker, whose clarity, administrative record, and long association with Palmerston, Russell, and Gladstone would compensate for a lack of charisma. His effectiveness as a speaker was enhanced by a wide knowledge of the intricacies of contemporary politics, based upon reading, personal acquaintance, and frequent attendance in the House of Commons. A long record of public service and the absence of any hint of self-serving made him an ideal shield during international embarrassments such as the British defeat at Majuba Hill in 1881 and the death of Gordon at Khartoum in 1885. 
Having never served in the House of Commons and having no strong political connections, Kimberley owed much to Gladstone. From the formation of the Palmerston ministry in June 1859, he was a strong advocate of Gladstone's fiscal policy, and always admired his parliamentary genius and reforming zeal. After supporting home rule in 1886, the belief that Kimberley was essentially a 'loyal lieutenant' became firmly embedded in the public mind. It was not generally known that he had frequently disagreed with Gladstone's policies and often dissented from his method. In departmental matters, Kimberley's patience, careful study, and mastery of detail often tempered Gladstone's zeal. In 1872-3, for instance, Gladstone reluctantly acquiesced in allowing Australian differential tariffs, and twenty years later he argued in the House of Commons, at Kimberley's insistence, against a motion he had wished to support in condemning the opium trade as 'morally indefensible' (Russell, 194-7). 
Matters of general policy he was content to leave to Gladstone, who frequently sought Kimberley's advice on Irish, imperial, and foreign questions. He was one of the few Liberal members who contributed regularly to discussions on the entire scope of Liberal legislation and policy. His legendary reputation as a garrulous monologist was offset by a self-effacing humility and a gift for concise and lucid written exposition of complex issues. As a result, he made real contributions to the drafting of legislation and the refinement of Liberal policy without offering initiatives. His greatest achievement associated with a specific piece of legislation was in piloting the 'Parish Councils Bill' through the House of Lords in January 1894. 
Throughout his life Kimberley promoted the broadening of educational opportunities as the best means of strengthening the growing democracy: he often spoke to a variety of improving organizations and served as trustee to a number of Norfolk schools, on the senate of the University of London (1859-1902), as president of the council of University College, London (1879-87), and as chancellor of the University of London (1899-1902). He was a good businessman, liberal in the improvement of cottages and farmland in Norfolk, and quick to take advantage of urban development in Falmouth. When in London, Kimberley resided from 1853 to 1874 at 48 Bryanston Square and from 1874 at 35 Lowndes Square, where he died of heart failure on 8 April 1902. He is buried in the Kimberley vault, St Peter's Church, Kimberley. 


@@@@@


doc= 36988


Wolfe, Humbert (1885-1940), poet and civil servant, was born of Jewish parents in the via Fatebenefratelli, Milan, on 5 January 1885. He was the younger son and third of the five children of Martin Wolff (1845-1894), of Mecklenburg-Schwerin, and his wife, Consola (1859-1926), daughter of Vita (Haim) and Orsola Terracini of Genoa. That same year Martin Wolff became a partner in a Bradford wool business, obtaining British nationality with his children in 1891. Umberto was educated at Bradford grammar school, and became a scholar of Wadham College, Oxford, where he obtained a second class in classical moderations (1905) and a first class in 'literae humaniores' (1907). 
In 1908 Wolff entered the Board of Trade as senior clerk in the harbour department, where his speed and brilliance of mind caught the attention of William (later Lord) Beveridge who in 1912 enticed him into the newly created department of labour exchanges and unemployment insurance. With the outbreak of war he became secretary to the munitions of war committee, and from 1915 to 1918 was controller of labour regulation in the newly formed Ministry of Munitions, serving under Lloyd George (whose favour he briefly enjoyed and mysteriously lost) and subsequently under Winston Churchill. According to the 'Introduction' to the 'History of the Ministry of Munitions', Wolfe's account in 'Labour Supply and Regulation' (1923) '[has] not been superseded' (Hazlehurst, 9). His nationality was called into question when he was appointed CBE in 1918 for his contribution to the war, described later by Lord Beveridge as 'of first-rate importance' ('The Times', 9 Jan 1940). Churchill loyally, but erroneously, tried to demonstrate that Wolff's father was a citizen of Schleswig-Holstein; Wolff chose this moment to change his name to Humbert Wolfe. 
After the armistice Wolfe reverted to employment exchanges, incorporated in the new Ministry of Labour. From 1920, as head of the general department and a principal assistant secretary, he was responsible for international labour questions. Until 1931 he was a regular member of the British empire delegation to meetings of the International Labour Organization (ILO) in Geneva, where his eloquence, his skill as a negotiator in explosive situations, and his witty interventions in French and English earned him respect and often affection. But he never achieved his ambition of becoming secretary-general of the League of Nations or director of the ILO. At home he strove to humanize labour exchanges, and to bring able men and (preferably attractive) women from varied backgrounds into the administrative class of the ministry. He was appointed CB in 1925. In 1931 Wolfe became director of services and establishments in the ministry, and from 1934 until 1938 he headed the department of employment and training, where his methods proved so effective that other ministries copied them and often turned to his department to fill critical vacancies. In March 1938 he was appointed deputy secretary to the ministry. 
Wolfe's wisdom and experience were invaluable, his energy and commitment boundless, in identifying and largely resolving the problems of manpower and the needs of home defence raised by the threat of impending war. High blood pressure, advanced arteriosclerosis, and sheer exhaustion took their toll, as he knew they would, and he died at his home, 75 Eccleston Square, London, on his birthday, 5 January 1940. The funeral took place on 11 January at St Martin-in-the-Fields. His grave, marked only by a hawthorn tree at his own request, is in Kensal Green cemetery. 
Wolfe was baptized into the Church of England in 1908, and married on 29 March 1910 his childhood sweetheart, Jessie Chalmers Graham (1883-1956), elder daughter of Joseph Chalmers Graham, rector of the Knox Institute, Haddington, East Lothian. They had one daughter, Ann. After his long-standing love affair with the successful young novelist Pamela Frankau (1908-1967), Wolfe and his wife were legally separated in 1938. 
Wolfe's was a many-sided, even chameleon-like personality. Ambition coupled with a superabundance of nervous and intellectual energy enabled him to pursue with equal ardour a career, a lively social life, and the writing, production, and editing in the space of twenty years of more than forty books of verse and prose, in addition to innumerable reviews in newspapers and periodicals. 
Wolfe's many voices -- ironic, lyrical, satirical, romantic -- displayed his mastery of poetic technique. Though the core of his writing was autobiographical, his compulsion to simultaneous self-revelation and concealment found expression in the use of the third person in the prose accounts of his early childhood, 'Now a Stranger' (1933), and of his Oxford days, 'The Upward Anguish' (1938). In the chronological sequence of prose sketches, 'Portraits by Inference' (1934), and his travel stories, 'P.L.M.' (1936), Wolfe plays the observer in the wings but effectively occupies centre stage. A number of poetic works were indirectly or covertly autobiographical: 'Humoresque' (1926), a harlequinade about lost love, a theme taken up and developed in the dramatic fantasy 'Reverie of Policeman' (1933) and the unpublished verse play 'The Publicist' (1927), in which the writer, both author and character, comes to terms with his own tangled life; and 'The Uncelestial City' (1930), a dying judge's review of his past, which borrows heavily from Wolfe's own life. 
Exclusively satirical writings were 'News of the Devil' (1926), which pilloried Fleet Street, 'Don J. Ewan' (1937), in which an American newspaper magnate scourged the modern world in Byronic stanzas, and the slighter volumes 'Lampoons' (1925), 'ABC of the Theatre' (1932), 'Stings and Wings' (1935), and 'Truffle Eater' (1933), an anti-Nazi pastiche of 'Struwwelpeter'. 
Volumes of occasional verse included 'London Sonnets' (1920), 'Shylock Reasons with Mr. Chesterton' (1920), 'The Unknown Goddess' (1925), 'This Blind Rose' (1928), 'Snow' (1931), and 'Out of Great Tribulation' (1939). Some had a central theme, as in the sonnet sequence 'The Fourth of August' (1935), and notably the winners and losers in 'Requiem' (1927) and the re-enactment of Christ's passion under Nazi tyranny in 'X at Oberammergau' (1935). Wolfe's daughter was the focus and inspiration for 'Kensington Gardens' (1924), 'Cursory Rhymes' (1926), 'Kensington Gardens in War-Time' (1940), and the cautionary tales of 'Circular Saws' (1923). 
Wolfe wrote as critic and interpreter in 'Dialogues and Monologues' (1928), 'Notes on English Verse Satire' (1929), 'Tennyson' (1930), 'George Moore' (1931), 'Signpost to Poetry' (1931), 'Romantic and Unromantic Poetry' (1933), and 'Ronsard and French Romantic Poetry' (1934). His translations ranged from the Greek anthology -- 'Others Abide' (1928) and 'Homage to Meleager' (1930) -- to 'Portrait of Heine' (1930), Edmond Fleg's 'Wall of Weeping' (1929), Ronsard's 'Sonnets Pour Helene' (1934), 'Cyrano de Bergerac' (1937), and a version of a romantic comedy by Eugene Heltai, 'The Silent Knight' (1937). 
He edited a number of collections and anthologies: 'Augustan Books of English Poetry' (1926-7), 'A Winter Miscellany' (1930), 'The Pilgrim's Way' (1936), 'Personalities' (1936) -- selections from A. A. Baumann -- and wrote introductions to other editions: 'The Poetical Works of Robert Herrick' (1928), 'Selected Poems by Swinburne' (1928), and 'The Life of Percy Bysshe Shelley' (1933). 

'Requiem' made Wolfe famous, and his verse remained popular despite attacks from the critics, but his posthumous eclipse thanks to the war and changing literary fashion was undeserved. While he consistently and unashamedly proclaimed his faith in beauty, goodness, and the power of poetry to transform the world, at the heart of his genius lay a satiric stance, and the ability to sum up an event or a person in a pungent phrase or a couplet, and in this he bears comparison with Herrick, Dryden, and Pope as much as with Heine. 


@@@@@


doc= 36989


Barry, Sir John Wolfe Wolfe- (1836-1918), civil engineer, was born on 7 December 1836 in London, the youngest son, in a family of five sons and two daughters, of Sir Charles Barry (1795-1860), the architect of the houses of parliament, and his wife, Sarah Rowsell (1798-1882). He assumed the additional surname of Wolfe in 1898. 
Educated at Trinity College, Glenalmond, and at King's College, London, he then became a pupil of Sir John Hawkshaw, under whom he subsequently acted as assistant resident engineer for the railway bridges and stations at Charing Cross and Cannon Street, London. In 1867 he began a long and distinguished career as a consulting civil engineer. In 1874 he married Rosalind Grace, youngest daughter of the Revd Evan Edward Rowsell, rector of Hambledon, Surrey; they had four sons and three daughters. 
In the last quarter of the nineteenth century and the early years of the twentieth Wolfe-Barry and his firm were responsible for numerous engineering projects, especially railways, bridges, and docks. In 1884 he overcame the difficulties associated with linking London's shallow underground railways to form the Circle Line. His other works included the Caledonian Railway's shallow underground lines in Glasgow, and its branch line north of Oban, including the cantilever Connel Bridge across Loch Etive. He was employed on most of the railway bridges crossing the Thames east of Westminster, as well as the King Edward VII road bridge at Kew. Following the death in 1887 of the architect Sir Horace Jones he had sole responsibility for Tower Bridge, completed in 1894. Now an icon of London, its form was determined by the need to provide a low-level road crossing while letting large ships enter the upper Pool of London. He was also occupied with various docks in Britain, each of which was at the then limit of construction techniques, notably the Barry docks and railway; the Alexandra Dock, Newport; Immingham docks; and extensions to Grangemouth docks, Middlesbrough Dock, and the Surrey Commercial docks in London. With Sir Benjamin Baker and A. C. Hurtzig he was engineer for the Royal Edward Dock at Avonmouth. 
Wolfe-Barry was also retained as a consulting engineer by many railway and harbour undertakings in India, China, and elsewhere. He was a member of many royal commissions, including that of the Port of London. He was one of the three members of the court of arbitration which in 1902 determined the price to be paid by the Metropolitan Water Board to purchase the eight London water companies. From 1892 to 1906 Wolfe-Barry was one of two British representatives on the international Suez Canal commission. He was specially interested in the problems of town traffic and served on the royal commission on London traffic (1903-5), having expressed his views on the subject in both the inaugural addresses he gave as chairman to the Royal Society of Arts, in 1898 and 1899. He was knighted in 1897. 
Wolfe-Barry took great interest in the Institution of Civil Engineers, of which he was a member for fifty-four years; he sat on its council for forty years, and was president in 1896-8. His final paper to the institution was 'Standardization... and its influence on the prosperity of the country' (1918). This chronicled his epoch-making initiative in 1901 in founding and championing the Engineering Standards Committee, which later developed into the independent British Standards Institution. He was chairman of the former body from 1905 until his death. 
The establishment of industrial standards made mass production possible, and Wolfe-Barry saw that as the adoption of most industrial standards would be voluntary, co-operation was necessary in formulating them. His view was accepted by the council of the Institution of Civil Engineers, which appointed the main committee in 1901 and supported its subsequent development. Participants in the hierarchical structure of sectional committees, subcommittees, and panel committees included the other principal technical societies, representatives of manufacturing and commerce, and government and other agencies. 
The initial advantage of standardization was that it simplified and lowered the cost of manufacturing processes. Early achievements by Wolfe-Barry's committees included reducing the number of patterns of tramway rail from seventy to nine and finding a uniform specification for portland cement which combined the best qualities of the many different specifications previously in use. The principle of standardization has subsequently been extended to a large variety of goods and services. The hierarchical committees, consensus-based decision-making, open participation, and regular reviewing advocated by Wolfe-Barry have been adopted worldwide by voluntary organizations concerned with developing industrial standards, including the International Organization for Standardization. 
In addition to his professional achievements his colleagues attached 'almost equal importance to the genial atmosphere which Sir John diffused around him -- an atmosphere of friendly sociability comparable to the mess-room of a good regiment' (Strain, 356). He was a fellow of the Royal Society and had many interests and activities outside his professional work, particularly in technical and scientific education. He introduced the requirement of a formal examination test of candidates for membership of the Institution of Civil Engineers. Wolfe-Barry was chairman of the City and Guilds Institute, and afterwards on the governing body of the Imperial College of Science and Technology. He was a member of the council of King's College, London, and the senate of the University of London. He took a prominent part in the establishment of the National Physical Laboratory, and held a number of civic offices in London. 
Wolfe-Barry's wide experience, sound judgement, and untiring energy made him a leading figure in the engineering profession. He died at his home, Delahay House, 15 Chelsea Embankment, London, on 22 January 1918. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 36990


Wolff, Sir Henry Drummond Charles (1830-1908), diplomatist and politician, was born on 12 October 1830 in Malta, the only son of the Revd Joseph Wolff (1795-1862), a missionary, and his wife, Lady Georgiana Mary (died 1859), daughter of Horatio Walpole, seventh earl of Orford. He was apparently named after Henry Drummond (1786-1860), co-founder of the Catholic Apostolic church, and used Drummond in the manner of a surname. He was educated at Rugby School during the headmastership of Dr Tait. 'I felt it a great honour', Wolff remarked in later life, 'to have received condign punishment at his hands' (Wolff, 1.18). He left Rugby in 1846, aged sixteen, to study foreign languages abroad, before being employed in deciphering dispatches at the Foreign Office. In 1853 he married Adeline (1826/7-1916), daughter of Walter Sholto Douglas; they had two sons and a daughter. 
After joining the permanent staff of the Foreign Office in 1849 Wolff enjoyed a remarkably eventful diplomatic career which lasted until 1890, albeit interrupted by several spells in parliament. In 1852 he served as attache to the British legation in Florence, but returned to the Foreign Office in the following year. He was employed as private secretary by Lord Malmesbury, the Conservative foreign secretary, in 1858, and in October of that year took a similar position with Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton, the colonial secretary. In 1859 he was made CMG, and in June departed for the Ionian Islands to become secretary to Sir Henry Storks, the high commissioner. In this capacity Wolff arranged the transfer of the islands to Greece in 1864, and was created KCMG for his efforts in 1862. 
Still a young man at this stage, Wolff had shown a considerable talent for getting on. This may be ascribed partly to his genial temperament and social gifts; he was an entertaining conversationalist and also a shrewd judge of character. During this period Wolff enjoyed a reputation as a man about town who paid much attention to attractive women, including, for example, the sisters of Lord Randolph Churchill. This association was to have important consequences later for his political career. But although a popular figure, he was regarded as slightly too bohemian in the most respectable political circles. 
As a result of his work in the Ionian Islands, Wolff enjoyed a pension awarded by the Greek government. He therefore felt free to spend several years pursuing various interests without any definite long-term objective in mind. He engaged in a little journalism (he contributed to 'The Owl' in 1864-70), made his first political foray as unsuccessful Conservative candidate at Dorchester in 1865, and tried to make some money by proposing a scheme for a channel ferry to the French emperor. He also travelled on the continent, notably to the battlefields of the Franco-Prussian War in 1870. 
A new phase in Wolff's life began in 1874 when he was elected as MP for Christchurch, with the advantage of Lord Malmesbury's influence. This election brought Disraeli to power with a Conservative majority for the first time since 1841. Wolff's knowledge of the Eastern question now stood him in good stead. First, the prime minister asked him to speak in support of the purchase of Suez Canal shares. Then the Russo-Turkish War of 1877 offered a further opportunity for advancement. Under the treaty of San Stefano, Russia attempted to establish a large Bulgarian state at the expense of Turkish territory and, in Disraeli's view, to the detriment of British interests. The foreign secretary, Lord Salisbury, sent Wolff to Paris, Vienna, and Berlin to ascertain the views of the leading statesmen with a view to revising the treaty. Subsequently, when a new state of Eastern Rumelia was created, Wolff was dispatched as the British representative on the international commission which was to draw up its constitution. He enjoyed some success in persuading the Russian government to accept the revised position by April 1879, but his work came to nothing when Eastern Rumelia reunited with the rest of Bulgaria. 
In this period Wolff's skills as a mediator were also deployed at home, where he acted as a go-between for Salisbury and Parnell, the Irish nationalist leader. Unusually for a Conservative, Wolff believed that some measure of self-rule for Ireland was unavoidable, and that the Conservatives would win a great political advantage if they secured a settlement along these lines. 
However, he felt that his efforts on behalf of the government were not sufficiently recognized, and by 1880 he had acquired a sense of grievance that was to remain with him for years to come. This probably strengthened his penchant for cross-party friendships, and his habit of collaborating with Conservative rebels such as Lord Randolph Churchill. He also faced a difficulty at Christchurch, where his constituents were less than appreciative of his protracted absences abroad; so much so that he yielded to pressure to abandon the constituency in 1880. Wolff required a more compact seat which would not make constant calls on his time. At the election of 1880 he was returned for the two-member constituency of Portsmouth. There he advocated a strong army and navy, abolition of the income tax, and reductions in taxes on items of consumption -- a programme nicely calculated to appeal to both tories and Liberals in what was a fairly marginal seat. 
Following Gladstone's triumphant return to power in 1880 Wolff rapidly rose to prominence as a result of his role in the Bradlaugh affair. As an atheist Charles Bradlaugh, who had been elected for Northampton, wished to affirm rather than swear the oath on taking his seat as an MP. Despite the fact that the leader of the opposition, Sir Stafford Northcote, accepted the government's proposal to establish a select committee to inquire into the issue, Wolff arose on 5 May 1880 to oppose the plan, somewhat to the displeasure of his own front bench. Subsequently, when Bradlaugh agreed to take the oath after all, Wolff again intervened to object on the grounds that, in view of Bradlaugh's views on religion and the monarchy, the oath would be meaningless if administered to him. Since this point was accepted by the speaker, Bradlaugh was forced to withdraw. In the subsequent debate Lord Randolph Churchill supported Wolff, and in this way the Fourth Party was born. 
Wolff's motives in all this were mixed. His interventions were in a sense an expression of his own light-hearted and mischievous attitude to politics, sharpened now by a resentment at being overlooked. Also, as an effective debater with a good grasp of parliamentary procedure, he found it frustrating that his leaders were too flat-footed or too deferential to oppose Gladstone vigorously. He certainly showed his contempt for Northcote, whom he described as 'a loathsome creature... a kind of earthworm', and one reason for continuing the guerrilla tactics was to drive him out of the leadership of his party in the Commons. 
The Fourth Party comprised only Wolff, Churchill, John Gorst, and Arthur Balfour. Wolff and Churchill, who was fifteen years younger, shared a similar irreverent attitude. 'Your letters are to me like a glass of the best champagne -- exhilarating and stimulating', declared Churchill (10 Sept 1889; Churchill, 202-3). That the two men were close friends even their opponents appreciated; Joseph Chamberlain described Wolff as 'Lord Randolph's jackal'. Throughout the 1880-85 parliament the Fourth Party held regular dinners to co-ordinate tactics; Wolff invariably entertained his colleagues at the Garrick Club. In the house he was the chief tactician and an indefatigable trouble-maker; during the first four months of 1880 alone he delivered sixty-eight speeches and asked thirty-four questions in the house. Gladstone foolishly played into the hands of the four by his readiness to reply to every question with laborious explanations. 
Eventually the success of the Fourth Party in obstructing the government began to undermine Northcote's position, as Wolff desired. Churchill extended the campaign against the leadership by championing the cause of the National Union of Conservative Associations. Wolff joined him in this and became a member of the council of the national union. But his key contribution was to negotiate with Salisbury to reach a compromise during the summer of 1884. 
It was during 1883-4 that Wolff made what was arguably his most enduring contribution to Conservative politics. He fully shared Churchill's concern about the Conservatives' inability to compete effectively with the Liberals in local constituency organization. Their attempt to rejuvenate the official party organization was never wholly successful. But in 1883, while the struggle over the national union remained unresolved, the idea emerged for what became the Primrose League. On the second anniversary of Disraeli's death (19 April) Wolff was very struck at seeing the whole of the Conservative Party in the House of Commons wearing what was supposed to be his favourite flower, the primrose. On the way home he remarked to Churchill: 'This should be turned to account. Why not start a 'Primrose League'?' 
During the summer Wolff and Churchill discussed the idea and enlisted the support of Sir Algernon Borthwick, the proprietor of the 'Morning Post'. They launched the Primrose League at the Carlton Club in November 1883. They declared that the object of the new organization was to rectify 'the failure of Conservative and Constitutional Associations to suit the popular taste or to succeed in joining all classes together for political objects'. It seems to have been Wolff rather than Churchill who ensured that the league would become a popular body rather than another clique. He opened up the membership by recruiting women and insisted on admitting all Christian denominations, including Catholics, who traditionally suffered from the entrenched protestant character of Conservative organizations. Wolff also borrowed freely from such organizations as friendly societies, the Orange lodges, and the freemasons to give the league its distinctive badges, honours, antiquated titles, and ritual. 
Although at its formation the league had seemed very much an alternative to the official party, this ceased to be the case after 1884, when the compromise negotiated by Wolff included official recognition for the league by the party leaders. As a result it evolved as a supportive adjunct to the official Conservative organizations and never threatened the control of the parliamentary leadership. 
Once the league had been successfully launched, however, neither Wolff nor Churchill played a major part in its affairs. They were more interested in the Conservative Party's return to office in 1885. Salisbury felt obliged to offer Churchill a cabinet position; but Wolff also expected recognition for his many services to the party. Yet he was not really suited to the tedium of administration, and no ministerial role was to be found for him. Churchill pressed successfully for Wolff to be made a privy councillor, but the prime minister had other things in mind for him. In August 1885 he sent Wolff to Constantinople and Egypt for discussions with the Turkish government about the future of Egypt. This move, later described as 'sudden and unexpected' (Hornik, 606), appears to have been a shrewd one on Salisbury's part. With his knowledge and experience of the region Wolff was bound to be attracted by the offer. Moreover, it had the advantage for Salisbury of interrupting the partnership of Churchill and Wolff. It also meant that Wolff was out of the country when the general election took place in November 1885. His opponents in Portsmouth used his absence to some effect and he lost his seat. There was to be no return to parliament; henceforward Wolff concentrated on his diplomatic career. He did attempt to act as mediator between Salisbury and Churchill during the crisis over the latter's resignation as chancellor in 1886; but the prime minister was content to let him go, and Wolff earned no gratitude from either party. 
Although Egypt had been under British occupation since 1882 the position had not been formally recognized. As envoy-extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary to the sultan, Wolff negotiated a settlement whereby Britain and Turkey would each appoint a commissioner to Egypt to help the khedive's government conduct reforms of the army and the government. Wolff then assumed the role of British high commissioner in Egypt from 1885 to 1887. He was left in place by Gladstone, who recognized his ability to maintain friendly relations with the khedive. By 1887 he had negotiated another convention with the sultan whereby the British would withdraw from Egypt after three years, provided no external or internal threat had arisen. Subsequently Britain would enjoy the right to use force in Egypt either to maintain order or to repel an attack from outside. Owing to French and Russian objections this convention was not ratified by the sultan, but in effect Wolff's work had gained Turkish recognition for the British presence in Egypt. 
In July 1887 Wolff returned to England -- much to the delight of Sir Wilham White, the ambassador at Constantinople (Hornik, 623) -- but by December he had been appointed to deal with another crucial part of the Eastern question as British minister at Tehran. The idea was that he should monitor Russian influence in northern Persia and try to protect British commercial interests there. His work was recognized by the award of the grand cross of the Bath in 1889. When in that year the shah of Persia visited Britain, Wolff was required to return home to attend on him throughout the tour. Then in August he left on a mission to St Petersburg in an attempt to reach an agreement over the extent of Russian and British influence in Persia. The improvement of Anglo-Russian relations became one of his chief objects. To this end he began discussions on a railway system designed to facilitate Russian communications with the Persian Gulf, and he believed that this prepared the ground for the Anglo-Russian entente of 1907. 
However, Wolff's health had begun to deteriorate. He suffered severely from gout, which compelled him to leave Persia in 1890. After briefly holding a post in Bucharest in 1891 he was transferred to Madrid as British ambassador in 1892. This turned out to be a much more difficult post than anticipated because of the outbreak of war between Spain and the United States. Wolff had to contend with the feeling among the Spanish that Britain did not sufficiently support them in this situation. After nearly nine years in Madrid, Wolff retired in October 1900 at the age of seventy. He took up residence in Brighton, where he died, at 128 King's Road, on 11 October 1908. His widow was granted a civil-list pension the following year, and died at her grace-and-favour apartment at Hampton Court on 31 March 1916. 


@@@@@


doc= 36991


Wolff, Martin (1872-1953), jurist, was born in Berlin on 26 September 1872, the elder child and only son of Wilhelm Wolff, banker, and his wife, Selma Ball. After studying under Heinrich Brunner and Otto Gierke, he became in 1900 a 'Privatdozent' in the Berlin faculty of law and in 1903 an extraordinary professor; in 1914 he was called to Marburg as an ordinary professor; in 1918 to Bonn; and finally in 1922 back to Berlin, where he taught until 1935 when, as a Jew, he was ousted by the Nazis. In 1938, on the invitation of All Souls College, Oxford, he emigrated to England, where he was naturalized in 1945. Wolff married in 1906 Marguerite, daughter of Hermann Jolowicz, silk merchant in London, and sister of another lawyer, H. F. Jolowicz; they had two sons. 
Trained in the German universities at a period when the best energies of academic lawyers were bent towards the completion of the German civil code, it fell to Wolff more than anyone else to explain that part of the code which enacted the law of property, to place it in its historical setting, and to draw out its consequences. This he did in lectures which have become a legend among German lawyers and above all, in 1910-12, in the relevant parts of L. Enneccerus, T. Kipp, and M. Wolff, 'Lehrbuch des burgerlichen Rechts', a book of the highest authority and influence which in his lifetime ran into nine editions and which the Nazis found no way of superseding. All German private law, indeed, fell within his province, and he wrote extensively on it, but more significant for his later career was his interest in private international law and comparative law, in both of which he acquired an audience extending far beyond Germany. He wrote a succinct but highly authoritative work on the former subject as applied in Germany and he was one of the most active participants in the work of the great Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Comparative Law. He was one of the editors of the 'Zeitschrift fur Auslandisches und Internationales Privatrecht' and of the 'Rechtsvergleichendes Handworterbuch fur das Zivil- und Handelsrecht', the nearest thing that has yet appeared to a comprehensive encyclopaedia of comparative private law. He also lectured regularly on French civil law. 
In England, Wolff was financially assisted by All Souls College in preparing a book on English private international law, which appeared in 1945 and rapidly established itself as an important authority. He made a special contribution to the subject by introducing a comparative element and used foreign experience to suggest the solution of problems which had not hitherto come before the courts; but so accurate was his exposition of English law and so complete his familiarity with the English point of view that reviewers disagreed with him as though he were one of themselves and not an intruder from abroad. A second edition appeared in 1950. He also found time in England to contribute a long account of French private law to the new edition of 'Chambers's Encyclopaedia' and a brilliant summary of commercial law to the 'Manual of German Law' published under the auspices of the Foreign Office. He saw appear at last, in 1950-52, a three-volume work to which he had made large contributions, the 'Traite de droit compare' by P. Arminjon, B. E. Nolde, and M. Wolff. 
Wolff's greatest strength probably lay in his lecturing, which was characterized by extreme lucidity, a wonderful gift for making abstract principles live by an apt choice of examples, and a patently sincere pursuit of justice. In the largest hall of Berlin University, holding between one and two thousand students, this tiny man with his light but clear voice commanded absolute silence by the sheer force of his personality, except when some witticism dissolved his audience into laughter. Moreover, although he never sought to dominate his more intimate pupils but strove to make of them independent thinkers, most if not all of them remained immune from Nazi influence. 
In Oxford, Wolff gave only one lecture, a famous and classical one entitled 'The nature of legal persons'; he did, however, attend regularly seminars on comparative law and so came into contact with quite a number of undergraduates, who learned to know his power as a teacher. He enjoyed these opportunities of meeting young men until his health began to fail during the last year or two of his life. Since he made no attempt to put himself forward, in the unpropitious conditions of the war and the immediate post-war period he did not become so rapidly known to his fellow lawyers, although he occasionally examined a thesis. But in the end he became well known and when he reached the age of eighty the university conferred on him the honorary degree, rarely given to academic lawyers, of DCL. Scholars from different countries combined to offer him a Festschrift which contains a full bibliography of his writings, and the Bundesrepublik conferred on him the 'Grosser Verdienstkreuz'. He held honorary doctorates from Marburg and Salonika. 
Wolff united a remarkably sweet and gentle disposition with a sharp and pungent wit and a clear insight into his own and other people's abilities and character. Those qualities, together with a wide range of interests, of which perhaps the most vital was in the theory and practice of music, made him excellent company. One of the greatest jurists of his age, he influenced deeply a whole generation of pupils and colleagues. He died at 2 Strathray Gardens, Hampstead, London, on 20 July 1953. 
F. H. Lawson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 36992


Wolfit, Sir Donald (1902-1968), actor and theatre manager, was born on 20 April 1902 at Homeleigh, 8 London Road, New Balderton, near Newark, the fourth of the five children of William Pearce Woolfitt (1862-1938), brewer's clerk, and his wife, Emma Tomlinson (1868-1925). He was educated at Barnby Road elementary school and at Magnus Grammar School, Newark. He became obsessed with the theatre from an early age, neglected his school work, and wanted above all else to be an actor. In 1918 Fred Terry, a leading actor-manager of the day, took his touring company to Nottingham. Wolfit (as he spelt his surname from 1924) wrote to him and was interviewed, but Terry advised him to reapply at a later date. Wolfit's parents, however, were opposed to the theatre as a career and urged him to try schoolmastering instead; he agreed because, being stubborn and single-minded -- traits he was to demonstrate throughout his life -- he was secretly plotting his escape from Newark and parental influence. He found employment at a small private boarding-school in Eastbourne and achieved his ambitions in 1920 when Charles Doran's touring Shakespearian company visited the town. Wolfit auditioned and was employed as assistant stage manager, walk-on, and understudy. He was a quick learner and ambitious. When an actor fell ill, the chance occurred to step in and play a string of small speaking-parts. He impressed with his remarkable, if sometimes uncontrolled, energy and was promoted to larger roles. After two years with Doran and a tour with another actor-manager, Alexander Marsh, Wolfit decided to try Fred Terry again, and landed the part of Armand St Just in 'The Scarlet Pimpernel'. For a year he toured with Terry and his wife, Julia Neilson, a glamorous couple whose choice of plays, mannered acting, and unwieldy productions Wolfit much admired. 
In 1924 Wolfit made his London debut under Matheson Lang who engaged him to play small parts in a season that included 'The Wandering Jew', at the New Theatre. There followed several years of touring and repertory engagements. In Sheffield, on 16 April 1928, he married an actress, Chris Frances Castor ('b'. 1895/6); they had a daughter. Professionally, the most important engagement at this time was with the Arts League of Service, founded by a cultural missionary, Eleanor Elder, whose small company of players travelled by bus to perform in remote towns and villages in Scotland. These early engagements had a lasting influence on Wolfit, encouraging his love of Shakespeare, his sense of service to the community, and, above all, his attachment to the dying actor-manager system. 
Wolfit's opportunity to make a real impression came when Lilian Baylis engaged him to play at the Old Vic during 1929-30. He displayed his versatility in a range of parts and was highly praised, especially as the King in 'Hamlet'. But for Wolfit it was not a happy time either professionally or privately. He made himself unpopular with some of his colleagues, and he was envious of the leading man, John Gielgud. Wolfit was not invited back for another season. His sense of being an outsider was intensified. Added to all this, his marriage ended. 
For the following six years Wolfit worked more or less continually in and around London or on tour. In 1930 he was employed by William Poel, the director who revolutionized the presentation of Shakespeare, and the following year he toured Canada with Sir Barry Jackson's company. He was back at the New Theatre in 1932 in 'Too True to be Good' by Bernard Shaw, who praised him for his performance as the Parson-Burglar; in 1933, at the same theatre, he was a last-minute replacement for the part of Thomas Mowbray in the highly successful 'Richard of Bordeaux', with Gielgud directing and playing the name-part. 
This uninspiring period was notable, however, for Wolfit's first brief venture into management in his home town of Newark. In 1934 he persuaded the town council to guarantee his expenses so that he could present a week-long festival of drama. He produced 'Arms and the Man', 'Twelfth Night', and 'The Master Builder', in which he played the leading parts with a company including John Clements and Margaret Rutherford. In the same year, on 15 September, he married Susan Katherine Anthony ('b'. 1906/7); they had a son and a daughter. 
Wolfit at last won national recognition for his performances at Stratford upon Avon in 1936 and again in 1937, under the direction of Ben Iden Payne, whose daughter Rosalind Iden (1911-1990) was to become Wolfit's leading lady. He fell deeply in love with her, left his wife, and lived with Rosalind, eventually marrying her on 20 April 1948. They remained a devoted couple. 
In Stratford, Wolfit was praised for his Kent in 'King Lear' and for his Hamlet. In between these two seasons he appeared as Antony opposite the Cleopatra of the Russian actress Eugenie Leontovich, directed by Theodore Komisarjevsky. The speaking of Leontovich was much ridiculed, but Wolfit was again lauded. His success encouraged him to take the plunge into full-time actor-management. In autumn 1937 he recruited a company of actors, many of whom had been with him in Stratford, and toured six plays by Shakespeare and 'Every Man in his Humour', as Bobadil. After nine weeks on the road he more or less broke even. 
Actor-management was a way of life that Wolfit followed for the next twenty-six years, presenting plays by Shakespeare and other dramatists, mostly on tour but with occasional forays into London. Each spring and autumn he ventured forth, criss-crossing the British Isles, changing trains at Crewe station on Sundays -- leading a company of players, most of whom were not of the front rank. The regular touring battered the scenery; the costumes became worn and shabby. His curtain-call was a theatrical event in itself. Whether or not the part was truly demanding, he appeared totally exhausted, holding on to the curtain for support. A speech followed in which he first thanked the audience for their reception, then announced the programme for the remainder of the week. His reputation suffered: he soon came to be regarded as unfashionable, his productions were regularly savaged by the critics; smart London disdained him, prompting Hermione Gingold's quip, 'Olivier is a 'tour-de-force', and Wolfit is forced to tour' (Harwood, 208). Often embattled, he developed a majestic persona, grandiose, passionate, often pompous. He could be frightening and brutal but also astonishingly kind and genuinely humble. 
Perceptive theatregoers and some critics, however -- especially James Agate -- acknowledged that Wolfit was a great actor in the grand tradition, and unequalled in certain roles. Possessed of a robust physique, he was unashamedly virile and full-blooded, able to generate crude, barbaric power. But he could also be delightful in comic roles. His voice had a remarkable range from bass to resonant falsetto, and he used it to startling effect. 
Wolfit's versatility was never in doubt. From 1937 to 1950 his repertory included Shylock, Touchstone, Macbeth, Richard III, Othello, Petruchio, Malvolio, Benedick, Falstaff in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor', and Solness in 'The Master Builder'. In two parts, however, he reached the summit of his art: Volpone, which he first played in 1938, a gloriously rich creation of a character relishing in his own evil; and his greatest achievement, King Lear. In 1942 he made an unsatisfactory attempt at the role, but in 1944 at the Scala Theatre, London, he was triumphant and was thereafter universally acclaimed as the greatest Lear of his generation. 
Wolfit's energy and strength were boundless. At the outbreak of the Second World War, against all advice, he carried out his plans for an autumn tour. He also joined the Home Guard at Frensham, and managed to combine both activities, including a short season in 1940 at the Kingsway in London. Later that year, he gave lunch-time 'Scenes from Shakespeare' at the Strand during air-raids. A bomb completely destroyed his scenery and costume store. Undaunted, he continued to tour, and in 1944 visited Egypt for the Entertainments National Service Association, followed by seasons in Paris and Brussels. He was deeply disappointed that his war service was not rewarded, but resumed his annual tours and in 1947 managed two highly successful visits to Canada and a season in New York. In 1950 he was appointed CBE. 
The pattern of Wolfit's career was broken when, in 1950, Tyrone Guthrie invited him to appear with a first-class company at the Old Vic as Lear, Timon of Athens, Lord Ogleby in 'The Clandestine Marriage', and Marlowe's 'Tamburlaine the Great'. Wolfit's Tamburlaine, directed by Guthrie, was another of his great performances and the critics showered him with praise. This was followed by Lord Ogleby, which also proved to be outstanding. But Wolfit chafed at performing in a company other than his own and surrounded by excellent supporting actors. He began to misbehave, resorting to the cheap tricks of a ruthless virtuoso performer to unsettle his colleagues. He was reprimanded by Guthrie, who admitted to being angry and brutal. Shortly afterwards, Wolfit claimed breach of contract for a trivial reason and left the Old Vic. He had destroyed a great opportunity to conform to the contemporary demands of working in an ensemble; he was unable to change his ways. 
In 1953 Wolfit returned to actor-management when he mounted a series of plays at the King's Theatre, Hammersmith, with a stronger company than usual. He opened to rave reviews and full houses for 'Oedipus the King' and 'Oedipus at Colonus', played as a double bill. There were revivals of 'The Wandering Jew' and 'The School for Scandal' but having started so promisingly, by year's end, and for the last time, he resorted to his tired Shakespearian productions, in which, however, he gave some magnificent performances. 
Wolfit was the subject of many stories that became part of theatrical folklore. Playing eight performances a week in eight leading roles, he developed a prodigious memory. Asked by a woman why, when playing Lear, for example, he did not get confused and speak bits of Macbeth, he replied, 'Madam, if you're invited to play golf, you do not take your tennis racket' (Harwood, 250). Also asked why he cut the Sir Topaz scene from 'Twelfth Night', thus depriving Malvolio, Wolfit's part, of some meaty stuff, he said, 'I can't learn it, and if I can't learn it, Shakespeare didn't write it'. 
Wolfit believed in the theatre as a cultural and educational force. His contribution was immense, for he provided people all over the British Isles, especially during the war, with the opportunity of visiting a playhouse, perhaps for the first time, and seeing Shakespeare with the leading roles played by an actor of extraordinary gifts. From 1950 he appeared in films and on television. Although some thought him too theatrical as a film actor, he gave splendid and acclaimed performances as Sergeant Buzfuz in 'Pickwick Papers', in 'Room at the Top', and as Svengali. 
In 1955 Wolfit had success on tour and in London with 'The Strong are Lonely', a play about the Jesuits in Paraguay. At the Lyric Theatre, Hammersmith, in 1957, he presented two plays by Henri de Montherlant, but the public did not respond. Wolfit announced his retirement as an actor-manager. That summer, however, he was knighted, and at once decided to come out of retirement and embark on one final tour under his own banner. He was the first actor to be twice honoured. 'I believe', he said, 'that makes me senior' (Harwood, 241). 
Wolfit's last appearance on the stage was in a musical, as Mr Barrett in 'Robert and Elizabeth' in 1966-7. He died in the Royal Masonic Hospital, London, on 17 February 1968 and was buried in St Peter's Church, Hurstbourne Tarrant, Hampshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 36993


Wollaston, Alexander Frederick Richmond (1875-1930), naturalist and explorer, born on 22 May 1875 at Clifton, Bristol, was the second son of George Hyde Wollaston (1844-1926), a schoolmaster at Clifton College. His mother, Sarah Constance, the daughter of Thomas Richmond and the granddaughter of Thomas Richmond, both miniature painters, and the niece of the portrait painter George Richmond, was a very talented woman. His relations included the moral philosopher William Wollaston, the astronomer Francis Wollaston, the natural philosopher Francis John Hyde Wollaston, the physicist William Hyde Wollaston, and the entomologist Thomas Vernon Wollaston. 
From a private school Wollaston entered Clifton College as a day boy. He cared little for school life and games, but enjoyed natural history. In 1893 he went to King's College, Cambridge, to which he remained devoted. He was one of the select few who attended the zoology lectures of Alfred Newton, whose 'Life' he published in 1921. During a long vacation he began a career of travel by walking from Hammerfest, Norway, through Lappland to the Baltic. He took only a poll degree in 1896, but stayed at King's for another two years (he proceeded MA in 1906). He then decided to obtain a medical qualification to increase his chances of joining an expedition, and accordingly went to the London Hospital and Addenbrooke's, became MRCS and LRCP in 1903, and graduated BCh at Cambridge in 1913. 
Finding life as a medical student in London very irksome, Wollaston took every opportunity to escape into the country and particularly to the mountains. He was elected to the Alpine Club in 1903 and served on its committee in 1922-4. In 1901 and 1904 he visited the Sudan with N. C. Rothschild to collect birds and animals, and later travelled round the world, visiting New Zealand, the Malay states, and Japan. 
In 1906 Wollaston took part, as doctor and collector of plants and insects, in the British Museum expedition, led by R. B. Woosnam, to the Ruwenzori Mountains in central Africa. He climbed what was then supposed to be the highest peak (15,286 feet), afterwards named Wollaston peak by the duke of Abruzzi, and returned home down the Congo; later he published an account of his travels and observations in 'From Ruwenzori to the Congo' (1908), in which he showed his sympathy with the Africans but defended Belgium against allegations then being levelled against it of brutality and exploitation in the Congo. 
In 1909 Wollaston joined the expedition to Dutch New Guinea organized by the British Ornithologists' Union under Walter Goodfellow. The expedition failed to reach the Nassau range, and there was much sickness; but Wollaston made a valuable collection of natural history specimens and an interesting study of the Tapiro tribe, discovered by the expedition and described in his 'Pygmies and Papuans' (1912). 
In 1912-13 Wollaston returned to New Guinea, taking C. B. Kloss as his only European companion. Having worked up the Utakwa and Setakwa rivers he reached the glaciers of Mount Carstensz (15,706 feet) and attained a height of 14,866 feet. The expedition was very arduous, but Wollaston showed himself a successful organizer. The party avoided beri-beri and Wollaston's sympathetic demeanor ensured good relations with the inhabitants. He secured a valuable collection of ethnological and natural history specimens and described the journey in the journal of the Royal Geographical Society (March 1914). He was awarded the society's Gill memorial in 1914. He was planning a third expedition to New Guinea when the First World War broke out. 
Wollaston volunteered as a surgeon in the Royal Navy. In 1915 he joined the east African expeditionary force, and served in it for two years; later he served in the Arctic. He was awarded the DSC for conspicuous devotion to duty in east Africa and was demobilized in October 1919. 
In 1921 Wollaston was medical officer and naturalist to the first Mount Everest expedition, led by Lieutenant-Colonel C. K. Howard-Bury. He treated members of the expedition and Tibetans, collected specimens of animals and plants new to science, and took some fine photographs. Afterwards he wrote a paper in the 'Geographical Journal' (July 1922) and two excellent chapters and an appendix in 'Mount Everest, the Reconnaissance' (1921). 
Wollaston married in 1923 Mary (1889-1943), the daughter of Daniel Meinertzhagen, head of the banking house of Frederick Huth. Later that year he and his wife visited the unexplored Sierra Nevada of Santa Marta, in Colombia, a region very difficult of access. He described the venture in the Royal Geographical Society's journal (August 1925) and in 1925 received the society's patron's medal. In 1928 he was appointed honorary secretary. 
Wollaston was elected to a six-year fellowship at King's College in 1920, despite his lack of scholarly qualifications. He remained a fellow until 1926, but in 1925 he settled at Uley, Gloucestershire. In 1928 he was re-elected fellow and appointed tutor to his college and went to live at Cambridge. Although reticent, he had a sense of humour, great insight, and a broad outlook, and was remarkably successful with undergraduates. After his death J. M. Keynes wrote of him that 'he could unlock hearts with a word and a look, and break down everyone's reserves, except his own', while Stanley Baldwin as chancellor of the university spoke of Cambridge 'mourning a prince among men'. The affection with which he was regarded intensified the horror aroused when on 3 June 1930 he and an accompanying police officer were shot dead in his college rooms by a demented undergraduate, Douglas Newton Potts, who then committed suicide. Wollaston's ashes lie in the chapel of King's College. He left a widow, a son, Nicholas ['see below'], and two daughters, Georgina and Jo. 
Wollaston was undoubtedly a brave and skilful explorer, although it was the manner of his death rather than his achievements in life which coloured his immediate reception and which led, for example, to his featuring with such men as John Franklin, David Livingstone, and Robert Falcon Scott in a 1941 textbook on explorers. Seventy years after his death it is not his travels but his photographs which are the focus of renewed interest. Those of Everest, the Congo, and New Guinea from the early years of the twentieth century (in the Royal Geographical Society) are much admired. 
Wollaston's son, Nicholas William Wollaston (1926-2007), novelist and travel writer, was born on 23 June 1926 at Bencombe House, Uley, Gloucestershire. He was educated at Winchester College and (after service in the Royal Navy in the Mediterranean and the Pacific) at King's College, Cambridge. 'When I arrived', he later recalled, 'the head porter doffed his bowler and said he was proud to meet my father's son. How could I compete? I've always felt this inadequacy, not living up to my father's name and fame. I did no work. I played the flute, drank a lot of beer in the Eagle, and got a third. ('The Times', 7 April 2003)' After a short period working at a leather tannery in Kenya owned by an uncle, then as a jackaroo on an Australian sheep station, he embarked on a career as a travel writer, starting with 'Handles of Chance: a Journey from the Solomon Islands to Istanbul' (1956). On 11 August 1961 he married Deirdre Johnston ('b'. 1939/40), daughter of Patrick Murdoch Johnston, British ambassador to Cameroon then Nicaragua; they had three children, Sophy, Sam, and Josh. Wollaston's first book after his marriage, 'Red Rumba: a Journey through the Caribbean and Central America' (1962), was particularly acclaimed, Graham Greene ranking it with Patrick Leigh Fermor's 'The Traveller's Tree'. Besides other travel books he published a biography of August Courtauld, 'The Man on the Ice Cap' (1980), seven novels, from 'Jupiter Laughs' (1967) to 'Cafe de Paris' (1988), each critically well received but none a bestseller, a semi-autobiographical account of a journey to La Mancha, 'Tilting at Don Quixote' (1990), and 'My Father, Sandy' (2003), in which he finally explored his relationship with the father he hardly knew. Much of his later writing remained unpublished, and in 2000 he was incensed by a publisher's report that suggested it was too 'late in the author's career': 'At a pinch, I'd change my name and borrow a photo of the barmaid in my local pub... if it would do the trick' ('The Observer', 6 Aug 2000). For the last thirty years of his life he and Deirdre were tenants of a National Trust house, Thorington Hall, Stoke by Nayland, Suffolk, where she ran a bed and breakfast business. He died on 23 April 2007 at Colchester General Hospital, of bronchopneumonia and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and was survived by Deirdre and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 36994


Wolmark, Alfred Aaron (1877-1961), painter and decorative artist, was born in Warsaw, Poland, on 28 December 1877, the eldest child in the family of four sons and one daughter of Levy and Gitel Wolmark. The Wolmarks, like many other central European Jewish families, were forced by continuous persecution to leave Poland; they emigrated to London during the 1880s -- 1883 has frequently been quoted but a date nearer 1888 seems more likely. The first extant document relating to Wolmark is his naturalization certificate, filled in by his father and sworn by him at the Worship Street police court in the East End of London on 1 January 1894. This document gives the family's residence as 65 Hanbury Street, Spitalfields; Wolmark's forename is given simply as Aaron, and it is probable that he adopted the English name of Alfred at a slightly later date. No record exists of his early education, which would have taken place within the Jewish community both in Warsaw and Spitalfields; clearly his aptitude for drawing was brought to the notice of the authorities, and he entered the Royal Academy Schools in 1895, where he studied for three years, winning a silver medal for figure drawing in December 1896. 
While at the Royal Academy Schools, Wolmark was befriended by Anna Wilmersdoerffer, and it was through her influence that he received several portrait commissions; the financial assistance of the Wilmersdoerffer family also enabled him to return to Poland in 1903, where he executed several important works based on Jewish historical subjects, such as 'Rabbi Ben Ezra', inspired by Browning's poem. These subject paintings are strongly influenced in technique by his studies of Rembrandt, the only artist to whom he had a lifelong devotion, but in his more spontaneous works he was already beginning to lighten his palette. During the next few years his palette continued to lighten, but it was not until he saw the important exhibition 'Manet and the Post-Impressionists', organized by Roger Fry at the Grafton Galleries, London, during the winter of 1910-11, that the full impact of modern French painting was revealed to him. 
On 11 July 1911 Wolmark married Bessie Leah Tapper, the daughter of Russo-Polish Jewish parents from the East End. (The couple had two sons and a daughter.) They set off for an extended honeymoon in Concarneau, where Wolmark painted many studies of Breton fisherfolk and harbour life. This series of paintings executed in bright flat areas of heavily applied pigment reduced his subject matter to its simplest form and led on to the geometric still lifes painted immediately after his return to London. He was at the height of his powers during the years from 1911 to 1915; in addition to painting he turned his hand to the decoration of pots, which he covered in strongly coloured aggressively geometric designs. Interior decoration, the theatre, and stained glass also occupied him at this time. His window for St Mary's Church, Slough (1915), was probably the most daring piece of modern glass in England at the time. Even the frames he designed for his paintings did not escape his decorative urge, being not only painted but, at times, covered with geometric collage of patterned wallpapers. His closest associate at this stage was Henri Gaudier-Brzeska, the French sculptor, who had settled in London. The Musee des Beaux-Arts, Orleans, acquired his portrait of Gaudier-Brzeska in 1957. 
Wolmark despised bohemianism, and, although he liked to play the part of an artist, especially when frequenting the Cafe Royal in London, it was through the elaboration of his dress rather than its disregard that he wished people to be aware of his profession. There is a massive plaster head of Wolmark by Gaudier-Brzeska which captures his air of self-confidence, tinged with arrogance; the floppy bow-tie and flowing hair hint at the subject's dandified appearance. (Bronze casts are in the principal museums in Southampton, Liverpool, and Birmingham.) Passed as medically unfit for military service in 1915, he spent the war years in England. In 1919 he went to New York, where one of his brothers was living, and painted a series of cityscapes; these paintings were shown at the Kevorkian Galleries, New York, in 1920, and mark the last phase of his contribution to avant-garde British painting. During the ensuing decades he felt himself increasingly out of touch with the modern movement, and settled down to paint landscapes and figure subjects in a highly personal, expressionistic manner; he also did some teaching, not in art schools but rather in the manner of the old masters, taking pupils to work in his studio. In 1928 he held an exhibition at the Lefevre Gallery, London, of portrait drawings of well-known contemporaries, including Israel Zangwill (whose complete works he had illustrated for the Globe Publishing Company three years previously), Jerome K. Jerome, Ford Madox Ford, D. Y. Cameron, and G. K. Chesterton. During his life he held many exhibitions in London, New York, and Paris. An exhibition at the Leicester Galleries, London, in 1948 commemorated his seventieth birthday. 
Wolmark died on 6 January 1961 at his home, 54 Colet Gardens, West Kensington, London. A memorial exhibition of his work was held at the Ben Uri Art Gallery, London, during September and October of that year; he had been one of the prime movers in the setting up of the Ben Uri Art Society in 1915, which did so much to foster artistic awareness among East End Jewry. Examples of his work are in the Tate collection and the National Portrait Gallery, London. 
Peyton Skipwith', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 36995


Wolseley, Garnet Joseph, first Viscount Wolseley (1833-1913), army officer, was born at Golden Bridge House, co. Dublin, on 4 June 1833, the eldest of seven children of Major Garnet Wolseley, 25th foot, and Frances Anne Smith. 
Wolseley's father, who had sold his commission shortly after marriage, died when Wolseley was only seven years old, leaving the family in somewhat straitened circumstances. This was to become one key to Wolseley's later career, for he assumed the role of head of and principal provider for the family, supporting his mother and two of his three brothers, George and Fred. Eventually George rose to high military rank himself, but earlier in his career he frequently incurred debts which Wolseley covered. Fred pursued various unsuccessful business ventures in Australia, which were a drain on Wolseley's own finances, particularly in 1878 and 1893. Thus Wolseley's pursuit of financial reward from his services, such as the grants he received after the Asante and Egyptian expeditions, and his determination to ensure that his daughter would succeed to his peerage after his death, were connected with assumed family responsibilities and an intimate comprehension of the disadvantages of being impecunious. His mother could manage only a day school education for him in Dublin, and, eager to improve his opportunities of obtaining a commission, Wolseley worked in a surveyor's office, thus acquiring a knowledge of draughtsmanship and surveying. 
Unable to afford a commission, Wolseley and his mother sought nomination from the commander-in-chief, Wellington, on the strength of his father's service. His mother's direct appeal was successful, and he was nominated to an ensigncy in the 12th foot on 12 March 1852. Wolseley later wrote that the first business of the young officer who wished to distinguish himself in his profession was to seek to get killed, and, in effect, this was the only means by which he could hope to advance while the system of purchase prevailed. In this sense, as Redvers Buller later noted, Wolseley was very much a self-made man. Wolseley inherited from his mother, a deeply religious Irish protestant, a profound belief in a destiny willed by God, which was to comfort him even in the darkest days of his failure to save Charles Gordon at Khartoum in 1885. Implicit fatalism allied to great courage was to bring Wolseley grievous wounds in his early career, but also that recognition he sought in his chosen profession. Ambition was to be another key to his future. 
Yet Wolseley also had immense pride in his country, which, like many other Anglo-Irish, he expressed solely in terms of love of England. He wrote in September 1882, 'To see England great is my highest aspiration, & that I might have a leading part in contributing to the attainment of that greatness, is my only real ambition' (Wolseley to his wife, 28 Sept 1882, Wolseley Collections, W/P 11/23). He despised foreigners and especially Irish nationalists, frequently alluding to the desirability of his filling some proconsular role in Ireland and, on at least one occasion, of putting himself at the head of the loyalists to resist the raising of a 'filthy green rag' (Maurice MSS, 2/2/18). The extremity of his patriotism was also apparent in his utter contempt for most party politicians. Wolseley despised the 'dirty dunghill sort of democratic wave... now passing over the world' (Wolseley to his wife, 24-7 Nov 1884, Wolseley Collections, W/P 13/31) and made little secret of his belief that party politics was the 'curse of modern England', as he expressed it in one public speech in April 1888. For Wolseley, the 'arch-traitor' Gladstone was to personify all that was wrong with the system, and his deep hatred for the 'canting old sinner' was only intensified by his attributing to Gladstone the blame for the peace concluded with the Boers after the death of his favourite, George Colley, at Majuba in 1881 and for the deaths of both Herbert Stewart, who had replaced Colley as his most favoured subordinate, and Gordon in the Sudan. Ironically, despite his Conservatism, he was regarded by his opponents within the army as a dangerous radical and by the Liberal leadership almost as a colleague. 
However, Wolseley's tendency towards allegedly 'sinister caesarism' (Preston, 'Khartoum relief expedition', 97) has been exaggerated, for he always understood the restricted constitutional parameters within which the army existed and the requirements of his political masters; he wrote, for example, in August 1879 that the whole truth should not be told in dispatches for 'unpleasant truths that can be made use of by the opponents of the Government you are serving should be reserved for one's private correspondence with ministers' (Wolseley to his wife, 8-13 Aug 1879, Wolseley Collections, W/P 8/19). There was a cynicism in this. Moreover, while despising the press and war correspondents, he consciously used his public utterances and writing, as he put it in February 1878, 'to keep my name before the public' (Wolseley to his brother, 18 Feb 1878, Wolseley Collections, 163/iv). He always denied that he wrote for newspapers as opposed to periodicals, but much the same effect was achieved through the employment of many of his staff by the press on campaign and his promotion of official and semi-official campaign histories. On a personal level Wolseley could be charming, but this was not always the image conveyed, and Disraeli was to write to the queen on one occasion: 'It is quite true that Wolseley is an egotist and a braggart. So was Nelson... Men of action when eminently successful in early life are generally boastful and full of themselves' (Beaconsfield to Victoria, 24 Aug 1879, Royal Archives, B61/34). 
Having secured his commission, Wolseley at once transferred to the 80th foot on 13 April 1852 in order to see active service in the Second Anglo-Burmese War. Within a few months of his arrival he distinguished himself in an assault on Myat Toon's stockade at Kyault Azein in March 1853, being so badly wounded in the left thigh that he would be troubled by the leg for the remainder of his life. Promoted to lieutenant in the 84th foot on 16 May 1853, he was invalided home and transferred to the 90th foot in Dublin on 24 February 1854. Promotion to captain followed on 26 January 1855 as a result of Wolseley's services in the Crimean War, and through his knowledge of surveying Wolseley was seconded to the engineers in the trenches before Sevastopol. There he met Charles George Gordon, who was to become one of his heroes; in turn, Wolseley would become one of only two men for whom Gordon prayed nightly. Wolseley was slightly wounded in the right thigh during one attack on the Quarries in June 1855, but on 30 August he was severely wounded by shellfire, suffering another wound to the right leg and losing the sight of his left eye. 
On recovering Wolseley was appointed deputy assistant quartermaster-general in the Crimea on 8 November 1855 and served on as such until the end of hostilities in June 1856. He was recommended for a brevet majority but could not receive it until he had served for six years. Regimental service was resumed at Aldershot, and the 90th embarked for China in early 1857, only to be diverted to India through the outbreak of the mutiny. Wolseley participated in the advance for the first relief of Lucknow via Cawnpore. The 90th then remained at Lucknow until the second and final relief in February 1858. Wolseley was appointed deputy assistant quartermaster-general on Sir Hope Grant's staff on 1 April 1858, succeeding his future rival, Frederick Roberts, and campaigning with Hope Grant in Oudh. The brevet majority having been secured finally on 24 March 1858, Wolseley was rewarded for his further services with a brevet lieutenant-colonelcy on 26 April 1859. Hope Grant became Wolseley's first military patron and Wolseley remained on Grant's staff in the same capacity for the Second Opium War between March 1860 and March 1861, the campaign becoming the subject of his first book, the generally unremarkable 'Narrative of the War with China in 1860' (1862). Promotion to an unattached majority had been received on 15 February 1861 and Wolseley received a majority in his regiment on 6 August 1861. In less than eight years Wolseley had risen, without purchase of his commissions, from ensign to brevet lieutenant-colonel at the age of only twenty-five, and had established a reputation for courage and judgement in action and as an able staff officer. 
Granted a period of long leave on his return from China, Wolseley was suddenly ordered to Canada as a result of the 'Trent' affair of November 1861 (when American officials boarded a British mail packet), taking up the appointment of assistant quartermaster-general at Montreal on 11 January 1862, a post he held until 31 March 1867. Like many other British officers in Canada, he took the opportunity of seeing something of the American Civil War, reaching the Confederacy and meeting both Robert E. Lee and 'Stonewall' Jackson in the aftermath of Lee's retreat from Maryland after Antietam. As indicated in 'A month's visit to the Confederate headquarters', an article largely reworked by his sister, Matilda, which Wolseley had published in 'Blackwood's Magazine' in January 1863, he favoured British recognition of the South. In Lee, too, he found a heroic figure, rivalled only by Gordon. A later article, 'General Lee', published in 'Macmillan's Magazine' in March 1887 has been described as a 'classic of Confederate literature' (Wolseley, 'American Civil War', 53). Wolseley also contributed a series of review articles on the war to the 'North American Review' during 1889 and sketches of Nathan B. Forrest and William T. Sherman to the 'United Service Magazine' in 1891-2, as well as encouraging G. F. R. Henderson to undertake his celebrated study of Jackson. However, his pro-Southern sympathies and hero-worship of Lee tended to detract from the analytical value of his work, and he was not the intellectual equal in this respect of either the commander-in-chief in Canada, Sir John Michel, or the adjutant-general of the Canadian militia, Sir Patrick MacDougall, both of whom were to become patrons of Wolseley during his Canadian service. Wolseley secured a brevet colonelcy on 5 June 1865, becoming deputy quartermaster-general on 1 October 1867 on Michel's recommendation and commanding first a cadet training school and then a camp of observation during the Fenian incursions. 
Although by then retired from the Canadian command, Michel was also to recommend Wolseley to lead the Red River expedition in 1870. In the meantime, however, two other aspects of Wolseley's Canadian service were significant. First, Wolseley married Louisa Erskine (1843-1920) on his birthday, 4 June 1867, while on a short home leave. 'Loo' became an important prop to Wolseley, promoting his interests while he was overseas and serving as the recipient of the letters and journals he wrote as a safety valve. A woman of keen wit and shrewd observation, she was apt to accuse Wolseley of composing his letters with an eye on posterity. In turn, Wolseley was to accuse her of declining to assist his social and political duties on Cyprus -- one of the few occasions when she accompanied him overseas -- and feigning a lack of interest in his military career. She was also somewhat jealous of other women, such as the duchess of Edinburgh, who were friendly with her husband. None the less, the affection between the two throughout their marriage was clear and Wolseley felt keenly the separations on campaigns, his letters frequently addressed to his little porpoise, ratcatcher, periwinkle, whippersnapper, or similar endearments. Their only child, Frances Garnet Wolseley, was born on 15 September 1872 and was to become a noted horticulturist. 
Secondly, in 1869, and at the suggestion of Sir Richard Airey, the army's quartermaster-general, Wolseley added to his military reputation through the publication of his 'Soldier's Pocket Book'. A practical manual of soldiering, which was to go through five editions, it was the only guide of its kind to military organization and tactics in the kind of small wars in which the army was increasingly involved. It was also the nearest that Wolseley would come to producing any substantial work of theory other than the paper on field manoeuvres submitted for the Wellington prize essay in 1872, which was placed second, and occasional articles in periodicals such as 'Blackwood's Magazine', 'Macmillan's Magazine', and the 'Nineteenth Century', which were written as often as not principally for money. The 'Soldier's Pocket Book' demonstrated Wolseley's understanding of logistics and advertised his commitment to military reform. The former was particularly apposite, for on 5 April 1870 he was chosen by the new commander-in-chief in Canada, the Hon. James Lindsay, to lead the Red River expedition to overthrow a provisional government established by rebellious 'metis' at Fort Garry, 600 miles beyond Lake Superior. 
Some 1200 men had to be transported across a series of unnavigable portages through the wilderness of the Canadian north-west, with an imperative to complete the mission and return before the lakes froze. Wolseley took a minute interest in the organization of his force, which he formally took over on 10 May 1870, and reached Fort Garry on 24 August, only to find that the 'metis' had fled. For his services Wolseley was created KCMG and CB, and was both praised by Lindsay and eulogized by G. L. Huyshe's semi-official campaign history. Wolseley was then brought home to take up the appointment of assistant adjutant-general in the discipline branch of the War Office on 1 May 1871. 
Wolseley did not play a leading role in the Cardwell reforms, as these were substantially completed before he returned to England. But he fully agreed with their aims, and particularly with short service and linked battalions, and he was quickly identified with the cause of reform within the War Office. He was selected by Cardwell in August 1873 to lead an expedition to punish Asante incursions into the Gold Coast protectorate by seizing their capital of Kumasi. Wolseley had been pressing for the appointment within the War Office, but his organizational and logistic ability was testified by the 'Soldier's Pocket Book', his achievements on the Red River, and his participation in the planning of the autumn manoeuvres in 1872. Moreover, he supported reform and this would be the first major expedition to test the Cardwell changes, although the recent re-organization had no immediate relevance to the actual conduct of colonial campaigning. Despite his reforming reputation, Wolseley at this time enjoyed the support of the army's commander-in-chief, the duke of Cambridge, who had already suggested his appointment as adjutant-general in India, only for the proposal to fall on Wolseley's lack of the required native language qualification. 
Accordingly, Wolseley took up the appointment of governor of the Gold Coast with the temporary rank of major-general on 2 October 1873. As was the case in the Red River campaign, the difficulties were primarily climate and terrain, and he had to plan on the basis of using British troops for the minimum possible time. Indeed, three British battalions did not arrive until January 1874, by which time Wolseley's locally raised forces had compelled the Asante to withdraw across the Pra. He then advanced on Kumasi, defeating the Asante at Amoaful on 27 January and occupying their capital on 4 February. Having burned Kumasi, Wolseley was back at the coast by 19 February and had re-embarked his army eight days later. It was a model campaign, extensively reported by the press, and it established Wolseley as the 'Modern Major-General', memorably portrayed by George Grossmith in Gilbert and Sullivan's 'Pirates of Penzance'. In addition, 'All Sir Garnet' became a cockney catchphrase. Wolseley was rewarded with the GCMG, KCB, a grant of $25,000, and major-general's rank on 1 April 1874. The honours came from the Conservatives, who had come into office during the campaign. Wolseley, whom Disraeli described as 'a little man, but with a good presence, and a bright blue eye, holds his head well, and has a lithe figure' (Monypenny & Buckle, 5.305), believed he would have been granted a peerage by the Liberals, and he turned down both the GCB and a baronetcy, believing the latter worthy only of 'common people'. 
The expedition also established the concept of the Asante or Wolseley ring or gang, which was to arouse strong opinions among rival groups such as the traditionalists, ranged around Cambridge, and the 'Indians', who came to be identified primarily with Roberts. The struggle with the former tended to encompass reform issues such as short service and the latter principally the empire's strategic orientation. However, neither particular issues nor the positions assumed by individuals on them were necessarily constant, although the context of rivalry was invariably centred upon manoeuvring adherents into particular commands. Wolseley claimed that he always made a practice of noting down the names of able soldiers wherever he met them and that merit was his only criterion, and it was widely recognized that he had the knack of picking able men. 
The selection of staff for the Red River campaign was dictated by those available in Canada and was essentially unplanned. Therefore Asante marked the effective beginning of the ring, although Redvers Buller, Hugh McCalmont, John McNeill, William Butler, and Huyshe had also been on the Red River expedition. In addition, Asante saw the adherence to Wolseley, among others, of Evelyn Wood, Colley, Frederick Maurice, Baker Russell, Henry Brackenbury, and George Greaves. Some were chosen fortuitously, while others such as Colley, Brackenbury, and Maurice, who had won the Wellington essay competition, were selected on intellectual reputation: Wolseley consistently encouraged the employment of Staff College graduates. He did not always have a free choice of staff as, for example, in 1879 in South Africa, when he inherited many of Lord Chelmsford's staff, or in Egypt in 1882, when the principal field commands were taken by those already designated to act in the autumn manoeuvres. He also found it politic on occasions to accept nominations by others such as Cambridge or the prince of Wales. Moreover in his later War Office appointments as adjutant-general, and even as commander-in-chief, Wolseley did not have exclusive control of the promotion system. Nevertheless, he was somewhat disingenuous in claiming that he always dropped failures or continually introduced fresh blood, and appointments were often a case of reshuffling the same cards, since he argued that he could rely instinctively on those familiar with his working methods and in whom he had full confidence. 
This was not how Wolseley's opponents saw the 'mutual admiration society', and there was resentment on the part of those excluded from his well-publicized campaigns. There were undoubtedly victims of the ring, such as Sir John Glover in Asante and Sir Charles Wilson in the Sudan, but it was not as exclusive as often claimed and no worse in its practices than those of Cambridge or Roberts, and similar networks occurred in other areas of Victorian life. A more significant charge was that constant employment of the same officers failed to develop others, although this was the claim of those, such as Cambridge, who were most irked by Wolseley ignoring the claims of seniority. Yet Wolseley did arguably become something of a prisoner of the initial success of the ring, feeling it necessary to employ the same men lest his rejection of them reflect adversely on his earlier choice. His criticism of many of his followers increased over the years, although this was also a result of prominent subordinates growing in stature and seniority themselves. 'The Chief' was respected rather than liked, and he had associates rather than friends. Also, the deaths of the two men to whom he felt closest, Colley and Stewart, whom Wolseley had recruited to the ring in Zululand in 1879, affected him greatly. Wolseley never forgave Wood, for example, for obeying government instructions and making peace with the Boers after Colley's death, while Buller's apparent willingness to accept appointment as commander-in-chief ahead of Wolseley in 1895 was regarded as betrayal. What made increasing dissension and rivalry within the ring so destructive, notably during the Gordon relief expedition, was that Wolseley's command style was built upon individuals willingly fulfilling specific roles in a kind of orchestrated military collective. Moreover, Wolseley's capacity to manage affairs decreased in proportion to the growth in the scale of operations. Generally Wolseley was able to co-ordinate the diverse talents of his chosen subordinates in ways well suited to colonial campaigning, but in the last analysis improvisation was no substitute for a proper general staff. 
Wolseley was a considerable political asset after Asante, and after a short spell back at the War Office as inspector-general of auxiliary forces from April 1874 to March 1875 he was sent out by the colonial secretary, Carnarvon, as high commissioner and general commanding to Natal, tasked with forwarding the cause of federation in southern Africa by pushing an amended constitution through the colonial assembly. Wolseley assumed his new position on 30 March, effecting the required administrative changes and returning to England in October to resume duty as inspector-general. He had grown sufficiently weary of the conservatism of the duke of Cambridge to contemplate retirement before his Natal appointment, while the duke himself was increasingly hostile to Wolseley's ambition to become commander-in-chief in India. Thus, while Wolseley regarded his next appointment on 25 November 1876, to membership of the Council of India at the India Office, as a possible stepping stone to the Indian command and found that his memoranda were taken far more seriously than at the War Office, Cambridge tended to welcome the opportunity to sideline him, and had earlier suggested Wolseley should be given the command in Canada. 
Wolseley's claims for an active command could not be easily dismissed, however, and in February 1878 he was designated chief of staff to Lord Napier in the event of a British expeditionary force being sent to resist Russian control of the Dardanelles. He received promotion to lieutenant-general on 25 March 1878 and then on 22 July was appointed the first high commissioner and governor-general of Cyprus, intended as a 'place d'armes' to counter Russian regional influence. Wolseley fretted that he thus missed the Second Anglo-Afghan War, where Colley, as the viceroy's private secretary, was pressing Wolseley's claims for field command. Similarly, it appeared that he would miss the Anglo-Zulu War, but after the disaster at Isandlwana and further mishaps suffered by Chelmsford, Wolseley was appointed governor and high commissioner in South Africa with the rank of local general on 23 June 1879. Before he could get to the front, however, Chelmsford secured victory over the Zulu at Ulundi and Wolseley's military role was confined to the pursuit and capture of the Zulu king, Cetshwayo, and the defeat of the Pedi chief, Sekukuni, in the Transvaal. Civil administration had few attractions for Wolseley, and in imposing the partition of Zululand and attempting to intimidate the Boers of the Transvaal into an acceptance of annexation he contributed to future difficulties in southern Africa. Once more expecting a peerage, which might further his claims to the Indian command, and once more returning to find a new government installed at home, Wolseley was offered only the GCB he had rejected six years previously. Wolseley also entertained some hopes of securing either the Bombay or Madras commands as a means of getting to India, where the commander-in-chief was due to retire in 1881. It was made clear, however, that he could not expect an Indian appointment, and on 1 July 1880 he became quartermaster-general at the War Office. 
Wolseley was to continue as quartermaster-general until 31 March 1882 and then was adjutant-general at the War Office, albeit interrupted by the Egyptian and Sudan campaigns, until 30 September 1890. It was a period which was to throw him directly into opposition to Cambridge, who rightly sensed that it was he to whom Wolseley referred at a public dinner in June 1880 as one of 'those great boulders of prejudice and superstition who now impede the way' (Royal Archives, E25/96a). The duke feared that reform would undermine regimental tradition and the army's constitutional position, and held that long service was essential to discipline, and that drill and discipline was the primary route to military efficiency. Wolseley was hardly the dangerous radical portrayed by Cambridge and his cousin, the queen: he was to share Cambridge's opposition to the abolition of the post of commander-in-chief and its replacement with a continental-style chief of staff. Moreover, like Cambridge, he was to press for the expansion of the army, for a definitive statement of the army's priorities, and for politicians to accept their ultimate responsibility for national security policies determined on political and financial rather than military grounds. 
However, Wolseley's reforming zeal and willingness to flout seniority in staff selection made him anathema to the duke and his circle. Particularly as adjutant-general, Wolseley oversaw modernization of the infantry drill book, the introduction of mounted infantry, improvement in campaign dress, greater tactical training, extension of the intelligence department, and the preparation of mobilization plans, the last two under the direction of Henry Brackenbury. Wolseley also championed what might be regarded as an 'imperial school' as opposed to either a 'continental' or an 'Indian' school of strategic thought, placing the priority firmly on home defence and envisaging any likely war against Russia as being waged through amphibious operations at the peripheries such as the Baltic, Black Sea, or the Turkestan/Caspian area rather than across the north-west frontier. The 'Indian' view that any threat to India must be regarded as the empire's first priority did not command the support often implied. While Brackenbury was converted to the 'Indian' position after 1891, this did not challenge the prevailing orthodoxy within the War Office; the celebrated Stanhope memorandum of 1888, which virtually recapitulated Wolseley's strategic perceptions, held sway until Roberts became commander-in-chief. Even then, the triumph of the 'Indians' proved short-lived, as attention moved towards a German rather than a Russian enemy. 
The duke and the queen disliked not only Wolseley's iconoclasm but also his apparent inability to refrain from public comment adverse to the duke. They blocked the attempt by Gladstone and his secretary of state for war, Childers, to make Wolseley a peer in March 1881, an elevation intended both to give the government military support for reform in the Lords and also to mollify Wolseley for his disappointment at the selection of Roberts to command in South Africa after Colley's death. Gladstone initially threatened to resign on the peerage issue but did not persist in this. However, Wolseley was offered the post of adjutant-general in December 1881 provided he guaranteed discretion in his public statements. 
Wolseley's tenure as adjutant-general was twice interrupted by campaigns. On 20 July 1882 the cabinet decided to appoint him commander, with the temporary rank of general, of the expedition to suppress Arabi Pasha's nationalist revolt in Egypt: the cabinet minute read: 'Instructions to Wolseley: Put down Arabi and establish Khedive's power' (Gladstone, 'Diaries', 31 July 1882). He was formally appointed on 4 August, left England on 15 August, and after a feint at Alexandria, swiftly and secretly transferred his troops down the Suez Canal to Isma'iliyyah. A sharp action at Qassasin brought him up to Arabi's fortified lines at Tell al-Kebir and these were captured on 13 September. Arabi's army was routed and Cairo promptly occupied. Wolseley received promotion to full general on 18 November 1882, the thanks of parliament, and a grant of $30,000, and was created Baron Wolseley of Cairo and Wolseley, though he wanted a viscountcy. Cambridge and the queen, who had been gratified by Wolseley's employment of the duke of Connaught during the campaign, fully acknowledged Wolseley's able victory, but the duke thought it made him too powerful and suggested either a colonial governorship or the lord lieutenancy of Ireland. 
Eighteen months after his return from Egypt, Wolseley saw Charles Gordon off to Khartoum and, as soon as the extent of the Mahdist revolt became evident, urged the necessity of a relief expedition. He did not prevail, and his belated appointment to command such an expedition on 1 September 1884 was from the first a forlorn hope, irrespective of the controversy that surrounded Wolseley's choice of following the Nile to Khartoum rather than advancing across the desert from Suakin to Berber, as was counselled by most other advisers to the government. Clearly, Wolseley was heavily influenced by the Red River experience and, indeed, Canadian voyageurs were brought over to handle the 800 special boats used on the Nile. The fall of Berber to the Mahdists in May 1884 and the subsequent difficulties in trying to push a railway out from Suakin tend to suggest the Nile route might have been the better, although this can never now be determined. The expedition was dogged by logistic delays, and, for the first time in his career, Wolseley's conduct of a campaign was limited by the government, which refused to allow him go any further forward than Korti. In any case he could not be everywhere, and, arguably, by maintaining such close control for so long he had hardly encouraged the development of initiative in his subordinates, now riven by mutual animosities. Wolseley was always regarded as a 'lucky' general and he himself was to remark that the 'sun of his luck' set when Stewart was fatally wounded before Methemmeh. Command of the desert column fell to Wilson, who wasted precious days before embarking on steamers for Khartoum. Wilson reached Khartoum two days too late, on 28 January 1885, but an earlier arrival might merely have hastened the Mahdist assault. Initially Gladstone's government appeared ready to avenge Gordon, but in April it was announced that there would be no further operations in the Sudan. Having reported on the situation at Suakin in May 1885, Wolseley supervised the withdrawal of his own force to Egypt. He returned to England an embittered man in July. It was small consolation to be created a knight of St Patrick and to be elevated to viscount on 19 August 1885 with succession to his daughter. 
As the end of his term as adjutant-general approached there was talk of Wolseley finally going to India, but he firmly declined the possibility on the grounds not only that his daughter was coming out that season but also, and more significantly, because there no longer seemed any real possibility of war against Russia in central Asia. He now hoped for war against France and aimed to succeed Cambridge as commander-in-chief. Aldershot, Gibraltar, and even Australia had also been mentioned, but Wolseley took up the Irish command on 1 October 1890. With more leisure time than at the War Office he was able to indulge his tastes. He tended to dislike society functions yet enjoyed intelligent company, and he and Louisa always had a wide circle of literary and artistic acquaintances. He also contributed articles to periodicals, including a series on Napoleon for the 'Pall Mall Magazine' in 1894, republished in book form as 'The Decline and Fall of Napoleon' in the following year. He also began writing a much delayed long-term project, 'The Life of John, First Duke of Marlborough', of which two volumes were published in 1894. It remained uncompleted for, on 1 November 1895 -- he had been created a field marshal on 26 May 1894 -- Wolseley succeeded Cambridge as commander-in-chief. 
His tenure was from the beginning overshadowed by the recommendations of the Hartington commission five years earlier that the post be abolished altogether and replaced by a continental-style chief of staff and a War Office council. Through the opposition of the queen, the duke, and leading Liberals, the proposal was buried, although an emasculated War Office council was established. Wolseley sometimes advocated a soldier as a continental-style minister of defence, but he did not wish his own perceived inheritance diminished. Indeed, he regarded a chief of staff as largely a device to create a role for Brackenbury, who had sat on the commission. As secretary of state after 1892, Campbell-Bannerman produced a modified version of the Hartington scheme, reducing the powers of the commander-in-chief, whose former departmental subordinates would now sit with him on an army board with direct and equal access to the secretary of state. Cambridge was finally eased out but it was Buller, who had succeeded Wolseley as adjutant-general, whom the Liberals intended to become commander-in-chief. 
Buller, however, was not acceptable to the Salisbury administration, which suddenly came into office in June 1895, and Wolseley was offered the post. A complication was that the queen wanted her son, Connaught, to succeed her cousin, and at one stage during the incessant manoeuvring of that summer Wolseley had offered to waive his own claims in favour of Connaught and to go as ambassador to Berlin. When presented with a straight choice between Berlin and being commander-in-chief, however, he accepted the latter, with even further diminished powers as laid down in the order in council of 21 November 1895. Wolseley was to remark of his new position that he felt like the 'fifth wheel of a coach', and he strove unsuccessfully to restore what he regarded as the necessary authority of the commander-in-chief over the army's command and discipline. Wolseley's belief that Buller had betrayed him hardly helped the atmosphere within the War Office, and it was made more poisonous still by the new depths of mutual hostility between Wolseley and the politicians as represented by the new secretary of state, Lord Lansdowne, who had a firm preference for Roberts. Little was achieved beyond some increase in military establishments and the revival of the autumn manoeuvres in 1898, but by this time Wolseley's faculties were fading fast, for in 1897 he succumbed to an illness from which he never fully recovered and which badly impaired his memory. 
Wolseley could certainly take pride in the efficiency and speed of the army's mobilization for the South African War in October 1899, and was equally justified in regarding the government as foolhardy in ignoring his advice to mobilize earlier. However, the deterioration in his relationship with Lansdowne had contributed to the lack of strategic direction at the beginning of the war, and the success of eventual mobilization paled beside the shock of the defeats of 'black week' in December. As a result, Roberts was sent out to supersede Buller as commander-in-chief in South Africa without Wolseley being consulted. Wolseley was persuaded to remain at his post by the queen, finally retiring on 30 November 1900 to be succeeded -- to his bitter regret -- by Roberts. In many respects, therefore, his career ended unfulfilled, even if he had arguably laid the foundations for further professionalization of the army. Also, through no fault of his own, the Victorian army's 'only general' had never endured the supreme test of command in the field against an equal adversary. 
In retirement Wolseley published, in 1903, two disappointing volumes of autobiography, 'The Story of a Soldier's Life', which took his account only as far as Asante. He was regimental colonel of the Royal Horse Guards from 29 March 1895 to 15 November 1907 and of the Royal Irish from 20 July 1898. He died at the Villa La Tourette at Menton in France on 25 March 1913 and was buried in St Paul's Cathedral, London six days later. His widow died on 10 April 1920 at her grace-and-favour apartment in Hampton Court Palace (where in 1917 she had an oratory created in Wolseley's memory) and, after cremation at Golders Green, her ashes were placed in her husband's grave. 
Wolseley's reputation was rapidly eclipsed not only through the greater prominence accorded Lord Roberts immediately prior to the First World War but also through the impact of that war itself on military and other historiography. Sir George Arthur produced in 1922 a bowdlerized and inaccurate edition of Wolseley's correspondence with Lady Wolseley, and two years later, co-operated with Maurice's son, also Frederick, in a biography. This attempted to portray Wolseley as the true architect of the army's ultimate victory in the 'great appeal to the arbitrament of the sword' (Maurice and Arthur, 342), which had eluded Wolseley in his own lifetime. The adulatory approach was largely repeated in the 1964 biography by Joseph Lehmann, 'All Sir Garnet', emanating from the 1960s revival of interest in the Victorian army. However, Wolseley was viewed with hostility by the Canadian historian Adrian Preston in editions of his campaign journals for South Africa (1971, 1973) and the Sudan (1967) and in articles over the next decade. Subsequently there has been another revival of interest in the period, and Wolseley has received a more scholarly appraisal which, while recognizing the complexities of his character, reasserted his reputation as the leading British soldier of his generation. 


@@@@@


doc= 36996


Wood, Charles (1866-1926), organist and composer, was born on 15 June 1866 at 11 Vicar's Hill, Armagh, the third son and fifth child of fourteen children of Charles Wood (1833-1893), lay vicar of Armagh Cathedral and diocesan registrar of Armagh, and his wife, Jemima Taylor. A chorister at Armagh Cathedral, Wood was educated at the cathedral school and he studied harmony and counterpoint (1880-81) with Thomas Osborne Marks, the Armagh Cathedral organist. In 1883 he was awarded the Morley open scholarship in composition at the newly instituted Royal College of Music. At the Royal College of Music he studied composition with Hubert Parry and Charles Stanford, horn with Thomas Mann, piano with Frederic Cliffe and Franklin Taylor, and counterpoint with J. F. Bridge. Later he took lessons in composition exclusively from Stanford and in the organ as a co-second instrument. Wood remained at the Royal College of Music until 1889 owing to the continued renewal of his scholarship, even as a non-resident student, during which time he was appointed to teach harmony at the college (1888), and, with Stanford's encouragement, he won an organ scholarship to Selwyn College, Cambridge (also 1888). After five terms at Selwyn he migrated to Gonville and Caius where he was made a lecturer in harmony and counterpoint (1889) and elected organ scholar (officially becoming organist in 1891); later, in 1894, he became a fellow of the college. In 1897 he became university lecturer in harmony and counterpoint on the retirement of G. M. Garrett. At Cambridge, Wood took the degrees of BA and MusB in 1890 and those of MA and MusD in 1894. Besides playing an active part as organist at Caius, he assisted Stanford as conductor of the Cambridge University Musical Society (1888-94) and he was bandmaster of the University Volunteers (1889-97). In addition to his work at the Royal College of Music he was an examiner for the Associated Board, which took him to Australia (1901-2), was a founder member and vice-president of the Irish Folk-Song Society (1904), and was president of the Musical Association (1924). In recognition of his contribution to British musical life he received the honorary LLD from Leeds University (1904) and an honorary DMus from Oxford (1924). 
Wood's underlying desire (so his pupil Dent claimed) was to write for the stage and the concert room; his student works at the Royal College of Music -- a string quartet (1885); a piano concerto (first performed under Stanford on 22 July 1886); a violin sonata (1886); a septet (1889); and an overture, 'Much Ado about Nothing' (1889) -- would appear to bear this out. However, whether through the exigencies of his life as a teacher or organist or by the demands of choral commissions, his subsequent instrumental output was restricted to one extended symphonic work, 'Patrick Sarsfield: Symphonic Variations on an Irish Air' (1899), modelled on Parry's 'Symphonic Variations', and a series of highly assured string quartets (published with an introduction by Dent in 1929), which evince his natural classicism, a strong if conservative concept of form, and a thorough, idiomatic understanding of writing for strings. His works for the stage were similarly slender -- two scores for the Cambridge Greek plays and two Dickens-inspired chamber operas -- and a full-scale opera 'Pat in Fairyland' (with J. Todhunter) was only sketched. Between 1885 and 1904 Wood produced a series of cantatas modelled essentially on those of his mentors, Parry and Stanford: 'On Time' (Cambridge, 1898) found a powerful precedent in Parry's 'Blest Pair of Sirens', while 'A Ballad of Dundee' (Leeds, 1904) looked to the narrative designs of Stanford's 'Revenge' and 'Voyage of Maeldune'. His most original choral work was his setting of Whitman's 'Dirge for Two Veterans', cast in the mould of a funeral march. The 'Dirge' represented the zenith of his admiration for the poetry of Walt Whitman, an admiration that earlier had produced a number of fine songs, including 'Ethiopia Saluting the Colours' (1898). He also collaborated with Alfred Perceval Graves, not only in his earliest cantata, 'Spring's Summons' (1885), but also in a series of publications of Irish folk-song arrangements that were very much in the manner and fashion of Stanford's collections. 
Wood was subsequently best known, however, for his substantial contribution to Anglican church music. Though influenced by the symphonic aesthetic of Stanford's service settings, Wood was attracted more by archaic contrapuntal paradigms, which increasingly inform later works such as the evening service in F ('Collegium regale', 1915) and the a cappella anthems 'Hail, gladdening light' (1919) and 'Tis the day of resurrection' (published 1927). A more intense antiquarianism, verging on the austere, is apparent in his two settings of the 'Nunc dimittis' for R. R. Terry at Westminster Cathedral (both 1916), his communion service in the Phrygian mode (published 1923), and the 'St Mark Passion' (1921), not to mention his utilization of metrical psalm tunes from Sternhold and Hopkins, the Genevan psalter, and plainchant. His interest in hymnody and carols (which produced 'The Cowley Carol Book', 'The Cambridge Carol Book', 'An Italian Carol Book' and 'Songs of Syon') resulted from his close friendship with the scholar the Revd G. R. Woodward during the 1890s. Yet Wood was also capable of the most sumptuous romantic expression, as is evident in partsongs such as the canonic setting of 'Come, sleep' by Beaumont and Fletcher (published 1908) and Shelley's 'When winds that move not' (published 1913), as well as the two anthems for choir and organ, 'O Thou, the central orb' (published 1915) and 'Expectans expectavi' (1919). 
On 17 March 1898 Wood married Charlotte Georgina ('b'. 1875/6), daughter of Captain Robert Wills-Sandford, Scots Greys, of Castlerea House, co. Roscommon. They had five children (two sons and three daughters), but the elder son, Patrick, was killed on active service in Italy with the RAF in 1918; the tragedy visibly affected Wood deeply. Owing largely to overwork and excessive travel, he was seriously ill with influenza in 1923 and he never fully recovered thereafter. After succeeding Stanford as professor of music at Cambridge in 1924, he held the position for only two years before dying from cancer in the Evelyn Nursing Home, Cambridge, on 12 July 1926. His wife survived him. He was buried in St Giles's cemetery on Huntingdon Road, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 36997


Wood, Charles Lindley, second Viscount Halifax (1839-1934), ecumenist, was born at the Admiralty in London on 7 June 1839, the second of the eight children and eldest son of Sir Charles Wood, later first Viscount Halifax (1800-1885), Liberal politician, and his wife, Lady Mary (1807-1884), the fifth daughter of Charles Grey, second Earl Grey. He was privately educated until 1852, when he was sent to Eton College; from here he went in 1858 to Christ Church, Oxford, where he took a fourth in law and modern history in 1863. 
As a child Charles, with his sister Emily, was invited to play with the royal children at Buckingham Palace, and the friendship formed with the prince of Wales, later Edward VII, proved to be lifelong. On the prince's marriage in 1862 Wood became groom of the bedchamber. He was expected to go into politics, like his father, and in the same year he became private secretary to his cousin, Sir George Grey, the home secretary, a post which he held until 1864. He was subsequently offered a post in the government on at least two occasions, the last in 1886. 
Although Wood had fallen under the influence of the Oxford Movement even before he went to university, it was there that he heard E. B. Pusey preach and began his friendship with H. P. Liddon, to whom he made his first confession about 1863. He did some work among the poor in London, in connection with the House of Charity, Soho, and in 1866 spent three months working among cholera victims in a temporary hospital in Bethnal Green, set up by Pusey and Priscilla Lydia Sellon. He even seriously considered joining the Society of St John the Evangelist when it was started, but R. M. Benson, the founder, told him he should serve God in the world. In 1868, to the initial regret of his father, he agreed to Pusey's request that he should be president of the English Church Union (ECU), an organization founded in 1860 to maintain the Catholic heritage of the Church of England, and to defend those who were under attack for their religious principles. He regarded this as his vocation in life: 'To see the Church of England, what it should be, and ultimately to see the reunion of Christendom, exhausts every possible ambition that I can picture to myself' (Lockhart, 1.145). He was president continuously until 1919, and again from 1927 until his death. Although his involvement in church politics made him feel obliged to resign from his position in the prince's household in 1877, he never regretted his decision. Indeed, on succeeding to his father's title as second Viscount Halifax of Monk Bretton in 1885, he affirmed it by changing the family motto to 'I like my choice'. 
Wood proved to be an excellent chairman of the monthly meetings of the council of the ECU, holding together a group which included some forceful characters with divergent views, while putting his own arguments cogently and persuasively. He steered the ECU through a long series of controversies in the Church of England over doctrine and ritual, which became more bitter with the passing of the 'Public Worship Regulation Act' in 1874 and the consequent imprisonment of several clergymen. Pusey praised him as 'the sense and moderation' of the council (H. P. Liddon, 'Life of E. B. Pusey', 4, 1898, 326). When he became a peer he took advantage of his right to speak in the Lords to defend the Catholic cause. It was in no small part due to Halifax that the bishops refused to allow any more prosecutions of ritualist clergy, and that the externals of Catholic worship were restored and tolerated in the Church of England. 
Halifax had long shared Pusey's vision of the corporate reunion of the Church of England with Rome, based on mutual explanation of the Anglican and Roman formularies. Aided by the Abbe Fernand Portal, a Lazarist priest and theologian, with whom he formed a deep friendship after a chance meeting in Madeira in 1890, he initiated two dialogues. The first revolved round the question of the validity of Anglican orders, about which Portal wrote a pamphlet to stimulate interest in France. Halifax tried to rouse support for reunion on both sides of the channel. He introduced Portal to the two Anglican archbishops and made several speeches, including an important one in Bristol that he had printed and circulated. He visited both Archbishop E. W. Benson and the pope, Leo XIII, even drafting letters for each of them, although they refused to enter into direct correspondence, and, with Portal, he launched in 1895-6 the 'Revue Anglo-Romaine', a magazine dealing with the problems of reunion. The outcome was the establishment in Rome of a commission of Roman Catholic theologians and historians, whose conclusions led Leo XIII to issue his encyclical 'Apostolicae curae' (1896) condemning Anglican orders as 'absolutely null and utterly void'. Halifax was deeply hurt but, convinced of the importance of the event, he collected all the relevant documents and correspondence and published them in 1912 under the title 'Leo XIII and Anglican Orders'. 
The second dialogue took place after a gap of twenty-five years. Halifax, then in his eighties, feeling that the 'Appeal to all Christians' of the 1920 Lambeth conference had created a more favourable climate, together with Portal, approached Cardinal Mercier, the Belgian primate, who was known to be sympathetic to the cause of reunion, with a view to discussing their differences. He succeeded in getting a letter of commendation from Archbishop Randall Davidson and this, together with the fact that the archbishop later nominated two additional theologians, Charles Gore and B. J. Kidd, to join the original two, W. H. Frere and Joseph Armitage Robinson, recruited by Halifax, gave the subsequent 'Malines conversations' a semi-official character. The first conversation in 1921 was based on a memorandum on the church and sacraments, drawn up by Halifax himself. The reluctance of the archbishop and the Vatican to be openly involved made the process very slow. Halifax worked tirelessly behind the scenes, writing letters to the press and to influential friends, and publishing a 'Call to Reunion' in 1922, in order to help carry forward the talks. His increasing deafness, however, made it difficult for him to play an active part in the later conversations. After the pope put an end to them, following the deaths of Mercier and Portal, Halifax, ignoring the wishes of the archbishop of Canterbury and the new archbishop of Malines (Mechelen), published the separate but mutually agreed reports on the conversations by the Anglican and Roman Catholic participants in 'The Conversations at Malines 1921-1925', and his own 'Notes on the Conversations at Malines' in 1928. Two years later, with a blatant disregard for the copyright laws, he published all the papers read at Malines, except one by Gore. Halifax was undoubtedly unrealistic about the possibilities of reunion at that time but, without what Gore called his 'so courageous a hopefulness' (Lockhart, 2.311), this first semi-official dialogue would never have taken place. 
On 22 April 1869 Wood had married Lady Agnes Elizabeth Courtenay (1838-1919), only daughter of William Reginald Courtenay, eleventh earl of Devon, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Hugh Fortescue, first Earl Fortescue. It was a happy marriage which lasted fifty years. The couple had four sons, all but the youngest of whom died young, and two daughters. The fourth son was Edward Frederick Lindley Wood, first earl of Halifax (1881-1959), viceroy of India and foreign secretary. Halifax enjoyed the life of a country gentleman, entertaining his friends and relations and hunting in Yorkshire, where he lived at Hickleton Hall, near Doncaster. He was 'a charming host and a whimsical companion', delighting in practical jokes, family games, and dressing up (Hodgson, 7). He died on 19 January 1934 at Hickleton, where he was buried four days later, one of his last achievements, the union of the ECU and the Anglo-Catholic Congress, having just been accomplished. A few years after his death, his son Edward published the ghost stories which he had collected throughout his life and loved to tell in 'Lord Halifax's Ghost Book' (1936) and 'Further Stories from Lord Halifax's Ghost Book' (1937). 


@@@@@


doc= 36998


Wood, Edward Frederick Lindley, first earl of Halifax (1881-1959), politician and diplomat, was born on 16 April 1881 at Powderham Castle in Devon, the home of his maternal grandfather, the eleventh earl of Devon. He was the sixth child and fourth son of Charles Lindley Wood (1839-1934), who later became the second Viscount Halifax, and his wife, Lady Agnes Elizabeth Courtenay (1838-1919). His great-grandfather was Earl Grey of the 'Reform Bill' of 1832. The Woods had emerged from among the gentry of Yorkshire to become one of the great landowning houses of northern England, but with three elder brothers Edward seemed to have little prospect of inheriting his father's title. Between 1886 and 1890, however, each of his brothers fell victim to one of the Victorian child-killing diseases, leaving him heir to the family viscountcy. These bereavements help to explain the extraordinarily close bond which developed between Wood and his father, despite the latter's somewhat macabre sense of humour. The world into which he was born was dominated by religion and hunting, and these remained the great passions of Wood's life, notwithstanding his distinguished political career. In later life he was sometimes known as the Holy Fox, a play upon the title which he inherited. Wood's father had accepted the presidency of the English Church Union in 1868 at the age of twenty-nine and retained this position until 1919. Thereafter he devoted himself to the cause of the reunion of the Christian churches and provided a spiritual commitment from which his son never deviated. He was president of the union again from 1927 until his death in 1934; his influence upon his surviving son was immense. 
Wood was born with an atrophied left arm, but shrugged off its effects and learned as a child to shoot and ride to hounds. He went to St David's preparatory school in Reigate in September 1892 at the age of eleven. He was not at all happy there and he found Eton College, to which he transferred in September 1894, only marginally more congenial. Its emphasis on the classics and sports failed to arouse his enthusiasm. Only at Oxford did Wood's academic talents begin to blossom. He arrived at Christ Church, his father's old college, in October 1899. There he concentrated on his historical studies and took no part in the debates of the union. His reward was a first-class degree in modern history and election to a fellowship at All Souls in November 1903 which he held until 1910. As junior fellow, Wood's duties included the preparation of a mayonnaise sauce for Sunday dinner and decanting the college's vintage port, but he enjoyed the intellectual atmosphere and began an association which lasted for the rest of his life. 
Upon the completion of his probationary year at All Souls Wood embarked upon an eighteenth-century-style grand tour with his Oxford friend Ludovic Heathcoat Amory. This took him to South Africa, India, Australia, and New Zealand and gave him the chance to study what became known as the dominions at a time of transition. Wood returned to England in 1905, but was not immediately tempted to enter politics at a difficult moment in the history of the Conservative Party. Instead, he returned to All Souls and devoted himself over the next two years to further academic study, which led to the publication of a short biography of John Keble. On 21 September 1909 he married Lady Dorothy Evelyn Augusta Onslow (1885-1976), daughter of the fourth earl of Onslow, who had held government office on four occasions and had also been governor-general of New Zealand. Lady Dorothy introduced a lightness and informality into her husband's life, which did something to lessen the natural aloofness for which Wood was already noted. It was a happy marriage, broken only by Wood's death fifty years later. The couple's first child, Anne, was born in July 1910, followed by a son, Charles, in October 1912. Two further sons, Peter and Richard, were born in 1916 and 1920 respectively. 
By the time of his marriage, Wood had decided to stand for parliament. Ripon was a natural Conservative seat, although the sitting tory member had, like so many of his colleagues, gone down to defeat in the Liberal landslide of 1906. With Conservative fortunes recovering, though not to the extent of producing a change of government, Wood was victorious in the general election of January 1910, securing a comfortable majority of more than 1000 over his Liberal opponent. Though he sat in the Commons until 1925, it was never his natural milieu, especially in the torrid atmosphere which characterized party politics in the years before the outbreak of the First World War. His own inclinations were towards reason, compromise, and conciliation, but these seemed to have little place in the parliamentary affairs of the day. He successfully defended his seat in the second general election of 1910 -- though with a reduced majority -- but it was probably to his relief, as someone for whom the hustings offered little attraction, that this was the last occasion upon which Wood fought a contested parliamentary election. At the elections of 1918, 1922, 1923, and 1924 he was returned unopposed. Wood made little impact in the Commons before 1914. Over the 'Parliament Bill' of 1911 he found himself, somewhat surprisingly, in the ditcher camp of outright resistance to the Liberal government's proposals, but he was more stirred by the bill to disestablish the Welsh church, which he opposed vigorously in debate. 
As captain in the Queen's Own Yorkshire dragoons, a yeomanry regiment recruited around his home at Hickleton in the West Riding of Yorkshire, Wood found his fate largely determined for him with the outbreak of European war in August 1914. His parliamentary appearances were inevitably rare during this period, but he did on one occasion manage to urge the immediate introduction of conscription. His division was not involved at the front line until 1916. Somewhat to his surprise he was mentioned in dispatches in January 1917 -- 'Heaven knows what for!' -- and, believing that he would be more usefully employed in England, he was relieved to be offered the post of deputy director of the labour supply department in the Ministry of National Service. There he served from November 1917 until the end of 1918. Later in his career Wood became closely associated with policies designed to avoid war if this was at all possible. In the First World War, however, while initially showing some sympathy for Lord Lansdowne's call for a compromise settlement, he emerged among those Conservative hardliners who demanded all-out victory and a punitive peace with Germany, putting his name to the Lowther petition in April 1919 which encouraged Lloyd George to take up an intransigent position at the Paris conference. 
In the post-war parliament Wood became a member of a small group of MPs which included Samuel Hoare, Philip Lloyd-Graeme, and Walter Elliot, whose aim was to espouse progressive policies. With his friend George Lloyd he produced a 100-page political pamphlet entitled 'The Great Opportunity' (1918), which argued that the Conservative Party should focus on the welfare of the community rather than the advantage of the individual. It also advocated a federal solution to the Irish question. Ireland, indeed, was one of Wood's main political interests at this time along with housing and agriculture. But his parliamentary career seemed likely to come to an early end when, in May 1920, he was offered and accepted the governor-generalship of South Africa. The offer, however, was withdrawn when it became clear that the South Africans expected someone of cabinet rank or a member of the royal family to fill this post. Soon afterwards Wood got his first foot on the ministerial ladder when appointed under-secretary for the colonies in April 1921. It was not an auspicious beginning, since the secretary of state, Winston Churchill, seemed reluctant at first even to meet his new assistant. Matters eventually improved, and in winter 1921-2 Wood toured the British West Indies in order to report to Churchill on the political and social situation there. 
Like several others Wood's political prospects were transformed by the ending of Lloyd George's coalition government in October 1922. He had become increasingly disillusioned with the latter's premiership, attended a meeting of junior ministers on 16 October at which the extent of disquiet about the prime minister became apparent, and was among the majority who voted at the Carlton Club on 23 October that the Conservative Party should contest the next general election as an independent force. With many leading Conservatives remaining loyal to Lloyd George, Wood was elevated from the obscurity of junior office to the ranks of the cabinet as president of the Board of Education on 24 October 1922. His appointment did not arouse much excitement, though some saw his elevation as evidence of an improvement in the moral character of the administration. In the climate of post-war austerity education was not a position offering many opportunities for constructive action, and Wood inevitably regarded it as little more than a stepping stone to higher office. It was indicative of his priorities that he made sure that his ministerial schedule left time for two days' hunting each week. This first experience of cabinet government ended when Baldwin called a surprise general election in December 1923 on the question of tariffs, a decision about which Wood felt considerable misgivings. 
After a brief interlude of Labour government, Wood returned to office as minister of agriculture on 6 November 1924. It was an appointment for which his landowning background equipped him well but, as was the case at education, it was not a post which then offered much scope for constructive initiatives. He was responsible for getting the agricultural returns and tithe bills through the House of Commons and found himself devoting far more of his time to his ministerial duties than at the Board of Education. But in October 1925 Wood was approached by the secretary of state for India, Lord Birkenhead, with the offer of the viceroyalty and governor-generalship in succession to Lord Reading, the Liberal lawyer. He had a family interest in India, as his paternal grandfather, Sir Charles Wood, had been the second holder of the secretaryship of state between 1859 and 1866. Nevertheless, his first inclination was to decline the offer on family grounds. With his sons of school age and, more importantly, with his 86-year-old father unlikely to survive a five-year viceroyalty, Wood was reluctant to leave Britain at this time. Only when his father recommended acceptance did he acquiesce. He now gave up his Commons seat, taking the title of Baron Irwin of Kirby Underdale, and left for India on 17 March 1926. 
In many ways Irwin was well fitted for his new post. He relished the pomp which was inseparable from it. Physically, he cut an impressive figure, and was an accomplished horseman. Six feet five inches tall, he easily gave an impression of aristocratic self-confidence which set him apart from lesser men. As a contemporary recorded: 'He has a magnificent head, and his tall figure and Cecilian stoop and sympathetic kindly eyes give more the impression of a Prince of the Church than a politician' (R. Bernays, 'Naked Fakir', 1931, 51). Yet at the same time he showed a sympathy for the Indian point of view unmatched by many of his predecessors. He also displayed considerable physical bravery in the face of more than one attempt to assassinate him during his time in the subcontinent. His viceroyalty was characterized by a patient commitment to ensuring that a contented India should remain inside the British Commonwealth for the foreseeable future. He set out to win Indian goodwill and co-operation, but could be firm when necessary, and stressed that it would be difficult to meet Indian wishes while Indians remained divided among themselves. In his first major speech as viceroy he appealed for an end to the endemic communal violence between Muslims and Hindus, and returned to this theme at intervals throughout his time in India. Towards terrorism he was uncompromising and, despite his Christian beliefs, felt no hesitation or remorse when signing death warrants which he considered justified. 
Many of the parameters of Irwin's viceroyalty had already been drawn when he assumed the reins of office. An important provision of the 'Government of India Act' of 1919, embodying the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms, had been that after an interval of ten years a commission should be appointed to inquire into the working of the new constitution and to advise on whether further reforms were needed. In the intervening period Indian national aspirations had grown apace, and Irwin fully accepted that eventual Indian self-government was inevitable and that Britain must steer the country in that direction in the medium-term future. Birkenhead decided to bring forward the appointment of the statutory commission, placing it under the chairmanship of Sir John Simon, but the fatal decision was that it should consist entirely of British members of parliament. Irwin, calculating that a mixed commission would have little chance of producing an agreed report and wrongly anticipating that Indians would, after suitable protest, fall into line with the British government's approach, had advised Birkenhead in this sense. It was the most fateful mistake of his viceroyalty, and one he came bitterly to regret. Once the composition of the commission was announced in November 1927, it became apparent that all the leading parties in India, including Congress, whose co-operation would be vital to any progress, would boycott Simon's mission. Irwin reassured Birkenhead that once Simon had arrived in India he would be able to win over moderate opinion, but the auguries were not good. In fact the Indian leaders treated the commission, which landed at Bombay on 3 February 1928, as if it had never arrived. Over the months which followed matters improved somewhat and Simon achieved some limited success, but his task was almost impossible, and Irwin became convinced that some new gesture would be necessary if real progress was to be made. Ironically, the viceroy's way ahead became easier following a change of government in Britain which saw Ramsay MacDonald form his second administration in June 1929, in which William Wedgwood Benn, a former Liberal, took the Indian portfolio. 
Irwin arrived on leave in Britain on 13 July, bringing with him a suggested exchange of letters between Simon and the new prime minister. The idea was that Simon would propose a round-table conference to discuss the eventual findings of his commission. MacDonald would reply by agreeing to the conference while stating that the Montagu declaration of 1917 had contained an implicit commitment to the ultimate attainment by India of dominion status. The drafts were shown to Simon, who had serious misgivings about a round-table conference. On the question of dominion status, however, Irwin got the impression that Simon at this stage had no such objections. Simon's fellow commissioners took almost exactly the opposite view, with the result that the exchange of letters went ahead with the dominion status statement omitted. But Simon failed to convey his colleagues' strength of feeling against the proposed declaration. Their belief -- which Simon soon came to share -- was that such an announcement would cut the ground from beneath the commission's forthcoming report. Indeed, it is curious that Irwin, too, did not seem to understand this. Dominion status would inevitably become a minimum demand rather than a maximum goal. The viceroy went ahead, and in October made a public declaration that the British government viewed dominion status as the natural issue of India's constitutional progress. 
This announcement had a dramatic impact in both Britain and India. Irwin's initiative was roundly denounced by much of the Conservative Party, even though he was only spelling out what had been implicit in British policy for more than a decade. His predecessor as viceroy, Lord Reading, joined in the condemnation while Simon also made his displeasure apparent. In India there was briefly renewed hope that British policy might yet satisfy national aspirations, but a conference in December 1929 between Irwin and Indian political leaders in New Delhi failed to produce agreement. Gandhi now withdrew to plan a campaign of civil disobedience with a view to securing complete independence from Britain. In a calculated gesture of defiance he walked for twenty-four days to the sea, where he picked up a handful of salt. This symbolic gesture broke a law which made it a punishable offence for Indians to own salt which had not been obtained through the government's monopoly. Irwin had little option but to order his arrest. He realized, however, that without Gandhi's co-operation there could be no real progress. George V had already opened the first round-table conference in November 1930, boycotted by Congress because of Gandhi's imprisonment. So in January 1931 the Indian leader was released, and on his initiative a series of eight meetings now took place between the viceroy and the mahatma. The contrast between the two men could hardly have been more stark, and Irwin never fully understood the Indian and his ways. As he once explained to his father, 'it was rather like talking to someone who had stepped off another planet on to this for a short visit of a fortnight and whose whole mental outlook was quite other to that which was regulating most of the affairs on the planet to which he had descended. (Birkenhead, 247)' But there developed a feeling of mutual respect in which the common strand of religious commitment and motivation was certainly important. Irwin showed a steely side to his character in these negotiations which led to the so-called Delhi pact of March 1931. Gandhi's concessions were substantial. Civil disobedience would be abandoned and Congress agreed to be represented at future sessions of the round-table conference. 
Irwin returned to England at the end of his five-year appointment on 3 May 1931. Already appointed GCSI and GCIE in 1926, he now received a knighthood of the Garter, an order of which he was to become chancellor in 1943. The Labour government whose Indian policy he had served so well collapsed in August 1931, and Baldwin was keen to make use of his talents as one of the quota of Conservative ministers in the newly constituted National Government which replaced it. But Irwin declined the offer of the foreign secretaryship, preferring for the time being at least to return to his estates in Yorkshire. He was also concerned that this appointment would not go down well with the right wing of the Conservative Party who resented his attitude towards Indian self-government. Instead, he took advantage of his relative leisure to accept an invitation from Vincent Massey to travel to Canada to deliver the inaugural Massey lecture at Toronto University. But the Conservative leader was not to be denied: in June 1932, after the sudden death of Sir Donald Maclean, Irwin agreed with some genuine reluctance to return to his former position as president of the Board of Education. As in the 1920s, however, the prevailing economic climate offered little scope for policy initiatives. In any case Irwin's views on education were becoming dated. On a visit to Hickleton he announced, 'We want a school to train them up for servants and butlers' (Birkenhead, 326). Though this lay outside his strictly departmental responsibilities, he was also enlisted to help Samuel Hoare in preparing the government's largest single piece of legislation, the 'Government of India Bill', which finally worked its way onto the statute book in 1935. In the mean time Irwin succeeded Viscount Grey as chancellor of the University of Oxford in 1933 and, upon the death of his 94-year-old father in January 1934, became Viscount Halifax. When Baldwin and the ageing prime minister, Ramsay MacDonald, exchanged positions in June 1935, Halifax, with some feeling of relief, moved from education to the War Office. Though he was secretary of state for only a few months, this move marked the beginning of his close association with the foreign and diplomatic affairs of the decade which would dominate the remainder of his ministerial career. The experience quickly convinced him that the country was unprepared for war, though at the committee of imperial defence he challenged the assertion of the chiefs of staff that the country's paramount need was to step up the pace of rearmament. It was a weakness in his understanding of the international situation that he never fully grasped, until it was too late, the enormity of Hitler's capacity for evil. Like Neville Chamberlain, Halifax retained a misplaced confidence that negotiation and the application of human reason were the best ways to ameliorate the threatening European scene. 
After the general election in November 1935 Halifax became lord privy seal and leader of the House of Lords. Then, when Neville Chamberlain became prime minister in May 1937, he was moved to be lord president of the council while still leading the Lords. In these non-departmental posts Halifax was free to range across the whole spectrum of government business, but both Baldwin and Chamberlain made especial use of his talents in the field of foreign affairs, where his interventions became increasingly important. During the cabinet discussion of the crisis created by the premature disclosure of the Hoare-Laval pact in December 1935 it was Halifax who warned that, if the foreign secretary was not dismissed, the situation might become so serious as to bring down the whole government. With Anthony Eden as foreign secretary Halifax was almost deputy foreign minister in the Lords, though this formal title was avoided probably out of sensitivity to Eden's position. In general the two men worked well together, though a legend later grew up surrounding the circumstances in which Halifax, as master of the Middleton hunt, accepted an invitation from the Reichsmarschall, Hermann Goring, to visit a hunting exhibition in Berlin in November 1937 and to shoot foxes in Pomerania ['see 'Cliveden set]. In later years this episode was presented, not least by Eden himself, as an illustration of Chamberlain's efforts to circumvent the Foreign Office in order to pursue his policy of appeasement in defiance of his professional advisers. In the circumstances Halifax was careful, after the Second World War, to place his own version of events on the record. According to this, Eden was himself instrumental in pressing Halifax to accept the invitation. The foreign secretary's later misgivings were partly the result of the promptings of his staff and partly a consequence of the way the visit was arranged, especially when it became clear that Halifax would be going to Berchtesgaden to meet Hitler. At this encounter, where the English aristocrat nearly mistook the Fuhrer for a footman, he failed to give any indication of British objections to German ambitions in Austria and Czechoslovakia. Indeed, he spoke of 'possible alterations in the European order which might be destined to come about with the passage of time'. In general, the visit did little to open his eyes to the true nature of the Nazi regime. 
By February 1938 Eden's relations with Chamberlain had reached breaking point. Halifax warned the prime minister of the growing strains within the cabinet and, when the crisis came, did his best, but without success, to effect a reconciliation between the two men. Eden duly resigned on 20 February, exasperated above all by Chamberlain's increasing interference in the diplomatic arena and unwilling to make further concessions to Italy without corresponding gestures of good faith from Mussolini. Chamberlain appointed Halifax to the vacant ministry on 21 February. Despite criticism from the Labour Party and elsewhere that it was inappropriate to appoint a peer to so senior an office, he was the logical successor. He had emerged as one of Chamberlain's most trusted lieutenants and had been deeply involved in foreign affairs for the past two years. 
Halifax's foreign secretaryship was the pivot of his career, and it remains the period upon which his historical reputation ultimately depends. Just as Eden did much to save his standing at the bar of history by his timely resignation, so Halifax did much to compromise his when he stepped into Eden's shoes. It was once usual to dismiss him as a mere cipher of his prime minister, one of the 'guilty men' collectively responsible for bringing Britain to the very brink of disaster in the summer of 1940 through the pursuit of the disastrous policy of appeasement. Chamberlain, as he testified in his private correspondence, certainly found Halifax a more congenial colleague than Eden -- 'I thank God for a steady unruffled Foreign Secretary' (Roberts, 102). Furthermore, Halifax's own memoirs did nothing to dispel the image that he was little more than a faithful subordinate, loyally carrying out the policies of his master in Downing Street. More recently, however, historians have used the documentary record to draw a more subtle picture, in which Halifax played a critical role in modifying Chamberlain's designs, emerging in the opinion of some as the dominant force in the making of British foreign policy by the spring of 1939. Halifax gave few indications of this independence of judgement during the early months of his foreign secretaryship. Indeed, he accepted the logic of Chamberlain's policies and had told the cabinet in December 1937 that 'in spite of all the efforts of the Foreign Secretary, the Prime Minister and others, we had arrived at a position which above all we had wished to avoid and in which we were faced with the possibility of three enemies at once. The conclusion which [Halifax] drew was... that this threw an immensely heavy burden on diplomacy and that we ought to get on good terms with Germany. (Roberts, 82)' Halifax had been in his new office just three weeks when Hitler incorporated Austria into the Reich. By this time Halifax was becoming more committed to a policy of rearmament, but the Anschluss left him under few illusions about the vulnerability of Czechoslovakia to the next initiative of Hitler's foreign policy. Indeed, he saw Britain's task in the summer of 1938 in terms of making the disagreeable task of forcing concessions on the Czechs as painless as possible. 
Halifax's exclusion from Chamberlain's party on the latter's three visits to Germany in September 1938 seemed merely to confirm the ascendancy of the prime minister and the fact that Eden's replacement had removed the final brake upon the pursuit of Chamberlain's personal diplomacy. But it is now clear that it was Halifax, influenced by his permanent under-secretary, Sir Alexander Cadogan, who persuaded the cabinet to reject the terms which the prime minister brought back from his second meeting with Hitler at Godesberg. This brought the country to the brink of war, a situation averted only by Chamberlain's dramatic flight to the conference at Munich, which determined the dismemberment of Czechoslovakia on terms marginally more favourable than those put forward at Godesberg. More importantly, however, Chamberlain's authority had been successfully challenged. His ascendancy within the cabinet was never as strong again. Thus a growing appreciation of Halifax's weight within the government -- and his position was always going to be strong, as Chamberlain could scarcely afford to lose a second foreign secretary -- has helped to modify perceptions of the all-powerful position of the prime minister. 
In the wake of Munich, Halifax urged Chamberlain not to use the popular mood of relief that war had been averted as an excuse to call a snap general election, but rather to seize the opportunity to broaden the basis of his government by the inclusion of Conservative critics such as Eden and Churchill and, if possible, Labour and Liberal opponents. Chamberlain took the first part of this advice but not the second. No general election was held, but the government remained essentially unchanged. It also fell to the foreign secretary to defend the settlement reached at Munich in the House of Lords on 3 October. He did so in more measured terms than had the prime minister in his notorious 'peace for our time' remark from the window of 10 Downing Street. Halifax argued that Munich was not a triumph but the lesser of evils, the best solution to an almost intolerable dilemma which offered no easy or entirely acceptable solution. In the weeks after Munich, Halifax was deeply affected by mounting evidence of Nazi barbarism, especially the anti-Jewish pogrom of 10 November, Kristallnacht. He now argued that a German expansion into eastern Europe would not help the cause of peace, but would simply draw the countries concerned into Germany's economic orbit. He advocated the use of British capital to lessen their dependence on Germany. 
After accompanying Chamberlain on his visit to Rome in January 1939, Halifax seems to have been instrumental in bringing about a distinct change of emphasis in British policy that spring. As early as January he proposed that full staff talks should be held with the French with a view to preparing for a possible war with both Germany and Italy. The stiffening in Chamberlain's line after the Prague coup, evident in his Birmingham speech on 17 March, which culminated in the issuing of a guarantee of Polish independence at the end of the month, owed much to Halifax's influence. 'The Polish guarantee was his pet scheme and his favourite god-child', noted Henry Channon (R. R. James, ed., 'Chips', 1967, 209). Despite his natural reluctance to embrace the atheistic regime of Joseph Stalin, he was quicker than Chamberlain to appreciate that only an alliance with the Soviet Union could give military reality to the Polish guarantee. The ensuing negotiations with the Soviets were perhaps doomed to failure, but Halifax did little to instil a sense of urgency into the proceedings and has been criticized for not convincing the Russians of Britain's earnestness by leading the negotiating team in person. He was once again with Chamberlain in the crisis of September 1939 and as much as him the object of the cabinet revolt which put a stop to any further delay in the British declaration of war, which duly came on 3 September. He was at least adamant that there could be no further negotiations with Hitler while German troops remained on Polish soil. 
Halifax remained foreign secretary in Chamberlain's reorganized war cabinet, though the role of diplomacy was inevitably transformed in the context of a European war. The main aim of his foreign policy was now to prevent the Soviet Union joining the ranks of Britain's military opponents. He favoured a cautious strategic approach, believing that the bombing of Germany at this stage of the conflict would merely provoke a retaliation which Britain was as yet ill-placed to resist. The fact that he alone among the four leading ministers who were regarded as the architects of appeasement -- Chamberlain, Simon, Hoare, and himself -- was not the object of vehement criticism in the crisis of May 1940 is striking. Indeed, there is evidence that many Labour leaders as well as the king and the majority of the Conservative Party would have preferred him to Churchill as Chamberlain's successor. As it was, it was Churchill who seized the initiative, welcoming a supreme challenge from which Halifax evidently drew back. Though the latter stressed the difficulties created by his position as a peer, there is little doubt that these could have been overcome had Halifax had the will to press his own claims. The crisis revealed inner self-doubts on the part of a man for whom political ambition had never been the most compelling motivation. A psychosomatic stomach-ache perhaps helped to confirm his misgivings. He may also have believed that he could, by remaining in his present position, exercise an influence over Churchill greater than he would have enjoyed as a prime minister with little grasp of military strategy. More importantly, Halifax's act of self-denial, by opening the way to Churchill's wartime premiership, was probably the most significant act of his long career. 
Though widely seen as a Chamberlain loyalist Halifax retained his position as foreign secretary in the new government. By now the war had reached a critical stage. Behind Churchill's rhetoric of unwavering resistance, the British government had to consider whether, with France collapsing and a German invasion perhaps imminent, the country could realistically hope to continue the struggle. Like many others, Halifax had serious doubts about Churchill's judgement and saw his own most important role as being to restrain the new prime minister's more romantic excesses. During the 'Phoney War' Halifax, confident that victory could be secured at a reasonable cost, had set his face against talk of a compromise peace. But as Britain faced the prospect of being left alone to confront Hitler's menace and with the fate of the army in doubt, he began to wonder whether the war could be won and to regard peace negotiations with the Nazis as a necessary development. Indeed, he believed that any peace terms which the Germans might offer would be more acceptable if Britain did not wait until her own position in the war had become absolutely desperate. Matters came to a head at meetings of the war cabinet on 26, 27, and 28 May, at which the debate became increasingly polarized between Churchill and Halifax. The latter argued that 'we had to face the fact that it was not so much now a question of imposing a complete defeat upon Germany, but of safeguarding the independence of our own Empire and if possible that of France' (Charmley, 403). At one point Halifax came near to resignation, an outcome which at that stage of the war might have been fatal to Churchill's government. But the prime minister successfully appealed over the head of his foreign secretary to the government's junior ministers. With their backing, and with Chamberlain now lining up behind him, Churchill was able to secure a majority in the war cabinet to thwart Halifax. 
These events may well have sealed Halifax's ultimate fate. As the country survived the battle of Britain, Churchill's defiance seemed to have been justified -- even though, on rational grounds, there had been much to be said for the foreign secretary's line that Britain should at least have investigated what peace terms were on offer. In the reshuffle which followed Chamberlain's final resignation from the government, Churchill tried hard to ease Halifax out of the Foreign Office. The latter was offered the lord presidency of the council, occupancy of 11 Downing Street, the leadership of the House of Lords, and a position which seemed to approximate to the deputy premiership. Halifax, however, preferred to stay where he was, although he did consent to resume the leadership of the Lords. Churchill was soon able to renew his efforts. When Lord Lothian, the popular and successful British ambassador in Washington, died suddenly in December, the prime minister invited Halifax to fill the vacancy. It was undoubtedly a post of great significance. Ultimate victory probably depended upon increasingly close American co-operation in the war effort, but Halifax was by no means a natural candidate for the post and it is difficult to escape the conclusion that Churchill was now determined to remove him from the higher reaches of the British government, even though the departing foreign secretary was assured that he could resume his place at the war cabinet table whenever he was on leave in London. Churchill's real motives are recorded in the diary of his private secretary. Halifax 'would never live down the reputation for appeasement which he and the F. O. had won themselves here. He had no future in this country' (J. Colville, 'The Fringes of Power', 1985, 321). Halifax's first reaction to Churchill's suggestion was one of horror. He and Lady Halifax tried desperately to persuade Eden, whom the prime minister had clearly pencilled in for the impending Foreign Office vacancy, to go in his stead. When, however, Churchill pressed the point, invoking the compelling dictates of duty in wartime, he had little alternative but to accept. The Halifaxes set sail in January 1941. 
An English aristocrat with a reputation for aloofness had few obvious qualifications for his new assignment in the most egalitarian of all societies. Though Roosevelt took the unusual step of welcoming the new ambassador in person as he stepped onto American soil, Halifax's first months in the United States were far from easy. He was guilty of a series of public relations disasters. He never really understood how the American government managed to function, once likening it to a disorderly day's rabbit-shooting. Gradually, however, he found his feet, aided by the tact of his cousin Angus McDonnell, who acted as a sort of stage manager for the new ambassador, and by his own readiness to throw himself tirelessly into his duties. From 1941 onwards Halifax became part of an increasingly professional propaganda effort in the United States. An incident in the autumn when he was pelted with rotten eggs and tomatoes by angry isolationists did his reputation much good in the longer term. His tours across the country brought him into contact with more ordinary American citizens than any of his predecessors had ever encountered. Halifax formed a good working relationship with the American president, while recognizing that he must necessarily take a back seat in the fostering of Anglo-American relations whenever Churchill was in the United States. He also won the confidence of the influential Harry Hopkins, Roosevelt's closest adviser. But Halifax's position was really transformed by America's entry into the war in December 1941 following the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. Thereafter he enjoyed a widespread popularity throughout the United States. It was a considerable act of transformation on Halifax's part, which allowed the man who had gloried in the imperial pomp of New Delhi to be seen eating a hot dog at a Baltimore ball game. 
In March 1943, arguing that his most important work was now done, Halifax indicated to Eden that he would like to return home. He had been marked by family tragedy. In November 1942 he heard that his second son, Peter, had been killed in action in north Africa. Only two months later he learned that his youngest son, Richard, had been severely wounded. Halifax remained a somewhat reluctant ambassador over the following months. In May 1944 he was consoled by the news that Churchill had put his name forward for an earldom. In the event he was still in post when the war came to an end and he agreed to the request of the new Labour foreign secretary, Ernest Bevin, that he should carry on until May 1946. This extension enabled him to play an important part in the negotiations led by Lord Keynes to secure an American loan after the abrupt termination of lend-lease, and he was still in the United States when Churchill delivered his celebrated iron curtain speech at Fulton, Missouri, of whose tone he was somewhat critical. 
On his return to Britain, Halifax was invited to join Churchill's shadow cabinet, but he declined the offer. He was now sixty-five, and in any case believed that his recent service under a Labour administration made his immediate return to the front rank of Conservative politics inappropriate. He preferred to go back to his Yorkshire estates, though he continued to play an active role in the House of Lords. One of his most telling interventions in the upper chamber came in a debate on a motion by Lord Templewood, the former Samuel Hoare, criticizing the decision of the Labour cabinet to hand over India to an Indian government by June 1948 at the latest 'without any provision for the protection of minorities or the discharge of their obligations'. In a measured speech which persuaded many wavering peers to support the government, Halifax concluded that he was not prepared to condemn what the government was doing unless he could honestly and confidently recommend a better solution, which he could not. One of his last important interventions in the Lords (11 December 1956) was to criticize the way in which Eden's government had mishandled the Suez crisis. He was particularly concerned about the damage done to Anglo-American relations. 
Halifax's final years were characterized by a combination of honours, good works, leisure, and travel. He gave much time to the governing body of Eton, to the chancellorship of Oxford University, and to All Souls, of which he was an honorary fellow after 1934. Soon after his return from the United States he succeeded Lord Harewood as chancellor of the University of Sheffield and he derived considerable satisfaction from his appointment as high steward of Westminster. He received honorary degrees from more than a dozen British, Canadian, and American universities. As president of the Pilgrims he was able to renew his work for Anglo-American friendship and co-operation, and in 1947 he became chairman of the General Advisory Council of the BBC. He resumed his duties as master of the Middleton hunt, and devoted himself to his estates and the affairs of the local church. In July 1957 he was appointed grand master of the Order of St Michael and St George. He found time to write a slim volume of memoirs entitled 'Fulness of Days', published in 1957. It was an extremely reticent book which added little to the historical record. In particular he made few efforts to challenge what had by then become the orthodox view of appeasement as a short-sighted and mistaken policy. By the mid-1950s Halifax's health had begun to fail, though he lived long enough to celebrate his golden wedding anniversary on 21 September 1959. He also had the satisfaction of seeing his youngest son, Richard, who had been elected to parliament in 1950, secure junior office in 1955. He died at Garrowby Hall, Garrowby, Yorkshire, on 23 December 1959 after a heart attack, and was buried on 28 December in the churchyard at Kirby Underdale. His titles passed to his eldest son, Charles Ingram Courtenay Wood. His widow lived on until 1976. 
Halifax's public career has three main component parts. He was a noteworthy viceroy of India, who played a key role in steering that country towards independence within the Commonwealth in the face of many siren voices of protest from within his own party. His period near the centre of power in the making of British foreign policy is now less roundly condemned than it once was. Though his background and character did not equip him to deal with the European dictators, he deserves some credit for abandoning, or at least for decisively modifying, the policy of appeasement. By March 1939 one prominent critic of the government's foreign policy had concluded that, thanks to Halifax's mounting influence, the government was 'now doing what we would wish' (Dutton, 'Eden', 135). After failing to become prime minister in May 1940, his role later that month in trying to persuade Winston Churchill of the need to consider a possible compromise peace shows not that he was a potential Quisling within the British cabinet, but rather that he was not taken in by the prime minister's sublime confidence in victory in the face of the weight of available evidence to the contrary. Exiled to the United States, he none the less made his most important contribution to public life, helping to lubricate the Anglo-American relationship which was often more fraught than early interpretations of the Churchill-Roosevelt partnership tended to suggest. 
Halifax belonged to an age and a class for whom political affairs were never an all-consuming activity. 'It is well known', noted one contemporary in 1936, 'that Halifax is only too anxious to retire from public life as he invariably tells everyone that his one object is to give up politics and go back and live at his home' (Neville Chamberlain MSS, NC7/11/29/37, University of Birmingham). To a later generation his passion for the chase sits somewhat uncomfortably beside his deep spirituality. Indeed, he once admitted that 'it surely shows how deeply rooted we are in the elemental instinct that steeplechasing and clay pigeon shooting, in which the fact of killing is absent, does not make nearly such an appeal to us as hunting something for its life. (Birkenhead, 197)' But Halifax was not encumbered by any particular intellectual subtlety. He placed a strong faith in his own judgement and, having reached a decision, was not easily deflected from it. In each of the posts he occupied he exuded an old-fashioned aristocratic authority, accentuated by a speech impediment which prevented him pronouncing the letter 'r'. 'My withers are completely unwung', he told John Wheeler-Bennett in response to criticism of the Munich settlement (ibid., 464). He was not an easy man to know. Most of those who met him were confronted by a form of professional charm which came easily to him, and with only a few close friends did he find it possible to relax his guard. Despite considerable inherited wealth he had a horror of waste and was extremely careful about money. R. A. Butler, who served as his junior minister at the Foreign Office, recalled an occasion at which an official brought in two cups of tea and four biscuits. Pushing aside the biscuits, Halifax insisted, 'Mr. Butler does not want these. Nor do I. Do not charge me' (Butler, 38). 


@@@@@


doc= 36999


Wood, Francis Derwent (1871-1926), sculptor, was born on 15 October 1871 at Eskin Place, Castlerigg, St John's, Keswick, Cumberland, fourth child of Alpheus Bayliss Wood, of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, pencil mill manager (died 'c'.1908), and Ann Mary, daughter of John Hornby Maw, of Ironbridge, Shropshire ('c'.1830-1916). His parents were educated, artistic, and impoverished; Alpheus a capable watercolourist with an eye for antiques; Ann Mary, well read in Greek, Latin, and Hebrew, had been taught to paint by Ruskin. Francis Derwent Wood rejected their rigorous Christianity from an early age. The Woods moved to Switzerland in 1880. Frank was small for his age, nicknamed Le Microbe as a schoolboy at College Gaillard, Lausanne. He was soon fluent in three languages and was a passionate sketcher and fossil hunter. After he had spent two years at the 'Kunstgewerbeschule' in Karlsruhe, Germany, where the family moved in 1885, in 1887 his mother wrote to Hamo Thornycroft seeking advice about her son's prospects as a sculptor. Impressed by the photographs she enclosed, Thornycroft became a lifelong mentor and friend of Derwent Wood (as he was often known). 
Having returned to Shropshire in July 1887, Wood entered art school and worked as a modeller for the family firm of Maw & Co., tile manufacturers of Ironbridge, and later for the Coalbrookdale foundry. He enrolled at the National Art Training School in 1890 where he studied under Lanteri, winning a national scholarship. A year later he became paid assistant to Alphonse Legros at the Slade School of Fine Art. As a student at the Royal Academy Schools from 1894 he assisted Thomas Brock and, among many prizes, in 1895 won a gold medal and $200 travelling scholarship for 'Daedalus and Icarus', a work influenced by Alfred Gilbert (bronze, Bristol City Art Gallery; plaster, Russell-Cotes Art Gallery, Bournemouth). 'Circe' was his first exhibit at the Royal Academy of 1895. The scholarship financed a year in Paris where, in his studio at 9 rue Falguiere, Wood made sculpture that he successfully exhibited at the Salon. Among many artists he encountered, Wood particularly befriended Gauguin, whose paintings he greatly admired. 
Between 1897 and 1900 Wood continued to assist Brock and was visiting director of modelling at Glasgow School of Art. Architectural commissions in Glasgow include figures of the arts for the Kelvingrove Gallery ('c'.1898). In London, Edwin Lutyens's Britannic House, Finsbury Circus, bears later architectural work (1921-5). 
In 1900 Wood took the studio at 27 Glebe Place, Chelsea, and was elected a member of the Art-Workers' Guild in 1901. He married Florence Mary Schmidt (1873-1969), a successful Australian soprano, on 25 March 1903 at St John's Church, Paddington. They lived until 1908 at 23 Clareville Grove, South Kensington, where their only son, Oliver, was born on 20 June 1904. In that year Wood became a founder member of the Society of British Sculptors. He was elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1910 and Royal Academician in 1920. Increasing success enabled the purchase of the lease of 18 Carlyle Square in 1911. Friends including Augustus John, Walter Sickert, Ambrose McEvoy, George Lambert, and D. H. Lawrence joined them for lively musical evenings at which Florence sang and her 'darling Francois' played the flute. 
Derwent Wood's numerous public monuments include 'Sir Titus Salt', Saltaire, Yorkshire (bronze, 1903), 'General Wolfe', Westerham, Kent (bronze, 1910), 'Edward VII', Rangoon (exh. RA, 1914), 'William Pitt' (marble, exh. RA, 1918; Capitol, Washington, DC), and portraying a friend, 'F. Henry Royce' (bronze, exh. RA, 1922; Derby). He also contributed the Australia Gate figures to Brock's Victoria memorial. Wood's portraits are remarkable for their modelling and character. 'Henry James' (marble, exh. RA, 1914; Tate collection), 'T. E. Lawrence' (bronze, exh. RA, 1920; Tate collection), and 'Ambrose McEvoy' (bronze, exh. RA, 1915; NPG) are among many whose vigorous and animated features reveal the artist's greatest strength. 
Wood joined up as an orderly in the Royal Army Medical Corps in 1915 and used his skills to develop a technique for masking facial disfigurements. He was commissioned in March 1916 on the strength of this distressing and vital work, and published his methods in 'The Lancet' in 1917. 
War memorials for Liverpool's cotton exchange, for Keswick (exh. RA, 1922), and for Ditchingham, Norfolk (bronze, exh. RA, 1920), were among those that dominated his tenure as professor of sculpture at the Royal College of Art from 1918 to 1923. The machine-gun corps memorial at Hyde Park, whose plinth is inscribed to the corps's 'Glorious heroes', is frequently criticized as an anodyne glorification of war (unveiled 1925, exh. RA, 1925, 1926). Wood intended the idealized David to represent the solitary machine-gunner, whose tragic role in the mechanized destruction of enemy hordes is revealed in the inscription 'Saul hath slain his thousands, but David his ten thousands'. He believed that if war memorials must be made, they should not evade the carnage of conflict. The monument teeters ambiguously between the glorification and the pathos of war. 
Francis Derwent Wood was a prolific intellectual traditionalist whose influences ranged from the French Renaissance to Alfred Stevens, Gilbert, and Thornycroft. Rare stylistic experiments include 'Penitent Thief' (bronze, 1918; Lady Lever Art Gallery, Port Sunlight) and 'La Paimpolaise' (teak, beech, and tin, exh. RA, 1899). Typical of his classical realism are 'Psyche' (bronze, exh. RA, 1908, 1919; Chantrey purchase 1919, Tate collection; bronze, 1920, Lady Lever Art Gallery, Port Sunlight) and 'Atalanta' (exh. plaster RA, 1907, marble 1909; Manchester City Galleries). A bronze cast of 'Atalanta', erected in his memory by friends from the Chelsea Arts Club in 1929, was stolen from Chelsea Embankment in 1991. 
A charming smile and frequent laughter leavened Derwent Wood's severe features. Modest in ordinary conversation, he could be argumentative and he voiced strong opinions about art. He abhorred capital punishment, had no time for Scotsmen, and was a generous employer whose assistants were well rewarded. He loved the Chelsea Arts Club, where he refuelled on cigarettes and legendary quantities of gin and bitters. He cut a flamboyant and dashing figure at the Chelsea Arts balls when he indulged his love of historic dress. He once appeared as Dante, whom he resembled. He was a member of the Garrick Club. 
Wood sketched and painted on holidays in France with Henry Royce, and at Amberley, Sussex, with the Sickerts. Drawings, caricatures, and bold woodcuts occupied him during his final illness. After surgery for lung cancer, Francis Derwent Wood died on 19 February 1926 at 14 Henrietta Street, Westminster. A memorial service overflowing with mourners followed his burial on 23 February at Amberley church. Until it was stolen, one of his own sculptures marked his grave. 


@@@@@


doc= 37000


Wood, Sir (Henry) Evelyn (1838-1919), army officer, was born at Cressing, Essex, on 9 February 1838, the youngest son of the Revd Sir John Page Wood, bt (1796-1866), rector of St Peter's, Cornhill, and vicar of Cressing ['see under 'Wood, Sir Matthew, first baronet], and Emma Caroline Michell (1802-1879), daughter of Admiral Sampson Michell of Croft West, Cornwall. Wood's uncle was Lord Hatherley, and his sister Katharine (Kitty) ['see 'Parnell, Katharine] married W. H. O'Shea and later C. S. Parnell. 
Wood attended Marlborough grammar school (1847-9) and Marlborough College (1849-52), leaving to enter the navy as a midshipman on 15 April 1852, after what he regarded as an unjust caning. In 1854 he was serving with HMS 'Queen' off the Crimea and went ashore with the naval brigade. He was wounded while aide-de-camp to the brigade commander in the assault on the Redan on 18 June 1855, having risen from a sickbed in order to participate in the attack. Upon recovering, he opted to transfer to the 13th light dragoons, in which he was commissioned on 7 September, and went back to the Crimea. After contracting typhoid and pneumonia in January 1856 he was nursed back to health by his mother, who travelled out to Scutari to do so. Having been promoted lieutenant on 1 February 1856 Wood returned to his regiment in Ireland, but transferred to the 17th lancers on 9 October 1857, embarking for India in 1858. 
During the Indian mutiny, from May 1858 until October 1860, Wood served on operations in central India, acting as brigade major to a flying column between November 1858 and April 1859 and receiving the Victoria Cross for routing, with ten men, eighty mutineers at Sindhara on 29 December 1859. He was promoted captain on 16 April 1861 and received a brevet majority on 19 August 1862 for his mutiny services. Although he passed the entrance examination for the Staff College in 1862 Wood was unable to take up the appointment, as one of his seniors took precedence at a time when only one officer a year could attend from each cavalry regiment, and he exchanged as a captain into the 73rd foot on 21 October 1862. He was then able to attend the Staff College in 1863, and after passing out filled a number of staff appointments, as aide-de-camp to William Napier in Dublin from January 1865 to March 1866, and successively brigade major and deputy assistant adjutant-general at Aldershot from July 1866 to November 1871. 
In the summer of 1867 he married the Hon. Mary Paulina Anne Southwell, a sister of the fourth Viscount Southwell and a Roman Catholic; they had three sons and three daughters. Wood was very close to his chief staff officer in South Africa in 1879, the Hon. Ronald Campbell, who was killed at Hlobane, but there is no real evidence to sustain allegations made in the early 1990s -- largely in connection with his later role in promoting the career of Douglas Haig -- that Wood was homosexual. Moreover, his wife's death in May 1891 was a severe blow to him, although their perceived mutual lack of some of the social graces had proved something of a handicap to Wood's career. Wolseley, for example, was to complain in October 1880 of the noise, poor food, and filth within the Wood household, while the duke of Cambridge opposed his appointment to the Aldershot command in November 1888 on the grounds that the Woods would make 'a very rough couple' (Cambridge to Ponsonby, 19 Nov 1888, Royal Archives, W10/82). Another important influence on Wood was his sister, the novelist Anna Steele, who allegedly wrote most of his speeches. 
Wood was promoted to an unattached majority on 22 June 1870 and then purchased a majority in the 90th light infantry on 28 October 1871. He was one of the last officers to so obtain promotion before the abolition of purchase, and he gained a brevet lieutenant-colonelcy on 19 January 1873 in consequence of the seniority achieved by his purchase. Having met Wolseley by chance in the War Office in May, while the former was planning the Asante expedition, and joked that his naval background would enable him to navigate west African waterways, Wood was summoned for special service on Wolseley's staff on 12 September 1873. In the Asante kingdom he raised and commanded African levies in the advance on Kumasi, and was slightly wounded at Amoaful on 30 January 1874. For his services he received a brevet colonelcy and the CB on 1 April 1874. His reputation now established as a member of the Wolseley ring, he lectured on his Asante experiences at the Royal United Service Institution in June 1874. He served at Aldershot between September 1874 and February 1878, first as superintending officer of garrison instruction, then as assistant quartermaster-general. Wood also studied law and was called to the bar in 1874. In 1877 he was offered command of the Staff College, but declined, as he felt George Colley would be more suitable: but Colley also declined. However, Wood was chosen for special service in South Africa, where his name was soon to become familiar to the public in a way which would give him some independence from Wolseley's patronage. 
Wood joined the staff of Lieutenant-General Thesiger, later Lord Chelmsford, tasked with concluding the Cape Frontier War of 1877-8. Wood commanded a column with ability and resolution, and on 13 November 1878 he succeeded to the command of his former battalion, the 90th, which had arrived in South Africa in the previous January. The war had hardly ended when that against the Zulu began, and Wood was given command of Chelmsford's no. 4 column at Utrecht, in the Transvaal, intended to safeguard the left flank of the British invasion of Zululand. When Chelmsford's main force met disaster at Isandlwana on 22 January 1879 and the right flanking force became besieged at Eshowe, only Wood's column was free to maintain offensive operations, from a base established at Khambula. Wood and Redvers Buller, commanding the frontier light horse, relentlessly harried the local Zulu of the Qulusi clan to the extent that the main Zulu army was dispatched towards Khambula. Having chosen to raid the Qulusi mountain stronghold at Hlobane for cattle on 28 March, Wood and Buller were caught there by the advance of this impi. Buller suffered heavy casualties in the confused and rapid descent from the top of Hlobane while Wood, originally intending to act in support of Buller, had become involved in a firefight at the eastern foot of the plateau in which Campbell and Wood's political agent were killed. Wood tried to extricate the two bodies but had to bury them hastily under fire. Hlobane was a disaster, Wood losing ninety-four white dead and more than a hundred of his African levies. However, securely entrenched back at Khambula, Wood immediately redeemed himself by repulsing the Zulu on the following day with such heavy loss -- probably more than 2000 dead compared with just eighteen dead among the defenders -- that it proved the turning point of the war. For the second invasion of Zululand in May 1879 Wood was appointed local brigadier-general and his force redesignated the flying column, linking with the 2nd division for the final push on Ulundi. With the defeat of the Zulu, Wood and Buller both chose to return to England rather than join Wolseley, who had come out to supersede Chelmsford, in the final pursuit of Cetshwayo. 
Wood returned to a hero's welcome, receiving the KCB but not the major-general's rank he thought his due, and for which Wolseley and the queen both pressed, since it would appear that Cambridge was determined to frustrate those associated with Wolseley from preferment in defiance of normal rules of seniority wherever possible. Wood made a considerable impression on the queen, who received him at Balmoral in September 1879, and to whom he was to address extraordinarily sycophantic letters in subsequent years. Wood's third daughter, born in 1881, was named Victoria Eugenie at the queen's wish. Compared with the reserved Buller, who accompanied him, Wood was 'wonderfully lively & hardly ceases talking, which no doubt came from his deafness & inability to hear any general conversation' (Victoria, 9 Sept 1879, Royal Archives, Z.388). The queen's private secretary, H. F. Ponsonby, feared Wood would be all too much for her but 'she hollered at him & he went off at all rates' (Ponsonby to his wife, 10 Sept 1879, Royal Archives, Ponsonby MSS, Add. A36 Box 18). 
It is not clear when Wood's deafness first occurred, but it was already pronounced by 1879 and became worse. Wood had two other abiding characteristics -- vanity and hypochondria. It was often said that he had his medal ribbons edged with a black border to accentuate their effect, while his 'curious jerky manner' (Lansdowne to Bigge, 15 July 1897, Royal Archives, W73/156) was attributed to what he himself admitted in his autobiography to be constitutional nervousness, despite his record of gallantry. He was, indeed, subject to frequent illnesses and somewhat accident-prone; his nose was once smashed by a giraffe he tried to ride at a private zoo in India. 
Having failed to secure promotion, Wood was given the brigade command at Belfast on 15 December 1879 and followed this with a similar post at Chatham on 12 January 1880, which he retained until January 1881, and which was broken by escorting the Empress Eugenie to Zululand in early 1880 to see the place where her son, the prince imperial, had been killed. Others in the party included Campbell's widow, and Wood took pains to erect suitable memorials to Campbell as well as others who had fallen at Hlobane and elsewhere. In January 1881 Wood agreed to go back to South Africa, initially only as 'staff colonel', to serve under Colley, to whom he was senior, against the Transvaal Boers. Given local rank as major-general, Wood pushed reinforcements up to Colley in Natal, and when Colley was killed at Majuba on 27 February, assumed command. Wood felt unable to resume the offensive until mid-March and was then directed by Gladstone's government to open negotiations. While obliged to arrange an armistice, Wood believed he would be able to defeat the Boers in renewed operations, and was condemned by many for not defying government instructions. Meanwhile Roberts was appointed to succeed Colley and, to the queen's dismay, Edward Newdigate was also named over Wood, although neither would reach South Africa before peace was concluded on 21 March 1881. In reaching agreement with the Boers, Wood had felt 'no discretion left to him, and that his only duty was to obey orders' (Wood to Victoria, 4 May 1881, Royal Archives, 040/144) although, when subsequently named as one of a royal commission for the settlement of the Transvaal, he did enter a dissenting opinion on boundaries and other issues. The queen was to sympathize with the unfavourable position in which Wood had been placed by governmental decisions beyond his control, but Wolseley never forgave him for not avenging Colley's death, and could not bear to have Wood near him. William Butler, who was to write Colley's biography, took a similar view. 
Finally confirmed as major-general on 12 August 1881 and rewarded with the GCMG, Wood returned to Chatham in February 1882 after turning down the post of governor of Natal. He was selected to command the 4th brigade in Wolseley's Egyptian expedition in August 1882, but Wolseley kept him confined deliberately to occupation duties at Alexandria. After a short spell back at Chatham, he then accepted appointment as the first British sirdar (commander) of the newly reconstituted Egyptian army on 21 December 1882. Wood hoped to command the Gordon relief expedition but Wolseley was appointed in September 1884, and Wood was again sidelined by his former patron to command the expedition's lines of communication. Wolseley believed Wood too desk-bound in this role, and tension also arose between Wood and Earle, commanding the river column. However, when Stewart was fatally wounded before Methemmeh in January 1885 and Buller sent forward to take command of the desert column, Wood replaced Buller as Wolseley's chief of staff. Wood's lack of organized working methods, such as mislaying telegrams he had stuffed in his pockets, proved an irritation to Wolseley, and Buller resumed his post in March. Wood had previously decided to resign the sirdarship, and went home in June 1885. 
Wood was appointed to the eastern district at Colchester on 1 April 1886 and, despite opposition from Cambridge, to the Aldershot command with the rank of local lieutenant-general on 1 January 1889, an arrangement necessitated by Wood being only tenth on the major-general's list. Both at Colchester and Aldershot he promoted more modern training, abolishing drill and ceremonies in favour of greater emphasis on field exercises, including night operations. He insisted, too, on better marksmanship among cavalrymen, while also promoting the cause of mounted infantry. Arguably, he proved one of the best trainers of troops in the army. He also did much to improve soldiers' conditions, supporting the reforms suggested by the Wantage commission in 1892, and later, as adjutant-general, he was to promote a series of early cinematic films to illustrate the soldier's life. Promotion to lieutenant-general came on 1 April 1890 and he received the GCB in the following year. He was considered for the chief command in India in 1892, although Henry Brackenbury believed his mind best suited to the narrower confines of Aldershot. The queen favoured Wood's appointment to India while Cambridge also favoured Wood going at least to Madras in order to enable the queen's son, the duke of Connaught, to get Aldershot. However, Wood became quartermaster-general at the War Office on 9 October 1893, reorganizing the arrangements for conveying troops overseas through new contracts with shipping companies and effecting more economical arrangements with railway companies. 
Wood was promoted general on 26 March 1895 and on 1 October 1897 succeeded Buller as adjutant-general in the War Office, Wolseley supporting the appointment on military and public rather than personal grounds. With the changes that had taken place in the relative responsibilities of commander-in-chief and adjutant-general and their respective relationship to the secretary of state for war in 1895, Wood was now in an influential position, particularly as Wolseley and Lansdowne disliked each other and as Wolseley's health rapidly failed him. Wolseley was later to complain that he rarely saw his adjutant-general and had little knowledge of the papers that passed between Wood and Lansdowne, while, in testifying before the royal commission on the South African War, Wood indicated that he had not been privy to the intelligence reports sent to Wolseley. He also argued that he had had little responsibility for the selection of field commanders and staffs for South Africa although the adjutant-general had considerable responsibility for mobilization. Yet Wood kept himself well informed: his distrust of Kitchener, for example, leading in 1898 to the selection of Major Douglas Haig as a special service officer specifically to report to him on operations in the Sudan. When Wolseley retired in November 1900 Wood became his acting successor until Roberts returned from South Africa, circumstances Wolseley's wife feared especially detrimental to her husband's interests. Significantly, Wood supplied information to Leo Amery whose 'Times History of the War in South Africa' was especially critical of the commanders in South Africa. On 1 October 1901 Wood took command of the 2nd army corps with headquarters at Salisbury. He was created field marshal on 8 April 1903 and retired on 31 December 1904. In retirement he was regimental colonel of the Royal Horse Guards in succession to Wolseley in November 1907 and also constable of the Tower of London from February 1911. 
Throughout his life Wood was a keen rider to hounds and a leading member of the Fishmongers' Company, of which he was prime warden in 1893. He contributed regularly to military periodicals and published a number of books including 'The Crimea in 1854 and in 1894' (1895), 'Cavalry in the Waterloo Campaign' (1896), and 'Achievements of Cavalry' (1897); he edited two volumes of 'British Battles on Land and Sea' (1915) and wrote autobiographical works -- the two-volume 'From Midshipman to Field Marshal' (1906) and 'Winnowed Memories' (1918). He was a JP and, from 1897, a deputy lieutenant of Essex, but resigned from the chairmanship of the County Territorial Association in January 1914 in support of the campaign by Roberts for 'national service', since it was argued that the existence of the territorials prevented the introduction of compulsory service. In political terms, however, he was broadly Liberal and was approached on at least two occasions to stand for parliament in the Liberal cause, his brother, Page Wood, unsuccessfully contesting East Essex as an 'advanced' Liberal in 1880. Wood died of heart failure at Harlow, Essex, on 2 December 1919 and was buried in Aldershot military cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 37001


Wood, Sir Henry Joseph (1869-1944), conductor, was born in London on 3 March 1869. His father, identically named, was an optician and engineering model-maker residing and trading at 413A Oxford Street, London, and his mother, Martha, 'nee' Morris, was Welsh; he was their only child. Both parents were musical, Henry Wood senior being a keen amateur cellist and a solo tenor in the choir of St Sepulchre's, Holborn. Their son's early aptitude for music (he took with equal zeal to painting) was nurtured mainly from home, though he also took organ and piano lessons from E. M. Lott, the organist of St Sepulchre's. 
Wood first won public notice as a fourteen-year-old organ recitalist in 1883. After taking private lessons in music theory from Ebenezer Prout, he entered the Royal Academy of Music (1886-8), where he acquired unusual skill as a piano accompanist for singers, playing for the great vocal teacher Manuel Garcia. His principal studies were composition with Prout, organ with Charles Steggall, and piano with Walter Macfarren. 
Wood's first ambition was to be a composer: several songs and other short pieces were published while he was still at the academy, and three operettas were later (unsuccessfully) produced. But an advertisement of his talents in 'The Stage' in June 1889 as 'pianist, composer and conductor' brought an engagement as musical director of Arthur Rousbey's touring opera company. A similar post followed with the more highly esteemed Carl Rosa Opera Company and then an appointment as assistant conductor in a London opera season presented at the Olympic Theatre by an Italian impresario, Lago. Wood's conducting of Tchaikovsky's 'Eugene Onegin' (17 October 1892, London's first production of any Tchaikovsky opera) marked him out in his destined role. 
So, by self-discovery, Wood became the first British-born career conductor. He had observed the techniques of eminent visiting conductors, making Arthur Nikisch his idol and even imitating his appearance. He took only one further operatic engagement, conducting the London run of Stanford's 'Shamus O'Brien' (1896). His place was to be on the concert platform, in particular that of the recently opened Queen's Hall (1893). Its manager, Robert Newman, engaged Wood at the age of twenty-six as conductor of the hall's first series of Promenade Concerts, opening on 10 August 1895. Financial support was provided by Dr George Cathcart, a musically minded throat specialist, who insisted on the adoption of the lower 'French pitch' in place of the prevalent higher pitch which caused singers such difficulties. 
Initially, programming adhered to the model of earlier seasons of Promenade Concerts in London: the fare was mainly of lighter music, including ballads, with a cautious infusion of classics. Wood's double command over orchestral players and audiences, at a time of generally improved musical awareness, permitted an increase in the symphonic component in such a way as to give the new series its distinction and its year-by-year renewal as a summer event (with occasional extensions to other seasons). By 1896 the dedication of Monday nights to Beethoven and Friday nights to Wagner was in place, with miscellaneous lighter music being played after the interval. 
Minimal rehearsal time was allowed. Six concerts a week (from Monday to Saturday) were prepared in only three rehearsals of three hours each per week. Even with the economy of repeating favourite works several times during the season, and the inclusion of songs and other items without orchestra, acceptable standards could not have been achieved without the iron discipline which Wood developed -- the rehearsal of each item rigorously pre-timed, and the players' parts copiously marked with precautionary instructions. 
Wood's gifts, however, not merely as trainer but as interpreter, took him further. From January 1897 Newman made him the regular conductor of his most prestigious series at Queen's Hall, the Saturday afternoon symphony concerts, as also (from September of that year) of the shorter Sunday concerts and other events. The works of Wagner and of Tchaikovsky were recognized as among Wood's chief strengths. Queen Victoria chose selections from both when Wood and the orchestra were summoned to perform at Windsor Castle on 24 November 1898. 
In Newman's London music festival of 1899, the Queen's Hall Orchestra under Wood was pitted against the Lamoureux Orchestra from Paris (Lamoureux, its conductor, was Wood's senior by thirty-five years) to public satisfaction. Wood pursued a parallel career as choral conductor which reached a peak with his appointment in 1902 to the triennial Sheffield music festival, where his later radical reinterpretations of such works as Handel's 'Messiah' aroused both admiration and fury. Elgar and Delius were among the composers gratified by Wood's vivid interpretations of their recent choral works. 
His 'sweeping, incisive, and picturesque' gestures and 'dark, wavy hair and full black beard' were noted by the American 'Musical Courier' magazine when Wood appeared as one of the guest conductors of the New York Philharmonic Orchestra during its 1904 season. He was accompanied on this first transatlantic trip by his wife, the former Olga Hillman, 'nee' Mikhailov (1868-1909); Russian-born, she was divorced from her first British husband when she and Wood married on 10 July 1898. It was the happiest of marriages: a gifted soprano, she sang at Wood's concerts as Mrs Henry J. Wood, and it was as her piano accompanist that Wood made his earliest recordings in 1908-9. Her death in the latter year at the age of forty-one was one of the severest blows to him. 
Wood's concert life had undergone a major change, Newman having been made bankrupt in 1902 in an ill-advised venture into theatrical management. Newman was nevertheless retained as adviser by Sir Edgar Speyer, a banker of German origin who took over the Queen's Hall Orchestra with lavish financial support. Wood's status was now enhanced as the conductor of new music by such composers as Debussy, Strauss, and Sibelius, and as the trainer of the orchestra which served those composers as guest conductors. Wood was likewise the pioneer of Mahler in Britain, giving the symphony no. 1 in 1903 and no. 4 in 1905. Audiences' occasional hostility he took in his stride, as when he gave the world premiere of Schoenberg's 'Five Pieces for Orchestra' in 1912. 
In 1904 Wood consolidated his command by ending the deputy system, which permitted a player to send a substitute if a more attractive engagement presented itself. In 1913 he became the first conductor to admit women to the general ranks of a major British orchestra. Newspaper reviews noted, as a novelty, his discouragement (by gesture) of applause intruding between the movements of a symphony or similar work. Equally innovatory was his gesture of motioning the orchestra to its feet to share in the applause for the conductor. At this time he began to conduct also for G. W. Brand Lane's concerts in Manchester. 
Knighted in January 1911, Wood was reapproached in that year by the New York Philharmonic and offered the succession to Mahler as its titular conductor: he declined. In June 1911 he remarried; his bride, Muriel Ellen Greatrex (1882-1967), was a highly capable businesswoman to whom Wood happily left the burden of correspondence and legal matters. The couple resided (as Wood and his former wife had done) at 4 Elsworthy Road, Primrose Hill, in north London, with the addition from 1915 of a country retreat, Appletree Farm House, Chorleywood, Hertfordshire. There were two daughters of the marriage. 
Wood successfully resisted pressure, at the beginning of the First World War, to ban German music. But Speyer, despite his British baronetcy, was driven out of Britain by anti-German feeling; Wood, to his discredit, made no protest. Fortunately the music-publishing firm of Chappell, already the hall's leaseholder, was willing to take over the Promenade Concerts and others under Wood's baton; his forces were now renamed the New Queen's Hall Orchestra. From 1915 he began to make orchestral recordings. In 1917 he declined the permanent conductorship of the Boston Symphony Orchestra, though he was to be a guest conductor in 1934. 
At the Zurich festival in 1921, Nikisch and Bruno Walter were among Wood's fellow conductors. His success at the Hollywood Bowl in 1925 secured further summer engagements there in 1926 and 1934. Yet in comparison with that of Thomas Beecham, a conductor acclaimed equally in concerts and opera, Wood's star was paling and his British reputation becoming more narrowly focused on the annual Promenade Concerts and on his choral conducting. A grievous blow in 1927 was Chappell's abandonment, for financial reasons, not only of the Promenade Concerts but also of the year-round symphony concerts at Queen's Hall. The newly powerful BBC took over the Proms (the abbreviation had become general) and Wood as their conductor, but he no longer commanded an orchestra of his own. 
Increasingly, Wood's artistic and financial fortunes came to depend on what share of concerts he might be allotted in the year-round season of the BBC Symphony Orchestra. The BBC chose Wood for important collaborations with Bartok (as pianist-composer) and Hindemith, and for the first performance in Britain (1930) of Mahler's symphony no. 8, the so-called 'Symphony of a Thousand'. But in the general repertory he had to compete against the availability not only of Adrian Boult as the orchestra's chief conductor but also of Beecham and such eminent foreign visitors as Bruno Walter, Willem Mengelberg, and Arturo Toscanini, in comparison with whom he was increasingly seen as a workhorse. 
In 1929 Wood launched a hoax on an unsuspecting Proms public, fathering on one 'Paul Klenovsky' an arrangement for vast orchestral forces of Bach's toccata and fugue in D minor, originally for organ; only after five years of successful performances did Wood disclose his authorship. A quite different type of arrangement, his 'Fantasia on British Sea Songs', created for a Trafalgar day centenary concert in 1905, survived as a festive contribution to the last night of later seasons. 
In 1923 Wood had taken on the conductorship of the senior orchestra at the Royal Academy of Music, giving its twice-weekly rehearsal dates priority in his diaries and retaining the post (to the great benefit of British orchestral playing) for some twenty years. With no less generosity and self-inconvenience he accepted the conductorship (1923-39) of the amateur Hull Philharmonic Orchestra, travelling thrice yearly to rehearse and conduct its concerts. 
Wood never ceased to give singing lessons, and in 1927-8 published a four-volume treatise, 'The Gentle Art of Singing'. Among his early pupils had been a very young mezzo-soprano, Jessie Goldsack [
At a time of domestic strain between Wood and his wife, whose behaviour had become increasingly self-centred, the sympathetic personality of Jessie Linton (her married name) offered him refuge. He wrote to his wife in February 1935 announcing that he wished to set up home with his ex-pupil but to retain the conventional appearances of the existing marriage. Devastated, Lady Wood would consent neither to that nor to divorce. Accompanied by her elder daughter she sailed for Japan (her brother was British consul in Nagasaki) and afterwards indulged her passion for travel by visiting China, New Zealand, and elsewhere. She did not return to England until after Wood's death. 
Through solicitors, a bitter legal dispute took place over the division of matrimonial assets, Wood accusing his wife of having cheated him in using his earnings to place substantial investments under her sole name. He could not prove, however, that she did so in bad faith, and the eventual settlement compelled him to give up Appletree Farm House to her. Apprehensive of further claims on his estate after his death, he also signed a statutory declaration (19 January 1938) charging his wife with constant cruelty and neglect throughout their marriage, a charge reinforced in a private document called 'My Confession', dated 4 February 1939. 
The accusations were exaggerated, but latterly Wood's unkempt appearance on the conductor's rostrum had been noted, as was his new spruceness when Jessie Linton took over his life with solicitude for every private and professional detail. The problem of how they might assuage social proprieties while living as though man and wife was solved by Wood's solicitor Stanley Rubinstein. On 27 September 1938 Jessie Linton changed her name by deed poll to Lady Jessie Wood, Lady being a forename rather than a title. The conductor freely spoke of her as his wife -- and inevitably, though in breach of protocol, she was often addressed as Lady Wood. 
Most of Wood's friends -- even Ethel Smyth, who at first had been violently critical of Wood's desertion of his wife -- were won over by Jessie's charm and her utter devotion to Wood. She played a vital part in the renewed vigour which marked his last years. The year 1938, somewhat arbitrarily chosen as his fiftieth in the role of conductor, called forth nationwide celebrations, culminating in a concert at the Royal Albert Hall (5 October) at which Wood conducted a force of combined London choirs and orchestras. Vaughan Williams contributed to it (and dedicated to Wood) his 'Serenade to Music', for sixteen solo voices and orchestra. Proceeds from this and other celebratory events went to the charitable cause Wood chiefly cherished, the endowment of hospital beds for orchestral musicians. 
Under the conditions prevailing in the Second World War the BBC declined to organize the Promenade Concert seasons of 1940 and 1941, but, by collaborating with a private entrepreneur, Keith Douglas, Wood kept them going. His beloved Queen's Hall, however, was destroyed by German bombing on 10 May 1941 and the concerts of that year were moved to the Royal Albert Hall -- and remained there when the BBC resumed them from 1942. The entry of the USSR into the war (June 1941) led to a new receptivity to Soviet music, and the BBC entrusted to Wood the first British performance (and indeed the first performance outside the USSR) of Shostakovich's symphony no. 7 (the 'Leningrad' symphony) in June 1942. His eagerness to give new works never dimmed. 
Though in his seventies, Wood also travelled to provincial centres amid the difficult conditions of the blackout to conduct the London Symphony, the Halle, and other orchestras -- as much in order to help the orchestras survive as to gratify audiences. From 1943, however, his physical powers perceptibly diminished. In that summer's Promenade season he was compelled not only to share the conducting of certain concerts (as in the two previous seasons) but to withdraw entirely from others. 
Wood's seventy-fifth birthday (3 March 1944) was marked by as much celebration as war permitted. A book of tributes had signatures of composers, conductors, and performers from the USA (including the exiled Bartok) as well as from Britain; a meeting of Soviet musicians saluted him in Moscow. The queen attended the concert given in Wood's honour by four London orchestras at the Royal Albert Hall on 25 March 1944, when Wood divided the programme with Boult and Basil Cameron. Proceeds went towards the building (which Wood always hoped for) of a new Queen's Hall, or a similar hall in central London. 
Almost immediately after the 1944 Promenade season began at the Royal Albert Hall, new German aerial attacks with the V1 caused the BBC to terminate it. Instead, the BBC Symphony Orchestra performed from its Bedford base only those items which were to be broadcast. A performance of Beethoven's symphony no. 7 on 28 July 1944 was Wood's last. He became ill that night at his hotel in Bedford and died at Hitchin Hospital on 19 August. The death certificate stated the causes of death as '(1) coma; (2) uraemia; (3) arterio-sclerosis'. 
Wood was cremated after a service at Hitchin parish church, and his ashes placed (by Lady Jessie Wood's decision) on 14 June 1945 at St Sepulchre's, Holborn, where he had learned the organ as a boy; a memorial window was designed by Gerald Smith in association with Frank Salisbury, who had painted Wood's official portrait (now in the National Portrait Gallery) in 1943. A bust by Donald Gilbert is displayed annually behind and above the orchestra during the Promenade season; it was given to the Royal Academy of Music with eight oil paintings by Wood on the condition that it should be thus displayed. At his death Wood left a modest $6460. 
In May 1943 the BBC had accepted 'the exclusive right to use the title 'the Henry Wood Promenade Concerts'' and after Wood's death (not before) began to use it; the series reached its centenary in 1995. To Wood's artistic energy, variety of taste, and avidity for new music is due the survival of those concerts not merely as a nightly summer entertainment but as a vital creative and educational force. His gargantuan capacity for work, the Proms forming only a sector of it, is further reflected in his unparalleled record of first performances (or first performances in Britain): at least 716 works by 356 composers. 
Nevertheless it could be argued that Wood's peak as a conductor was reached in the decade before 1915. That was when, at the head of the orchestra which he had trained (and Speyer financed) to be the finest in London, he captured the most discriminating audiences with his strongly emotional performances of Wagner and Tchaikovsky as well as proving such a powerful advocate for the new music of Sibelius, Strauss, and Debussy. Later his work was perceived as too reliant on routine, and even his omnivorousness of taste showed up negatively against what the public saw as the virtue of specializing -- as demonstrated in the repertories of Beecham or Bruno Walter. 
No longer with his own orchestra to command, Wood became increasingly identified with the Proms almost to the exclusion of everything else, and the conditions of that seasonal engagement encouraged reliability above penetrative insights. The companies which issued his gramophone recordings directed them mainly to the popular end of the classical market, and the reappearance of some of his work on compact disc has not won him any significantly upgraded esteem as an individual interpreter. What he sustained to the end (through half a century of public prominence) were the qualities of energy and integrity. He was the supreme trainer of British orchestral players and the magnet of a popular adoration which was purely musical, his demeanour owing nothing to either exhibitionism or verbal asides. The failure in his last decades to consolidate a place in the pantheon of great interpreters does not topple his position as one of the most remarkable musicians Britain has ever produced. 
Wood's autobiography, 'My Life of Music', vivacious in style but factually unreliable, appeared in 1938, his book 'About Conducting' in 1945. Throughout his life he was a passionate amateur painter in oils: several of his paintings survive at the Royal Academy of Music along with his library of musical scores and other memorabilia. He had almost no other non-musical interests and very rarely read a newspaper. He became in 1906 a member of the Rationalist Press Association and was elected in 1937 an honorary associate of that body, but no explicit pronouncements of humanist (or any other) belief are known. His relations with fellow musicians usually remained formal, but many anecdotes survive of his considerateness towards his orchestral players and also of oddities of speech in rehearsal ('both sides of the orchestra aren't together'). His players nicknamed him Timber -- more than a play on his name, since it seemed to represent his reliability too. 
At the time of his seventy-fifth birthday celebrations in 1944 it was widely thought that Wood might be given a peerage or the OM; he received instead the less conspicuous distinction of Companion of Honour. He was made a member of the order of the crown of Belgium in 1920 and an officer of the French Legion d'honneur in 1926. He was awarded the Royal Philharmonic Society's gold medal in 1921, and became an honorary freeman of the Worshipful Company of Musicians in 1938. He received honorary doctorates from the universities of Manchester (1923), Oxford (1926), Birmingham (1927), Cambridge (1935), and London (1939). He became a fellow of the Royal Academy of Music in 1920 and of the Royal College of Music in 1923. 
His wife, Lady (Muriel) Wood, died at Roehampton, London, on 21 May 1967. His unmarried companion Lady Jessie Wood, who continued indefatigably to promote his memory and wrote a valuable memoir, died at Seaford, Sussex, on 14 June 1979, aged ninety-six. 


@@@@@


doc= 37002


Wood, Sir (Howard) Kingsley (1881-1943), politician, was born on 19 August 1881 in West Sculcoates, Hull, the eldest of the three children of the Revd Arthur Wood, a Wesleyan Methodist minister, and his wife, Harriett Siddons Howard (who was related to Sarah Siddons). He was educated at the Central Foundation Boys' School, Cowper Street, London, a Methodist institution, near Wesley's Chapel in the City Road, Finsbury, where his father was minister for nine years. Wood himself later became a prominent Methodist and served for many years as treasurer at the chapel. 
Wood was articled to a solicitor and qualified in 1903, having taken honours in his law finals and won the prestigious John Mackrell prize. In 1905 he married Agnes Lilian (died 1955), daughter of Henry Frederick Fawcett, an artist; there were no children. Wood set up his own City practice -- which subsequently became Kingsley Wood, Williams, Murphy, and Ross -- specializing in industrial insurance law. As representative of the industrial insurance companies, he negotiated concessions in their favour from Lloyd George in the discussions leading to the 'National Insurance Act' of 1911. He was chairman of the London Old Age Pension Authority in 1915 and chairman of the London Insurance Committee from 1917 to 1918. He was also a member of the National Insurance Advisory Committee from 1911 to 1919. From 1916 to 1919 he was chairman of the Faculty of Insurance, and served as its president in 1920, 1922, and 1923. 
Wood was elected to the London county council in 1911 as Municipal Reform member for Woolwich, and served on committees on old-age pensions, housing, and insurance. In 1917 he presented a memorial to the government's food controller recommending that all bread should be sold by weight. However, it was in 1918 that he made his mark on national politics by organizing a memorial proposing the establishment of a ministry of health. The prime minister, Lloyd George, adopted the proposal, and Wood was knighted in the same year. At the general election of 1918 he was elected as Conservative MP for West Woolwich, a seat which he held until his death, and became parliamentary private secretary to successive ministers of health, Christopher Addison (1919-21) and Sir Alfred Mond (1921-2), both Coalition Liberals. Wood voted against the break-up of the coalition in 1922 and, although he agreed to follow Bonar Law after the Carlton Club meeting, he also said that he was prepared to co-operate 'with men actuated by similar views of an anti-Socialist and constitutionalist nature' (Kinnear, 148). He did not hold office under Law but he served Neville Chamberlain, the Conservative minister of health, as parliamentary secretary from 11 November 1924 to 4 June 1929, forming long-lasting political links with him. One important measure sponsored by Wood was the 'Summer Time Bill' of 1924, and he worked closely with Chamberlain on local government reform. Wood's growing reputation in government circles was reflected in his appointment as a civil commissioner during the general strike of 1926, and as a privy councillor in 1928. 
Wood enhanced his reputation with his party by his effectiveness in opposition, following Labour's victory in the general election of 1929. In October 1930 he was elected first chairman of the executive committee of the National Union of Conservative and Unionist Associations, and in that position (which he held until 1932) he co-operated closely with Neville Chamberlain, who was then party chairman. When the National Government was formed under Ramsay MacDonald in 1931 the number of posts available for Conservatives was at first limited, and Wood had to be content with being appointed parliamentary secretary to the president of the Board of Education, Sir Donald Maclean, a Liberal, on 3 September. However, following the general election of that year, Wood achieved ministerial rank on 10 November 1931 when he became postmaster-general, in charge of the General Post Office (GPO), which was then a government department. 
The Post Office had been much criticized for some years, especially on account of its telephone service. Wood appointed a committee on Post Office reform in 1932, and implemented its recommendations. These included the appointment in 1934 of a director-general -- almost analogous to a managing director -- in place of the secretary to the Post Office; the position had been filled by civil servants not noted for their commercial enterprise. Wood's own approach to the Post Office was very much that of a businessman. He established a new relationship with the Treasury whereby, instead of the whole of the Post Office's profits for a year being handed over to the chancellor, as hitherto, a fixed annual contribution was to be made to the exchequer and any surplus profit was to be used to improve the Post Office's services. Wood expanded the telephone service by improving efficiency, lowering charges, and making skilful use of publicity. The film unit and library of the Empire Marketing Board were taken over in 1933, and, as the GPO film unit, achieved a reputation for making documentaries of high quality. Wood's success in making the Post Office a source of pride rather than embarrassment for the government led to his entering the cabinet, at Chamberlain's suggestion, on 20 December 1933. 
As postmaster-general Wood was the minister responsible for broadcasting, and he found himself at odds with Sir John Reith, the director-general of the BBC, over the renewal of the BBC's charter, which at the beginning of 1934 had only three more years to run. Reith felt that Wood had given the BBC insufficient protection from pressure from the cabinet to stop a broadcast in 1932 by a former German U-boat captain; Reith wanted a senior cabinet minister, such as the lord president (Baldwin), to be responsible for the BBC, rather than the postmaster-general, to ensure that the BBC's views would be adequately represented. Wood, for his part, was less inclined than his predecessors to agree with the director-general on every question, and Reith's diaries contain a number of uncomplimentary remarks about him. For example, Reith noted that it was 'utterly damnable that the BBC should be made the political catspaw of a little bounder like K.W.' ('Reith Diaries', 110). 
Wood's gifts as an organizer and publicist led to his being appointed chairman of the National Government propaganda committee in 1935, with responsibility for preparing for the forthcoming general election. When Baldwin became prime minister on 7 June 1935 Wood was put in charge of the Ministry of Health, which at that time was responsible for housing as well as the health services in England and Wales. Once more Wood's energy served the government well: the slum clearance programme was pursued with energy, and overcrowding was greatly reduced. There was also a marked improvement in maternal mortality, mainly due to the discovery of antibiotics able to counteract septicaemia, but also because a full-time, salaried midwifery service was created under the 'Midwives Act' of 1936. Shortly after the government embarked upon a rearmament programme in 1936, Sir Thomas Inskip, the minister for co-ordination of defence, told the cabinet that a shortage of building labour threatened to cause delays; Wood said that the Ministry of Health would be prepared to slow down house-building to prevent a rise in prices. On the other hand, he told the cabinet that there was evidence of physical deterioration in the population of some of the special areas and asked that some of the factories which were to be built in connection with rearmament should be located in communities with high unemployment (cabinet minutes, 29 July and 14 Oct 1936, Cabinet Office papers, ser. 23, vol. 85). 
Wood's standing in his party was recognized in February 1938 when he was unanimously elected grand master of the Primrose League in succession to Baldwin, who had held the office since 1925. By 1938 there was growing discontent in parliament and the aircraft industry with the Air Ministry on account of its failure to maintain parity with the German air force. The secretary of state for air, Viscount Swinton, sat in the House of Lords, and when the air estimates were debated in March, Chamberlain, who had succeeded Baldwin as prime minister, had to defend the Air Ministry from demands for an inquiry into its administration. It was clear that this situation could not continue, and on 16 May Wood was appointed to be Swinton's successor. The new secretary of state had no previous experience of a defence department, but he had shown himself to be a capable minister and he could be relied on to represent the government effectively in the Commons. 
The cabinet had approved a new programme, known as Scheme L, for the expansion of the air force in April, when it had authorized the Air Ministry to accept as many aircraft as the British aircraft industry could produce -- up to a maximum of 12,000 machines in the next two years. Finance was made freely available; it was in 1938 that the Air Ministry overtook the Admiralty as the major spender among the defence departments. But there were many technical problems to be overcome, and in August, on the eve of the Munich crisis, deliveries of aircraft in Britain were no higher than they had been in May. A more ambitious programme, known as Scheme M, was proposed by the Air Ministry after Munich, but Wood accepted the Treasury's argument that, if Scheme M were revised to concentrate more on fighters and to go slowly on bombers, the strain on the economy would be alleviated. Fighter production in 1939 was three-and-a-half times greater than in 1938, while bomber production was two-and-a-half times greater; overall, the gap between British and German aircraft production had been closed by the time war broke out. 
Relations with the aircraft industry were not much easier under Wood than they had been under Swinton, partly because of the Air Ministry's repeated requests for modifications to types in production, but also because of Wood's need to respond to parliamentary criticism of the industry's profits. In 1939 the Air Ministry calculated that if its existing agreement with the Society of British Aircraft Constructors on pricing of contracts was not modified, the average rate of profit on private invested capital would be 21 per cent, whereas the official view was that the maximum should be 15 per cent. In March, Wood announced that the agreement was to be modified, with the effect that the industry agreed to forgo a third of its forecast profits for the year. Despite these difficulties, he appears to have established good personal relations with Sir Charles Bruce-Gardner, the chairman of the Society of British Aircraft Constructors, who served on the secretary of state for air's Industrial Advisory Panel and the Air Council's Committee on Supply. 
By the spring of 1940 Wood felt exhausted by his efforts, and on 3 April he changed places with the lord privy seal, Sir Samuel Hoare, and had a brief period as a cabinet minister without departmental responsibility. However, British defeats in Norway later that month led to a debate in the House of Commons on 8 and 9 May, at the end of which the government majority decreased heavily. It fell to Wood, as a candid friend, as well as a senior member of the Conservative Party, to tell Chamberlain that resignation was inevitable. He also advised Churchill not to give way to pressure from those who wanted Lord Halifax to succeed Chamberlain. It is not possible to know if Wood's advice was decisive, but it certainly helped to produce the change of government on 10 May. Two days later, Wood was appointed to be chancellor of the exchequer. The new prime minister, Churchill, was by no means universally popular in the Conservative Party, and was doubtless glad to have the support of someone known to be a friend of Chamberlain. 
Wood did not enjoy as prominent a position in the government as is normal for a chancellor of the exchequer. He was not at first a member of the war cabinet, although he was frequently in attendance at its meetings. He became a full member on 3 October 1940, but he was again excluded from its membership in a major reshuffle on 19 February 1942. As someone who had supported appeasement -- he was believed to have advised calling a general election after Munich to take advantage of Chamberlain's popularity at the time -- Wood was never likely to be close to Churchill. Indeed, he was treated with condescension by a number of Churchill's close associates, including Beaverbrook and Brendan Bracken (Colville, 232). However, the fundamental reason why the chancellor was not prominent in the war cabinet was that under Churchill the Treasury ceased to be the central department of government. Financial budgeting was replaced by the allocation of physical resources, especially manpower, as the means of establishing priorities in defence programmes. Non-military aspects of policy, including economic policy, were co-ordinated by a cabinet committee presided over by the lord president of the council: initially Chamberlain, subsequently Sir John Anderson, and then Clement Attlee. The Treasury's main jobs were to finance the war with as little inflation as possible, to conduct external financial policy so as to secure overseas supplies on the best possible terms, and to take part in planning for the post-war period. 
Wood was no financial expert, but his capacity for hard work and his willingness to seek and act upon the best advice available were useful characteristics in a chancellor. At the beginning of July he set up a new consultative council to advise him, and was fortunate in securing the services of the economist John Maynard Keynes and of Lord Catto, a future governor of the Bank of England, as members. His first budget, on 23 July, was criticized, both at the time and subsequently by the official historian of financial policy, on the grounds that his proposals would not prevent an inflationary expansion of the government's short-term debt (Sayers, 56-7). In fact the extra taxation that Wood imposed was rather more than Keynes estimated at the time to be necessary to curb inflation. The standard rate of taxation was increased from 7's'. 6died to 8's'. 6died, which, with a top rate of surtax of 9's'. 6died in the pound, gave a top marginal tax rate of 18's'. in the pound. A new fiscal instrument, purchase tax, was introduced on articles regarded as luxuries or near-luxuries. In deference to the Labour members of Churchill's coalition, excess profits tax, which had been fixed at 60 per cent in September 1939, was raised to 100 per cent, despite advice from Treasury officials that such a rate would deny businessmen the incentive to economize on resources or take risks with new investment. 
Subsequently Wood was won over to Keynes's conception of using national income accounting to estimate the additional revenue that must be raised if there was to be no inflation, rather than (as hitherto) confining the budget to central government revenue and expenditure. A white paper, 'An analysis of the sources of war finance and an estimate of the national income and expenditure in 1938 and 1940', was published in January 1941 and Wood's budget of 7 April 1941 was described by Keynes as 'a revolution in public finance' ('Collected Writings', 22.354). There were still political limits on how far theory could be applied. Keynes thought that national income analysis showed that upwards of $300 million should be raised in additional taxation but, confronted by Churchill's hostility to what he considered to be severe tax proposals, Wood decided to aim at $250 million. The standard rate of income tax was raised to 10's'. in the pound, giving a top marginal rate of 19's'. 6died in the pound, while income and personal allowances were reduced, greatly increasing the number of people liable to income tax. The extension of direct taxation was made politically more acceptable by the adoption of another of Keynes's ideas, post-war credits, so that part of the tax was a form of forced saving. In theory the post-war credits could be repaid to prevent a post-war slump, such as had occurred after the First World War, but in the event inflationary pressure after 1945 made repayments an inconvenient obligation for chancellors. 
Also under Wood there began in 1940 the compulsory deduction of income tax at source from wages and salaries. He died on the morning of the day on which he was due to announce the scheme devised in 1943 for PAYE (pay as you earn), whereby tax liability was to be calculated on current, not past, earnings. His innovation was of lasting benefit to future chancellors. Wood's budgets in 1942 and 1943 followed the same lines as his budget of 1941, and overall he raised a significantly higher proportion of war finance through taxation rather than borrowing than his predecessors had done in the First World War. 
Wood also sought to moderate wage claims by adopting a policy of subsidizing rationed goods that were within the cost-of-living index, while imposing heavy taxes on goods outside it. In his budget of 1941 he committed the government to stabilizing the index at its existing level, while warning that if wage rates continued to rise, the government would have to abandon this policy. The policy proved to be expensive, the cost of subsidies rising from $70 million in 1940 to $190 million in 1943, but it was thought justified from the industrial relations viewpoint, and was discontinued only gradually after the war. 
Wood's period as chancellor saw Britain's external financial position greatly weakened, as gold and foreign exchange reserves were used, and overseas investments sold, to pay for essential imports, while industrial output was shifted from exports to war production. So when the Beveridge report was published at the beginning of December 1942, advocating a comprehensive scheme of social insurance, Wood warned the cabinet against taking on commitments that might exceed the country's resources. He pointed out that after the war it would be necessary to give priority first to maintaining defence forces sufficient to avoid a repetition of the events of 1914 and 1939, and then to reconstructing Britain's economy and export trade. He assumed that there would have to be cuts in tax rates, both to stimulate enterprise and to meet the expectations of the electorate. Beveridge's scheme of social insurance was only one of several reconstruction plans, and there were other pressing claims to financial assistance, such as those of housing, education, electricity, agriculture, forestry, and colonial development; Wood called upon the cabinet to determine priorities ('The financial aspects of the social security plan', memorandum by the chancellor of the exchequer, 11 Jan 1942, 'Cabinet Office papers', ser. 65, vol. 33). In that respect he was acting as an orthodox chancellor, but he faced a critical and restive House of Commons when, in an emotional debate on 17 February 1943, he emphasized the prevailing financial uncertainty and the need for caution in implementing the Beveridge plan ('Hansard 5C', cols. 1825-38). Although the coalition government had declared that it had accepted the principles of the plan, Wood's speech tended to spread doubt about whether the Conservatives were as committed to them as Labour was. 
Wood overcame considerable handicaps to rise as far as he did in politics. His modest, nonconformist background was very different from that of traditional Conservative leaders, but was useful at a time when the Conservatives were seeking to attract nonconformists who had previously supported the Liberal Party; for example, in the 1920s Wood organized nonconformist Unionist League luncheons at which Conservative leaders would speak. He was a far from imposing personality: short, plump, and bespectacled. One experienced observer described him as an 'appalling speaker' (Colville, 47); his voice was thin and high, and he often delivered speeches from manuscript notes. On the other hand, he was respected because he was efficient, and was generally liked because he was genial. His successes as a minister can be attributed to his thoroughness, energy, shrewd judgement, and willingness to listen to advice. He inspired loyalty among his staff, and could be relied upon to take whatever decision was necessary and to maintain it, both in cabinet, where his influence was considerable, and in parliament, where he was normally adept at handling criticism. He succeeded Chamberlain as chairman of the Conservative Research Department in 1940, and he was very much missed by the party after his death. He died suddenly at his home in London, 12 Buckingham Palace Mansions, Westminster, on 21 September 1943. 


@@@@@


doc= 37003


Lloyd, Marie (1870-1922), music-hall entertainer, was born on 12 February 1870 at 36 Plumber Street, Hoxton, London, the eldest of nine children born to Matilda Mary Caroline 'nee' Archer and her husband, John Wood, an artificial flower maker and part-time waiter at the Eagle public house on City Road. Through her father's influence she studied artistes and finally performed at the Grecian Music-Hall attached to the Eagle at the age of fourteen, under the name Bella Delmere, in the same week that Jenny Hill appeared there. 
Marie herself dated her career from her first appearance as Marie Lloyd, at the Falstaff Music-Hall on 22 June 1884, when she was spotted by George Belmont. Within six weeks she was fourth on the bill at the Star Palace of Varieties in Bermondsey, singing 'The boy I love is up in the gallery', a song which became something of a trademark although originally written for Nelly Power. By 1886, still only sixteen, she was earning $100 per week and in a position to buy her own songs. The following year, on 12 November, she married Percy Charles Courtenay, a racecourse tout; they had one daughter, Marie. The marriage rapidly proved difficult, but professionally she went from strength to strength; the regard in which she was held is made clear by the invitations to perform in pantomime at Drury Lane in 1891, 1892, and 1893. Lloyd, however, found the restrictions of a script unsuited to her talent, remarking of her performance, 'Bloody awful, eh?' (Farson, 46). Music-hall offered greater scope for the apposite and bawdy ad-libs that created a framework for her songs, and its format was well suited to her unique delivery. Shaw praised her perfect sense of pitch and rhythm, and the precision of her diction is apparent in the feeblest archive recordings. This vocal accuracy allowed a complex relationship with her material. She could play out the contrast between the persona of a song and her own stage presence: as a cockney child in the country, giggling as a bull 'wagged 'is apparatus', she wiped her nose on her sleeve and kicked aimlessly, dressed in one of the elaborate gowns she loved; she could add a top-spin of lewdness to the most innocent lyric and slip into amused contemplation of her own naughtiness; the title of one of her first commissioned songs, 'When you wink the other eye', symbolized her stage presence -- the sense of sharing a secret with her audience rather than simply a smutty joke. 
Lloyd articulated disappointments of working-class life, especially those of women. Some of her most famous songs were grounded in the realities of poverty: 'My old man', despite its jolly chorus, is about the disorientation of a wife forced yet again to do a moonlight flit because there is no money for the rent. 'Off went the cart with me home packed in it', she sang confidingly, and the audience understood the desolation that sets the wife drinking until she can't remember her new address. The violence that underlay many marriages underscored the song 'It's a bit of a ruin that Cromwell knocked about a bit', the story of a woman who loses her money after 'sitting in the grass with a commercial traveller'. Lloyd favoured these poignant vignettes increasingly as her career progressed, giving rise to an image that her friend Naomi Jacob describes with some indignation in her biography: 'Realising that she was growing old, [she] determined... to show herself to her public as she really was... an old, grey-faced, tired woman' (Jacob, 199). Lloyd loved clothes, designing luxurious stagewear as well as painstakingly detailed costumes for numbers like these. It was not fading looks that prompted her interest, but rather a pride in versatility. Nor were her 'drabs' always downtrodden: in Lloyd's most quoted song, an old woman whose husband fancies a fortnight on his own is told: '
If that's your blooming gime, I intend to do the sime 

'Cos a little of what you fancy does yer good. 

' This insistence on women's right to pleasure brought Lloyd into frequent collisions with censorship, most famously in her clash with Laura Ormiston Chant of the Social Purity Alliance. In 1894 Chant campaigned against the 'ladies of the promenade' who used the Empire Theatre as a market place. She succeeded in prompting the London county council to erect screens around the promenade, only to have them torn down by an outraged public (Winston Churchill used the occasion to make his first political speech). She went on to make a public protest when Lloyd was singing at the Empire, and Lloyd was called before the council's theatres and music-halls committee with a view to changing some of her songs. The story goes that she sang 'Johnny Jones', a child's-eye view of the facts of life, in tones of angelic purity; she then performed 'Come into the garden, Maud', larded with leers and nudges, provocatively nibbling her pearls to point up each innuendo, finally arguing 'it's all in the mind'. 
The episode has passed into legend, and this masks the real tragedy -- that Lloyd and Chant were constructed by the press of their time as natural enemies, and have continued to be read as such. In fact they often shared a political position. If Lloyd asserted female desire, Chant was as concerned with the right to resist marital rape. Her concern for censorship arose out of the 'Contagious Diseases Act', which sought to stop the spread of venereal infection by allowing the police to subject any woman on the streets to forcible examination; she fought to prevent men excited by the sensual patter of the halls gaining access to prostitutes and infecting their wives. Chant frequently spoke out against domestic violence: in the same year as the battle of the promenade Lloyd was threatened by her estranged husband, Percy Courtenay. Chant was preoccupied by the low wages of music-hall performers: in 1907 Lloyd supported a strike by the Variety Artistes' Federation against an attempt by Stoll-Moss to create a monopoly and limit the freedom of performers; she was appalled by contractual loopholes permitting managements to extract unpaid matinees from exhausted performers, gave generously to the strike fund, and picketed theatres using non-union labour. 
Lloyd's popularity substantially aided federation victory but in a few years she encountered both political and personal difficulties. In 1896 she had met the singer Alexander (Alec) Hurley (1870/71-1913) but, denied a divorce until May 1905, did not marry him until 27 October 1906. Their marriage crumbled in 1910 as she became infatuated with Bernard Dillon ('c'.1888-1941), the jockey who rode Lemberg to Derby victory in that year. They lived together openly, although she did not pursue her intended divorce, and from the outset the partnership was fraught with problems; Dillon lost his jockey's licence and turned to drink. Meanwhile Lloyd was snubbed by Oswald Stoll when he organized the royal command performance in 1912. It seems likely that this was an act of revenge for the strike, although Stoll may also have seen Lloyd's exclusion as illustrating his policy of making music-hall respectable. He published a manifesto in 'The Era' on the day of the performance: 'Coarseness and vulgarity etc are not allowed... this intimation is rendered necessary only by a few artists' (Jacob, 93). 
Lloyd's response was to stage her own show at the London Pavilion, under a banner proclaiming every one of her performances a 'command performance by order of the British public'. Her departure for America in 1913 was a further attempt to recover from the snub, but on landing she and Dillon were threatened with deportation and sent back to Ellis Island. Dillon was charged under the 'White Slave Act' with 'taking to the country a woman who is not his wife' and Lloyd with being a 'passive agent'. Lloyd was outspoken on the subject of American hypocrisy; pointing to the Statue of Liberty she remarked 'I love your sense of humour'. The Washington board of enquiry reversed the decision as Lloyd was boarding the 'Olympic' to sail back; Lloyd and Dillon were allowed to stay on surety of $300 each if they would undertake to live apart in the USA. Lloyd agreed, and performed to enthusiastic houses. Hurley died during the tour, and Lloyd and Dillon married at the British consulate in Portland, Oregon, on 21 February 1914. 
Throughout the First World War Lloyd toured factories and gave special concerts for soldiers, but she did not receive any official recognition for her work. Her post-war years were marked by the increasing violence of Dillon, and she continued to work out of financial necessity; their marriage ended in separation in 1920. She died from heart and kidney failure on 7 October 1922 at her home, 37 Woodstock Road, Golders Green, Middlesex, having been taken ill on the stage of the Alhambra, and was buried in Hampstead cemetery. Descriptions of her at the end of her career range from assurances of her continuing greatness to accounts of performances marred by drunkenness and depression. Sentiment, perhaps, colours both these images. What is clear, however, is that the nation's grief at Marie Lloyd's death was also grief for the death of the music-hall that had shaped her. 


@@@@@


doc= 37004


Wood, Sir Robert Stanford (1886-1963), civil servant and educationist, was born in Islington, London, on 5 July 1886, the younger son of the Revd John Roskruge Wood, Baptist minister, and his wife, Frances Ann Wren. He was educated at the City of London School and at Jesus College, Cambridge, where in 1908 he obtained first-class honours in part one of the classical tripos and, the following year, second-class honours in part two of the historical tripos. After two years of teaching, mainly at Nottingham High School for Boys, and of serving as a scout commissioner, Wood joined the Board of Education in 1911 as an inspector of schools. In 1922 he married Iris Cecilie, daughter of Frederick Arnsby, piano manufacturer, with whom he had a daughter. During the inter-war years Wood rose through the ranks of the civil service to be principal private secretary to the president of the board, Lord Eustace Percy (1926-8), director of establishments (1928-36), and principal assistant secretary for technical education (1936-40). 
In 1938 Wood was seconded for special service with Sir John Anderson (later Viscount Waverley), then lord privy seal and later home secretary, working on matters relating to home security in the event of war. In 1940 he returned to the Board of Education as deputy secretary (Maurice Holmes being secretary), an appointment which he held for six years. When almost all the board's staff moved to Bournemouth during the blitz, Wood remained in London to provide support to the president, Herwald Ramsbotham. In October 1940 he joined an informal committee of senior Board of Education officials which discussed plans for educational reconstruction. They produced a pamphlet, 'Education after the War' (1941), widely referred to as the 'green book', which was circulated among educational bodies. Wood contributed an important paper, 'Partnership in education', which contended that the board should reassert itself in relation to local education authorities and should take the lead in forming policy. His note to the committee of 20 November 1940 contained 'most of the more important changes in the school system which were to be made after 1944' (Gosden, 242). It proposed the raising of the school-leaving age to fifteen and the replacement of the existing distinction between elementary and grammar schools with a new, age-based division between primary schools (catering for five- to eleven-year-olds) and a tripartite system of secondary schools for those aged over eleven. 
From July 1941 R. A. Butler, Ramsbotham's successor as president, worked closely with Wood, who was made KBE in that year. Butler was anxious to support his senior civil servants' proposals for educational reform, and he consulted Wood on technical education and the relations between schools and industry. Wood played a key role in determining the membership and terms of reference for Sir Arnold McNair's wartime inquiry into teacher training and for Sir Cyril Norwood's committee on the secondary school curriculum and examinations. During the first part of 1943 much of Wood's time was consumed by developing ideas and drafting proposals on further education that featured in the white paper 'Educational Reconstruction', and which subsequently formed an important part of the 1944 'Education Act'. Wood also chaired an office committee on the post-war emergency recruitment and training of teachers and, over the winter of 1943-4, was the principal speaker at a series of Board of Education conferences intended to justify the controversial introduction of the one-year teacher training scheme. Some of those who attended these meetings were sceptical about his assurances that emergency-trained teachers could expect professional parity with colleagues trained for two years in permanent colleges and graduate teachers emerging from universities. The experience of operating the scheme tended to confirm these doubts, but Wood's achievement in developing an initiative that produced 35,000 additional teachers between 1945 and 1951 was nevertheless considerable. 
By the terms of the 1944 act, the board became the Ministry of Education and, upon the retirement of Sir Maurice Holmes in 1945, it was widely expected that Wood would become permanent secretary. This did not happen, possibly because of objections from Ellen Wilkinson, the Labour minister of education. Disappointed, Wood departed from the ministry in 1946 to succeed Kenneth Vickers as principal of Southampton University College. Having over many years become acquainted with some of the college's strengths, ambitions, and constraints, especially in the areas of technical education and teacher training, he was well qualified to lead the drive for university status, a task that was accomplished within five years. 
Wood made the acquisition of new buildings and equipment a priority, although the building programme had to be carried through not only in the face of the usual post-war difficulties but in a town which also needed to replace the port, the thousands of houses, and the industrial buildings destroyed during the war. He continued his predecessor's policy of providing halls of residence for students, one of the main objects of his principalship being that the university should be a body of scholars leading a communal life. During his six years at Southampton, student numbers almost doubled, considerable funds were raised for development, and close contact was established with the educational authorities of both Southampton and Hampshire. A major development was the establishment of an institute of education with a circle of affiliated training colleges. In conjunction with Lillian Penson, vice-chancellor of London University (for whose external degrees Southampton students were then prepared), he developed the idea of a 'special relationship' with the University of London, which culminated in 1952 in the granting of a full university charter to Southampton. Wood became Southampton's first vice-chancellor but he retired on grounds of age at the end of the session. 
Wood was made an honorary fellow of Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1952, and was also an honorary member of the Goldsmiths' Company of London. In 1955 he visited Palestine and Iraq to lecture on British universities for the British Council. He died at his home, 104 Iverna Court, London, on 18 May 1963. 


@@@@@


doc= 37005


Wood, Thomas (1892-1950), composer, was born on 28 November 1892 at Chorley, Lancashire, the only child of Thomas Wood, a master mariner, and his wife, Hannah Lee. As a child he accompanied his father on many voyages and he always regarded this experience as an education of the most effective kind. It was supplemented, in his case, however, by other schooling, both general and musical; and Wood had already completed an external degree in music at Oxford before he arrived there in 1913 to work for the degree of BA which he obtained in 1918. In 1916 he migrated from Christ Church to Exeter College, with which he was to be associated for the rest of his life, and in 1917 his studies were interrupted by a period at the Admiralty. After the war, at the Royal College of Music, he studied under the direction of Sir Charles Stanford, to whom Wood's music owes much. He became DMus in 1920. 
Wood spent a short time as director of music at Tonbridge School. On 2 July 1924 he married St Osyth Mahala ('b'. 1886/7), daughter of Thomas Eustace-Smith. The same year he returned to Exeter College as lecturer (he held the post until 1927) and there began the compositions for which he soon became known. During the next thirty years he produced a series of works, both choral and orchestral, of which the most successful were 'Forty Singing Seamen' (1925), 'A Seaman's Overture' (1927), 'Daniel and the Lions' (1938), 'Chanticleer' (1947), and 'The Rainbow' (1951). Wood's achievements were made despite eyesight so poor as to be near blindness. 
Apart from music the prevailing passions of Wood's life were the sea, foreign travel, and the British empire. For the empire he had a romantic idealist's love. He undertook extensive journeys, sometimes for musical activities, sometimes for personal interests, and at least once (1944) for the government. These journeys provided material for a number of books of which 'Cobbers' (1934) was widely acclaimed as a penetrating account of the Australian scene and character. Wood's music was naturally influenced by these interests. English life, in the country or at sea, and the ways of ordinary men and women are the constant themes to which its sturdy plain-spoken individuality is well suited. After 1945, having come to feel that his wide interests were dissipating his talent, Wood prepared to devote himself wholly to musical composition. His sudden and untimely death on 19 November 1950, at his home, Parsonage Hall, Bures, Suffolk, frustrated an intention upon which his friends had based high hopes. He had been elected an honorary fellow of his college, and had been made a member of the Arts Council, in the previous year. 
Thomas Armstrong', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37006


Wood, Thomas McKinnon (1855-1927), politician, was born on 26 January 1855 at 22 Leslie Street, Stepney, London, son of Hugh Wood, merchant and shipowner in, successively, Kirkwall, Leith, and the Minories, London, and his second wife, Jessie, daughter of the Revd Thomas McKinnon, of Sauchieburn, Kincardineshire. He was educated at the Brewers' Company School, Aldenham, Hertfordshire, Mill Hill School, and University College, London, where he matriculated in June 1872. In a distinguished undergraduate career he gained first place in the faculty of arts and the university exhibition in English. He studied political economy under L. H. Courtney and the philosophy of mind under G. C. Robertson. He graduated in 1875 with honours in logic and moral philosophy, and worked briefly on the ninth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', covering subjects ranging from 'Casuistry' to 'Cromwell, Thomas'. He returned to London in 1878, when his father became blind, to join the family firm as a partner. The Wood family were active members of the King's Weigh House Congregational Chapel, where Wood met and married in 1883 Isabella, sister of the minister Alexander Sandison. 
Wood's political career began with his election to the second London county council (LCC) in 1892, standing as a 'Progressive' (the municipal label of London Liberalism) for Central Hackney. Wood won for Progressivism a seat which had returned two Conservatives to the first council in 1889 and would return a Conservative to Westminster until 1906. He soon joined the Progressive inner circle, securing election to the party committee in February 1894, and his prominence within the majority group secured a succession of influential council positions. He chaired, at various times, the parliamentary, local government, water, and general purposes committees, and the council itself in 1898-9. He became leader of the Progressive Party in April 1897, retaining this position until he entered the government in April 1908. Election to parliament in 1906 had already prompted his retirement as an elected councillor at the end of the last progressive LCC in March 1907, but he was elected an alderman of the seventh council and remained on the LCC until March 1909. 
Wood was an effective local politician, presiding over the Progressives' two most remarkable landslide victories in 1901 and 1904, when radical Liberalism captured some of London's safest Conservative suburbs. He was not, however, an innovator in policy. He joined the council after the main objectives of Progressive municipal policy -- the public ownership of water and other public utilities, the taxation of London's ground landlords, fair wages for council employees, and the extension of direct labour operations -- had been defined, and he added little to the programme himself. The views articulated in such occasional statements as his address on 'Ideals of citizenship' at the 1904 Congregational Union Conference ('private enterprise necessarily and properly has to look first to the question of profit; a municipal government can do a great many things aiming not at profit but at the general benefit of the community') reflected standard progressive views. He was a typical urban radical of his day, subscribing equally to the progressive social programme and the traditional Liberal causes of free trade and Irish home rule. An offer from Harold Harmsworth, the future press baron Lord Rothermere, in 1901 to support the Progressives in return for the 'elimination of Home Rule and the acceptance of a policy of sane and unaggressive imperialism' held little appeal to Wood or most of his party. Indeed, Wood's greatest problems as party leader arose over the traditional Liberal concern of denominational education, when the 'Education (London) Act' of 1903 established the LCC as the capital's education authority, implementing a measure detested by most nonconformists. Though a Congregationalist himself, Wood saw education as a social rather than a denominational issue, but his determination to operate the act disturbed some nonconformist progressives and ensured his vilification by militant dissent outside the council. 
After three unsuccessful attempts, at East Islington (1895), St Rollox, Glasgow (1900), and Orkney and Shetland (1902), Wood entered parliament as Liberal member for St Rollox in 1906 -- one of five LCC Progressives to be returned. St Rollox was a largely working-class seat containing railway and other engineering works, and Wood's background in social politics helped him not merely to win the constituency in the Liberal landslide of 1906, but to retain until 1918 a seat which had previously returned a new member at every election since its creation. In his 1906 campaign he emphasized unemployment and old age pensions and indicated his support for universal suffrage, the payment of MPs, and the Labour Party's 'Trades Disputes Bill'. At Westminster, though, he proved to be 'very nearly a silent member of the House of Commons -- except when London measures were under discussion'. 
Wood's ministerial career was undistinguished. He was appointed parliamentary secretary to the Board of Education by Asquith in April 1908, apparently to alleviate nonconformist misgivings over that year's abortive 'Education Bill'. His handling of the education issue at the LCC made him a questionable choice for this task, but he had little opportunity to make further enemies before he was appointed under-secretary of state at the Foreign Office, in October 1908, ostensibly to enhance that department's commercial expertise. In October 1911 he became financial secretary to the Treasury, convincing himself that he would 'have more power than three fourths of the Cabinet', though T. P. O'Connor remembered him as doing his work there 'without any great distinction'. Despite an unimpressive ministerial record he was a convenient choice to succeed Lord Pentland as Scottish secretary, thus entering the cabinet, in February 1912. In this post he steered various measures through parliament, including the 'Mental Deficiency (Scotland) Act' of 1913 and the 'Temperance (Scotland) Act' of 1913; though not a teetotaller, he supported temperance and with the latter measure he became the only British politician to pass a local option bill into law. He also introduced measures necessary for Scottish wartime organization with skill and tact. In July 1916 he was again appointed financial secretary to the Treasury, remaining in the cabinet as chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, but his ministerial career ended with the collapse of the first wartime coalition in December 1916, when he fell victim to the reconstruction of the government. The 1918 'coupon election' brought predictable humiliation to Wood, as to other Asquithians, when, after a campaign devoted largely to attacks upon Lloyd George, he lost his deposit at St Rollox, gaining only 8 per cent of the vote. He made one attempt to return to parliament in 1922, when he was defeated in his former LCC constituency of Central Hackney. 
Wood served as deputy lieutenant for the county of London in 1899; he declined a knighthood in 1907, but was sworn a privy councillor in 1911. He became a life governor of University College, London, and received an honorary LLD from St Andrews University in 1899. 
Wood's London addresses during his LCC years were, successively, Brookfield House, Highgate, and Portland Place. He acquired a house at Crowborough in Sussex in the 1900s. He had six sons and two daughters, four sons and one daughter surviving him. He died at 24 Queen's Gate, South Kensington, London, on 26 March 1927, two weeks after his wife. 'His nature had no expansiveness', O'Connor recalled, 'It was essentially dry, uninspired and uninspiring'. Another obituarist noted 'a certain brusqueness which unnecessarily alienated some of his political friends', suggesting that 'the cavalier way in which he sometimes treated opponents did not tend to smooth his political path'. 


@@@@@


doc= 37007


Woodall, William (1832-1901), politician, elder son of William Woodall of Shrewsbury and his wife, Martha Basson, was born in Shrewsbury on 15 March 1832 and educated at the Crescent Schools, Liverpool. He entered the business at Burslem of James Macintyre, china manufacturer, whose daughter Evelyn (died 1870) he married in 1862; they had no children. On Macintyre's death in 1870 he became senior partner in the firm. He was also chairman of the Sneyd Colliery Company. 
Woodall was active in local affairs, devoting himself especially to the cause of technical education. He was chairman of the Burslem school board (1870-80), of the Wedgwood Institute there, and of the North Staffordshire Society for Promotion of the Welfare of the Deaf and Dumb. He sat on royal commissions on technical education (1881-4) and the care of the blind and deaf mutes (1886-9). In September 1897 he accompanied Sir Philip Magnus and others to Germany to study technical instruction methods there. 
Woodall was Liberal MP for the borough of Stoke-on-Trent, 1880-86, and was first representative of Hanley from 1885 to 1900. He was a strong supporter of home rule, disestablishment, and local veto, as well as of the extension of the franchise. 
In 1884 Woodall succeeded Hugh Mason (MP for Ashton under Lyne) as leader of the women's suffrage group in the Commons, and introduced (10 June) an amendment to the 'Representation of the People Bill' to provide that 'words having reference to the right of voting at parliamentary elections, importing the masculine gender, include women'. As chairman of the Central Committee for Women's Suffrage (established in 1872), he headed a memorial from 110 members to Gladstone, but the prime minister resisted the amendment as likely to imperil the bill. The division was taken on 12 June 1884, when 135 voted with Woodall and 271 against. In obedience to a strong party whip, 104 Liberal supporters of the women's cause voted with the majority: had they voted according to their convictions the amendment would have been carried by 72 votes instead of being lost by 136. On 19 November Woodall brought in a bill granting the vote to single women on the same terms as men, but the second reading was four times adjourned and it never reached a division. Under Gladstone's short third administration of 1886 Woodall was surveyor-general of the ordnance. He revived a bill for women's suffrage in July 1887, and after further delays he reintroduced it in April 1889 and again in 1891. He accepted office as financial secretary to the War Office (August 1892 to June 1895) in Gladstone's fourth government. 
Woodall presented to Burslem a large wing to the Wedgwood Institute and free library, besides founding the Woodall Liberal Club there and bequeathing a collection of valuable pictures to the art gallery. He wrote for various magazines and reviews, republishing some articles in 'Paris after Two Sieges' (1872). He was a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur. He died at the house of his nephew-in-law, Dr Woodhouse, 2 South Parade, Llandudno, on 8 April 1901. The Woodall Memorial Congregational chapel at Burslem was built in 1906. 


@@@@@


doc= 37008


Woodgate, Walter Bradford (1840-1920), oarsman and writer, was born at Belbroughton rectory, Worcestershire, on 20 September 1840, the eldest son of the Revd Henry Arthur Woodgate (1801-1874), rector of Belbroughton and canon of Worcester, and his wife, Maria, 'nee' Bradford. His younger brother was Major-General Sir Edward Woodgate. He entered Radley College in 1850, matriculated at Brasenose College, Oxford, as a scholar in 1859, graduated in 1863, and was called to the bar (Inner Temple) in 1872. 
For more than half a century Woodgate was the outstanding figure on the upper Thames. He rowed his first race in 1858 for Radley against Eton over the Henley course; he rowed his last race there in 1868. He was in the Oxford winning crew in the university boat races of 1862 and 1863, and won the university pairs three times and the sculls twice; at Henley he won the Grand Challenge Cup in 1865, the Stewards' Cup in 1862, the Diamond sculls in 1864, and the Goblets in 1861, 1862, 1863, 1866, and 1868. He also held the Wingfield sculls in 1862, 1864, and 1867. At Henley in 1868 Woodgate's Brasenose four in the Stewards' Cup jettisoned its cox immediately after the start and the crew was disqualified. Nevertheless, by 1874 his point had been accepted and all the fours events had become coxless. Fred Weatherly (1848-1929), the cox, could not swim but survived to write 'Danny Boy' and 'Roses of Picardy' among other ballads. 
Woodgate was not only a great oarsman, but his knowledge of the sport was unsurpassed and it covered almost a century of rowing: he entered the rowing world soon enough to meet the giants of its early days (he had known Thomas Stainforth, the Oxford stroke in the first university boat race in 1829), and he was present at Henley regatta in 1920. His textbook, 'Oars and Sculls, and How to Use Them' (1875), remains a classic, as does his 'Boating' (1888), with its wealth of historical detail. 
The breadth and variety of Woodgate's interests are evident in his 'Reminiscences of an Old Sportsman' (1909), in which he wrote not only about country life, steeplechasing, and school and college life (he was the founder of Vincent's Club at Oxford), but also about the parentage of James I, the Royal Geographical Society's conflicting motives in their search for Dr Livingstone, his own indirect share in Pasteur's researches, politics, and police morality (he never took the law too seriously). As a journalist he helped to launch 'Vanity Fair' and 'Land and Water', was associated with the 'Pall Mall Gazette' in its early days, and contributed to 'The Field' for half a century. He also wrote a few novels under the pseudonym of Wat Bradwood, and in 1893 published 'A Modern Layman's Faith'. 
Woodgate was a man of unflinching rectitude, of decided opinions, but also of great kindliness, and he was an excellent raconteur. As a young man he was strikingly handsome; in later years his fine, stern face and stalwart figure made him a typical John Bull, an effect accentuated by a low-crowned top hat. He died on 1 November 1920, in his sister's house, Brantwood, Highfield Lane, Southampton, of a heart condition brought on by bronchial trouble. He never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 37009


Woods, Sir Albert William (1816-1904), herald, was born on 16 April 1816 at Hampstead, Middlesex, the youngest of four sons and the fifth of six children, all apparently illegitimate, mentioned in the will of Sir William Woods (1785-1842), Garter king of arms. He was the second son and third of the father's four children with Mary Ann Young; the two eldest sons were with Elizabeth Blake. Mary Ann Young, variously described as the daughter of a greengrocer in St Paul's Churchyard, a banner maker in the College of Arms, and Woods's cook-housekeeper, was the sole executrix of his will. The paternity of Sir William Woods is uncertain; there was a tradition that he was an illegitimate child of Charles Howard, eleventh duke of Norfolk and earl marshal (1746-1815), although he bore the arms matriculated in the Lyon Office, Edinburgh, in 1812 by George Woods of London, brother and heir of the comedian William Woods, of the Theatre Royal, Edinburgh. Sir Albert Woods also bore these arms until 22 December 1891, when a new grant reshuffled the charges in his father's arms. Nothing is known of his education, which was described by his son-in-law Sir Arthur Naylor Wollaston (1842-1922) as private. Sir Anthony Wagner in 'Heralds of England' records that he dropped his aitches and that Edward Bellasis (1800-1873), serjeant-at-law, puzzled whether there really was an 'h' in herald after a visit to the College of Arms in 1869 (p. 516). 
About 1832 Woods began working in his father's office, and on 27 June 1837 was appointed Fitzalan pursuivant-extraordinary, as such attending the coronation of Queen Victoria. On 2 August 1838 he was appointed Portcullis pursuivant, following his father's appointment as Garter king of arms on 23 July 1838. On 1 December 1838 he married -- at St George's, Camberwell, on her twenty-first birthday -- Caroline (1817-1911), daughter of Robert Cole, merchant, of Rotherfield, Sussex, with whom he had two children: William Francis Woods (1840-1870), the father of Albert William Woods (1865-1890), Rouge Dragon pursuivant in 1886, whose gambling led to bankruptcy in 1889; and Caroline Marianne (1844-1902), wife of Sir Arthur Naylor Wollaston and mother of Sir Gerald Woods Wollaston (1874-1957), Garter king of arms (1930-44). Woods was promoted Norfolk herald-extraordinary on 28 October 1841 and Lancaster herald on 9 November 1841, and held the latter post with that of gentleman usher of the scarlet rod of the Most Honourable Order of the Bath, with the annexed office of Brunswick herald, to which he was appointed on 24 November 1841. Following the reorganization of the order in 1857 and the abolition of those offices he was made registrar and secretary of the Order of the Bath, as embodied in the new statutes of the order dated 31 January 1859. 
On 28 July 1842 Woods was appointed inspector of regimental colours, in succession to his father, who had died on 25 July. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London on 25 March 1847. On 5 August 1869 he was appointed king of arms of the Order of St Michael and St George, and, on 2 November 1869, Garter king of arms, in succession to Sir Charles George Young. He was knighted on 11 November 1869, and was appointed registrar of the Order of the Star of India (instituted 23 February 1861), of the Order of the Indian Empire and of the Order of the Crown of India (both instituted 1 January 1878), and of the Royal Order of Victoria and Albert. As Lancaster herald and as Garter, Woods was in attendance on six investiture missions to foreign sovereigns. He was a knight of grace and director-general of ceremonies of the order of St John of Jerusalem in England, and also a prominent freemason, being grand director of ceremonies from 1860 until his death. He was appointed CB in 1887, KCMG on 21 May 1890, KCB on 22 June 1897, and GCVO on 30 June 1903. 
Woods was determined that his grants should mark a definite period in heraldry and that no nineteenth-century grantee could expect a simple coat. Sir Anthony Wagner wrote that Woods 'was businesslike, energetic and possessed immense knowledge of ceremonial, precedence and the day to day business of his office' but added that he 'was not an historian or a scholar and his influence on heraldic design has been thought deplorable' (Wagner, 'Heralds of England', 516). A portrait of Woods in 'The Genealogist' in 1892, when he was aged seventy-seven, referred to his working as hard as any man half his age, and to his courteous and able exercise of his duties. By 1897 he was very seriously ill, yet continued to assemble all paperwork for his many offices from his home at 69 St George's Road, Warwick Square, Pimlico, while Sir William Henry Weldon (1837-1919), then Norroy, acted as his deputy for ceremonial purposes and Sir Henry Farnham Burke (1859-1930), then Somerset herald, prepared the coronation of Edward VII, in 1901-2. The impact of Woods's increasing debility was all the greater because he had, in the words of one contemporary, 'obtained somehow or other a veto and authority in all heraldic matters which few if any earlier Garters ever had' (A. C. Fox-Davies, in 'Genealogical Magazine', 7.480-82). Fox-Davies knew of no evidence of 'delay or inattention' (ibid.) but in December 1903 a secretary employed by Woods found 150 grants of dignities in the Order of the Bath, signed by Queen Victoria, and a further 485, signed by Edward VII, which had not been sent to the intended recipients. In the same year Sir William Alexander Baillie-Hamilton (1844-1920), then officer of arms of the Order of St Michael and St George, lamented: 'a great deal of the business of several of the Orders is still nominally in the hands of a nonagenarian hermit concealed in St. George's Road, who is of course long past his work, and is nothing worse than an obstruction, but who clings tenaciously to his fees and his prerogatives. (Galloway, 154)' Woods died, of heart disease, at his home in Pimlico on 7 January 1904, and was buried at Norwood cemetery, London, on 11 January. Like his predecessors he had been appointed for life, and his refusal to retire led directly to the formation, on 1 April 1904, of the Central Chancery of the Orders of Knighthood, which took away from Garter and the other heralds the registration and secretarial work connected with most orders of chivalry. 


@@@@@


doc= 37010


Woods, Donald Devereux (1912-1964), microbiologist, was born at Ipswich on 16 February 1912, the elder son of Walter James Woods, builder and decorator of Ipswich, and his wife, Violet Mabel Cobb. Woods was educated at Northgate School, Ipswich, and became a scholar at Trinity Hall, Cambridge; he graduated in 1933 with first-class honours in parts one (1932) and two (1933) of the natural sciences tripos. He remained at Cambridge with a Beit memorial fellowship and took his PhD in 1937. From 1933 to 1939 he worked in association with Marjory Stephenson at Cambridge and under her influence became interested in the metabolic processes of bacteria. In 1939 he joined the Medical Research Council's unit for bacterial chemistry as a Halley-Stewart research fellow, working at the Middlesex Hospital, London. In the same year he married Alison Lillian, daughter of George William Halls, agricultural engineer; they had one daughter. 
From 1940 to 1946 Woods was engaged in war work at the chemical defence research establishment at Porton Down, Wiltshire. At the end of that period he became reader in chemical microbiology in the biochemistry department of the University of Oxford under Professor Rudolph A. Peters, and in 1951 he became a fellow of Trinity College, Oxford. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1952. In 1955 he was appointed to the first chair in chemical microbiology in the United Kingdom -- the Iveagh professorship, endowed by Arthur Guinness, Son & Co. 
Woods's major impact on his branch of science was made in a paper (published in 1940) which was prepared when he was working in the unit directed by Paul Fildes at the Middlesex Hospital. At that time sulphonamide drugs had become established as the first really effective chemotherapeutic agents for use against bacterial infections. Fildes's group was concerned with the substances essential for the growth of pathogenic bacteria, and one of its lines of attack was to analyse animal and vegetable extracts for the essential components. Sulphanilamide was known to inhibit bacterial growth quantitatively and the inhibition was prevented, also quantitatively, by extracts of yeast and other organisms. Woods set out to discover the anti-sulphanilamide factor in yeast extracts and, within four months, he had shown that it was p-aminobenzoic acid. Woods had been trained at Cambridge as a biochemist and, recognizing the similarity of the chemical structures of p-aminobenzoic acid and sulphanilamide molecules, he suggested that the drug could be acting as an inhibitor of an enzyme bringing about some essential metabolism of p-aminobenzoic acid. The idea rapidly received support by the identification of p-aminobenzoic acid in various biological complexes and the demonstration that it formed part of the molecule of folic acid, a substance essential to the functioning of a variety of enzymes important in biosynthetic reactions. 
This demonstration by Woods -- that a chemical analogue of an 'essential metabolite' could become a useful drug -- appeared to open up a direct approach to the rational development of chemotherapeutic agents by structural modification of other metabolites. Woods was unable to follow this approach himself since he was engaged, for the next six years, in war work. During this period others confirmed the accuracy of his predictions, though it was many years before any 'metabolite analogues' which were effective for the clinical treatment of infections were discovered -- mainly because the nature of the selective action of sulphanilamide was not understood at this time and because the majority of analogues proved to be non-selective 'in vivo'. 
When Woods returned to academic life in 1946, p-aminobenzoic acid had been established as the biosynthetic precursor of folic acid and he devoted much of the rest of his research career to elucidating the nature and functions of folic acid in its various forms. During this time a series of young research workers worked under his guidance and many of these later became leading investigators in other laboratories and universities. Woods was a dedicated teacher and had a gift not only for exposition but also for enlisting and maintaining the interest of a large number of collaborators, young and old. In 1953 he delivered the first Marjory Stephenson memorial lecture to the Society for General Microbiology; this lecture provides a delightful account both of his work at that time and of his approach to the problems of chemical microbiology. Woods was invited to give the Leeuwenhoek lecture to the Royal Society in 1964, but he died in the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, on 6 November 1964, before he could deliver it. His wife survived him. 
E. F. Gale', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37011


Woods, Edward (1814-1903), civil engineer, was born in London on 28 April 1814, the son of Samuel Woods, a merchant. After an education at private schools, he became in 1834 an assistant to John Dixon, recently appointed chief engineer of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway. Woods was placed in charge of the section between Liverpool and Newton-le-Willows, including the tunnel then under construction by William Mackenzie (1794-1851) between Lime Street and Edge Hill stations. In 1836 he succeeded Dixon as chief engineer. He married Mary Dent, daughter of Thomas Goodman of Birmingham on 5 October 1840. They had three sons and two daughters. 
Despite the amalgamation of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway with the Grand Junction Railway in 1845, Woods remained, until the end of 1852, in charge of the works on the Liverpool and Manchester section. These included the construction of the Victoria Tunnel (completed 1848) between Edge Hill station and the docks, a large goods station adjoining Waterloo Dock, and a line between Patricroft and Clifton, opened in 1850. In 1853 he established himself in London as a consulting engineer. 
Woods's work on the Liverpool and Manchester line enabled him to observe at first hand the strengths and weakness of this pioneer railway. He played a prominent part in various early experimental investigations into the working of railways. When Count de Pambour visited Britain in 1834, and again in 1836, Woods assisted him with his experiments into fuel consumption and locomotive performance. Pambour's work was widely reported, and translated into English ('A Practical Treatise on Locomotive Engines', 2nd edn, 1840). Woods clearly profited from this experience, and was soon conducting his own experiments. In 1836 he made observations on the waste of fuel due to condensation in the long pipes conveying steam about a quarter of a mile to the winding-engines used for hauling trains through the Edge Hill Tunnel. He was a member of a committee, with Dr Dionysius Lardner, appointed by the British Association in 1837 to report on the resistance of railway trains, and presented a separate report ('British Association Report', 1841, 247). In 1838 he presented to the Institution of Civil Engineers a paper ('Transactions', 2.137-55) 'On certain forms of locomotive engines', which contained some of the earliest accurate details of the working of locomotives, and for which he was awarded a Telford medal. The consumption of fuel in locomotives was the subject of a paper presented by him to the Liverpool Polytechnic Society in 1843 ('Weale's Quarterly Papers on Engineering', 2/5, 1844), and of a contribution to a new edition of Thomas Tredgold's 'The Steam Engine' in 1850. 
In 1853 Woods carried out, with W. P. Marshall, experiments on the locomotives of the London and North Western Railway (LNWR), between London and Rugby, and their three reports to the railway company recommended weights and dimensions for various classes of engines. These were followed, in 1854, by a joint report on the relative merits of coal and coke as locomotive fuel. Woods's research provided an invaluable insight into early locomotive design and performance, and influenced many of his contemporaries. 
The consultancy work undertaken by Woods was chiefly connected with the railways of South America, including the Central Argentine Railway, the Copiapo extension, Santiago and Valparaiso, and Coquimbo railways in Chile, and the Mollenda-Arequipa and Callao-Oroya lines in Peru. Many of these lines were built by the American contractor Henry Meiggs, with Woods acting as UK consultant. He was responsible not only for surveys and construction, but also for the design of rolling stock to meet the somewhat special conditions. His son Edward Harry assisted him in much of this work, and acted as resident engineer and manager on the Central Argentine Railway. Other engineering work included a wrought-iron pier, 2400 feet long, built on screw piles at Pisco on the coast of Peru, a quay wall built at Bilbao in 1877, and Montevideo waterworks. 
In the 'battle of the gauges' he favoured the Irish gauge (5 feet 3 inches) or the Indian gauge (5 feet 6 inches). He regarded break of gauge as a mistake, and in 1872 opposed the introduction of a new gauge in Victoria, Australia. In 1877, as president of the mechanical science section of the British Association, he delivered an address on 'Adequate brake power for railway trains'. Elected a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1846, he was president in 1886-7. In 1884 he was president of the Smeatonian Society of Civil Engineers. 
Woods died at his residence, 45 Onslow Gardens, London, on 14 June 1903, and was buried at Chenies, Buckinghamshire on the 18th. Two of his sons, and both daughters, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 37012


Woods, Henry (1868-1952), palaeontologist, was born on 18 December 1868 at Cottenham, near Cambridge, the only child of Francis Woods, a farmer, and his second wife, Mary Ann Granger, daughter of a Haddenham farmer. His father died when he was two years old. He was educated at the village school and, following a move with his mother in 1880, at the higher grade school in Cambridge. Although he gained several prizes and a scholarship, he left in 1883 to start work, but continued to study in his spare time. On entering St John's College, Cambridge, in October 1887 he proved to be a brilliant student. He gained a first class in part one of the natural sciences tripos in 1889, and was elected a scholar; obtaining a first class in part two of the tripos, the following year, taking geology, he was awarded the Harkness scholarship for the best performance in the examination. He took his MA in 1894 and won the Sedgwick prize in 1895. 
Woods joined the teaching staff of the department of geology, Cambridge University, in 1892, filling a new post of demonstrator in palaeobotany. In 1894 he also became demonstrator in palaeozoology, and in 1899 he was appointed to the first lectureship in palaeozoology -- a post he held until his retirement in 1934. His connections with the department lasted almost to the end of his life, and he continued to act as librarian until past the age of eighty. 
Prior to his official appointment Woods had been working on the palaeontological collections in the department (Bulman, 645), and had published 'A Catalogue of Type Fossils in the Woodwardian Museum, Cambridge' in 1891. He devoted considerable time to the collections until a full-time curator was appointed (in the 1920s). Woods was also involved in planning the new Sedgwick Museum with Professor McKenny Hughes, and on its completion in 1904 became responsible for its arrangement. A zealous teacher, he produced the fundamental treatise 'Palaeontology: Invertebrate' (1893) from his lecture notes; this textbook went through numerous editions until its concentration on basic morphological facts, reflecting Woods's cautious attitude to the philosophical and interpretative aspects of palaeontology, meant that it was superseded by more modern works. 
In 1910 Woods married Ethel Gertrude Skeat (died 1939), the third daughter of Walter William Skeat, professor of Old English at Cambridge. In 1908 she was awarded the Murchison fund by the Geological Society in recognition of her various contributions to palaeontology. She and Woods had no children. 
Woods's original contributions established him as one of the foremost invertebrate palaeontologists of his generation. His 'Monograph of the Cretaceous Lamellibranchia of England' (1899-1913) was still a fundamental reference at the close of the twentieth century. His meticulous observations and clear morphological descriptions, combined with a thorough comparison of the relationship of contemporaneous taxa, and a high standard of illustration, have ensured its lasting importance. His equally precise 'Monograph of the Fossil Macrurous Crustacea of England' (1925-31) deals with a less abundant group, but has an identical status in modern taxonomy. Woods published other significant descriptive monographs on Cretaceous Mollusca from South Africa (1906, 1908), New Zealand (1917), and Northern Nigeria (1911), and one on Tertiary Mollusca from Peru (1922). 
Woods was usually reluctant to indulge in speculative hypothesis, but one of his earlier papers on the supposed evolution of the Cretaceous bivalve 'Inoceramus' had a major role in establishing the importance of the Inoceramidae during that period. His earlier analysis of the chalk rock fauna (1896-7) modified contemporary opinion on chalk deposition and compares with more recent palaeoecological interpretation. He must be regarded as unique in that, despite publishing many systematic descriptions, he only created a single taxon at supra-specific level, the bivalve sub-genus 'Cucullaea' ('Dicranodonta'), in 1899. 
Tall and spare, with a pronounced stoop in later life, Woods had a quiet, reserved manner, tempered by his kindly grey eyes. The only available portrait of him is a passport photograph, confirming both his liking for travel and his self-confessed, unsociable, shy disposition. Although not a dynamic personality, or an outstanding lecturer, he instilled a love of fossils into many of his students. 
The Geological Society of London awarded Woods the Lyell fund (1898), the Lyell medal (1918), and the Wollaston medal (1940). He was elected FRS in 1916, was a member of the Geologists' Association for sixty years, and was made an honorary member of the Royal Society of New Zealand, and of the Yorkshire Philosophical Society, for his work on Cretaceous fossils. Owing to financial necessity, he became a most practised and efficient examiner for many of the principal examination authorities. He served on the councils of both the Palaeontographical and the Geological societies. But apart from his work, his only other interest was gardening. 
After a short illness Woods died on 4 April 1952 at his home, The Homestead, Meldreth, Cambridgeshire, where he had lived since 1924. Precise and methodical to the end, he bequeathed the bulk of his estate to the Palaeontographical Society and the Geological Society. 


@@@@@


doc= 37013


Woods, Sir John Harold Edmund (1895-1962), civil servant, was born in Kensington, London, on 20 April 1895, the elder son of John Henry Woods (1866-1944) and his wife, Annie Alker, both of whom came from Wigan. His father was a cherubic, scholarly man who had been a wrangler at Peterhouse, Cambridge, and a mathematical coach before seeking ordination (1905) and was subsequently vicar of St Mark's, South Shields, and rector of Glaston, Uppingham. 
Woods was educated at Christ's Hospital, Horsham, Sussex, and after the First World War at Balliol College, Oxford. He won classical and other school prizes, was captain of rugger, cricket, and fives, and was reappointed captain of the school for a second year. In 1914 he won an exhibition to Balliol but went straight from school into the army as a lieutenant in the 22nd battalion, Royal Fusiliers. In 1916 he was severely wounded in the leg and was invalided out, although not until 1918. He surmounted his war wound sufficiently to go up to Balliol (1918-20) and to sit the civil service entry examination in July 1920, passing second and joining the Treasury. His wounds, however, remained throughout his life, involving him in forty-five surgical operations with long periods in hospital and a major daily task of cleaning and plugging the huge hole in his leg. 
In spite of his wound, of which the stick he always carried was a reminder, Woods remained an exuberant personality and a very clubbable man. John Henry, as he was universally and affectionately known, was good company, with an abundance of stories and a keen sense of fun. He was able to play cricket with the help of a runner and to complete a full round of golf. He could also indulge his passion for listening to good music. In 1928 he had attended the Imperial Defence College and in 1929 he served as assistant private secretary to the prince of Wales. He married in 1930 Molly, daughter of Noah Henry Baker, who was senior clerk of works, police architect and surveyors' department, Scotland Yard. They had one son and one daughter and enjoyed a very happy and full married life. 
When Woods rejoined the Treasury he was in charge in the 1930s of the provision of government finance for work-creation schemes and the building of the new Cunard ocean liners, and secretary of the 'Trade Facilities Act' advisory committee. He was also much in contact with the accountancy profession to which the Treasury turned for guidance on the role of public funds to rescue industries in difficulties. The friendships he formed in the world of industrial finance were subsequently strengthened in the war years and after; and in the discharge of his various responsibilities his powers matured. 
In 1931 Woods was appointed private secretary to Philip Snowden, chancellor of the exchequer and later lord privy seal, who remained one of his heroes for his courage and integrity. In 1936 he became principal private secretary to Neville Chamberlain as chancellor of the exchequer and then in 1937-40 to his successor, Sir John Simon. In normal circumstances he would have gone on to be head of a department but instead, with the country now at war, he was promoted to principal assistant secretary at the Treasury and put in charge of expenditure for the armed services -- not a congenial job to one who had served throughout the First World War. His most important tasks were to formulate government policy on the pricing of munitions, supplemented by evidence on contract procedures to the public accounts committee; and, after appointment in 1943 as permanent secretary of the Ministry of Production, to co-ordinate munitions production in alliance with the chief executive, Sir Robert Sinclair, an alliance that continued in the post-war period under Churchill's brief caretaker government, when the ministry was merged with the Board of Trade. 
In 1945, when the Labour government took over and Cripps succeeded Oliver Lyttelton as president of the Board of Trade, Woods, who was knighted (KCB) in that year (GCB, 1949), continued as permanent secretary. Although he and Cripps seemed at opposite extremes in personality they collaborated successfully, with mutual respect and understanding. His service at the board continued through six strenuous post-war years that formed the apogee of his career. The staff of the board had grown from 2400 before the war to 15,000, with responsibilities ranging from the great diversity of controls introduced in wartime to the export drive aiming to increase the volume of exports from 30 per cent of the pre-war volume to 150 (or even 175) per cent. The burden of securing effective co-ordination between different areas of policy was a very heavy one, however much was delegated to senior staff, and was not made easier by his loss of an eye in an accident. There were also periods -- for example, before devaluation in 1949 -- when Woods was on extended sick leave. 
The pressure continued when Harold Wilson took over from Cripps in 1947. Woods was asked to take on new duties such as membership of the Economic Planning Board. It was a period dominated by controls, in which the conditions for their removal were hard to create. He gave much thought to the action that might be taken and to preparing Harold Wilson's bonfire of controls. It was at this time that he drew attention to the move to replace controls by some form of voluntary action which he christened 'voluntaryism', observing that it sounded like 'the occupational disease of a church organist' ('DNB'). 
In 1950 Woods was appointed chairman of a Treasury organization committee charged with examining how the Treasury conducted its affairs and distributed its responsibilities. But by this time he was finding the pressure of work beyond his powers and decided to retire from the civil service. Early in 1951 he accepted an invitation from his friend Sir George Nelson to join the board of the English Electric Company as an executive director. He played an important part over the next decade in the expansion in the company's business overseas and developed a close association, on behalf of English Electric, with a number of other companies. 
Released from the pressure of government work, Woods was able to take on duties to which he felt attracted. As a devout Christian he gave priority to service to the Church of England in membership of the church's central committees, particularly the central board of finance, and sought to provide additional help to archbishops. Throughout the 1950s he accepted one appointment after another; in 1952 he was elected president of the National Institute of Economic and Social Research, and accepted membership of the committee on the Churchill Falls development power scheme in Canada; in 1953 he joined the advisory committee of the Revolving Fund for Industry and the Waverley committee on atomic energy; in 1954 he took part in the inquiry into the administrative and disciplinary consequences of the Crichel Down affair, and in 1957-9 he served as a member of the Radcliffe committee on the working of the monetary system. In addition to this sequence of responsibilities he was a visiting fellow of Nuffield College, Oxford, a director of the Sadler's Wells Trust Ltd, a governor of the Administrative Staff College at Henley, and treasurer of the British School at Rome. 
In 1962 Woods's long spell of ill health forced him into a wheelchair and put an end to his active life. Later in the year, on 2 December, he died at his home, Burchetts, Haywards Heath, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 37014


Woodward, Sir Arthur Smith (1864-1944), palaeontologist, was born on 23 May 1864 at Macclesfield, Cheshire, the elder son of Edward Woodward, silk dyer, and his wife, Margaret Smith, whose maiden name he used as an additional surname. Both families had long been connected with the silk trade in Macclesfield. As a child Woodward collected wild flowers, beetles, and seaweeds; a fossil he was given while on holiday at Llandudno led to an interest in geology. 
Woodward was educated at the King Edward VI Grammar School, Macclesfield, which awarded him a scholarship to Owens College, Manchester. There he was taught by, among others, William Boyd Dawkins, the archaeologist and geologist, who became his lifelong friend. In 1882, and before graduation, Woodward obtained a position in the geology department of the British Museum (Natural History), then newly transferred to South Kensington. He worked under the direction of William Davies, arranging the collections of fossil vertebrates for exhibition. The quality of the fishes in the collections of the earl of Enniskillen and Sir Philip Egerton, which the museum had just acquired, turned Woodward to the special study of fossil fishes. He attended the Swiney lectures given in the museum in 1883 by Ramsay Heatley Traquair, then the authority on the subject, and evening classes in comparative anatomy and general biology at King's College. At the suggestion of the keeper, the museum's trustees instructed Woodward to make a catalogue of all the fossil fishes in the department: he thus entered on his life-work, which was to make him the greatest palaeoichthyologist of his time. 
The first of the four volumes of the 'Catalogue of Fossil Fishes in the British Museum' appeared in 1889, the last in 1901. Nearly one hundred years later they were still in great demand. Although Woodward produced over six hundred publications, most of them papers in scientific journals, the catalogue was his 'magnum opus'. A monument of meticulous accuracy and of intense research, it was the first application of evolutionary theory to the whole field. It became the mainspring of Woodward's multifarious activities: he acquired a speaking knowledge of several European languages; travelled widely in quest of new material, both in the field and in public and private collections; made contact with palaeontologists of many nationalities, and entertained them at home; and worked to enrich the collections further, until, by the wealth of its material, his department drew researchers from all parts of the world. 
In 1892 Woodward became assistant keeper and in 1901 he succeeded to the keepership. By delegating the supervision of invertebrates to the assistant keeper he was able to concentrate his studies on vertebrates generally, and fossil fishes in particular. In 1894 he married Maud Leonora Ida (1874-1963), daughter of the geologist Harry Govier Seeley; they had one son, who entered the colonial service and died in 1924, and one daughter. 
Woodward received many honours. The Royal Society elected him a fellow in 1901 and awarded him a royal medal (1917); he served as president of a number of scientific societies and received several other medals, including the Lyell (1896) and Wollaston (1924) medals of the Geological Society, the prix Cuvier of the French Academie des Sciences (1918), and the Mary Clark Thompson medal of the National Academy of Sciences, Washington (1942). He also held honorary doctorates from the universities of Glasgow, St Andrews, Tartu, and Athens. He was knighted in 1924. 
Woodward's reputation as a distinguished and successful scientist has been marred, though his fame increased, since exposure of the Piltdown fraud in the 1950s. In 1912 Charles Dawson, a Sussex solicitor, showed Woodward fragments of a human skull said to have come from Pleistocene gravels at Piltdown, Sussex. Woodward joined Dawson in excavations at the site and together they found further hominoid fragments, worked flints, and other mammalian fossils. In 1913 Woodward described 'Piltdown man' as 'Eoanthropus dawsoni', and with Dawson, Teilhard de Chardin, and others he continued to work the Piltdown site. Dawson died in 1916; nothing was found at Piltdown thereafter by Woodward or anyone else. The known parts of Piltdown man -- a braincase of human type associated with an apelike lower jaw -- became increasingly anomalous in comparison with human fossils found subsequently, and during the 1950s all the Piltdown fossils were shown to have been faked and/or planted at the site. Piltdown man comprises parts of an unusually thick human braincase and of an orang-utan lower jaw, stained and modified in various ways. 
Since the Piltdown fakes were uncovered in the 1950s, there have been repeated attempts to identify the forger. Dawson must have been involved; candidates proposed as his co-conspirator include Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, W. J. Sollas, M. A. C. Hinton, Teilhard de Chardin, and Sir Arthur Keith. Whereas the true culprits and their motives may never be identified with certainty, their victim or dupe was certainly Woodward. Between 1912 and his death, he published some twenty-five papers bearing on Piltdown, and his last work, dictated to his wife during his blindness and issued posthumously in 1948, was 'The Earliest Englishman', a book on Piltdown man. Whether the forger's motives were self-advancement or spite, Woodward was completely taken in; the acuity displayed in his work on fishes and other vertebrates deserted him. 
Woodward was a strict disciplinarian, and has been described as a humourless martinet. Although perhaps not easily approachable, he could be very kind and considerate to his junior staff. During his forty-two years at the museum he was absent through sickness for only one half-day -- with a broken arm. His outside interests were few and this perhaps made it difficult for him to understand the wider outlook of his colleagues, to whom his single-minded zeal and devotion to duty were nevertheless an inspiration. Yet he appreciated music, and, surprisingly, enjoyed taking his children to the pantomime. 
Following his early retirement in 1924, Woodward never again entered the British Museum, but he continued to work and travel until blindness overtook him in his final years. Apparently he was piqued at having been passed over for the directorship in 1919. Woodward died at his home, Hill Place, Balcombe Road, Haywards Heath, Sussex, on 2 September 1944. He was cremated at Brighton crematorium on 6 September; a memorial service was held at All Saints' Church, Lindfield, Sussex, on 8 September. His library of nearly 10,000 works was purchased by University College, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 37015


Woodward, Herbert Hall (1847-1909), composer and clergyman, was born on 13 January 1847 at The Friars, near Liverpool, the fifth and youngest son of Robert Woodward (1801-1882) and his wife, Mary (died 1891), the youngest daughter of William Hall, of Ryall's Court, Ripple, Worcestershire. His father, a Liverpool merchant, purchased the Arley Castle estate, near Bewdley, in 1852. Both his parents' families had long been settled in Worcestershire. After attending Radley College, Woodward matriculated at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, in 1862. At Radley he studied music under Dr E. G. Monk and at Oxford under the Revd Dr Leighton Hayne; he graduated BMus in 1866 and BA in 1867. He then spent eighteen months at Cuddesdon Theological College, and, being ordained deacon in 1870 and priest in 1871 in the diocese of Oxford, became curate and precentor of Wantage. There he remained for eleven years, working as assistant priest under William John Butler, afterwards dean of Lincoln. He composed his communion service in E[flat], which appeared in many editions, for the church choir at Wantage. 
In 1881 Woodward was appointed a minor canon of Worcester Cathedral, and in 1890 he became precentor, succeeding the Revd E. V. Hall. In the autumn of 1881 he composed the anthem 'The radiant morn', which first appeared in the 'Musical Times' in June 1882 (pp. 329-33), and became 'one of the best-known modern anthems in English church music' ('MT', 46, 1905, 724). He formed at Worcester a successful preparatory boarding-school for the choirboys, of which he was warden for twenty-eight years, from 1881 until his death. He had a great influence on the services at the cathedral, and raised the standard of worship to a high level. Other works he published include communion services in D (1885) and A (1897), and numerous anthems including 'The sun shall be no more thy light by day' (1887), 'Rejoice greatly' (1889), 'Behold, the days come, saith the Lord' (1895), 'The day thou gavest, Lord, is ended' (1896), and 'Comes, at times, a stillness as of even' (1908). A bachelor with private means, he was widely known for his generous philanthropy. He resided at College Yard, Worcester, but died at 45 Devonshire Street, Portland Place, London, after an operation, on 25 May 1909. He was commemorated at Worcester by the Woodward memorial wing of the choir-school buildings. 


@@@@@


doc= 37016


Wooldridge, Harry Ellis (1845-1917), musician and artist, was born on 28 March 1845 in the parish of St Lawrence in Winchester, Hampshire, the son of Harry Wooldridge, stationer and publisher, and his wife, Emma Frances Jones. He was educated privately before starting work at Lloyd's, but in 1865 he enrolled in the Royal Academy Schools, London. A friendship with Edward Burne-Jones encouraged Pre-Raphaelite sympathies and he embarked on a wide-ranging career in art and design in the late 1860s and the 1870s. He exhibited paintings at the Royal Academy, which were always well hung and the first of which was purchased by Frederic Leighton. A cabinet which he had decorated was placed in the South Kensington (later the Victoria and Albert) Museum, and he undertook commissions -- from G. F. Watts and T. G. Jackson, among others -- to execute murals and to design stained glass. His large reredos at St Martin's Church, Brighton, and many of the windows manufactured by James Powell & Sons, in a Renaissance style, date from the 1870s. He also painted frescos in St John's Church, Hampstead, London. 
Meanwhile, Wooldridge was also exploring old Italian music in the British Museum. An accomplished singer from an early age, he now became interested in contrapuntal music and was asked to edit and revise William Chappell's 'Popular Music of the Olden Time' under the new title of 'Old English Popular Music' (1893). He omitted any songs which did not exist in early printed sources, rejecting popular tunes based on oral tradition, and he substituted his own harmonizations for those of G. A. Macfarren, who had harmonized the tunes in the original edition. 
On 18 June 1894 Wooldridge married Julia Mary Olding ('b'. 1850/51), daughter of Stephen Olding, banker; they had no children. He was appointed Slade professor of fine art at Oxford in 1895, and was twice re-elected to the post from which he retired in 1904. From Trinity College, as an honorary MA (1895), he taught in rounded periods of Caroline diction and rhythm. In his inaugural lectures he reviewed theories of art from Plato to Hegel. While accepting much of Hegel's analysis, he criticized his attribution of artistic developments to entirely moral and political causes, pointing out the importance of newly discovered materials and methods and their exploration within artistic communities as forces for change. 
Wooldridge collaborated with his friend, the poet Robert Bridges, on the 'Yattendon Hymnal' (1899), and he served on the committee for the revision of 'Hymns Ancient and Modern' but retired after several meetings, dissatisfied with the quality of the work. There are church settings and compositions by him in 'Musica antiquata' (1907-8, 1913): the combination of aesthetic sensibilities with scholarly knowledge here shown identifies the best of these simple four-part polyphonic settings with the workmanship of the original masters. For the Purcell Society he edited 'Three Odes for St Cecilia's Day' (1899) and 'Birthday Odes for Queen Mary' (1902). While at Oxford he was asked to contribute the first volume of the 'Oxford History of Music', for which he conducted much obscure research: his two volumes, 'The Polyphonic Period' (1901 and 1905), traced the development of polyphonic music to the end of the sixteenth century. 
Wooldridge had a well-formed and thickset frame, blue eyes, and a ruddy auburn beard trimmed like a Frenchman's. Punctilious in dress and manners, he was a good raconteur and mimic. Although generous and genial, he was notably intolerant of pretension, particularly of the artistic kind. His knowledge of Latin and Greek was poor, but he spoke French and Italian like a native and was extremely well read. Wooldridge died at his home, 90 Oakwood Court, Kensington, London, on 13 February 1917. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 37017


Wooldridge, Sidney William (1900-1963), geomorphologist and geographer, was born in Hornsey, north London, on 16 November 1900, younger son (there was also a daughter) of Lewis William Wooldridge, bank manager, and his wife, Helen Chadwick. His early childhood was spent in Cheam, Surrey, and his later schooling was at Glendale county school, Wood Green, London, where he enjoyed explorations in the countryside inspired by evening classes in geology. From 1918 he read geology at King's College, London, graduating with a first-class degree in 1921 and publishing his first paper that year. He began research in petrology, gaining his MSc in 1923 and DSc in 1927, but his research on the Tertiary and Pleistocene deposits on the North Downs and Chilterns showed an increasing interest in geomorphology. He became demonstrator (1922), assistant lecturer (1925), and lecturer (1927) at King's College, teaching on the combined geography and geology course which drew together human geographers at the London School of Economics (LSE) and geologists and geomorphologists at King's; the course became very influential in the 1930s in uniting human and physical sides of geography. In 1933 his increasing interest in geography made him one of three prime movers behind the foundation of the Institute of British Geographers, a forum for professional academic geographers dissatisfied with the Royal Geographical Society's continuing emphasis on exploration and on research by amateur geographers. A personal link with the subject came in 1934 when he married Edith Mary Stephens, a geography student at King's and later a geography teacher. 
Wooldridge worked mainly on the stratigraphy, structure, and morphological evolution of the London basin and the Weald. River development and denudation chronology were particular interests, and his method involved meticulous fieldwork and mapping to identify complex features such as river terraces and erosion surfaces. His work was inspired by the theories of W. M. Davis on cycles of landscape evolution, and bore fruit in a number of research papers, a successful textbook, and 'Structure, Surface and Drainage of South-East England' (1939), a landmark in the development of geomorphology. With his co-author David Leslie Linton he was awarded the Royal Geographical Society's Murchison award in 1942. This followed other awards which provided funds for the fieldwork he considered of prime intellectual importance and whose social aspects he relished. In the 1930s he began to publish on human and historical geography, probably influenced by his King's colleague L. Dudley Stamp. Wooldridge's interest lay in relating early human settlement to physical features. Linton again co-authored several of his important papers in the field. The south-east and particularly the Weald proved fruitful ground for his theses that detailed elucidation of the physical landscape was a prerequisite for understanding human settlement and land use, and that the geographer's goal was regional description grounded in physical geography with human geography following from it. 
With the outbreak of the Second World War, King's College was evacuated to Bristol and, isolated from his colleagues of the LSE, Wooldridge became responsible for both physical and human geography, a development which completed his transformation from a geologist to a geographer. From 1944 to 1947 he was professor of geography at Birkbeck College, London, where he enjoyed teaching adults, but returned to King's in 1947 as its first professor of geography. Wooldridge served as president of the Institute of British Geographers (1949-50) and president of the geography section of the British Association meeting of 1950; he was on the council of the Royal Geographical Society (1947-51), and was chairman of the field studies council in 1952. These responsibilities, combined with a strenuous schedule of examining and lecturing at his own and other institutions, led to a stroke in 1954. Reluctant to relinquish any activity, he carried on after a brief respite, but the strain under which he worked led to more difficult relations with colleagues. None the less, honours continued to come his way: he was made CBE in 1954 in recognition of his work on the government's sand and gravel council; in 1957 he received the Victoria medal of the Royal Geographical Society; and in 1959 he was elected fellow of the Royal Society, one of the few geographers ever to be so honoured. 
Wooldridge was a keen golfer and cricketer, a lay Congregationalist preacher until he converted to the Church of England late in life, and an enthusiast for amateur operetta. He died suddenly on 25 April 1963 at Halliday Hall, King's College, while on official college business. 
The years following Wooldridge's death inevitably brought a re-evaluation of his work. Later laboratory techniques rendered his own, and his conclusions that followed therefrom, unacceptable, and later evidence on palaeo-environments made his assumptions look simplistic: but these developments he could not have foreseen and would have welcomed. More serious are criticisms of his reliance on Daviesian theory and consequent overemphasis on form to the neglect of process (though he himself was aware of this shortcoming of the Daviesian method given the prevailing lack of knowledge about processes) and on the identification of stages in the evolution of both the physical and the human landscape. Thus, although reissued in 1955, by about 1970 'Structure, Surface and Drainage' had become a classic work, rather than a statement of current knowledge, and his method of regional description had been largely abandoned by geomorphologists. However, his role as a pioneer geomorphologist was incontrovertible, and his calls for a historical perspective in and regional focus to geographical enquiry continued to inspire those who sought to unify its physical and human aspects. 


@@@@@


doc= 37018


Woolf, (Adeline) Virginia (1882-1941), writer and publisher, was born Adeline Virginia Stephen on 25 January 1882 at 22 Hyde Park Gate, London. She was the third child of Leslie Stephen (1832-1904), a London man of letters and founding editor of the 'Dictionary of National Biography', and his second wife, Julia Prinsep Duckworth, 'nee' Jackson (1846-1895) ['see 'Stephen, Julia Prinsep], whose soulful, large-eyed beauty had made her a frequent subject for the pioneering Victorian photographer Julia Margaret Cameron, her great-aunt. The niece wrote Cameron's biography for the 'Dictionary of National Biography', and drew on her own nursing practice for her 'Notes on Sickrooms' (1883). The Stephen forebears were evangelicals, part of the Clapham Sect around the reformer William Wilberforce; Leslie Stephen was the son of Jane Catherine Venn (daughter of John Venn ['see under 'Venn, Henry], rector of Clapham) and Sir James Stephen, the colonial under-secretary who framed the bill to abolish slavery in 1833. As lawyers, writers, and educators, the Stephens belonged to the professional elite -- the intellectual aristocracy, so called -- in nineteenth-century England. Julia Jackson grew up in a different set, that of the Pre-Raphaelite artists who gathered at Little Holland House in London. Though artists, including Holman Hunt, proposed to her, she chose to marry a polished gentleman, Herbert Duckworth. She was a grieving young widow with three children when she married Leslie Stephen and produced four more: the artist Vanessa Bell (1879-1961), (Julius) Thoby Stephen (1880-1906), Virginia, and the psychoanalyst Adrian Stephen (1883-1948). 
In spring 1882, just after Virginia's birth, Leslie Stephen was on one of his habitual tramps in Cornwall when, on an impulse, he rented Talland House outside St Ives. There was no furniture in the upstairs rooms nor did the cold water tap work, but there was a perfect view across the sea to Godrevy lighthouse. So each year from mid-July to mid-September, for the following ten years, the Stephen family moved to that large square house with its terraced gardens, divided by hedges of escallonia, descending the slope towards the sea. An entry in Virginia's diary for 22 March 1921 looks back to an ordinary summer day in August 1890, to the sound of the sea and the children in the garden, and concludes that all her life was 'built on that, permeated by that: how much so I could never explain'. 
The rest of the year was spent in London, shut up at 22 Hyde Park Gate, in Kensington, a tall, narrow house, crammed with the ill-assorted offspring of different unions. The younger Stephens, as a close-knit group of gifted children, excluded Laura, the slower child of their father's first marriage to Minny Thackeray ['see 'Stephen, Harriet Marian (1840-1875)]. When Laura showed signs of disturbance, she was detached from the family and put away for life in an asylum. 
It was decided at an early age that Virginia was to be a writer. Writing absorbed her, she said, 'ever since I was a little creature, scribbling a story in the manner of Hawthorne on the green plush sofa in the drawing room at St. Ives while the grown-ups dined' (V. Woolf, 'Diary', 19 Dec 1938). At five she could write a letter in 'a most lovely hand' and tell her father a story every night. Later, after her elder brother, Thoby, went away to school, she, Vanessa, and Adrian devised a serial in the night nursery -- as in the Bronte parsonage -- a romance about the unsuspecting Dilke family next door who were made to discover gold under the nursery floor. At St Ives there was a different serial, a garden story about Beccage and Hollywinks, spirits of evil who lived on the rubbish heap and disappeared through a hole in the escallonia hedge. 
Virginia's bookishness drew her closer to her father than his other children were. Her mother caught her, at nine, twisting a lock of her hair as she read, in imitation of Leslie Stephen. Throughout her life, she retained a fascination for 'that old wretch my father' (V. Woolf, 'Letters', 3 May 1927), though she often condemned him. During her adolescence he seemed a tyrant; then, as she grew older, she would dip into his letters and memoirs, and find a mirror image of herself, 'a fastidious delicate mind, educated & transparent' ('Diary', 22 Dec 1940). The ambivalence was never resolved. Her father was forty-nine when she was born, and she and the other children of his second marriage saw an eminent Victorian with a great forehead and nose, a long grey beard, and heavy eyebrows, wisps of which lowered over his eyes. In colossal hiker's boots he would hop along before or behind the family party, swinging his stick, and humming 'like a stridulous grasshopper' ('Letters', 10 Aug 1909). 
Virginia's strongest memories from childhood were the idyll of St Ives, a basis for art, and at the other extreme, humiliation at the age of six when Gerald Duckworth, her grown-up half-brother (the younger son of her mother's first marriage), lifted her onto a ledge and explored her private parts -- leaving her prey to sexual fear and initiating a lifelong resistance to certain forms of masculine authority. 
There is a photograph of Julia Stephen reading with her four youngest children about 1894. Virginia's face is long, her bones thin and delicate, and her observant eyes are rounded at their lower edge like pears. The photograph breathes the stillness of the children's absorption. More than thirty years later Virginia Woolf created a similar scene in her most famous novel, 'To the Lighthouse' (1927), based on childhood memory. As the mother, Mrs Ramsay, reads aloud she thinks that 'they were happier now than they would ever be again'. In actual life, domestic security exploded for Virginia at thirteen, when Mrs Stephen died unexpectedly, at forty-nine, on 5 May 1895. This was closely followed by the death of her half-sister and surrogate mother, Stella Duckworth Hills, while pregnant in 1897. Later, in an autobiographical fragment (among her essays of 1940, Berg collection, New York Public Library), Virginia pictured herself as she was at that time: an emergent creature struck by successive blows as she sat with wings still creased 'on the broken chrysalis'. 
Further blows came. Leslie Stephen died in 1904, and then, too, Virginia's elder brother, Thoby, from typhoid, contracted on an expedition to Greece in 1906. That decade of deaths sealed off her childhood and divided it sharply from the rest of her life. Ghostly voices spoke to her with increasing urgency, perhaps more real than the people who lived by her side. When voices of the dead urged her to impossible things, they drove her mad but, controlled, they became the material of fiction, as in her treatment of Septimus Warren Smith, haunted by dead fellow soldiers of the First World War, in her novel 'Mrs Dalloway'. He commits suicide after doctors prescribe a sanatorium. 
In September 1897 there is the first record, in her 'Early Journals', of Virginia Stephen's wish to die: 'This diary is lengthening indeed', she wrote at the age of fifteen, 'but death would be shorter & less painful.' To go on she needed a rhinoceros skin -- 'and that one has not got!' 
After the deaths of Mrs Stephen and Stella there was no controlling George Duckworth, her elder half-brother, who would prowl by night, and pounce. He was his sister's 'first lover' according to Virginia's memoir '22 Hyde Park Gate': 'creaking stealthily, the door [of her bedroom] opened; treading gingerly someone entered. 'Who?' I cried. 'Don't be frightened', George whispered. 'And don't turn on the light, oh beloved. Beloved -- ' and he flung himself on my bed, and took me in his arms. ('Moments of Being')' Though he fondled his sister by night, by day he ridiculed her appearance and spoke of her as 'the poor goat'. 
Shame and Victorian proprieties forbade mention of this. When she was twenty-two Virginia collapsed on 10 May 1904, two and a half months after her father's death. That summer she threw herself out of a window and was nursed back to health, within three months, by Stella's friend Violet Dickinson. She and Virginia developed a 'romantic friendship'. Miss Dickinson was thirty-nine, large (6 feet 2 inches), high-spirited, harum-scarum -- the first and kindest of the strong women to whom Virginia looked for petting and cherishing. Violet, prescribing fresh air and friendship, was more successful than any later nurse. 
During the 'black summer' of 1910 Virginia's mental health was again threatened, though to judge by her witty letters she was in no sense mad. In July and August she spent six weeks at a private nursing home, Burley, in Twickenham, which specialized in patients with nervous disorders. This was her first experience of a sanatorium, and she loathed it: the phoney religious atmosphere and the ugliness of an institution decorated in mottled green and red. Worse, she felt shut up with the tiniest of minds. In this the staff seemed indistinguishable from the patients. She told her sister that to escape, 'I shall soon have to jump out of a window.' 
Despite Virginia's protests, her doctor, Sir George Savage, could think of nothing better than to send her back to Burley in 1913, when she sank into depression. This time she emerged suicidal. On 9 September 1913 she saw two new mind specialists, Dr Maurice Wright and the distinguished Sir Henry Head (overbearing and dangerously misguided in the view of Henry James who had consulted Head in 1912). Both doctors prescribed a return to the sanatorium. She went home, took an overdose of veronal, and nearly died. In October she was installed in George Duckworth's house near East Grinstead, Sussex, becoming once more the dependant of the man who, for her, epitomized sexual abuse and social power. A relapse followed in February 1915, when she lost control. Incoherent, sometimes screaming, she lapsed into a coma. 
Whatever the diagnosis -- it has been called acute neurasthenia or manic depression -- Virginia's instability had some biochemical base which was not understood. She certainly had a genetic basis for mental suffering -- her father was depressive and gloomy, her mother melancholic -- yet aspects of her disturbance are open to explanation and, beyond that, even in 'madness' hers remained a rare mind. Two facts counter any glib diagnosis: first, in her own view breakdowns were connected with the position of women. Her feminist treatise 'A Room of One's Own' speculates on the fate of Shakespeare's sister, a hypothetical woman born to write in the sixteenth century, who 'would have been so thwarted and pulled apart by contrary obligations to genius and womanhood that she would certainly have gone crazed, shot herself, or ended her days in some lonely cottage outside the village, half witch, half wizard, feared and mocked at.' The second counter-truth is that in 'the lava of madness' she found her subjects. 'It shoots out of one everything shaped, final, not in mere driblets, as sanity does' ('Letters', 22 June 1930). She prolonged her apprenticeship that the volcanic matter might be cooled by an educated intellect. This was the result of a rigorous but unconventional training. 
Virginia Stephen was educated at home. When she was six her father passed on her first letter to her godfather, adding that when he felt 'lazy' in the mornings he amused himself 'by reading lessons with the children instead of dictionarying' ('Letters', 1.1). Between thirteen and fifteen Virginia had further lessons for two hours every morning (some Livy or Greek exercises) with her father in his study on the fourth floor of 22 Hyde Park Gate. It had a high ceiling of yellow-stained wood and three long windows which overlooked the roofs of Kensington. Along the walls were complete editions of English and French classics -- twenty, thirty, or forty volumes -- bound in red calf. Leslie Stephen lay in a rocking chair, somewhat like a cradle, with a board across its arms and on it a china inkstand. There he wrote his books and read, dropping books in a circle around him. In April 1897 he noted that Ginia was devouring books, almost faster than he liked -- among them Lockhart's 'Life of Sir Walter Scott', Macaulay's 'History', and the two volumes of 'Essays in Ecclesiastical Biography' by her grandfather Sir James Stephen. 
Lessons were often preceded by walks with Leslie Stephen in Kensington Gardens. At such times he was simple and confiding. He had contempt for novelists who merely reflected workaday life with servile fidelity, and he taught Virginia to admire 'fountains of poetic interest' which Hawthorne could discover in a prosaic scene (L. Stephen, 'Nathaniel Hawthorne', 'Hours in a Library', 1, 1892, 169-98). His quick, terse judgments had a sure directional instinct like his hiker's steps, when he could do 40 miles a day; to be with him felt like an adventurous expedition. Though his silences might last from the Round Pond to Marble Arch, they were 'curiously full of meaning, as if he were thinking half-aloud about poetry and philosophy and people he had known', as she wrote in 'Leslie Stephen', an essay of 1932. He had once been a Cambridge don, and Virginia had the advantage, at fifteen, of daily supervisions which were all the better for their informality. In her essay on her father she recalls: 'To read what one liked because one liked it, never to pretend to admire what one did not -- that was his only lesson in the art of reading. To write in the fewest possible words, as clearly as possible, exactly what one meant -- that was his only lesson in the art of writing.' All the same, because he did not see how closely she approached his own high gifts, Virginia was wary, and did not show him some of her pieces, including 'A history of women'. For Leslie Stephen held contradictory attitudes to women's education. In theory, as he had written to his wife when courting her, he hated 'to see women's lives wasted simply because they have not been trained well enough to take an independent interest in any study' (1877, Berg collection, New York Public Library), but later, at one lunch, Virginia noticed how he snubbed his niece Katherine Stephen (who became principal of Newnham College, Cambridge) for presuming to be an intellectual. 
At twenty Virginia went in for another 'orgy of reading' ('Hours in a library', 1916, in V. Woolf, 'Essays'), including Hakluyt's 'Voyages of the Elizabethan Seamen' which her father brought her from the London Library. At this stage she decided that, as there was no acceptable contemporary giant, she would stay with the classics 'and consort entirely with minds of the very first order'. 
Leslie Stephen shaped Virginia's tastes, especially for biography. She picked up his reverential glow balanced by humour. He taught her to pit observed truth against established paradigms, and that if writing is to last it must have, for its backbone, some fierce attachment to an idea. But his deepest influence on his daughter's writing may lie in his unorthodox tramps. Virginia, too, was a walker. A year after her father's death she returned to his favourite ground in Cornwall, and in her Cornwall diary of 1905 lies the origin of her narrative experiments. As her fiction was to follow the uncharted paths of the mind's free movement, so this diary records how she would step aside from the highway at St Ives and trust to footpaths 'as thin as though trodden by rabbits', which led over hills and moor (V. Woolf, 'Early Journals'). As though she were tracking a metaphor for her future work, she followed natural paths which ignored artificial boundaries. Padlocked gates and farm walls were deceptive barriers, for when she climbed over, the path would continue. By tramping literally in her father's footsteps, she came upon an exploratory plot that ignored the signposts of birth, marriage, and death in order to find those unlooked-for moments that shape our lives. As early as 1905, tracking her individual way across the gorse where there were only grey farms, she noted that 'for the walker who prefers the variety & incident of the open fields to the orthodox precision of the high road, there is no such ground for walking as this'. In his postscript to the 'Dictionary of National Biography' Leslie Stephen had said he was impatient of the kind of research that seemed incapable of fruitful conclusions. The success of his daughter's novels was to depend on their conclusions, where she would justify the mind's keen ramble by a dramatic find. 
Virginia was largely self-educated, and continued with a programme of reading throughout her life. Her only sustained formal study was in Greek. At fifteen she attended a few Greek classes at King's College in London, and at eighteen wrote to a cousin, Emma Vaughan, in June 1900: 'Greek... is my daily bread, and a keen delight to me.' In October that year she began private lessons with old Clara Pater, sister to Walter Pater, in an atmosphere of Persian cats and Morris wallpaper, but these lessons proved too undisciplined, and in 1902 Miss Pater was replaced by Janet Case, one of the first women to pass through Girton College, Cambridge, who gave Virginia the only systematic tuition she ever had and introduced her to the feminist cause. 
George Duckworth tried to launch Virginia, with her sister Vanessa, in London society. It was a failure: at social events Virginia would know and speak to nobody all evening and would stand, crushed by the crowd, against a wall. On one occasion she managed to read Tennyson behind a curtain. Though she was to draw on London society in her works, notably in 'Mrs Dalloway', she was too intellectual and unconventional to feel at ease in such a set. Later, in another feminist treatise, 'Three Guineas', she characterized women as 'Outsiders'. It was her view that the 'Outsider' is latent in all women. In her essay 'Thoughts upon social success' (1903; 'Early Journals') the society woman, encased in artifice, appears unreachable: the dinner bell striking eight calls her into existence. If approached by an authentic woman, 'she folds all her petals closely round her' (ibid.). 
After her father's death in 1904 Virginia -- together with Vanessa, Thoby, and Adrian -- left the solid red brick of Kensington for the superb fadedness of Bloomsbury. In their new home at 46 Gordon Square, Vanessa dispensed with the red plush and wallpapers of Hyde Park Gate; instead she painted the walls white and allowed light to enter the tall, clean, rather cold rooms. The trees seemed to fountain from the centre of the square. For the sisters this meant freedom to put writing and painting first; to reinforce their conspiratorial bond at Hyde Park Gate with a shared artistic purpose; and to speak their minds as they shook off time-wasting activities such as going to balls, drawing on white gloves, making tea-table conversation (at which they were wonderfully adept) with important men. 
Virginia's first story, 'Phyllis and Rosamond' (1906), feels its way into a mode of existence she and her sister had recently escaped: the lives of two society girls, daughters at home, two specimens of the many who 'cluster in the shade'. Here, in the unseen space of consciousness, the young writer found a prime subject for future work. It is no accident that her first published essay (for a women's supplement of a clerical journal called 'The Guardian') recounts a pilgrimage to Haworth parsonage, the Yorkshire home of the Brontes who, half a century before, had voiced the hidden trials of women. 
At home Virginia Stephen played up to the family's caricature of her as mad genius and helpless, scatty dependant of her sister. She would expand on the agony of shopping for one forced to keep her underclothes pinned together by brooches. Yet she was professional and direct as a teacher from 1905 to 1907 at Morley College, a night school for workers in south London. It soon became obvious that the organizers preferred the safety of mediocrity. The principal, Mary Sheepshanks, suggested that Virginia might hold a little social evening or pass on a little English grammar, but she replied that the newly literate should not be fobbed off with sham learning. Virginia insisted on a proper course in English history, even though only three pupils came, and hoped to give them a foundation for further study rather than the unconnected fragments offered by the college curriculum. 
As a writer, too, Virginia Stephen showed herself self-disciplined, professional, prolific, and courageous. In biographical reviews between 1908 and 1910 she developed a theory crucial to her development as a novelist. With Elizabeth I, with the traveller Lady Hester Stanhope, or the letter writer Jane Carlyle, she examined the hidden moments and obscure formative experiences in a life, rather than its more public actions. In her first novel, 'The Voyage Out', drafted between 1908 and 1912 and published in 1915, a would-be novelist called Terence Hewet expounds the challenge which the author had set for herself: 'I should like to write about Silence; the things people don't say. But the difficulty is immense.' The heroine, Rachel Vinrace, is a silent creature who is surfacing throughout a voyage, and then dies before her shape is clear. In Rachel we have a new kind of heroine, easily defaced, therefore faceless, and, because we cannot 'see' her, we can hear her breathe, and faintly, far off, pick up her elusive note. Rachel may be defined by sexual fear or by the other self she imagines as she looks overboard: the great white monsters of the lower waters who would explode if they came to the surface. The aim, though, is not just to stress a woman's vulnerability, but to suggest possibilities latent as yet in human nature. When Rachel and her aunt look out of the window at night into the dark garden of the foreign villa, they speak in broken sentences like people in their sleep. They barely break the night's silence: 'Very gentle their voices sounded, as if they fell through the waves of the sea.' 
During the twentieth century it was customary to separate the pre-modern from the modernist author, but these advanced explorations of women's nature challenge any such methodological divide. 
In Gordon Square the two Stephen sisters brought together a group of innovative men whom Thoby had known in Cambridge: Leonard Sidney Woolf (1880-1969), a stubborn, passionate man, alert to the ills of society and with the practical sense to combat them; the biographer Lytton Strachey; the art critic Clive Bell; the artists Roger Fry and Duncan Grant; the novelist E. M. Forster; and the economist John Maynard Keynes. The shock of Thoby's death in 1906 sealed his sisters' ties to his friends. Vanessa married Clive Bell in 1907, and the Stephens' 'Thursday evenings' continued at 29 Fitzroy Square, where Virginia and Adrian set up a separate home. This proved the beginning of the Bloomsbury group, afterwards called 'Old Bloomsbury' to distinguish it from its later adherents. Old Bloomsbury abjured the chattiness of society for speculative silence; granted agency to women; welcomed sexual freedom and homosexuality; and generally ridiculed the social, religious, and moral orthodoxies of the Victorians. This appeared avant-garde, especially to disapproving relatives of the unchaperoned Stephen sisters, and even more so when it was reported that Vanessa had managed to shake off all her upper clothing when she danced at a party in 1911, while Virginia had bathed naked in the river at Grantchester with the poet Rupert Brooke. Yet the group looked back to the reforming energy of Clapham, continued to uphold the rational humanism of Leslie Stephen's generation of Victorian agnostics, and reinforced the family piety of their forebears with their relish for recollections and memoirs. 
The amusingly congenial Lytton Strachey came from the same upper middle-class intelligentsia as the Stephens. Strachey was an active homosexual, and after an abortive proposal from him in 1909 Virginia, at thirty, married Leonard Woolf on 10 August 1912 in St Pancras town hall. A few months earlier, in May, he had resigned from the colonial service after a six-and-a-half-year stint as civil servant in Ceylon, demonstrating his determination to marry Virginia. The pair embarked on a writing life in London and in Virginia's and Vanessa's rented retreat, Asheham House, at the foot of the South Downs in Sussex. 
Virginia introduced Leonard to friends and relations as a penniless Jew. As a Jew, and also as a heterosexual male, he was alien; as Thoby's friend, he felt close. She was stimulated and a little put out by the severity of his judgments -- 'I despise you forever', he might say if she wished to kick up her heels at a fashionable party given by Lady Ottoline Morrell. Leonard Woolf backed his wife's writing with an inflexible work routine, even on Sundays; he plucked out her 'thorns'; and he nursed her through periods of mental suffering. He was hurt by his wife's antisemitic remarks about his family, while he, for his part, was a bit obtuse to the inhibiting effects of sexual fear, and early on blamed his wife as a sexual failure -- endorsed by Vanessa, who had suffered from Virginia's flirtation with Clive Bell and where an element of rivalry always interfused sisterly bonds. Leonard's accusation was repeated in his autobiographical novel 'The Wise Virgins' (1914). But their correspondence reveals that 'the Woolves' developed their own dramas of intimacy, conducted in the private language of playful animals. This kind of lovemaking -- in which a man lends himself to a woman's imaginative drama -- is re-created in her greatest story, 'Lappin and Lapinova' (published in 1939, but begun as far back as 1919). 
The adjustment to marriage, as well as fears for the publication of 'The Voyage Out', were the background to Virginia Woolf's breakdowns in 1913 and 1915. In 1915 Miss Thomas, director of Burley, announced that Virginia's mind was 'played out' and persuaded her family that her character had permanently deteriorated. But the doctors and nurses who believed there could be no full recovery were wrong. By November 1915 she was 'sane'. The twenty dark years were over, and the fertile stretch of her life began. 
From 1915 until 1924 the Woolfs lived quietly at Hogarth House, Richmond. There, in 1917, they ordered a hand-printing machine and set up the Hogarth Press, at first as a hobby and with a view to publishing their own work. Soon, though, the Hogarth Press became a publishing phenomenon, putting out some of the most advanced writing of the day, including works by T. S. Eliot, Katherine Mansfield, E. M. Forster, Maynard Keynes, Gorki, Freud, Robert Graves, Edith Sitwell, and of course the Woolfs themselves. When they moved to 52 Tavistock Square in Bloomsbury in March 1924, they re-established their press in the basement. 
At the time the press was established Virginia Woolf was writing her second novel, 'Night and Day', which revives the subject of her first, unpublished story, 'Phyllis and Rosamond': the undefined nature of women who 'cluster in the shade'. Katharine Hilbery is the granddaughter of an eminent Victorian poet. Her character is modelled on Vanessa: her silent stoicism and secret commitment to mathematics, an equivalent to Vanessa's painting and, like that, in conflict with a sense of responsibility as a daughter at home. Katharine is drawn into the contrasting lives of the new woman, the idealistic political worker Mary Datchet, and of the abrasive solicitor Ralph Denham, rising out of a graceless suburban household which yet, as Katharine perceives, seethes with vigour. The Hilbery house is in Cheyne Walk, in the Chelsea area of London where George Eliot had lived and later Henry James. There art and prosperity mingle as a stable, pre-war civilization. But it has become too mannered, a milieu that cherishes the effete writer William Rodney, to whom Katharine almost automatically becomes engaged. Katharine's mute uneasiness questions the intellectual aristocracy. As her unease deepens into wordless futility, she is driven to reject the Strachey-like Rodney for the ungentlemanly but life-giving Denham. Biographically, the novel offers a rationale for the Woolf marriage, while it circles the unknown and unused potentialities of women in the context of their struggle for the vote, not granted until its year of publication, 1919. 
The continuity with the Victorian novel led Katherine Mansfield to disparage 'Night and Day' as old-fashioned. There was no novelty, Mansfield claimed: no attention to the war and no evidence of modernity. This remained the view through the twentieth century. It was not recognized that the ordeal of consciousness, as developed by George Eliot and Henry James, was Virginia Woolf's starting point for the novel of the future where, as she put it in 'The Mark on the Wall' (1917), her plan was to follow the mental track of 'modest mouse-coloured people... Those are the depths [novelists] will explore, those the phantoms they will pursue, leaving the description of reality more and more out of their stories.' She discards the pretensions of the great soul for a nondescript old woman in a third-class carriage or a housewife ordering the fish, and relocates the Romantic drama, the awakening to a moment of sublimity, in the domestic scene. This is the source of Virginia Woolf's continuing appeal for most readers: her repeated demonstration that the most humdrum domestic actions, knitting a brown stocking, or dishing out the 'boeuf en daube', or sewing a dress for a party, can stir moments of inward enlargement, just as a mark on the wall sends the writer's thoughts racing on different tracks, on the history of the house and its occupants or the question of death and after. 
From 1919 Virginia Woolf shaped the modern novel. Her essays 'Modern novels' (1919) and 'Poetry, fiction and the future' (1927) introduce a principle that writers have no need of sensational events: any day can suffice. She rejects the narrative coherence of Victorian fiction in favour of 'an ordinary mind on an ordinary day', often several minds. Three short fictions, 'The Mark on the Wall' (1917), 'Kew Gardens' (1919), and 'An Unwritten Novel' (1920), were less stories than theoretical expositions of the new form of fiction that she had come upon, back in 1905, in the course of tramps in Cornwall. Her aim was to find in the 'moment of being' a climactic inward event, parallel to what her friend T. S. Eliot termed 'unattended moments' and what James Joyce termed 'epiphany'. Woolf and Eliot wished to cut through the voluminousness of nineteenth-century writing in order to identify 'the moment of importance'. Both wished to cross the frontiers of consciousness where words fail. Virginia Woolf said that she had to crack through the paving stone and be enveloped in a mist. This was not mere cloudiness, as hostile critics assumed, but the first move to crack through the predictable facade of the traditional novel where every button on a gentleman's jacket is in place. The Victorians had trusted language to say just what they meant; the moderns found this impossible, and therefore communicated through symbols -- the lighthouse or the waves -- which require a reciprocal effort on the part of the reader. Virginia Woolf therefore gave fiction the depth of poetry. 
Although she dismissed the shallow realism of her immediate predecessors H. G. Wells, John Galsworthy, and Arnold Bennett, it is significant that her criticism skirts George Eliot, founder of realism -- for George Eliot had attended to 'the roar from the other side of silence' ('Middlemarch', chap. 20). In this sense Virginia Woolf's modernism was not as new as it appeared. She also followed Henry James in her conviction that dramas of interior life were as momentous and dangerous as visible ones; and, like James, cultivated an inclusive view of truth as opposed to the reductive categories of standard thinking. Arguably, the most innovative element in her work was her challenge to the category 'per se'. 
Stung by Mansfield's view of her as old-fashioned, Virginia Woolf cultivated an up-to-date image with shorn hair, lipstick, and lifted chin, as seen in the jutting profile of her Man Ray portrait. Her post-war letters practised the modish tone of mocking hilarity as she watched Mrs Clifford's mouth 'open like an old leather bag' ('Diary', 1.254). Her next novel was almost ostentatiously modern, a collage of broken impressions that makes up the portrait of a young man who died, as Thoby did, still unformed. All through 'Jacob's Room' his would-be biographer talks directly to the reader: we two push ourselves forward -- busy, agog, distractable -- while our subject slips out of sight. The would-be biographer is vibrating 'at the mouth of the cavern of mystery, endowing Jacob Flanders with all sorts of qualities he had not at all... What remains is mostly a matter of guess work. Yet over him we hang vibrating.' The biographic obsession is comic in its futility. The deliberately fragmented narrative with its curt sentences, its gaps and tantalizing glimpses, compels us to share in the biographer's effort and failure. 
A problem rose out of the haste for modernity: the book's treatment of the myriad people who glanced at Jacob but did not 'see' him. Given their brash, instant visibility, they should hit the eye with the jolt of the crowded caricatures in Eliot's post-war poems or with the deflating humour of Katherine Mansfield, both of whom the Hogarth Press had published in 1918 and 1919 as samples of advanced writing. But the casual thrust of derision never quite brought out the best in Virginia Woolf. Her opinions became rash to the point of prejudice. She had neither Eliot's lethal strike nor the worldly-wise affections of Mansfield. She herself feared that 'Jacob's Room' would come to appear 'sterile acrobatics' ('Diary', 14 Feb 1922). 
It was published in 1922, the same year as Eliot's 'The Waste Land' and Joyce's 'Ulysses'. Censorship had not allowed the Hogarth Press to publish 'Ulysses', but though Virginia Woolf disliked this novel (she spoke of an adolescent scratching his pimples), Joyce's expansion of consciousness flowing through the hours of the day surely influenced her next novel, 'Mrs Dalloway' (1925), whose original title was 'The Hours'. Here she found her distinctive mode: her use of consciousness became more focused, more penetrating (digging out caves, she said, behind her characters). 
Far from a floating self-indulgence suggested by the outworn phrase 'stream of consciousness' (associated with Virginia Woolf in the past), a 'framework of steel' ('To the Lighthouse') provides the substructure of each novel. This may be seen in the bifurcation of 'Mrs Dalloway', which follows concurrently the minds of two people who never meet but whose lives do bear on each other, in the way of light/shadow, sanity/insanity, public/private. The shell-shocked Septimus Warren Smith represents the underside of consciousness which the ruling society of Westminster does not acknowledge. 

'To the Lighthouse' (1927) experiments with the passage of time through a tripartite frame. The reader moves from the Victorian setting of the opening section to the post-war setting of the final section via the blind corridor of 'Time Passes'. The brutal impersonality of this bravura piece of writing takes us through the period of the First World War during which precious lives -- Mrs Ramsay, her daughter dying in childbirth, her son killed at the front -- are sidelined in square brackets, and the Ramsay house, representing civilization, almost rots away. Civilization is restored, first by the cleaner Mrs McNab, then by the artist Lily Briscoe who returns to complete her painting of Mrs Ramsay reading to her child; only, now, Mrs Ramsay must be distilled from memory -- not the beauty a photograph might record, but what will endure: the unseen source of her life-giving power. The passage of time has shaped this woman as a wedge-shaped core of darkness. It is an abstraction, a modernist portrait. 
On the publication day of this great novel, its author drooped under 'the damp cloud' of a review in the 'Times Literary Supplement', 'timid', 'doubting', a replica of its reviews of her previous two novels ('Diary', 5 May 1927). Yet a month later she began to find herself 'almost an established figure... They don't laugh at me any longer', she noted in her diary on 6 June. 'Possibly I shall be a celebrated writer.' 
Virginia Woolf's most daring novel, 'The Waves' (1931), has not yet had its due. Its 'framework of steel' invents a revolutionary treatment of the lifespan. Here the writer is at her furthest remove from the traditional biographic schema, the public highway from pedigree to grave. Not only are there no pedigrees in 'The Waves'; there are no placing surnames and no society to speak of, for here she explores the genetic givens of existence, unfolding what is innate in human nature against the backdrop of what is permanent in nature: sun and sea. A writer called Bernard wishes, he tells his reader, 'to give you my life'. That life, like those of his five friends, is composed in each case around a defining phrase -- 'a limpet clinging to a rock' or 'the nymph of the fountain, always wet' -- which gives a life its internal coherence. Compared with this, the set form of the lifespan -- the chronology of birth, school, mating, death -- is, says Bernard, 'a convenience, a lie' because it does not see, beneath the platform of public action, the half-finished sentences and half-discernible acts on which life turns. The diagram of the lifespan allows parallel lives to reach their apogee at any one of nine phases from childhood to old age. 
Part of Virginia Woolf's greatness lay in her continuation of Henry James's aim to define the novel as a form of art. She fulfils its inherent flexibility when she blends the novel with other genres to create new forms: where 'The Waves' is a poem-novel, 'The Years' (1937) is an essay-novel, and 'Between the Acts' (1941) a drama-novel. Her flair for experiment remained at the ready throughout her life: as she brought a great work to completion, she would see, on her horizon, another wave rising, far out. 
Virginia Woolf entered the political arena with 'A Room of One's Own' (1929). It originated as two papers read to women undergraduates in the Arts Society at Newnham College and the ODTAA Society at Girton College, Cambridge, in October 1928. The aim was to establish a woman's tradition, recognizable through its distinct problems: the age-old confinement of women to the domestic sphere, the pressures of conformity to patriarchal ideas, and worst, the denial of income and privacy ('a woman must have money and a room of her own if she is to write'). A brief history of women's writing tries to prove that their works were deformed by inward strife -- not convincingly when we are pressed to agree that 'Jane Eyre' is flawed by its author's protest against the limitations imposed upon women. On the other hand, Virginia Woolf is brilliantly persuasive when she ridicules the power bias of male history narrowing in on war and kings with golden teapots on their heads. A counter-history waits in the wings: the untried potentialities of women, nurtured but unspoilt in women's colleges, who are not to be imitation men but are to think back 'through their mothers'. Virginia Woolf wants to retrieve rather than discard the traditions of womanhood, a position forecast in 1906 at the outset of her career with a historical story, 'The Journal of Mistress Joan Martyn', set during the fifteenth-century Wars of the Roses. It suggests that women excluded from historical record were the true makers of England as they passed their unnoticed code of preservation from mother to daughter, cultivating domestic order and the arts of peace, as opposed to militarized thugs who repeatedly destroyed it. 
The second feminist treatise, 'Three Guineas' (1938), was cooler than 'A Room of One's Own', addressing the 'Sir' who struts about in uniforms with medals and honorary degrees. Virginia Woolf's pacifism, in the run-up to the Second World War, evoked understandable opposition -- Leonard Woolf was lukewarm, and certain friends, Victoria (Vita) Sackville-West and Maynard Keynes, sent her to Coventry -- but her attack on war as a pastime of men in power has survived its ill-timed publication and has come to underpin the conviction that, far from withdrawing from politics, Virginia Woolf had a politics which looked beyond her age. She cast her vote against power itself; nor could she condone the adversarial sport of party politics because she cared too much for the fate of ordinary people. 
What was timely in 'Three Guineas' was its point that certain professions, like the church and diplomatic corps, were still closed to women. Where the 'woman question' in the nineteenth century was concerned largely with issues of the vote and education, Virginia Woolf became the leading spokeswoman for the dominant issue of the twentieth century: professional advance. Her support for the advancement of women co-existed with her readiness to love women. It was flirtatious rather than physical, and she remained evasive and ambivalent about her sexual identity, but she adored, romanced, mythologized, and wished to be petted by women, in particular the writer and gardener Vita Sackville-West, where romance, from December 1925, was bound up with the amusement Virginia Woolf found in the aristocracy. According to Vita, they made love only twice, despite many opportunities (Vita Sackville-West to Harold Nicolson, 17 Aug 1926, Nicolson, 158-9). 'Orlando: a Biography' (1928) celebrates Vita as a man-woman, switching gender to endorse the androgynous creative mind through the ages. 
Though women throughout the world appropriated Virginia Woolf in these terms during the 1970s and 1980s (a time when her public image changed from that of precious aesthete to that of fighter for the cause), some lost sight of the longer-term issue that underpins her work from start to finish: the question of woman's nature and what it will contribute to civilization. This is the subject of 'The Mysterious Case of Miss V.' (1906), which reappears as a proposition in 'The Voyage Out': that it will take yet six generations for women to come into their own. For this reason the feminist Woolf has remained pertinent, increasingly a contemporary as her twentieth-century generation recedes further into the past. In a speech of 21 January 1931 before the London National Society for Women's Service (printed eventually with 'The Pargiters', 1977), she told a parable of a fisherwoman who unreels the rod of reason into the pool of consciousness -- when the line races away to the depths of the pool, the fisherwoman reels it back. Reason comes to the surface panting with rage and disappointment, but the fisherwoman tells her that men are not ready to hear the facts about women's passions which she has retrieved. The question of woman's obliterated desire is restated in fictional terms in the honeymoon-and-after story 'Lappin and Lapinova'. 
Virginia Woolf's commitment to unseen aspects of womanhood was bound up with an impulse to explore the lives of the obscure. She celebrated (and practised) marginal genres of diary and letters which were open to women. Her biographical theories broke the march of verifiable fact as practised by her father in the 378 lives (amounting to 1000 pages) which he contributed to the 'Dictionary of National Biography' from 1885 to 1901. On 3 December 1923 his daughter observed in her diary, 'I shouldn't have been so clever, but I should have been more stable, without that contribution to the history of England.' In a biographical dictionary, of course, subjects are chosen on the basis of public importance; Virginia Woolf inverts this in her essay 'The Art of Biography' (1939): 'The question now inevitably asks itself, whether the lives of great men only should be recorded. Is not anyone who has lived a life, and left a record of that life, worthy of biography -- the failures as well as the successes, the humble as well as the illustrious? And what is greatness? And what is smallness?' So she chose to write on Selina Trimmer, who took up her duties as a governess in 1790; on Sara Coleridge, who edited the works of her father, the poet; on Flush, the spaniel who shared the sickroom of Elizabeth Barrett and accompanied her when she eloped with Browning; and on Harriette Wilson, who, as a courtesan (to, among others, the duke of Wellington), lived the life of an outcast, winding 'in and out among the bogs and precipices of the shadowy underworld'. 
Virginia Woolf's biographical essays took up the challenge of the gaps in such lives -- it might be said in all lives -- which she approached by accepting that a measure of imaginative truth must co-exist with factual truth. The greater her work, the more completely it takes issue with her father's practice of biography as he edited the 'Dictionary of National Biography' during the first ten years of her life. At the age of five Thoby had produced a box which he called his 'contradictionary box'. Asked the reason for its name, he said it was full of rubbish. Leslie Stephen had discerned gleams of satire. In a sense Virginia Woolf's whole 'oeuvre' was contra-dictionary: her lives of the obscure; the intractable absence of the biographic subject who cannot be deduced from his leavings in 'Jacob's Room'; the unseen inward life of Mrs Ramsay, lit momentarily by the beam of the lighthouse; and invisible presences -- the continuing presence of the dead, blurring the formal limits of the lifespan. All forecast possibilities for biography. 'The art of biography is still in its infancy', Virginia Woolf observed in the second draft of 'The Waves', 'or more accurately speaking, is yet to be born.' 
Virginia Woolf did not venture to apply her theories to her one full-scale effort, 'Roger Fry: a Biography' (1940), perhaps because she felt an obligation to the Fry family (who commissioned it) to present the kind of proper, discreet portrait they would expect. In the course of writing this book she groaned under the burden of fact, much as her father had done in the 1880s, locked by his own rulings to the 'drudgery' of 'Dryasdust' ('DNB', 3.1029). Even so the daughter, like the father, did exercise the selectiveness that Virginia Woolf advocates in 'The Art of Biography': 'almost any biographer, if he respects facts, can give us much more than another fact to add to our collection. He can give us the creative fact; the fertile fact; the fact that suggests and engenders.' 
In the last decade of Virginia Woolf's life she began to develop a public voice to counter the rant of political demagogues. She called the autumn of 1932 'a great season of liberation' as she resolved to speak out as a woman against the abuses of power ('Diary', 31 Dec 1932). In this she was encouraged by a new friendship with an older, militant feminist, Dame Ethel Smyth, who had composed the music for the suffragettes' 'March of the Women' and conducted it with a toothbrush from a window in Holloway prison. While Virginia was enlivened by Ethel's directness, she did not welcome her demands for attention, nor as a lover, and resisted Ethel when she blamed Leonard for his wife's lack of religious sense: 'Lord! How I detest these savers up of merit', she wrote ('Letters', 8 Aug 1934), 'my Jew has more religion in one toenail -- more human love, in one hair.' 
In 1932 Virginia Woolf began to write a series of feminist essays with an idea of alternating essays and fiction in a work which became a fictional chronicle of a family from the 1880s to the 1930s, emphasizing the fate of Victorian daughters of the author's generation. This was 'The Years'. The discarded essays (collected posthumously as 'The Pargiters') were closely linked with the outspokenness of 'Three Guineas'. In her defiant role as outsider, Virginia Woolf refused all honours: the Clark lectures at Cambridge for 1933; appointment as Companion of Honour in 1935; and honorary degrees from Manchester and Liverpool in 1933 and 1939. She would not allow herself to be used as a token woman. 'It is an utterly corrupt society', she wrote in her diary on 25 March 1933, '& I will take nothing that it can give me.' 
A public voice requires an audience, and in her final novel, 'Between the Acts', Virginia Woolf turns away from the elite audience of her modernist novels to address a national audience, the grass roots of rural England, through a form of drama which became popular in the late thirties: the historical pageant. The novel is set in a country house in 1939 just before the outbreak of war, and the challenge of its pageant, as of local dramas going on between the acts, is the question of whether England's national treasure -- its character and literature -- can be retrieved from the past and sustained through the present threat of invasion. 
The novel was written during the blitz. The Woolfs' London home at 37 Mecklenburgh Square, Bloomsbury, where they had moved with their press in 1939, was bombed in September 1940, and they retreated to a village existence in their country home, Monk's House, in Rodmell, Sussex. When Virginia Woolf went up to London she saw 'the desolate ruins of my old squares: gashed; dismantled; the old red bricks all white powder... Grey dirt & broken windows... all that completeness ravished' ('Diary', 15 Jan 1941). It reinforced her fear that the treasures of the past would not survive. Her feeling for certain alleys and little courts between Chancery Lane and the City amounted to a passion, the closest she came to patriotism: the England of Chaucer, Shakespeare, Pepys, Samuel Johnson, and Dickens. As German bombers flew nightly over Rodmell, she shook free from war propaganda which attributed insane love of power to an occasional dictator. Reframing the old Clapham issue of slavery, she suggested that we are all enslaved, irrespective of nationality, by 'a subconscious Hitlerism in the hearts of men'. The word 'slavery' reverberates through her 'Thoughts on peace in an air raid' (1940): 'If we could free ourselves of slavery we should free men from tyranny.' 
Rodmell is only 3 miles from Newhaven, where the German Ninth Army would have landed if operation Sea Lion had been carried out. The Woolfs could not know that both of them were already on Himmler's list for immediate arrest, but they were aware of the danger to a Jew and his wife. In 1940 Leonard devised two contingency plans for their joint suicide, though at this point Virginia hoped for ten years more and to finish her novel. But towards the end of the year and early in 1941 she lost confidence that she could reach a wider audience and began to think there was no cure for womanishness bred by manliness -- 'both so hateful' ('Letters', 25 Jan 1941). 
Just before 11.45 on the morning of Friday 28 March 1941 Virginia Woolf weighted her pocket with a large stone and drowned herself in the fast-running River Ouse near Monk's House. She was hearing voices and feared she was going mad, but there was no outward sign of derangement. Her suicide notes were written with rational civility and gratitude to her husband. After her body was recovered three weeks later, on 18 April, Leonard buried her ashes in Monk's House garden under one of the two elms with boughs interlaced which they had called Leonard and Virginia. The elms are no more; and the ashes are now under a replica of Stephen Tomlin's bust of Virginia Woolf in 1931 with long, stiffened face and owlish, in-turned eyes. 
Virginia Woolf left nine novels, nearly 4000 letters, about 400 essays (some attributions uncertain), and thirty volumes of her diary. With the rise of brutal regimes in the thirties, she began to appear too withdrawn, too fragile and precious, to critics from Wyndham Lewis to Queenie Leavis, who did not pick up her public voice. From the mid-1930s to the mid-1960s her reputation dropped. Her search for a wider public, set in motion in her last years, had seemed to founder in the whirlpools of her diffidence and the cross-currents of the Second World War. Yet her pacifism, unacceptable at the time, began to read convincingly twenty-five years later when Americans of the late 1960s rejected their warmongers in Vietnam, a mark of civilization as Virginia Woolf conceived it. Not surprisingly her wide popularity began then and there, reaching cult status with the publication of Quentin Bell's biography of his aunt in 1972. Nicholas Henderson, who was British ambassador to the United States, described how the celebrity-hunters of Washington 'prostrated themselves at Quentin's feet asking to be told 'everything'' ('Mandarin: the Diaries of an Ambassador, 1969-1982', 1994, 337). There followed a burst of posthumous publication from 1975 to 1985. The complete diary, a monument to its age, may come to be seen as the editing feat of the century, not only for its accuracy, but for the family and social detail which Anne Olivier Bell offers in her comprehensive notes. At the same time there were informed editions of the complete letters (in six volumes, edited by Vita's son, Nigel Nicolson), essays, various memoirs, drafts of her novels, and the complete shorter fiction. Her international reputation has continued to spread, stimulating other media. A CD of eighteen songs, 'Woolf -- a Portrait in Song' by Chappelle, Smith, and Taylor, celebrates a life too long perceived as tragic. In 2002 a ballet, 'Orlando', was put on by the Compagnie Buissonniere in Sao Paulo. 
The experimental modernity of the early 1920s was the image Virginia Woolf imprinted on the public until, in the 1970s and 1980s, this image shifted to another partial truth: the feminist Virginia Woolf who advanced the struggle for women's rights. In the nineties Eileen Atkins gave a marvellously accurate one-woman performance as Virginia Woolf delivering 'A Room of One's Own' in Cambridge. There was a 'Bookmark' programme on BBC2, bringing together the life and work in November 1984, directed by Anna Benson Gyles. In the same year there was a dramatization of 'To the Lighthouse' on television. Films of 'Orlando' and 'Mrs Dalloway' came out in 1993 and 1998 with Vanessa Redgrave in the latter role. 
At the same time there has been a curious insistence on narrowing Virginia Woolf's life to the woes of insanity and suicide, particularly evident in biographical plays, from Edna O'Brien in the late 1970s to the film 'The Hours' (2003). There has often been a similar bias in treatments of other women writers -- the suicide of Sylvia Plath and the mental decline of Iris Murdoch, going back to the brooding tombstones in Mrs Gaskell's life of Charlotte Bronte. In each case the effect is to distance the work in order to dwell instead on the sufferings that bring greatness down. There has been a concurrent tendency to judge a woman by her flaws -- Charlotte Bronte's failure to be a lady by nineteenth-century standards of passionlessness; Plath's excessive ambition by 1950s standards of femininity; and Virginia Woolf's self-confessed snobbery and antisemitism, at present to the fore. It is not that genuine flaws should be ignored, but we need to be aware that flaws in men -- say, Wordsworth's abandonment of the pregnant Annette Vallon or Dickens's unkindness to his wife or Tolstoy's crazed religiosity -- are still perceived differently, and appear incidental to starry reputations. 
For this and other reasons, the woman writing has remained somewhat elusive. As the queen of the Bloomsbury group and as a writer of letters, Virginia Woolf flaunted different colours according to her company. 'How queer', she acknowledged, 'to have so many selves' ('Diary', 4 July 1935). The result was an abundance of legends in her lifetime and for three to four decades following her death. The batty image constructed by her family and her flights of fancy at Bloomsbury parties gave her a reputation for untrustworthiness which has influenced the popular view of her life; the myth of the frail lady authoress with her frigid body, a precious aesthete withdrawn from the world, is endlessly repeated. But she kept the hardworking professional out of sight. She had to 'be private, secret, as anonymous and submerged as possible in order to write' ('Letters', 17 Sept 1938). 
In the shadow of legend was the 'restless searcher' ('Diary', 27 Feb 1926). She liked to imagine a voyage of discovery or the fin of a submerged form lurking in the waves. 'Why is there not a discovery in life?' she went on. 'Something one can lay hands on & say -- This is it?' Each afternoon, when she took long walks, London itself beckoned as an unexplored land. Crossing Russell Square, close to home, she sensed 'the infinite oddity of the human position', and felt, she said, 'my own strangeness, walking on the earth'. 


@@@@@


doc= 37019


Woolf, Leonard Sidney (1880-1969), author and publisher, was born on 25 November 1880 in Kensington, London, the third of ten children of Sidney Woolf QC (1844-1892) and his wife, Marie de Jongh (1848-1939). He was brought up in Reform Judaism, became an atheist in his teens, and remained sceptical about the religious temperament. Some of his earlier writing depicts antisemitism, but Woolf maintained that it had no influence on his life. Woolf was eleven when his father died, leaving his family in financial difficulties. Fears of economic and social instability underlay Woolf's political convictions. His mother risked her small capital to educate her children, who then supported her. Woolf attended St Paul's School for five years as a scholar. He went to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1899 on scholarships for five years, obtaining a first class in part one of the classical tripos (1902) but only a second in part two (1903). At Trinity, Woolf became friends with Saxon Sydney-Turner, Lytton Strachey, Clive Bell, and Thoby Stephen (son of Sir Leslie, brother of Virginia and Vanessa). Out of these friendships the Bloomsbury group developed. 
Woolf's formative education at Cambridge took place largely through the Apostles, to which he was elected -- the first Jew -- in 1902. G. E. Moore was the dominant influence there, and to him Woolf owed his commitment to rationality, clarity, and common sense; Moore's concern with states of mind and his basic distinction in 'Principia ethica' (1903) between instrumental and intrinsic value was incorporated into Woolf's political theory. Through the Apostles Woolf also came to know John Maynard Keynes, Roger Fry, Desmond MacCarthy, and E. M. Forster -- all of whom became associated with the Bloomsbury group -- as well as Bertrand Russell and Goldsworthy Lowes Dickinson, who influenced Woolf's political writings. 
In 1904, partly because of his family's financial needs, Woolf joined the colonial civil service in Ceylon rather than becoming a schoolmaster or lawyer. He served for seven years, at Jaffna, Kandy, and finally, Hambantota where, as the youngest assistant government agent in the service, he administered 100,000 Sinhalese in a district of 1000 miles. There he continued what he later called his anti-imperialist education. Striving to improve the lives of the villagers with an efficiency that was at times ruthless, he became increasingly ambivalent about his government's mismanagement of jungle agriculture, the absurdity of one civilization imposing itself on another, and the hypocrisy of the British failure to prepare its colony for self-government. Returning on leave to England in 1911, Woolf began 'The Village in the Jungle' (1913), a novel that movingly reflected these concerns. He became involved again in London with his Cambridge friends and relatives who now made up the Bloomsbury group: Virginia Stephen, her sister and brother-in-law, Vanessa and Clive Bell, Vanessa's future partner, Duncan Grant, Strachey, Fry, Keynes, Forster, and the MacCarthys. Woolf's growing disillusionment with imperialism was one reason for his resignation from the civil service in 1912, but a more important motive was that he had fallen in love with Virginia Stephen (1882-1941) ['see 'Woolf, (Adeline) Virginia]. 
With their marriage on 10 August 1912, Virginia took Leonard's family name and made it that of the most famous woman writer of her time. For literary history, Leonard became, in effect, Mr Virginia Woolf. He had recognized her genius before their marriage, but not the extent of her mental instability. For nearly thirty years one of Leonard's chief occupations was caring for Virginia. Without his vigilant love, her books would never have been written; he was her first reader, her editor, and her publisher. Though not a sexually active marriage, theirs was one of profound and enduring affection. In 1915 the Woolfs moved to Richmond for ten years, then returned to Bloomsbury; weekends and longer periods were spent in Sussex where in 1919 they bought Monk's House, a cottage in Rodmell, near Vanessa's family at Charleston. There with Virginia, Leonard wrote, gardened, bowled, cared for his dogs, and worked as parish clerk. The Woolfs were bombed out of Bloomsbury in 1940. After Virginia's suicide in 1941 Leonard continued to live alone at Monk's House and in London; he watched over Virginia's reputation, publishing five volumes of her uncollected essays, and editing a selection of her diaries. A late loving relationship of Leonard's with the artist Marjorie Tulip (Trekkie) Parsons (1902-1996) is revealed in their published letters. 
Leonard Woolf's education as a socialist began with his return from Ceylon. After his autobiographical second novel, 'The Wise Virgins' (1914), which satirized Bloomsbury and offended his family, Woolf turned to journalism for a livelihood. He became interested in the Women's Co-operative Guild through friendship with Margaret Llewelyn Davies, and joined the Fabian Society under the tutelage of Beatrice and Sidney Webb. Woolf wrote two books on consumer co-operative socialism, maintaining in them that economics should be organized according to the needs of consumers and that control of production is a means toward a civilized life rather than an end in itself, as both capitalists and Marxists thought. He had become, he wrote later, 'a socialist of a rather peculiar sort' ('Beginning Again', 105). 
With the First World War, Woolf's critiques of imperialism and capitalism coalesced into internationalism. An inherited tremor of his hands kept him from having to decide whether he was a conscientious objector. In 1916 he wrote two Fabian reports on international government, arguing that it could make war unlikely through the resolution of disputes, and showing how far international laws and organizations already existed without compromising state sovereignty. Woolf's reports became part of the basis for the League of Nations and then the United Nations. 
During the First World War Woolf also became involved in editing the first of a series of periodicals; he eventually contributed towards editing 'The Nation', the 'Political Quarterly' (which he co-founded in 1931), and the 'New Statesman'. Even more important was the Hogarth Press, which Leonard and Virginia started in 1917. With no printing or publishing experience and no capital, the Woolfs created a remarkable enterprise that expressed their Bloomsbury values. Its initial purpose was to publish modernist writing that the Woolfs liked and that other publishers did not. They began by printing two of their own stories and then works by various writers including Katherine Mansfield and T. S. Eliot. They went on to publish work by many others including Forster, Fry, Keynes, Russell, Vita Sackville-West, Christopher Isherwood, Freud (the standard translation of his writings), and of course Virginia Woolf herself. The Hogarth Press was never a full-time activity for the Woolfs, but something they initially did as recreation from their writing. As the press grew and prospered it became a burden, and in 1938 Virginia sold her half-interest to John Lehmann, who remained Leonard's partner until their disagreements led Woolf to sell Lehmann's share to Chatto and Windus in 1946. 
After the First World War, Woolf's anti-imperialism, socialism, and internationalism found expression in a number of books and pamphlets, the most important being 'Empire and Commerce in Africa' (1920), which analysed the economic imperialism of African colonization. Woolf began to develop here the theory of political history that he expressed more fully in later books. The logic of history, he claimed, was to be found only in the beliefs, desires, and ideals of individuals' states of mind that made up what he called 'communal psychology'. 
From 1919 to 1945 Woolf served as secretary to the Labour Party's advisory committees on international and imperial questions. He was literary editor of the 'Nation and Athenaeum', under Keynes's chairmanship, from 1923 to 1930, when the Woolfs' rising income enabled him to resign and write 'After the Deluge: a Study of Communal Psychology'. The first volume (1931) surveyed the growth of democratic communal psychology in the eighteenth century; the second (1939) concentrated on 1830 to 1832. Woolf interrupted this work to write three shorter books in the 1930s on totalitarianism. In them he again advocated the need for socialist co-operation and international government, and he warned of the impending destruction of his civilization's values, which for Woolf were freedom, democracy, equality, justice, liberty, tolerance, and the love of beauty, art, and intellect. Woolf's insistence on these liberal (and Bloomsbury) values alienated socialist colleagues not yet disillusioned by Stalinism. The last volume of 'After the Deluge', retitled 'Principia politica' (1953), became something of a political autobiography. Two more volumes were planned, but Woolf abandoned them after reviews criticizing his knowledge, methodology, and organization. He turned instead to direct autobiography and wrote the five volumes on which his reputation as a writer now mainly rests. 'Sowing' (1960), 'Growing' (1961), 'Beginning Again' (1964), 'Downhill All the Way' (1967), and 'The Journey not the Arrival Matters' (1969) provide the most reliable description of the development and character of the Bloomsbury group as well as an indispensable account of Virginia Woolf's life by the person who knew her best. 
Leonard Woolf's own personality is revealed in his autobiographies with remarkable detachment and integrity; a fatalistic strain in them sometimes masks the considerable charm, dry humour, and deep feelings of the man. The high value he gave rationality renders his political analyses simplistic at times, yet he knew how little most people were guided by reason. Woolf's capacity for unremitting, efficient work made him hard on subordinates; he once calculated that his had done between 150,000 and 200,000 hours of wholly useless work. Futile as his political writing and committee work may have appeared to him, he was nevertheless right about the wrongs of imperialism and capitalism, the need for international organization, and the evils of fascist and communist totalitarianism. Leonard Woolf suffered a stroke and died at Monk's House on 14 August 1969. Following cremation, his ashes were buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 37020


Woollard, Frank George (1883-1957), developer of mass production, was born on 22 September 1883 in London, the son of George Woollard, general steward to a firm of private bankers, and his wife, Emily Constance, 'nee' Powell. He was educated at the City of London School and Goldsmiths and Birkbeck colleges. Between 1900 and 1905 he was apprenticed to Dugald Drummond with the London and South Western Railway (LSWR) at Eastleigh, Hampshire. There he was exposed to two factors that would shape his future career: he was involved in the design of an early motorized vehicle, the Clarkson Steam Omnibus, and he also witnessed the introduction of a crude assembly line in 1904 to manufacture all steel coaches. The cycle time on this line was seven and one-third hours, a factor which encouraged Woollard later in his career to consider flow production techniques in the British automobile industry despite relatively short production runs. 
About 1905 Woollard left LSWR to begin a career in the car industry. He worked for a number of years in the design office of Weigel Motors Ltd, which was well known for its car racing successes. In 1911 he married Catherine Elizabeth Richards, daughter of Henry Richards, engraver. They had a son who died in infancy and a daughter, Joan Elizabeth, who became a sculptor and painter. After a brief time with Medhurst and Brewer, consulting engineers, he became chief draughtsman with E. G. Wrigley & Co. in Birmingham, rising to director and chief engineer in 1917 and assistant managing engineer in 1918. During the First World War, he was responsible for the production of tank gearboxes, his first exposure to producing large numbers of standardized products. After the war, he supervised a contract to manufacture front and rear axles, and gearboxes for the Morris Cowley. Production was reorganized along flow lines to meet Morris's demands. 
In 1923 Woollard left Wrigley to become director and general manager of the engine branch of Morris Motors Ltd. His first task was to reorganize the old Hotchkiss plant in Coventry. With the use of flow production assembly techniques, within a year output increased from 300 to 1200 engines per week. In early 1924 the machinery used to manufacture engine blocks, the heaviest and most complex component of an engine, was reorganized and placed in order according to the sequence of individual operations. Initially, the machines were linked with hand conveyors and workers manually pushed blocks between production stations. In late 1924 a bold step was taken towards automated production with the introduction of a hydraulic system which automatically moved blocks between stations, clamped them into fixtures, and sequenced the machines. 
Woollard had appreciated that such a system offered advantages in the areas of planning and co-ordination, and in the control of labour, giving management more authority to set the pace of work. He believed that such control would be accepted by the workforce if it was accompanied by rising living standards. At the time, this was itself almost as radical a concept as the shift to automated production. Woollard's innovative use of automatic transfer machinery had to be abandoned because of failures in the electric, hydraulic, and pneumatic control mechanisms. However, he paved the way for Ford to implement a similar system in Detroit some twenty years later. 
Woollard was a director of Morris Motors from 1926 to 1932, leaving the company in 1932 partly because of personal disagreements with Morris, who retained a firm control of company policy. He moved on to become managing director of Rudge-Whitworth Ltd (1932-6), director of Birmingham Aluminium Casting Company Ltd, and director of the Midland Motor Cylinder Company Ltd (1936-53), after which he retired. His inability to find employment with one of the major British vehicle companies may indicate how little his innovative methods were appreciated by the majority of entrepreneurs in control of the motor industry. He was active, and it would seem respected, within a number of professional associations. Having joined the Institution of Automobile Engineers (IAE) in 1915, he went on to become its president from 1945 to 1947. He arranged the IAE's merger with the Institution of Mechanical Engineers (IME) in 1947, becoming the first chairman of the automobile division of the IME. He was also a member of the Institution of Production Engineers, chairman of the executive committee of the Aluminium Development Association (1949-52), and chairman of the Zinc Alloy Die Casting Association (1952-6). He was a founding member of the British Institute of Management and a member of the American Society of Automotive Engineers. 
In later life, Woollard became active in educating industrial administrators at the University of Birmingham and Birmingham College of Technology, where he was chairman of the industrial administration group (1951-7). He also returned to writing. His 'Principles of Mass and Flow Production' (1954) extended the ideas originally presented in a series of papers in 1925. Based on his experiences at Morris Motors, it provides a rare insight into the question of mass production in the pre-1939 British context. 
Woollard was known as kind, gifted, and philosophical, someone with a sense of humour, a twinkle in his eyes, and a sincere interest in the welfare of his colleagues and his students. He died of heart failure on 22 December 1957, in the Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Edgbaston, Birmingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 37021


Woolley, Sir (Charles) Leonard (1880-1960), archaeologist, was born at 13 Southwold Road, Upper Clapton, Hackney, London, on 17 April 1880, the third of eleven children (four boys and seven girls) of the Revd George Herbert Woolley, curate of St Matthew's, Upper Clapton, and his wife, Sarah Cathcart. Coming from a large family, he had to finance his education by scholarships for St John's, Leatherhead, and New College, Oxford, where he achieved a first in 'literae humaniores' (1903) and a second in theology (1904). By his final year at university Woolley had abandoned his initial ambition of taking holy orders, settling instead on becoming a schoolmaster. When the warden of New College, W. A. Spooner, advised him to take up archaeology, Woolley acquiesced. After studying modern languages on the continent, he was in 1905 appointed assistant to Arthur Evans, keeper of the Ashmolean Museum. Woolley served his apprenticeship in field archaeology while excavating with D. Randall-MacIver in Wadi Halfa (Egyptian Nubia) in 1907-11; during this period he also conducted a brief excavation of Roman baths at Teano in Italy. 
Woolley's first experience with the ancient Near East came at Carchemish (Syria), a project that D. G. Hogarth had organized for the British Museum. When the excavation director, R. Campbell Thompson, left the project after the first season (1911), Woolley accepted the position and directed the five remaining seasons of the project (1912-13, 1920). Working with T. E. Lawrence as his assistant, Woolley uncovered defensive works, temples, and palaces of neo-Hittite (9th-8th centuries BC) Carchemish; the sculptured orthostats that graced the buildings provided important documentation of neo-Hittite art. Woolley also recovered traces of earlier occupations, but circumstances prevented him from uncovering significant portions of these. 
Woolley and Lawrence also collaborated in a survey of Wadi Araba south of the Dead Sea, their work bringing to completion the Palestine Exploration Fund's programme of mapping all the Holy Land. This work, published in 1915 as 'The Wilderness of Zin' under both collaborators' names, produced information and experience that was later useful to Lawrence's war. With the outbreak of the First World War Woolley served as an intelligence officer posted to Cairo, attaining the rank of major before the Turks took him prisoner late in 1916 when his ship blew up in the eastern Mediterranean. During his internment Woolley entertained his fellow prisoners of war with written vignettes of his archaeological experiences in Italy, Egypt, and Syria; published in 1920 as 'Dead Towns and Living Men', these stories humorously depict the often difficult and sometimes dangerous conditions of archaeological work in Ottoman Near East. When the unsettled post-war conditions impeded further excavation at Carchemish, Woolley collaborated in 1921 with T. Eric Peet in excavations at Tell al-Amarna (briefly the capital of New Kingdom Egypt) on behalf of the Egypt Exploration Society. 
After several seasons in Egypt Woolley began the work for which he is best remembered, his excavations at Ur in southern Iraq. R. Campbell Thompson (1918) and R. H. Hall (1918-19) had started excavations there on behalf of the British Museum, but this work fell into abeyance for lack of funds. When in 1922 the British Museum accepted the proposal by the University of Pennsylvania Museum of a joint venture at Ur, Woolley was named the expedition's director. He worked at Ur for twelve seasons between 1922 and 1934, assisted during many of those seasons by Katharine Keeling, who became his wife, and by Max Mallowan. He also completed the excavations at the nearby site of al- 'Ubayd that Hall had begun. Woolley revealed at Ur occupation beginning in the prehistoric 'Ubaid period and enduring into Hellenistic times, a span of four and a half millennia (roughly 4500-200 BC). His most enduring discoveries belong to the eight centuries between 2600 and 1750 BC, from the heyday of the Sumerian civilization to the time of Hammurabi. 
Woolley first encountered the famous royal cemetery in autumn 1922 while extending Hall's work but elected to defer tackling it until the 1926-7 season in order to give himself time to master the technical difficulties of Mesopotamian excavations and to train a skilled workforce; few archaeologists would have had the patience to follow this intelligent course. Of the sixteen tombs that Woolley identified as royal, many contained stunning wealth, as did several other tombs that did not satisfy his criteria for royalty; among the thousands of burial objects are some of the great examples of Sumerian art. The royal tombs also contained as many as seventy-four other bodies, apparently retainers accompanying their master in death; this macabre touch stirred great popular interest. The royal tombs formed the initial (2600 BC) nucleus of a larger cemetery of several thousand poorer graves, the interments occurring over the next half-millennium. Although Woolley argued for the royalty of his sixteen burials, subsequent scholars have mulled over the nature of the cemetery without reaching firm conclusions. 
The architectural gems of the city belonged to the Ur III (2100-2000 BC) period when Ur was the capital of a small empire, and to the early Old Babylonian (2000-1750 BC) period when the city fell into the hands of neighbouring princes. The first Ur III king built the religious centre of the city; his ziggurat, or stepped tower-like platform, has become an iconic image of Mesopotamian architecture. Later Mesopotamian kings periodically renovated the ziggurat and main temples, notably in the fourteenth century BC and sixth century BC. Woolley also uncovered several residential quarters of the Ur III and Old Babylonian periods; although less spectacular than some of his other results, their combination of architecture, private archives, burials, and other finds continues to be an invaluable resource for understanding the social and economic fabric of more ordinary life in ancient Mesopotamia. 
A change in the antiquities laws of Iraq encouraged many Mesopotamian archaeologists to shift their attention to Syria after 1933, then under the French mandate. In 1937 Woolley initiated his third great excavation project in Hatay (a part of northern Syria transferred to Turkey in 1938). He chose Tell Atchana (ancient Alalakh) and the port at al-Mina to investigate connections between the Aegean world and the Near East, Hatay forming a corridor between the eastern Mediterranean coast and the interior; his team also excavated at two prehistoric mounds near Atchana during the project's seven seasons (1937-9, 1946-9). At Atchana Woolley found a sequence of palaces and temples belonging to the middle and late Bronze ages (2000-1200 BC). The walls of one palace had been decorated with frescoes in a style borrowed from Minoan art, an unanticipated result for Woolley's research. Their archives of cuneiform tablets make Alalakh levels VII ('c'.1700 BC) and IV ('c'.1450 BC) the most discussed portions of the sequence; the inscription carved on the statue of King Idrimi is still one of the few historical sources for the time around 1500 BC. The excavations at al-Mina revealed ten levels of structures that Woolley identified as warehouses associated with Greek pottery and other objects, a sequence that Woolley assigned to the eighth to fourth centuries BC. Although the al-Mina results are incompletely published, they remain a cornerstone of discussions about Greek commercial enterprise in the east. 
At the request of the archaeological survey of India, Woolley visited the subcontinent in 1938 on an inspection tour, aiming to revive the moribund survey. He advised a focus on training, and recommended that Mortimer Wheeler be named director-general; this happened in 1944. During the Second World War Woolley served as lieutenant-colonel with a brief to safeguard European patrimony. He was knighted in 1935, and received numerous scholarly distinctions (honorary degrees from the universities of Dublin and St Andrews, and the Lucy Wharton Drexel (University Museum, 1955) and the Flinders Petrie (University of London, 1957) medals. 
For much of his adult life Woolley split his year between Near Eastern fieldwork and London, where he turned his attention to writing and lecturing; in both worlds he was extraordinarily energetic. He was a hard but fair taskmaster in the field, and drove himself very hard -- the workday began within half an hour of sunrise, and Woolley continued well past midnight in his office. He worked with two or three assistants, a small staff that supervised a workforce of up to 400 men ('the maximum consistent with proper supervision', in Woolley's words); such ratios of staff to workforce, although common at the time, can compromise the quality of excavation. As a result, Ur's contribution to Mesopotamian chronology remained secondary, and Atchana's history has attracted a prolonged, ongoing debate. But the extensive exposures of public and residential architecture that he achieved in his three major Near Eastern excavations would have been otherwise impossible, and the trade-off was worth while. 
Woolley held the admirable view, commonly expressed but rarely honoured in the profession, that failure to publish archaeological excavations is criminal. His record on this score was exemplary, for in addition to presenting annual reports and public lectures about his results he also produced usually multi-volume final reports for each of his three major projects. 'Carchemish' appeared in three volumes (vol. 1 by Hogarth, 1914; vol. 2 by Woolley, 1921; vol. 3 by Woolley and R. D. Barnett, 1953); the usefulness of these volumes is often marred by inadequacy in excavation techniques of the day. He completed the ten volumes of the Ur report ('Ur Excavations') soon after the project's conclusion, several volumes appearing during the lifetime of the project although budgetary problems delayed publication, the last volume appearing in 1976. The Ur reports, so rich in detail, are Woolley's principal legacy to Near Eastern archaeology. The final report on Tell Atchana ('Alalakh: Excavations at Tell Atchana', 1955) appeared just six years after the excavations there ended, although this volume did not match the excellent standard of the Ur reports. 
Woolley also composed several interpretative studies, among them 'The Sumerians' (1928), 'The Development of Sumerian Art' (1935), and 'Abraham' (1936). Of less enduring value by their very nature, these works were marred from the beginning by shortcomings of Woolley's intellectual attitudes. His was not an academic bent, and his scholarship emphasized fieldwork over library research. Only incompletely did he attend to contemporary research on early Mesopotamia, and this limited his understanding of Sumerian civilization and of Ur itself, thereby encouraging his ill-founded persuasion that civilization arose significantly earlier in Mesopotamia than in Egypt; he therefore endorsed a chronology significantly older than that accepted by scholarship in the 1930s and later. Despite his youthful decision against holy orders he greatly exercised his theological interests, notably at Ur in his eager identification of a silt deposit as evidence of Noah's flood; his search for traces of Abraham sometimes forced his interpretations into unlikely directions. 
Woolley found time to write popularizing books as well. In addition to his general introduction to archaeology, 'Digging up the Past' (1930), he presented his findings at Ur in 'Ur of the Chaldees: a Record of Seven Years of Excavation' (1929; revised in 1954 to include all twelve excavation seasons). He also gave Tell Atchana a popular treatment in 'A Forgotten Kingdom' (1953). In these writings Woolley explained his results and their implications to the reading public, to satisfy the intense curiosity that his Ur discoveries had aroused and to encourage continued public support of ever more costly archaeological excavations. Here again he set a laudable standard that most archaeologists fail to meet. In these books, as well as in public lectures and in the tours he gave to the frequent visitors to his excavations, Woolley displayed both his gift for story-telling and showmanship, and his keen imagination that sometimes overcame scholarly sobriety. 
Woolley married Katharine Elizabeth Keeling (1888-1945), the widow of Lieutenant-Colonel (Bertram E.) Francis Keeling, on 11 April 1927; she was the daughter of Carl Theodore Menke, of King's Norton, Worcestershire, a merchant of Prussian origin. Suffering persistent ill health but accompanying Woolley in his fieldwork none the less, Katharine Woolley was 'a daunting and powerful personality of whom even at this time it is difficult to speak fairly' (Mallowan, 36). The Woolleys were childless. Woolley died at 16 Fitzroy Square, St Pancras, London, on 20 February 1960, and was cremated at Golders Green, Middlesex, on the 24th. 


@@@@@


doc= 37022


Worboys, Sir Walter John (1900-1969), chemical industrialist and design promoter, was born at Cottesloe, Western Australia, on 22 February 1900, the eldest child of Walter Worboys, engineer, and his wife, Amanda Urquhart. He was educated at Scotch College and the University of Western Australia where he graduated in chemistry and geology. He proceeded as a Rhodes scholar to Lincoln College, Oxford, where his supervisor was Nevil Sidgwick, and gained his DPhil in chemistry in 1925. He then joined Synthetic Ammonia and Nitrates Ltd, a subsidiary of Brunner, Mond & Co., as a research chemist at Billingham, and devoted himself to the production of synthetic nitrogen and fertilizers, then in an early stage of development. 
On 22 March 1927 he married Ethelwyn Bessie (Betty), daughter of Henry Lavers, an Australian mining engineer; they had one son and one daughter. 
Brunner Mond became one of the founder constituents of Imperial Chemical Industries, with which company Worboys remained until he retired as commercial director in 1959. During his later years with the chemical industry he carried a full share of its burdens. He was chairman of the Association of British Chemical Manufacturers in 1953-6 and president in 1957-9. He was a member of council of the Society of the Chemical Industry in 1955-8 and gold medallist in 1957, and became a fellow of the Royal Institute of Chemistry in that year. 
Worboys's interest in industrial design, always active, was greatly stimulated by his service as chairman of ICI's plastics division from 1942 until 1948, when he became a director of the main company. Plastics lent themselves with equal facility to good or bad design; Worboys resolved to exploit the good and to discourage the bad, and he employed designers to serve both aims. He joined the Council of Industrial Design in 1947 and in 1953-60 was its chairman. The council, started by the Board of Trade in 1944 to encourage good design as a necessary feature of the post-war export drive, had never enjoyed an easy life, and in its early days had perhaps more critics than friends. There were those who felt that good design could best be determined by market forces, others who saw in any attempt to influence it the hand of government interference. When Worboys became chairman he decided, probably on the strength of his experience with the Festival of Britain of 1951 in which he took an active part, that if the council was to make its mark there was an overwhelming need for a permanent exhibition gallery in London. Such a project meant much greater government support; the fact that this support was provided on a pound-for-pound basis with industry was Worboys's special achievement and his success was due, not only to his enthusiasm and driving force, but also to his ability to convince Whitehall that under his guidance the council and its Design Centre (as the permanent exhibition was to be called) would develop on sound and productive lines. 
In the event, the Design Centre went from strength to strength, impressively fulfilling the bold and original conception that manufacturers could be persuaded to pay for space in which the goods shown would be selected by another body. The formation of the Design Centre was a turning point in the fortunes of the Council of Industrial Design; in a world where much that is ugly is created daily, the work of the council has provided a steady influence for good. As Sir Gordon Russell, former director of the council and Worboys's close partner in its work, wrote: 'When the history of the revolt against ugliness comes to be written, it will be seen how important was the work of a very small group of top-ranking businessmen after the last war. Of these Walter Worboys was a natural leader' ('The Times', 21 March 1969). Worboys's concern with industry, with design, and with the arts made a clear bond with the Royal Society of Arts; he became a fellow of the society in 1949, was awarded the bicentenary medal in 1956, and was elected a member of its council in 1961. In 1967 he became chairman of council, a post he held until his death. 
Some ten years remained to Worboys after he left ICI, and into this period he compressed a new career. In 1960 he became chairman of British Tyre and Rubber Industries and started a much needed programme of modernization and reorganization, which contributed greatly to the subsequent growth and strength of the company. In 1965 the Westminster Bank, of which he was a director, persuaded him to accept the formidable responsibility of chairing the British Printing Corporation, whose affairs were then at a low ebb. He held both these posts until his death, and they constituted a heavy burden. During this period Worboys began to undertake new commitments in the educational field. Early in the 1950s he had become a governor of Radley College and in 1962 he became chairman of the governing council of Roedean School. Worboys also played a notable part in the university developments of the 1960s by serving as a member of the academic advisory committee for the University of East Anglia and as chairman of the corresponding body for Brunel University. He presided over the government committee on road traffic signs set up in 1961 with results which were appreciated by road users throughout the land. 
In appearance Worboys always seemed active, fit, and alert. He was a man of distinction, endowed with the eye at once of the administrator, the artist, the scholar, and the man of affairs. To all his many activities he brought a sense of style. He set uncompromising standards, both of behaviour and performance. His manner could vary from warmth to severity, and his tolerance for the imperfect was limited, but at heart he was most kindly. He was essentially a man of his times. Justly described in the company's house journal as one of the architects of the modern ICI, he was equally at home in the City, in Whitehall, and in the arts. He accomplished much and the burden it placed on his daily life was cheerfully borne. He found his pleasures in his family, his work, in the arts, and in his country home, Norton Hall, Norton-on-Tees. His appointment as an honorary fellow of Lincoln College in 1957 gave him especial satisfaction. He was knighted in 1958 and received an honorary doctorate from Brunel University in 1967. Worboys died at his London home, Flat 8, 69 Onslow Square, Kensington, on 17 March 1969. 
M. J. Dean', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37023


Wordie, Sir James Mann (1889-1962), polar explorer and scholar, was born on 26 April 1889 at Partick, Lanarkshire, the youngest son of John Wordie, carting contractor, and his wife, Jane Catherine Mathers Mann. He was a first cousin of Sir James Mann. He was educated at Glasgow Academy and Glasgow University, where he obtained his BSc with honours and distinction in geology in 1910. He went as an advanced student to St John's College, Cambridge, reading for part two of the natural sciences tripos (geology) and graduating in 1912. He then began research work in geology. In 1913 he won the Harkness scholarship in geology and in 1914 was appointed university demonstrator in petrology -- an office he held until 1917 and again from 1919 to 1923. His work brought him into touch with geologists such as Frank Debenham and Raymond Priestley, returned from the second expedition of Captain Scott. These contacts strengthened an interest in Arctic and Antarctic exploration and scientific discovery, already awakened by reading books on travel and mountaineering in his father's library and by working with J. W. Gregory. 
In 1914 Wordie joined the Antarctic expedition of Sir Ernest Shackleton as geologist and chief of the scientific staff, and so served under a distinguished explorer whom he always acknowledged as his master. The expedition proved arduous and perilous in the extreme. Wordie himself spent a year in 'Endurance' drifting 'beset and sinking' in the Weddell Sea; a period of discomfort and danger at Ocean Camp; and a winter marooned on Elephant Island while Shackleton made his epic voyage to South Georgia for help. Wordie ably played his part in maintaining the morale of the expedition; and in spite of its failure to fulfil its exploratory intentions and in spite of the rigours he had undergone, he brought back important geological specimens and useful observations on oceanography and on the polar ice pack. 
Wordie returned in 1917 to a country at war, joined the Royal Artillery, and saw service in France. On his demobilization, the polar regions called him back: in 1919 and again in 1920 he went to Spitsbergen as geologist and second-in-command of the Scottish Spitsbergen expedition under W. S. Bruce. In 1921 he won a fellowship at St John's College, Cambridge, and henceforward made the college, and Cambridge more generally, the base from which to set out on a long series of Arctic and Antarctic expeditions. He went to Jan Mayen and east Greenland in 1921, 1923, 1926, and 1929 (in the former he made the first ascent of Beerenberg, for he was a dedicated mountaineer); to north-west Greenland, Ellesmere Island, and Baffin Island in 1934 and 1937. The Second World War ended further polar exploration, but throughout it (indeed, from 1923 to 1949) Wordie served on the 'Discovery' committee of the Colonial Office which advised on the oceanographical work undertaken by 'Discovery I' and 'II'. From 1937 to 1955 he chaired the committee of management of the Scott Polar Research Institute in Cambridge of which he was a founder member. 
The young explorer under Shackleton, the leader of expeditions which introduced many young men (notably Gino Watkins and Vivian Fuchs) to the polar world, had now become the elder statesman of Arctic and Antarctic exploration, whose advice was widely sought and always influential. During the war Wordie served for a time as director of the Cambridge sub-centre of the naval intelligence division. His knowledge of local conditions was invaluable to the planning of operation TABARIN, whose objective was the maintenance of British claims to Graham Land and adjacent territories. This grew into the Falkland Islands Dependencies Survey, whose advisory scientific committee sat under his chairmanship. So it was that in 1947 Wordie was in polar latitudes for the last time, visiting South Orkney and South Shetland as well as Graham Land. But in his role of elder statesman of polar exploration he remained influential, as deputy chairman advising Fuchs when the Trans-Antarctic Expedition was being planned and as chairman of the British national committee for the International Geophysical Year (1954-8). He was also chairman of the British Mountaineering Council (1953-6). He is commemorated by the Wordie Glacier in Graham Land and the Wordie Crag in Spitsbergen. 
Closely bound up with Wordie's interests in polar exploration was his service to the Royal Geographical Society. He was a fellow from 1921 and became a member of the council in the following year. He was honorary secretary from 1934 to 1948, spanning the difficult war period. After a time as foreign secretary he was president of the society, from 1951 to 1954, and in that capacity he welcomed back the expedition under Sir John Hunt which made the first ascent of Mount Everest; he became the first chairman of the Mount Everest Foundation. 
Wordie's third great absorbing interest was St John's College, Cambridge, to which he was devoted. After election to his fellowship in 1921 he was appointed a tutor in 1923. From 1921 until 1952 (with intermissions) he was director of studies in geography. In 1933 he became senior tutor, an office which he held with that of president from 1950 until (perhaps rather to his surprise) he was elected master in 1952. He held the mastership until 1959, when his health had already begun to fail. As a tutor Wordie showed himself, though shy, an excellent judge of men, and brought his remarkable memory to bear on them, their affairs, and their family connections with unfailing accuracy. His filing system seemed, too, to depend on memory, for his large table was littered with papers from which he never failed to extract the document required. As an elder statesman and eventually master, his shrewdness and instinctively accurate judgement of people served the college well; and the college benefited also from the affection he generated in his pupils. As a committee man he was better at deciding on a line of action (usually the right one) than at justifying it in argument. 
Wordie gained the Back grant of the Royal Geographical Society in 1920 and its founder's gold medal in 1933; the Bruce medal of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (1926); the gold medal of the Royal Scottish Geographical Society (1944); and the Daly medal of the American Geographical Society (1952). He received honorary degrees from the universities of Glasgow and Hull, was an honorary fellow of Trinity College, Dublin, and was a commander of the order of St Olaf of Norway. He was appointed CBE in 1947 and knighted in 1957. 
On 21 March 1923 Wordie married Gertrude Mary (died 1971), daughter of George Thompson Henderson; they had three sons and two daughters. He died in Cambridge on 16 January 1962. 
B. H. Farmer', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37024


Wordsworth, Dame Elizabeth (1840-1932), college head, was born on 22 June 1840 at Harrow on the Hill, Middlesex, the eldest of the seven children of Christopher Wordsworth (1807-1885), headmaster of Harrow School, from 1844 canon of Westminster, and from 1868 bishop of Lincoln, and his wife, Susanna Hatley Frere (1811-1884). In 1844 the family moved to 4 Little Cloister, in the precincts of Westminster Abbey, and from 1851 until Elizabeth was twenty-eight they usually spent four months of each year in Westminster and eight in Stanford in the Vale, in Berkshire, where her father held a living. She was educated at home, apart from one rather fruitless year at a boarding-school in Brighton when she was seventeen. Her father, intelligent governesses, and her own wide reading provided a substantial but uneven academic education. She learned almost no mathematics or science, but studied Latin, history, modern languages, English literature, drawing, and singing, and taught herself Greek from her younger brother John Wordsworth's school books in order to read the 'New Testament' and Homer. Christian faith shaped her upbringing profoundly, and throughout her life she treasured the liturgy, devotion, and traditions of high-church Anglicanism. Her piety was straightforward, scholarly, and practical, rooted in detailed study of the 'Bible' and theology, but also in humdrum parish work in rural Stanford. Westminster, meanwhile, gave access to clerical and academic society in London, to galleries, and the theatre. From the age of thirteen she also travelled extensively in Europe with her family, and continued to do so with relatives and friends all her life. 
Elizabeth was intelligent, witty, and unusually well read in several languages. Her father relied on her as a research assistant for an ambitious 'Bible' commentary, and then as his secretary when he was appointed bishop and the family moved to Riseholme Palace near Lincoln. She never queried the convention by which her brothers John and Christopher were sent to Winchester College and then Oxford and Cambridge respectively, while she, as a girl, was educated informally at home. But when the headship of an Oxford hall of residence for women students was proposed to her in 1878 she accepted, and her father approved, although her brother John, then a fellow of Brasenose College, Oxford, saw no need for such an initiative. 
During the ten years between the move to Riseholme and Elizabeth Wordsworth's appointment as founding principal of Lady Margaret Hall, her range of friendships and academic interests widened, and she became a writer. From 1868 she experienced a particularly close relationship with Edward White Benson, headmaster at Wellington College and examining chaplain to her father at Lincoln, and his wife, Minnie. The Wordsworth and Benson families saw a good deal of one another, but Edward Benson and Elizabeth became especially intimate friends, passionately sharing intellectual and ecclesiastical interests in long conversations and letters. Her friendship with Edward Benson was expansive and personally engaging in a way that was not repeated with any other man. By the mid-1870s the intensity of communication had abated, while her friendship with the Benson family as a whole continued. 
In 1870 Elizabeth met the novelist Charlotte Mary Yonge in Oxford and they became lifelong friends. Elizabeth herself published a first novel, 'Thornwell Abbas', in 1876 under the pseudonym Grant Lloyd, followed by a second, 'Ebb and Flow', in 1883. From the early 1870s she also wrote poems, plays, stories, essays, and devotional pieces, as well as co-authoring a biography of her father in 1888. She acquired the reputation of a minor poet. She often stayed with her brother John and his wife in Oxford, and became a regular and popular participant in Oxford dinner parties. She attended lecture courses by the historian Robert Laing in the series given from 1873 onwards by Oxford dons for women, and wrote essays for Laing which he thought outstanding. Whether socially or through these lectures, she met many of the men and women who were determined to provide a university education for women in Oxford, including Edward Talbot, founding warden of Keble College, and his wife, Lavinia. She was not herself part of this pioneering group; her own energies were concentrated on her family, her writing, and her father's work in Lincoln. 
In November 1878 Elizabeth Wordsworth accepted Edward Talbot's invitation to become principal of a residential hall for women that a committee of high-church Anglicans was establishing in Oxford. Her interest in higher education for women owed nothing to feminist principle, and everything to her conviction that well-educated women would be better wives and mothers and more useful members of the Church of England and of English society. She proposed that the new hall be named after Lady Margaret Beaufort, mother of Henry VII and a patron of the arts and learning, whom she described as a gentlewoman, a scholar, and a saint. She wanted her students to be all three. 
Lady Margaret Hall (LMH) accepted its first students in 1879, and Elizabeth remained its principal until her retirement in 1909. She was small, brisk, confident, and outspoken, and she brought to the new venture her characteristic generosity of mind and informality. Although her ideal was a family-sized community, plans for expansion were drawn up almost immediately, and she was impatient to see them implemented. The first new building to be added to the original Victorian villa was designed by Basil Champneys and completed in 1884. One of the four buildings by Reginald Blomfield that established the central form and classical style of the college was opened in 1896 and, at the insistence of the LMH council, bore her name, with the second following in 1910, the year after her retirement. Student numbers rose from nine in 1879 to fifty-nine in 1909. The individual students rather than the institution were always her main interest. She enjoyed their company, and encouraged them to walk, row, play tennis and hockey, and to ride bicycles when these appeared, seeing no need to impose further restrictions beyond the already strict conventions of the period. She expected them to be lively as well as hard-working. The students in turn found her inspiring, entertaining, and idiosyncratic. They listened to her 'Bible' studies on Sunday evenings, acted in her annual plays, met the many visitors who called to see her, monitored her odd taste in headwear, and enjoyed having such a learned and notable, if sometimes disconcerting, character as their principal. Some of them were also deeply disappointed by her lack of interest in feminist causes, including the suffrage, and irritated by her conventional views on a woman's main role as wife and mother. She was none the less clear-sighted about the need of many women to be financially and emotionally self-reliant, and was determined to equip them to make their way independently. 
In 1886, a year after Bishop Wordsworth died, Elizabeth unexpectedly inherited $600 from his estate, and decided to found St Hugh's Hall in his memory, for women students who could not afford the fees at LMH. This personal initiative was a great success; the hall later became St Hugh's College, Oxford. Meanwhile she continued to be a generous benefactor of LMH, giving or loaning money on several occasions for its development. Elizabeth Wordsworth, founder of one hall for women and founding principal of another, none the less managed to keep a low profile in the controversy in the 1890s over whether to admit women to the BA degree. She eventually argued for it, even though the LMH council opposed it, but she did not have very strong views on the matter. She was adamant, however, that a proposal being discussed at the same time, to introduce a non-resident diploma for women, would undermine the existing halls, and she opposed her council's support for it. An initiative that gained her full approval and active commitment was the opening of the Lady Margaret Hall Settlement in Lambeth in 1897, with its obvious practical commitment to those in need. 
In 1900 Elizabeth Wordsworth gave up her house in Lincoln to live all year round in Oxford, first at Gunfield House, next door to LMH, and then, after retirement, at 12 Rawlinson Road. She received an honorary MA from Oxford University in 1921, one year after degrees were opened to women. She was elected an honorary fellow of Lady Margaret Hall and of St Hugh's in 1926. In the jubilee year of LMH, 1928, she received the honorary degree of DCL from Oxford University and was made a DBE. She died at her home in Rawlinson Road on 30 November 1932, and was buried on 5 December in Wolvercote cemetery, the most unselfconscious yet the most influential pioneer of women's university education that Oxford had known. 


@@@@@


doc= 37025


Wordsworth, John (1843-1911), bishop of Salisbury, eldest son of Christopher Wordsworth (1807-1885), and his wife, Susanna Hatley, daughter of George Frere, was born on 21 September 1843 at Harrow School, where his father was then headmaster; Christopher Wordsworth was later bishop of Lincoln, and was the nephew of the poet William Wordsworth. John's brother, the younger Christopher Wordsworth, was sometime fellow of Peterhouse, Cambridge. His sister Elizabeth Wordsworth was the first principal of Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford; another sister, Susan (died 1912), was the first head of the Southwark Diocesan Society of Grey Ladies. John Wordsworth was taught first by a Mrs Wallace at Brighton, and then at Ipswich; he went to Winchester College as a pensioner, and in October 1861 became a scholar of New College, Oxford. He gained a first-class mark in classical moderations, though not in his finals, and took a second in 'literae humaniores' in 1865, when he was awarded his BA. He won the Latin essay prize in 1866 and the Craven scholarship in 1867, and he proceeded to an MA in 1868. 
After a year as assistant master at Wellington College under Edward White Benson, afterwards archbishop of Canterbury, Wordsworth was elected in 1867 to a fellowship at Brasenose College, Oxford. He was ordained deacon (1867) and priest (1869) by Bishop Wilberforce of Oxford, and became chaplain of Brasenose College. In 1870 he was appointed as examining chaplain and was collated to a prebend in Lincoln Cathedral by his father, who had just been made bishop of Lincoln. In the same year he married Susan Esther (died 1894), daughter of the librarian Henry Octavius Coxe. There were no children of the marriage. 
Although Wordsworth was initially interested in divinity, his work at Brasenose was mainly classical. In 1874 he published 'Fragments and Specimens of Early Latin', a standard text for many years, though its philology dated quickly. The publication gave him the reputation of being one of the best Latin scholars in Oxford, however, and he soon applied himself to biblical study. In 1878 Oxford University Press accepted a proposal from him for the publication of a critical edition of the 'Vulgate New Testament' which would attempt to recapture the exact words of St Jerome. He began to collect his material, engaging assistants to collate western-European manuscripts, and examining earlier collations (such as those of Richard Bentley and John Walker). They purchased unused material of Constantin Tischendorf and searched the works of the patristic writers for quotations. Wordsworth fulfilled all the requirements of palaeographical, grammatical, historical, and exegetical knowledge, and his notes and indices were known for their erudition. 
As a preliminary to the substantive publication, certain important manuscripts were from 1883 onwards printed in full in 'Old Latin Biblical Texts'. In this task Wordsworth was helped by William Sanday and some other scholars, later including the Revd Henry Julian White, professor of 'New Testament' studies in King's College, London. The four gospels were printed in 1889 ('St Matthew'), 1891 ('St Mark'), 1892 ('St Luke'), and 1895 ('St John'). An 'Epilogus' of discussions and results followed in 1898, the whole forming a quarto volume of over 800 pages. The 'Acts' appeared in 1905. White continued the work after Wordsworth's death, with the assistance of the Revd George Mallows Youngman. Before his death Wordsworth published a minor edition of the whole 'Vulgate New Testament', which appeared in 1912. Although he grew less involved in the work in his latter years, he retained full knowledge of every detail and gave the final decision on doubtful questions. 
Meanwhile Wordsworth had gained high office at Oxford and in the Church of England. In 1877 J. B. Mozley, regius professor of divinity, chose him as his deputy, and he served as deputy professor for two years. The lectures he wrote during that time formed the basis for the Bampton lectures of 1881. Entitled 'The one religion', they provided a comparison of Christianity with other great religions. Wordsworth was neither an orientalist nor a philosopher; but the Bampton lectures show his strong interest in missionary work. He was among the founders of the Oxford Missionary Association of Graduates, and of St Stephen's House, which was designed to prepare members of the university for mission life. In 1883 he was elected as the first incumbent of a newly founded Oriel professorship of the interpretation of scripture. The post carried with it the sinecure of the canonry of Rochester, where Wordsworth threw himself into the work both of the church and of the cathedral. Two years later he was nominated to the see of Salisbury in succession to George Moberly. He was consecrated bishop on 28 October 1885, and was made DD at Oxford in the same year. Thereafter, his duties as bishop had to take precedence over his literary work (apart from the 'Vulgate'). 
Succeeding to a well-administered diocese, without the problem of an increasing population, Wordsworth was able to devote much of his time to the general policy of the church. He developed his knowledge of ecclesiastical law. He was fearless in risking litigation and became the first to exercise the power under the 'Pluralities Act Amendment Act' (1898), under which a bishop could, at the expense of an incompetent priest, appoint a new curate to his neglected parish. He also revived the canonical right of examining and rejecting, on the score of insufficient learning, the presentee to a benefice. His diocesan work in the field of education involved efforts to maintain elementary church schools. He also founded and endowed the Bishop's School at Salisbury for the secondary co-education of boys and girls, a progressive step at the time. Wordsworth's influence inside the Church of England was especially powerful. He was close to Archbishop Benson, and his assistance proved indispensable to Benson's successors. He was one of the assessors in the bishop of Lincoln's case in 1889-90, and he studied the relevant law and history in order to give a reasoned judgment. 
Wordsworth believed in the ideal of a unified church. However, although in practice a tolerant man, he had inherited much of his father's antipathy towards Rome, and he was firmly of the view that the differences between Catholicism and the Church of England were wide. He acknowledged the intellectual and scholarly strength of the Roman Catholic scholars, but lost no opportunity to assert his church's claims to antiquity or superiority. He watched the growth of the Old Catholics in Austria and was always alert to signs of internal revolt in the Roman Catholic church. Wordsworth saw the churches' only hope of unity as lying in a general recognition of episcopacy. It was through this commonly held understanding that he felt drawn to the Orthodox Swedish and Moravian churches; and he was energetic in the negotiation of terms of possible association. His last work, the Hale lectures, delivered at Chicago in 1910, and published in England in 1911, on the national church of Sweden, was inspired by this motive. Although composed in ill health, it was a substantial and original contribution to religious history and was translated into Swedish. 
In his 'De successione episcoporum in ecclesia Anglicana' (1890) and 'De validitate ordinum Anglicanorum' (1894), he attempted to refute what he saw as the scruples of the Jansenist Church of Holland. He continued the correspondence throughout his life, though his hopes were never fully realized. 
Wordsworth also made some efforts to continue the attempts of his uncle, Charles Wordsworth, to draw together the episcopal and presbyterian churches of Scotland. His elaborate history of his uncle's episcopate, published in 1899, and his later researches, such as his 'Ordination Problems' (1909) and 'Unity and Fellowship' (1910), were concerned with examining precedents for the absorption of apparently imperfect fringe religious societies into approved and recognized religious groups. In addition he wrote much on practical ministry, drawing inspiration from history; he published 'Holy Communion' (1910) and 'Ministry of Grace' (1901, 1902). The latter is a history of the Christian ministry. Wordsworth remained conservative in his attitudes towards criticism of the 'Bible', where history showed institutions and scripture to be authoritative. 
In his preaching Wordsworth showed himself equally sure of his ground, both scripturally and historically. He spoke impressively and often with originality. He read widely on the local and national history of his diocese and kept abreast of current affairs. Though he was an accomplished critic and writer of Latin, he was not greatly interested in style in English literature, but he admired the moral tones of his great-uncle's poetry. He was made honorary LLD of Dublin in 1890, of Cambridge in 1908, and honorary DD of Bern in 1892. In 1905 he was elected a fellow of the British Academy. Wordsworth's first wife died in 1894, and on 2 January 1896 he married Mary Anne Frances (1870-1938), eldest daughter of Sir Robert Williams, first baronet, MP for West Dorset; they had four sons and two daughters. 
Wordsworth died suddenly at the bishop's palace, Salisbury, on 16 August 1911. He was buried on 19 August at Britford, near Salisbury. His wife survived him. Bishop Wordsworth is memorable for his contributions to theological studies and for his efforts in trying to unite different churches on the basis of episcopacy. A memorial and choir stalls were also erected in his honour in Salisbury Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 37026


Workman, Herbert Brook (1862-1951), Methodist minister and college head, was born in Peckham, London, on 2 November 1862, son of John Sansom Workman, a Welseyan Methodist minister, and his wife, Mary Brook. Educated at Kingswood School, Bath, of which his younger brother, W. P. Workman, was later headmaster (1889-1918), he took a London BA (1884) and MA (1885) from Owens College, Manchester, and prepared at Didsbury College for the Methodist ministry. He married in 1891 Ethel Mary, daughter of Alban Gardner Buller, solicitor, of Birmingham; they had two sons and one daughter. 
Workman had a notable spell of fifteen years as a circuit minister before serving as principal of Westminster Training College in 1903-30. After the long regime of the redoubtable J. H. Rigg the college needed a new, tough broom. Workman brought to the task not only his own growing reputation as a scholar, with a flair for picking colleagues and pupils of coming eminence, but great gifts of shrewdness and administrative prescience. He raised the college to a new eminence, and his concentration on training teachers at Westminster and at the sister college of Southlands stood his church in valuable stead at a time of crisis in its educational policy when numbers of Methodist day schools were closing. From 1919 until his retirement in 1940 he held the important office of secretary of the Methodist education committee. The most notable of his achievements was the consolidation of a ring of Methodist residential schools, to which, through his efforts, there were notable additions. He was a member of the senate of the University of London, which awarded him the degree of DLitt (1907). 
Workman was the first distinguished church historian to come from the Methodist church, and perhaps the first protestant and nonconformist scholar to show sensitive sympathy with the medieval church. It is true that his first historical writings, begun as a circuit minister, treated the elements of dissent within medieval Christendom. The small volumes 'The Church of the West in the Middle Ages' (2 vols., 1898-1900) and 'The Dawn of the Reformation' (2 vols., 1901-2) have long been superseded, but are remarkable for the care and accuracy with which their author had studied a great range of authorities and sought the truth among the primary documents. These studies found their climax in the sympathetic portrayal of John Hus, to which his 'Letters of John Hus' (1904) formed a useful epilogue. There followed studies in the early church, 'Persecution in the Early Church' (1906) and 'The Evolution of the Monastic Ideal' (1913), which showed his flair for colourful and interesting narrative material. His 'Christian Thought to the Reformation' (1911) is in contrast disappointing and not very perceptive. His great work, however, was his massive study 'John Wyclif' (2 vols., 1926). Workman was preparing a further volume to cover the history of later Lollardy at the time of his death. Probably his best single writing was his classic essay, published as 'The Place of Methodism in the Catholic Church' (1921), originally written for the 'New History of Methodism' (2 vols., 1909), of which he was one of the editors. There his evangelical convictions and his wide catholic sympathies enabled him to set the evangelical revival against the long perspective of the Christian past. The worth of his studies was recognized by the University of Aberdeen, which awarded him the degree of DD in 1914. Workman died at his home, 29 Vineyard Hill Road, Wimbledon, on 26 August 1951. He was survived by his wife. 
E. G. Rupp', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37027


Wormall, Arthur (1900-1964), biochemist, was born on 17 January 1900 in Leeds, the second child in the family of two sons and two daughters of James William Wormall, a printer and lithographer, and his wife, Ann Phillis. He entered the boys' modern school, Leeds, and at seventeen was awarded a senior city scholarship to Leeds University, where he read for the honours BSc degree in chemistry under Professor J. B. Cohen. He served in the university Officers' Training Corps and joined the Royal Air Force in 1918. The end of the First World War in November allowed him to resume his degree course without any serious delay and to become engaged at the same time in his first research problem. He was also able to take up a junior appointment as demonstrator in biochemistry in the department of physiology and biochemistry at Leeds. Wormall remained at Leeds University for the next fourteen years and became lecturer (1926) and senior lecturer (1933). He was awarded the degree of DSc in 1930. Wormall married Eva Jackson in 1925; they had two daughters. In June 1928 he was elected to a Rockefeller medical research fellowship and chose to work for about a year with Karl Landsteiner at the Rockefeller Institute in New York and then at the Marine Biological Station, Woods Hole, Massachusetts. 
After his return to England, Wormall accepted an appointment from the Colonial Office to visit Uganda to investigate some special aspects of sleeping sickness. He returned to Leeds on completing this assignment and became involved in an exacting teaching load in the physiology department. Nevertheless it was at this time that Wormall made several valuable contributions to the clarification of the nature of serum complement in terms of chemistry of the reactive components and this work stimulated many of the numerous investigations by others on this subject. He enjoyed an increasing reputation as an able investigator in immunochemistry. During this period at Leeds he also became especially interested in the action of mustard gas (di-2-chloroethyl sulphide) and related vesicants on tissue constituents. 
In 1936 Wormall was appointed the first professor of biochemistry at St Bartholomew's Hospital medical college, London, where he spent much time launching a new department; he remained professor of biochemistry at the medical school for the rest of his life. As early as 1936 Wormall considered the possibility of using isotopic tracers and was a pioneer worker on this important aspect of immunochemistry. With the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 Wormall moved his department from London to the Sir William Dunn Institute of Biochemistry at Cambridge. Difficulties resulting from this move, and the heavy academic responsibilities both in London and Cambridge, considerably reduced the amount of his research; but at the war's end Wormall and his colleagues returned to London and resumed the task of developing the use of radioactive tracers in immunological investigations. 
At the time of Wormall's return, the development in London University of a BSc (special honours) degree course, together with an extensive reorganization of his own department of biochemistry, occupied much of his time and he frequently regretted the amount of his energy that had to be given to these and other activities rather than to research. There can be no doubt, however, about the excellent advice he gave to the board of governors and college council -- in particular that concerning the purchase of land for future expansion of St Bartholomew's Hospital. In 1949 Wormall and G. E. Francis organized a course on the use of stable isotopes in biological investigations. It was the first of its kind in the United Kingdom, proved a great success, and continued annually for fifteen years. In 1952 Wormall was invited by the University of Sao Paulo, Brazil, to organize the first Latin-American course in radioisotopes and his success was recognized in 1953 by the conferment on him of a doctorate 'honoris causa'. 
Although always busy, Wormall was never too occupied to help others. In spite of failing health and long periods in hospital, he remained cheerful and full of hope. In December 1955 he suffered a cerebral thrombosis which kept him away from his work for nearly a year. After a brief return to the department he had a further stroke in April 1962 and from then on he was completely paralysed until he died in St Bartholomew's Hospital on 9 May 1964. 
As a Yorkshireman and therefore a cricketer, Wormall was probably as pleased by his election to the MCC as he was by his election to the Royal Society, both in 1956. 
W. T. J. Morgan', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37028


Worrell, Sir Frank Mortimer Maglinne (1924-1967), cricketer, was born at Bridgetown, Barbados, on 1 August 1924, the son of Athelston Worrell, a ship's steward. He was educated at Combermere School, where he was coached by the former test cricketer Derrick Sealy. He first played for the island as a slow left-arm bowler at the age of seventeen, while still at school, but his batting, in which he was right-handed, developed so rapidly that in 1942-3 he scored his first century in first-class cricket, 188 against Trinidad at Port of Spain, and in the following season he played what proved to be the highest innings of his career: 308 not out in an unbroken partnership of 502 with J. D. Goddard, again against Trinidad. This was a world record for the fourth wicket until Worrell and C. L. Walcott surpassed it two seasons later with an unbroken 574, yet again against Trinidad, when Worrell made 255 not out. 
In 1947 Worrell left Barbados for Jamaica after failing to get a job at home. In Jamaica he got employment as a clerk, joined Kensington cricket club, and also played football. His international career began against the MCC tourists in 1947-8. He made 294 in three tests, and his 131 not out at Georgetown was the first of his nine test centuries. In 1948 he began a long and happy association with Radcliffe in the central Lancashire league: his aggregate of 1694 (average 112.80) in 1951 was a record for the competition. Between 1948 and 1959 (not every year), he compiled 9103 runs (average 77.14) in league cricket for Radcliffe and later for Norton. While in Radcliffe, he married on 28 May 1948 a fellow Barbadian, Velda Elaine Brewster ('b'. 1922/3), daughter of Mervyn Brewster, photographer. She and their daughter Lana survived him. With an eye to the future, Worrell graduated BA (Admin) in 1959 at Manchester University. 
With many international players taking part, the northern leagues were a stern academy of cricket and Worrell gained valuable experience of English conditions. He learned to play on wickets of varying pace, and he quickened his bowling, relying now on swerve rather than spin. Thus he was well equipped to take his place in the West Indies touring team to England in 1950, which after losing the first test won the remaining three and became the first West Indies team to win a rubber in England. With his lithe elegance, perfect timing, and exquisite footwork, he was one of the celebrated trio -- Everton Weekes and Clyde Walcott were the others -- of outstanding batsmen in this talented side. He headed the test averages with 539 runs at 89.83, and on the tour he made 1775 at 68.26, with six centuries, as well as taking thirty-nine wickets. His 261 at Nottingham was then the highest individual score for either country in tests against each other in England, while his stand of 283 for the fourth wicket with Weekes was the highest test partnership for the West Indies in any part of the world. It was beaten by himself and Garfield Sobers when they put on 399 against England at Barbados in 1960. 
In Australia in 1951-2 the West Indies could not repeat their English success. Worrell, with only 337 in ten test innings, was not the only batsman to be unhappy against the Australians' pace on hard pitches and their use of the short, fast bumper, although he made 108 at Melbourne, batting almost one-handed after an injury. With the disappointment of their high expectations the side's morale collapsed, there was frequent dissension, and they lost four of the five tests. But it was Worrell's most successful series as a bowler; his seventeen wickets at 19.35 included six for 38 at Adelaide in the only test the West Indies won. Home series against India, England, and Australia were, by his own standards, not years of abundance, although he made 237 against India at Kingston in 1953. When the West Indies came to England in 1957, he easily headed the tour averages with 1470 runs at 58.80, and his four centuries included a masterly 191 not out in the third test at Nottingham, when he batted right through the innings. He also took seven wickets for 70 in the fourth test at Leeds. But the tour was a disappointment for the team, whose confidence characteristically disintegrated after the first test slipped from their grasp when they had seemed certain to win it. They were then beaten three times by an innings. 
Because of injuries Worrell captained the side in the last four matches of the tour, and he showed qualities of leadership which led, after various internal struggles, to his appointment as captain in Australia in 1960-61. The post had been offered to him twice before but Worrell had rejected it to enable him to complete his studies at Manchester University. His acceptance, in the end, came at a time when the newly independent territories in the Caribbean were looking for black leaders in all walks of life. A remarkable series began with the first tie in the history of test cricket, and although the West Indies eventually lost by two matches to one, the result would have been reversed if two vital decisions had not gone against them. Although personally Worrell had only a moderate tour, his side fulfilled his promise that they would bring back to cricket the spirit of adventure. On their departure Worrell's men received a send-off 'normally reserved for Royalty and national heroes' ('Wisden', 1962, 832). The Worrell trophy was instituted to commemorate the Brisbane tie. In the following year, 1961-2, he led the West Indies to a 5-0 victory over India. 
Worrell fought his last campaign when he led the West Indies in England in 1963. This was another eventful rubber which the West Indies won 3-1 after a dramatic drawn game at Lord's. Worrell did not do much with the bat, but his 74 not out in 95 minutes at Manchester, with fifteen fours, recalled the player he had been in his vintage years. At the end of the tour he announced his retirement, but he managed the side that defeated the visiting Australians in 1965 and made the West Indies unofficial world champions. In his career he made 15,025 runs at 54.24, with 39 centuries, and took 349 wickets at 28.98. In 51 tests, 25 against England, he made 3860 at 49.48 and took 69 wickets at 38.72. 
But although in his prime Worrell was a great batsman, correct yet uninhibited, with a free swing whose delicacy concealed its power, statistics do not measure his contribution to the game. It was he who disciplined the West Indies into an organized force in international cricket. The political, cultural, and ethnic differences of the scattered Caribbean islands had made earlier teams unpredictable and at times almost uncontrollable. Their resolution was easily weakened by disappointment, and insular rivalries had a divisive effect. But under a relaxed and easy manner Worrell inspired his players with his own strength of character and breadth of outlook. His firmness, which at times could be ruthless, prevented the psychological deterioration which had weakened earlier touring sides, and he welded a team of talented but erratic and temperamental players into the finest in the world. In so doing he raised the status and self-respect of black cricketers. 
Worrell was a lover of England and a true federalist -- in the sense that he believed in the West Indies and did not allow himself to be involved in insular jealousies. He was knighted in 1964. In 1961 he was appointed warden of Irvine Hall, at Mona, near Kingston, in the University College of the West Indies. He described himself, in a BBC interview two years later, as ''in loco parentis' to students, an administrator responsible for moral welfare and discipline, a personal adviser' (Tennant, 75). He was also heavily involved in planning sports facilities. He found time to play cricket with an underprivileged boys' club called Boys Town. 
In 1962 Worrell was nominated by the prime minister of Jamaica, Sir Alexander Bustamante, to a seat in the country's upper house -- the senate. But, beyond two speeches, he contributed little in his two years before leaving Jamaica in 1964 to become dean of students and warden of two halls in that part of the university which was based in Trinidad. The post was similar to that in Jamaica but with more responsibility. He took a strong line on discipline and exercised 'enormous moral authority' (Tennant, 88). There was still some cricket -- with five first-class matches in England in 1964 -- and opportunities to lecture abroad. It was on a visit to India, at the request of the government, that he felt unwell. The University of Punjab had given him an honorary doctorate of laws in February 1967. Five weeks later, on 13 March 1967, he died in the university hospital at Kingston of leukaemia; he was buried in Barbados, where he had bought land for his eventual retirement. 

'The Times' declared Worrell would be 'remembered as much for his leadership as for his play' ('The Times', 14 March 1967). His funeral and burial in Barbados were followed by a memorial service in Westminster Abbey, London, the first ever held there for a sportsman. In his memory a fund was set up to benefit young people, in education and in sport, throughout the Commonwealth. 


@@@@@


doc= 37029


Sir (John) Hubert Worthington (1886-1963), architect, the youngest son of Thomas Worthington and his second wife, Edith, was born on 4 July 1886 at Chorley, Alderley Edge, Cheshire. He was educated at Sedbergh School (1900-05) and then at the school of architecture, Manchester University. During this period he visited Rome and returned full of enthusiasm for the Italian Renaissance, especially the work of Peruzzi. He was also inspired by the work and personality of Edward Lutyens and, after being articled to his half-brother Percy, from 1912 he spent two years in Lutyens's office. During the First World War, when a captain in the Manchester regiment, Worthington was severely wounded on 1 July 1916 in the offensive on the Somme, but he survived overnight in a shell hole and was rescued the following day. His subsequent army duties were educational, but the Manchester regiment remained a part of his life. He was mentioned in dispatches. 
Worthington returned to architectural practice in 1919, when he joined Percy in the family firm. Twenty-two years his senior, Percy Worthington was then engaged on his major works. Hubert proposed opening a London office and was keen to extend the firm's patronage, but his early commissions were small and in the north. In 1923 he was appointed professor at the Royal College of Art, London, a post he held for five years. In addition to his enthusiasm for the Italian Renaissance and the work of Lutyens, he had as his architectural bible Geoffrey Scott's 'The Architecture of Humanism' (1914). Early commissions included the war memorial cloister at Sedbergh (1922-4) and the dining-hall and staff wing at Rossall School (1926-8), both Renaissance-inspired designs. The arcaded cloister at Sedbergh is cut into a hillside and supports a terrace facing the grandeur of a Pennine landscape. In contrast, the building at Rossall is enclosed. The large, expressive dining-hall and flanking clock tower are reminiscent of an Italian basilica and campanile. The studied quiet of Sedbergh and the exuberance of Rossall are equally characteristic of Worthington's personality. Simultaneously he carried out many smaller schemes in the Greater Manchester area; particularly notable are his gateway and lodge to Ashburne Hall ('c'.1926), where the handsome set of gates, a 'tour de force' of wrought ironwork, provides a fine flourish to the setting. 
In 1929 Worthington was appointed Slade lecturer in architecture at Oxford University, and four years later he designed a new wing to the university's Radcliffe Science Library (1933-4), the first of many commissions he executed for the university and its colleges. Most were for new buildings, such as the forestry and botany building, but he also carried out internal restoration and refurbishment of the Radcliffe Camera in 1939 and the Bodleian Library in 1955. As a designer Worthington aimed to create a personal style based largely on traditional building. Probably Lutyens was the role model, but Sir Herbert Baker's Rhodes House in Oxford provided a precedent in the modern use of squared limestone rubble in small blocks with ashlar dressings. Worthington adapted this mode for almost all his Oxford commissions and combined it with idiosyncratically detailed door casings and window heads. His buildings have weathered handsomely, but the mannerisms have detracted from his reputation. His library interiors are notably successful, the most distinctive being that at New College (1939). Notable exceptions to the usual pattern of his Oxford designs are the neo-Georgian Lincoln House in Turl Street (1939) and the dolphin gate to Trinity College (1947-8) on St Giles'. 
On 20 October 1928 Worthington married, at Holy Trinity Church, Sloane Street, Chelsea, (Sophie) Joan ('b'. 1905), the daughter of Sidney Marshall Banham, a physician; they had three children. Following Percy Worthington's death in 1939 Hubert became the principal of the firm, and in 1941 he was joined in the practice by his wife. Though unqualified professionally, she had studied architecture at the Royal College of Art during his professorship. A gifted draughtswoman, one of her roles was to prepare exhibition drawings. The Second World War reduced the range of the practice but brought industrial work and the care of damaged historic buildings, and in 1943 Worthington was appointed by the Imperial War Graves Commission as principal architect for Egypt and north Africa. The work, which lasted until the 1950s, included the selection of sites and the design and supervision of the various cemeteries and memorials to the missing, among them one at Valletta, Malta, to missing airmen. Economy favoured large cemeteries, but Worthington insisted that sites should be located close to the battlefields and given their familiar names. They extend from Alexandria to Tunisia. Worthington adopted simple means of expression with low buildings, occasionally shallow-domed, screen walls, and pergolas. The largest cemetery is at El Alamein, where there are more than 7000 graves. The architectural design relies on stark, simple geometry. One of the most attractive cemeteries is Knightsbridge, close to the Egyptian border, where the sloping site is terraced and the headstones follow the stepped formation. 
Worthington's major rebuilding commission was the inns of court, London, where the intricate and historic area occupied by the Middle and Inner temples had been so heavily devastated that not only repair but reconstruction was required. This work was shared with Sir Edward Maufe and T. W. Sutcliffe. Some of the repairs and remodellings are historic reconstructions, but the larger replacements reflect the styles of their respective designers. Their outstanding achievement was the retention and re-creation of an intimate historic environment. More personal to Worthington was his work at Manchester Cathedral, where he succeeded Percy as architect in 1938. He was called out early on 23 December 1940 after a heavy air raid. The north-east corner had been demolished and the blast had left the famous choir stalls of 'c'.1510 precariously balanced against each other across the chancel. Worthington immediately organized a team of skilled craftsmen to secure the stalls and collect the oak fragments, relating them where possible to individual stalls. In their repaired state the war damage is almost indiscernible. The repair of the general fabric was not completed until 1955, and Worthington and his wife visited the site daily when in Manchester. 
Worthington served as vice-president of the RIBA in 1943-5 and was a member of the Royal Fine Arts Commission from 1945 to 1950. He received a knighthood in 1949, but the honour he prized above all was his membership of the Royal Academy, where he was elected an associate in 1945 and an Academician in 1955. In his later years he was regarded as representative of the pre-war establishment with outmoded architectural ideas, but in practice he showed a flexible awareness of contemporary design. It is evident in the development plan he prepared in 1951 for Manchester College of Science and Technology which was adopted and has been largely realized. 
Tall and broad, with a colourful personality, Worthington was a conspicuous figure. He was open, direct, businesslike, quick to respond but unpretentious. The family home at Alderley Edge was modest, architecturally informal, comfortable, and quietly reflective of a lifelong interest in the arts. Worthington died at Manchester Royal Infirmary on 26 July 1963 and was cremated. He is commemorated in the chapel of the Manchester regiment in Manchester Cathedral, where the east window was donated by his friends from the regiment, and a plaque records his devoted service to the cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 37030


Worthington family (per. 1849-1963), architects, came to prominence with Thomas Worthington (1826-1909), who was born on 11 April 1826 at Crescent Parade, Salford, Lancashire, the fourth of six sons of Thomas Worthington (1779-1842), a merchant of Manchester, and his second wife, Susanna (1792-1869), the daughter of Samuel Barton, a tallow chandler of Hackney. Thomas's twin sister died in infancy and a son of his father by a previous marriage died in 1827. The family were Unitarians and members of the historic Cross Street Chapel, Manchester. Thomas Worthington senior owned a warehouse in High Street, Manchester, then the spine of the city's cotton trade. His death in 1842 left the family impoverished, but Susanna owned property and maintained the family in a smaller house in Cheetham Hill, Manchester. Thomas was educated at the Unitarian school of Dr John R. Beard in Higher Broughton, Salford. At the age of fourteen he was articled for seven years to Henry Bowman and began to 'grind at the drill and routine of an Architect's training' (T. Worthington, 'Memories', 10). The Gothic style championed by A. W. N. Pugin was then at its height, and Bowman, a scholarly architect, published two books of carefully measured and drawn architectural plates: 'Specimens of Ecclesiastical Architecture' (1846) and, with J. S. Crowther, 'Churches of the Middle Ages' (1853). Worthington joined Bowman in 'church hunting' and also assisted in the preparation of plates. In 1844 he won the Royal Society of Arts gold medal for a finely drawn design of a Gothic chancel, and two years later the silver medal essay prize of the Institute of Architects. He was introduced to William Tite, an architect practising on a national scale, who offered him 'a berth'. On completing his articles, Worthington joined Tite's office. For some months he worked from Carlisle on railway projects until a financial crash halted investment and his employment. 
In February 1848 Worthington set out with a Mancunian friend, Henry Darbishire, on a tour of the continent with the aim of seeing Rome and the colourful architecture of northern Italy, then attracting popular attention. Sketching 'en route' (Worthington was a talented watercolour painter), in mid-March they reached Rome, where, apart from a walking tour to Assisi and Perugia, they remained until late May. Worthington then continued alone to Naples and Paestum before returning north to the cities of Tuscany. He arrived home in October with a first-hand knowledge of Italian Gothic and Renaissance architecture which he had recorded in sketchbooks and to which he later referred when in practice. In his memoirs, written fifty years later, Worthington summarized the diary and notes kept during his tour. 
Tite advised Worthington to establish his own practice in Manchester and, after gaining experience of quantity surveying, in 1849 he opened an office in King Street, a prime location in the city. He received commissions for houses in developing residential areas and submitted a design in the competition for a building to house the Great Exhibition of 1851. Though unsuccessful, his entry was noticed by the architectural commissioners and he was appointed secretary to the Manchester local committee for the exhibition; he declined a London appointment, astutely choosing to represent the interests of exhibitors from Lancashire and Yorkshire. 
By 1850 the need to improve the living conditions of the poor was widely recognized. Through his Unitarian inheritance, Worthington actively participated in voluntary societies promoting reform. Foremost was the Manchester Statistical Society, national in the range of its inquiries and the first of its kind in the country. Worthington contributed to its investigations and published two papers in its annual transactions. Housing reform was most conspicuous among his social interests; his first Statistical Society paper was on 'Homes for the poor' ('Transactions', 1860-61), and in 1866, by invitation of Lord Shaftesbury, he lectured on housing to the Social Sciences Association, then meeting in Manchester. His appointment as architect to a charitable body two years later enabled him to realize his ideas. When abroad he had noticed the widespread use of urban tenements, and this and the improved health produced by model housing schemes in London led him to propose multi-storey blocks combining improved facilities with a more humane character. On a congested Salford site he built two four-storey blocks with adequately ventilated dwellings of varied size, each including a scullery, rubbish chute, and WC compartment. Although built economically, and a notable improvement on other contemporary models, Worthington's more generous example was not followed, but in other fields he proved more influential. As architect to a company founded to provide public laundries, baths, and swimming pools in needy areas of Manchester and Salford, between 1855 and 1860 he completed three projects, each meeting different functions and incorporating improvements progressively. These were typologically important and became influential through the technical press. Copies of drawings were purchased for use abroad. 
Less innovative conceptually but of wider significance was Worthington's work on hospital design. From 1858 Florence Nightingale's 'Notes on Hospitals' promoted a vigorous campaign to improve hospital design, mainly by introducing the pavilion principle, which reduced cross-infection by locating airy wards in isolated, cross-ventilated, widely spaced parallel blocks. In Manchester this principle was strongly supported by the Statistical Society, and when in 1862 the building of a new hospital was proposed for the Chorlton Union at Withington, Worthington was entrusted with the design. It contained 480 beds in five three-storey blocks and closely followed the new principles. In 1865 the design was published, and a letter of 23 July 1865 from Miss Nightingale comments that, if the estimated costs were achieved, the hospital would 'set up a model to the whole country' (Pass, 91). Worthington presented a paper on the project to the Statistical Society ('Transactions', 1866-7), and as a pamphlet the design was circulated to all boards of guardians and to centres in Europe and the colonies. Miss Nightingale's forecast was fulfilled and Worthington's reputation was established. 
Worthington's general practice expanded simultaneously with the social projects. In 1862 he was invited to prepare designs for a 'receptacle' in which to house and display a newly commissioned commemorative statue of Prince Albert. His design, a richly decorated Italian Gothic ciborium, received royal approval and preceded G. G. Scott's similar memorial designed for Kensington Gardens, London. Early in 1863 the newly created space was named Albert Square, and the memorial, placed at its centre, became the focal point of the emerging prime civic space of the city. 
A pronounced Italian influence is evident in much of Worthington's architecture. In 1858 he made a second Italian tour concentrating on the Veneto, the inspiration of which is reflected in the handsome memorial hall (which commemorated the deposition of dissenting clergy in 1662), completed in 1866, also in Albert Square. Stylistically, Worthington was a versatile pluralist, equally at ease with the Renaissance palazzo mode as with Venetian Gothic. He also had a flair for English Gothic, which he used in his designs for a number of Unitarian chapels in the Manchester area. A fine, soaring example is Brookfield Unitarian Chapel, Gorton (1871). For his last major commission, Manchester College, Oxford, Worthington looked back to the Perpendicular style he had studied as a pupil. Uncharacteristically, it is ill-suited to its context, but in central Manchester he used the eclectic high Victorian Gothic vocabulary skilfully, and in his police and magistrates' courts in Minshull Street (1868-72) he produced a masterpiece of urban design. 
On 10 April 1863 Worthington had married Elizabeth Ann Scott (1835-1870) of Stourbridge, Worcestershire, and he later built Fieldhead, a house where they lived at Crumpsall, a suburb of north Manchester. Four children, including Percy Scott Worthington ['see below'], were born there, and in 1869 the family moved to Broomfield, Alderley Edge, an attractive house that Worthington had designed in 1847. Elizabeth died shortly after the birth of their fifth child, a son. On 10 October 1873 Worthington married Edith Emma Swanwick (1847-1942), the 26-year-old daughter of a friend. The family increased by six more children, the youngest of whom was Hubert Worthington ['see below']. 
Worthington served as president of the Manchester Society of Architects in 1875, as vice-president of the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) from 1885 to 1889, and as president of the Royal Manchester Institution; in 1881-2 he led the negotiations for the transfer of its fine building and modest art collection to Manchester corporation with the proviso that the corporation would spend $2000 annually for twenty-five years on expanding the art collection. Manchester gained a distinguished art gallery, and the funding laid the foundation of the modern collection. 
From 1895 Worthington largely withdrew from the practice and in 1906 his connection was formally dissolved. His interest in architecture remained undimmed and his son Hubert recalled that when he was an architectural student his father could hardly be stopped from taking a hand in his entries for student competitions. Just over 6 feet tall, he had 'a noble head and figure with his snowy white hair and beard and his fresh complexion' (J. H. Worthington, 8). Thomas Worthington died peacefully at Broomfield on 9 November 1909 and was buried in the graveyard of the Unitarian chapel at Dean Row, Wilmslow, where the family had worshipped. 

Sir Percy Scott Worthington (1864-1939), architect, the eldest son of Thomas and Elizabeth Worthington, was born on 31 January 1864 at Green Bank, Bennett Road (then described as 'Polygon'), Crumpsall. In 1878 he went to Clifton College, Bristol, where he proved himself to be a good sportsman and scholar. He entered Corpus Christi College, Oxford, in 1883 to read classics, and graduated in 1887. Following architectural studies under his father, he spent a period in the office of John McVicar Anderson in London; he also attended the Royal Academy Schools and University College, London, where he was awarded the Donaldson medal. A sketching tour through the Balkans to Athens and Istanbul followed. Writing on the construction of five famous domes, in 1889 he won the silver medal essay prize of the Royal Institute of British Architects, and in 1890 he qualified as an architect by examination. In 1880 Thomas Worthington had made his chief assistant John Elgood a partner in his firm, which was then styled Worthington and Elgood. In 1891 Percy Worthington became a partner, and following Elgood's death in 1893 the firm became Thomas Worthington & Son. On 3 July 1895 at the Presbyterian meeting-house, Hale, Altrincham, Cheshire, Percy Worthington married Lucy Juliet (1866-1956), the daughter of Charles Henry Wolff. They lived modestly, first in a converted cottage at Styal, Wilmslow, and from 1922 at Gorsey Brow, Mobberley, a house he designed. They had one son, Thomas Shirley Scott Worthington (1900-1981), who became a partner in the practice in 1945, and a daughter. 
Percy Worthington shared the interest of his generation in vernacular buildings and the revival of arts and crafts. Good examples of the latter include the richly detailed Ullet Road Unitarian Church, Sefton Park, Liverpool (1896-1902), and the first phase of Ashburne Hall, Fallowfield, Manchester (1909-31), a women's hall of residence. From about 1904 Worthington turned to the current revival of classicism, using its vocabulary with assured inventiveness, as is illustrated in Manchester by the Union Bank, London Road (1910-11), and the office of Liverpool and London Globe Insurance, Albert Square (1915-19), and by many neo-Georgian houses in Cheshire, among which the remodelled Kerfield House, Ollerton (1912), is notable. On some of his major commissions, such as the faculty of arts building, Manchester University (1911-19), and the masonic temple, Bridge Street, Manchester (1923-9), which despite its extremely compact form is surprisingly spacious and grand internally, he embraced full neo-classicism using giant orders and highly formal planning, quietly integrating and exploiting the new technology of steel and reinforced concrete with apparent ease. These two commissions were the principal works cited when Worthington received the RIBA gold medal in 1930. Towards the end of his career he worked in a quieter form of classicism, best seen in Manchester grammar school (1928-31), produced in collaboration with Francis Jones (1864-1975). 
In a professional life of almost fifty years Worthington was responsible for more than a hundred projects -- domestic, educational, ecclesiastical, and medical -- and won many of his major commissions in competition. He maintained a consistently high standard of design and craftsmanship, and his work on hospitals was described by his obituarist and confrere W. G. Newton as pioneering. From 1919 his half-brother Hubert was active in the practice, but it appears that generally each was responsible for his own projects. 
In 1919 Manchester University conferred the degree of doctor of letters upon Worthington and in 1935 he was knighted. Like his father, he had given generous support to many of Manchester's institutions, and in 1903-4 he had been instrumental in the creation of a school of architecture in the university. He served on the Royal Fine Arts Commission and was vice-president of the RIBA. Percy Worthington died at his home on 15 July 1939 and was cremated three days later. There is a memorial to him in Mobberley churchyard. He was described by Newton as modest, unhurried, meditative, and possessed of 'a critical judgement, perhaps over-acute, and at all times an obstinacy not to be satisfied with anything less than the best, as he saw it' ('DNB'). 

Sir (John) Hubert Worthington (1886-1963), architect, the youngest son of Thomas Worthington and his second wife, Edith, was born on 4 July 1886 at Chorley, Alderley Edge, Cheshire. He was educated at Sedbergh School (1900-05) and then at the school of architecture, Manchester University. During this period he visited Rome and returned full of enthusiasm for the Italian Renaissance, especially the work of Peruzzi. He was also inspired by the work and personality of Edward Lutyens and, after being articled to his half-brother Percy, from 1912 he spent two years in Lutyens's office. During the First World War, when a captain in the Manchester regiment, Worthington was severely wounded on 1 July 1916 in the offensive on the Somme, but he survived overnight in a shell hole and was rescued the following day. His subsequent army duties were educational, but the Manchester regiment remained a part of his life. He was mentioned in dispatches. 
Worthington returned to architectural practice in 1919, when he joined Percy in the family firm. Twenty-two years his senior, Percy Worthington was then engaged on his major works. Hubert proposed opening a London office and was keen to extend the firm's patronage, but his early commissions were small and in the north. In 1923 he was appointed professor at the Royal College of Art, London, a post he held for five years. In addition to his enthusiasm for the Italian Renaissance and the work of Lutyens, he had as his architectural bible Geoffrey Scott's 'The Architecture of Humanism' (1914). Early commissions included the war memorial cloister at Sedbergh (1922-4) and the dining-hall and staff wing at Rossall School (1926-8), both Renaissance-inspired designs. The arcaded cloister at Sedbergh is cut into a hillside and supports a terrace facing the grandeur of a Pennine landscape. In contrast, the building at Rossall is enclosed. The large, expressive dining-hall and flanking clock tower are reminiscent of an Italian basilica and campanile. The studied quiet of Sedbergh and the exuberance of Rossall are equally characteristic of Worthington's personality. Simultaneously he carried out many smaller schemes in the Greater Manchester area; particularly notable are his gateway and lodge to Ashburne Hall ('c'.1926), where the handsome set of gates, a 'tour de force' of wrought ironwork, provides a fine flourish to the setting. 
In 1929 Worthington was appointed Slade lecturer in architecture at Oxford University, and four years later he designed a new wing to the university's Radcliffe Science Library (1933-4), the first of many commissions he executed for the university and its colleges. Most were for new buildings, such as the forestry and botany building, but he also carried out internal restoration and refurbishment of the Radcliffe Camera in 1939 and the Bodleian Library in 1955. As a designer Worthington aimed to create a personal style based largely on traditional building. Probably Lutyens was the role model, but Sir Herbert Baker's Rhodes House in Oxford provided a precedent in the modern use of squared limestone rubble in small blocks with ashlar dressings. Worthington adapted this mode for almost all his Oxford commissions and combined it with idiosyncratically detailed door casings and window heads. His buildings have weathered handsomely, but the mannerisms have detracted from his reputation. His library interiors are notably successful, the most distinctive being that at New College (1939). Notable exceptions to the usual pattern of his Oxford designs are the neo-Georgian Lincoln House in Turl Street (1939) and the dolphin gate to Trinity College (1947-8) on St Giles'. 
On 20 October 1928 Worthington married, at Holy Trinity Church, Sloane Street, Chelsea, (Sophie) Joan ('b'. 1905), the daughter of Sidney Marshall Banham, a physician; they had three children. Following Percy Worthington's death in 1939 Hubert became the principal of the firm, and in 1941 he was joined in the practice by his wife. Though unqualified professionally, she had studied architecture at the Royal College of Art during his professorship. A gifted draughtswoman, one of her roles was to prepare exhibition drawings. The Second World War reduced the range of the practice but brought industrial work and the care of damaged historic buildings, and in 1943 Worthington was appointed by the Imperial War Graves Commission as principal architect for Egypt and north Africa. The work, which lasted until the 1950s, included the selection of sites and the design and supervision of the various cemeteries and memorials to the missing, among them one at Valletta, Malta, to missing airmen. Economy favoured large cemeteries, but Worthington insisted that sites should be located close to the battlefields and given their familiar names. They extend from Alexandria to Tunisia. Worthington adopted simple means of expression with low buildings, occasionally shallow-domed, screen walls, and pergolas. The largest cemetery is at El Alamein, where there are more than 7000 graves. The architectural design relies on stark, simple geometry. One of the most attractive cemeteries is Knightsbridge, close to the Egyptian border, where the sloping site is terraced and the headstones follow the stepped formation. 
Worthington's major rebuilding commission was the inns of court, London, where the intricate and historic area occupied by the Middle and Inner temples had been so heavily devastated that not only repair but reconstruction was required. This work was shared with Sir Edward Maufe and T. W. Sutcliffe. Some of the repairs and remodellings are historic reconstructions, but the larger replacements reflect the styles of their respective designers. Their outstanding achievement was the retention and re-creation of an intimate historic environment. More personal to Worthington was his work at Manchester Cathedral, where he succeeded Percy as architect in 1938. He was called out early on 23 December 1940 after a heavy air raid. The north-east corner had been demolished and the blast had left the famous choir stalls of 'c'.1510 precariously balanced against each other across the chancel. Worthington immediately organized a team of skilled craftsmen to secure the stalls and collect the oak fragments, relating them where possible to individual stalls. In their repaired state the war damage is almost indiscernible. The repair of the general fabric was not completed until 1955, and Worthington and his wife visited the site daily when in Manchester. 
Worthington served as vice-president of the RIBA in 1943-5 and was a member of the Royal Fine Arts Commission from 1945 to 1950. He received a knighthood in 1949, but the honour he prized above all was his membership of the Royal Academy, where he was elected an associate in 1945 and an Academician in 1955. In his later years he was regarded as representative of the pre-war establishment with outmoded architectural ideas, but in practice he showed a flexible awareness of contemporary design. It is evident in the development plan he prepared in 1951 for Manchester College of Science and Technology which was adopted and has been largely realized. 
Tall and broad, with a colourful personality, Worthington was a conspicuous figure. He was open, direct, businesslike, quick to respond but unpretentious. The family home at Alderley Edge was modest, architecturally informal, comfortable, and quietly reflective of a lifelong interest in the arts. Worthington died at Manchester Royal Infirmary on 26 July 1963 and was cremated. He is commemorated in the chapel of the Manchester regiment in Manchester Cathedral, where the east window was donated by his friends from the regiment, and a plaque records his devoted service to the cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 37031


Wrench, Sir (John) Evelyn Leslie (1882-1966), promoter of the British empire and author, was born at Brookeborough, co. Fermanagh, Ireland, on 29 October 1882, the younger son of Frederick Stringer Wrench (1849-1926) of Killacoona, co. Dublin, an Irish land commissioner, and his wife, Charlotte Mary (died 1935), daughter of Sir Alan Edward Bellingham, third baronet, of Castle Bellingham, co. Louth. His older brother, F. A. C. Wrench, a sub-lieutenant in the Central India horse, died of malaria in 1903. He had two sisters, Mary and Winifride. 
Wrench was educated at Summer Fields School, Oxford (1893-6), and at Eton College (1896-9), where he excelled at modern languages but fell behind in other subjects. His schooling was frequently interrupted by injury or ill health, and after one such episode, in March 1899, his parents withdrew him from Eton in order to allow him to travel on the continent. Discarding an earlier vocation to become a missionary, Wrench determined on a diplomatic career, and, after travelling through Russia and Turkey with his family, he spent eight months in Germany perfecting his knowledge of the German language. While there, however, he hit upon the idea of emulating the German production of picture postcards. On his return to England at the age of seventeen he founded the 'Wrench Series'. Old Etonian contacts were useful in obtaining permission to set up stalls at royal and public buildings, but the success of Wrench's business owed a great deal to his own skills as a salesman and organizer. At one point Wrench was employing 100 staff and had a turnover in excess of $5000 a month. Wrench himself was catapulted into the public eye as a fine example of a young British entrepreneur. Over-rapid expansion proved his undoing, however, as too much capital was locked up in stands and stock. The banks foreclosed early in 1904, and Wrench was forced to sell his business for a nominal amount. Wrench's failure was a personal blow, but it was one from which he was able to learn. Thereafter, his enthusiasm was always tempered by perseverance and a certain stoicism. 
One of those who had been impressed by Wrench's entrepreneurial abilities was Alfred Harmsworth, Lord Northcliffe. In July 1904 he invited Wrench to join his staff as a private secretary. Wrench agreed, and for the next eight years he acted as Northcliffe's assistant and troubleshooter, serving variously as editor of the overseas edition of the 'Daily Mail', editor of the 'Weekly Dispatch', managing director of the Paris 'Daily Mail', and export and sales manager of the Amalgamated Press. 
As a young student in Germany in 1900 Wrench had been much affected by the continental reaction to Britain's difficulties during the South African War. His imperial enthusiasm was reawakened during a visit to Canada in 1906, when he stayed with Lord Grey, who showed him Cecil Rhodes's political will and testament. This kindled in Wrench the idea of an 'empire crusade', modelled on the German Navy League, to harness support for the empire in Britain and its overseas dominions. Wrench's sense of mission was strengthened during the 1909 Imperial Press Conference, and in 1910, with Northcliffe's encouragement, he launched the Overseas Club with an article in the 'Daily Mail'. Wrench at first combined the organization of the club with newspaper work, but he soon found that he had to fight the impression that it was merely a publicity stunt for the overseas 'Daily Mail'. Turning down Northcliffe's offer to make him editor-in-chief of periodicals and a director of the Amalgamated Press, Wrench resigned his newspaper posts in 1912 in order to devote himself fully to his imperial mission. 
The Overseas Club (renamed the Overseas League following its amalgamation with the Patriotic League of Britons Overseas in 1918) enjoyed a rapid success. Wrench described it as 'a kind of 'Grown-up Boy Scouts'' (Wrench, 'Uphill', 266). Branches of the club -- many of them founded by Wrench during an empire tour in 1912-13 -- were regularly supplied with speakers and suggestions as to activities by the central office, and, from 1915, with the journal 'Overseas', edited by Wrench. During the First World War the club raised more than $1 million towards providing tobacco and other 'comforts' for the troops. 
Wrench joined the Royal Flying Corps as a second lieutenant on 23 March 1917 and was immediately posted to Scotland to oversee recruiting work. During this time he was involved in attempts to found an Irish Unity League, to promote the idea of a united Ireland within the British empire. A brief visit to Ireland soon convinced him that the scheme was not worth pursuing. In June 1917 he joined the staff of the Air Board, and in December he was promoted major and appointed principal private secretary to the air minister, Lord Rothermere. Following the latter's resignation in April 1918 Wrench joined the Ministry of Information, where he was given overall control of the British empire section, reporting directly to Sir Roderick Jones and Lord Beaverbrook. He was created CMG for his war services in 1917. 
During the war Wrench conceived the idea of a new organization to promote friendship and co-operation between the British empire and the United States, which he saw as vital to the stability of the post-war international order. With the help of Walter Hines Page, the American ambassador, and Sir George Perley, the Canadian high commissioner, he launched the English-Speaking Union at a dinner in London on 28 June 1918, presided over by Lord Balfour. Like the Overseas Club, the English-Speaking Union prospered rapidly, promoting exchanges, travelling fellowships, lectures, and social events, and from January 1919 publishing the journal 'Landmark', again edited by Wrench. Absorbing the Atlantic Union (founded by Sir Walter Besant in 1897) in February 1919, the English-Speaking Union attracted members from throughout Britain and the self-governing dominions, and Wrench was closely involved in setting up a sister society, the English-Speaking Union of the United States, with William H. Taft as its first president, in May 1920. 
Throughout the inter-war years Wrench devoted much of his time to the affairs of the Overseas League and the English-Speaking Union. In addition, he became a contributor to 'The Spectator' in 1922, joined the board the following year, bought a controlling interest from St Loe Strachey in 1925, and served as editor from 1925 to 1932. He later sold his controlling interest to Ian Gilmour, but he remained chairman of the board for the rest of his life. For his various public services Wrench was knighted in 1932. 
In 1929 Wrench founded a third society, the All Peoples Association, with the aim of promoting international amity in general and Anglo-German understanding in particular. The rise of Nazism made the work of the association increasingly difficult, and Wrench found himself (unfairly) branded as a pro-Nazi. In 1936 he reluctantly decided to close the association. The publication of his book 'I Loved Germany' in 1940 -- attempting to distinguish between Nazism and the traditional characteristics of the German people -- was widely criticized by contemporaries. 
On 18 May 1937 Wrench married his first cousin, Hylda Henrietta (1879-1955), daughter of Sir Victor Alexander Brooke, third baronet, sister of Sir Alan Brooke (later Viscount Alanbrooke), and widow of Sir Frederick Des Voeux, seventh baronet. Hylda was an enthusiastic supporter of Wrench's many causes, serving as chairwoman of the Overseas League's Soldiers and Sailors Fund from 1914 to 1918 (receiving the CBE in 1918) and as the league's honorary controller from 1918 to 1940. After their marriage she was an invaluable collaborator as well as companion. Her death was a great blow. They had no children. 
In August 1940 Wrench and his wife set out on a lecture tour of Canada, the United States, New Zealand, and Australia, putting the case for a vigorous war effort. Returning via Singapore, they were stranded in India, where they stayed until April 1944. While there, they busied themselves organizing social functions and welfare work for American servicemen and civilians. In May 1942 the viceroy, Lord Linlithgow, appointed Wrench American relations officer with the government of India. Wrench's main task in this post was to organize meetings for American journalists with representatives of the Muslims, the untouchables, the princely states, and others opposed to Congress policies. He later considered that his efforts had gone a long way towards moderating the pro-Congress line of the American press. 
After the war Wrench devoted himself increasingly to writing. Particularly noteworthy were his three biographies, 'Francis Yeats-Brown' (1948), 'Geoffrey Dawson and our Times' (1955), and 'Alfred, Lord Milner: the Man of No Illusions' (1958). All three were based on personal acquaintance as well as access to the private papers of his subjects. 
In 1958 Wrench was involved in the foundation of yet another society, the Anglo-Kin Society, which aimed to encourage genealogical and topographical research in Britain for the benefit of the descendants of British settlers overseas. He was president of the Dickens Fellowship from 1961 to 1964, and was for many years senior trustee of the Cecil Rhodes Memorial Museum Foundation at Bishop's Stortford, Hertfordshire. On the occasion of the Overseas League's golden jubilee in 1960 (when it was given the title Royal) Wrench was advanced to KCMG. His work for Anglo-American understanding was recognized by the award of the Benjamin Franklin medal by the Royal Society of Arts in 1964. He also received honorary degrees from the universities of Bristol and St Andrews. 
Contemporaries remembered Wrench as ascetic-looking, graceful, and charming, with an infectious enthusiasm and boundless energy. He was not an original thinker, but he wrote fluently and engagingly. His main talent was for organizing people. His first loyalty was to the empire, but, like his hero Lord Milner and his friends Lionel Curtis and Philip Kerr (Lord Lothian), he conceived of the empire as a free association of peoples, co-operating to promote self-government and international stability. He was a firm supporter of Indian constitutional reform while editor of 'The Spectator' and, despite his lifelong concern to promote friendship between peoples of British descent, he condemned racism in any form. Again like Curtis and Kerr, he found it easy to transfer his enthusiasm from the idea of imperial unity to that of eventual world unity, whether through federation or some other means. 
Wrench died at his home, the Mill House, Marlow, Buckinghamshire, on 11 November 1966. He was buried at All Saints' Church, Marlow, on 15 November, and a memorial service was held in St Paul's Cathedral on 9 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 37032


Wright, Sir Almroth Edward (1861-1947), medical scientist, was born at Middleton Tyas, near Richmond, Yorkshire, on 10 August 1861, the second son of the Revd Charles Henry Hamilton Wright (1836-1909), an eminent Hebraist and militant protestant, and his wife, Ebba Johanna Dorothea, daughter of Nils Wilhelm Almroth, governor of the royal mint, Stockholm. Sir Charles Theodore Hagberg Wright, librarian to the London Library, was a younger brother. Wright was educated privately by his parents and tutors and then at the Royal Academical Institution, Belfast. At the age of seventeen he entered Trinity College, Dublin, and took his degree in modern literature in 1882, and his medical degree a year later. With travelling scholarships he spent a year in Germany studying under J. F. Cohnheim, C. Weigert, and C. F. W. Ludwig, three of the leading figures of the day in pathology and physiological chemistry. On his return to London he read law for a time and later took a clerkship at the Admiralty, which he said allowed him more than enough time to spend on medical research at the Brown Institution. In 1887 he moved to his first full-time post, as temporary demonstrator of pathology at Cambridge. He then moved to Sydney for two years and returned to England, via a further term in Germany, to work at the newly opened conjoint laboratories of the two royal colleges. Not every late nineteenth-century medical research scientist followed such a hectic schedule, but almost all had to improvise careers from short-term and often part-time appointments. In 1889 Wright married Jane Georgina Wilson (died 1926), daughter of Robert Mackay Wilson JP, of Coolcarrigan, co. Kildare; they had two sons and one daughter. 
In his first permanent post, that of professor of pathology at the army medical school at Netley, Hampshire, between 1892 and 1902, Wright changed the curriculum from its traditional emphasis on morbid anatomy towards the new areas of patho-physiology, bacteriology, and immunology, and, more significantly, he established a highly successful and productive research group. During these years he, and the group that became known as 'Wright's Men', explored many lines of research, but the most notable was the development, testing, and introduction of anti-typhoid inoculation. He also served on the Indian plague commission in 1898-9. Following various disputes with the army authorities, not least their reluctance to adopt his vaccine, Wright left the army medical school in 1902 to take up the appointment of pathologist at St Mary's Hospital, London, where he transformed a small department into one of Britain's leading medical research laboratories and in time an independent research institute. Wright retained his association with St Mary's until 1946. 
During the first decade of the twentieth century, Wright's main work was the development and promotion of his system of vaccine therapy. This novel use for vaccines, which had previously been thought able only to prevent infections, was based on new ideas concerning the operation of the human immune system and complex laboratory methods for preparing vaccines and monitoring their effects. There was a considerable vogue for vaccine therapy in the 1900s which increased the demands for clinical laboratories in hospitals and general practice. Wright's work at this time had a broader significance, for it became the flagship of a project to recast medicine so that the laboratory replaced the clinic as the source and arbiter of medical knowledge. Wright challenged clinicians with his vision of future physicians who were reliant on the laboratory for diagnosis, prognosis, and therapies. Wright's department attracted patients seeking cures for chronic infections, and many of its staff were able to develop large private practices. Medical scientists from around the world came to see the system, and the department attracted support from the Parke Davis Company, who marketed its products. St Mary's made beds available for clinical research, the first such facility in Britain. However, the unalloyed success of vaccine therapy was transient and after 1910 its value was viewed with increasing scepticism, with many clinicians only too pleased to see laboratory medicine damaged and Wright's own professional standing dented. 
However, Wright's interests and work had already moved on. In 1911 he went to South Africa to study pneumonia among the African workers in the Rand goldmines, and after failing with vaccine therapy he resorted to trials with a system of preventive inoculation similar to that developed for typhoid fever. On his return to England, Wright abandoned his large private practice and devoted himself to full-time research. He was appointed director of the bacteriological department of the newly founded Medical Research Committee (later Council) in 1913, but the outbreak of the First World War meant that he never took up the post. Instead he went to France as a temporary colonel in the Army Medical Service and set up a laboratory in the casino at Boulogne, where he worked on new methods to control wound infections. His ideas and methods were once again controversial, not least because he questioned the value of antiseptic surgery and promoted a complex alternative of saline treatments. The value of his methods was severely tested, largely because of the aggressive way in which it was promoted and the polemical exchanges that Wright was drawn into. None the less, he received three awards for his wartime researches -- the Leconte prize of the Paris Academie des Sciences in 1915, the Buchanan gold medal of the Royal Society in 1917, and the first gold medal of the Royal Society of Medicine in 1920. After the war Wright returned to St Mary's and for a further twenty-five years continued to work on the problems of immunization, in particular the changes induced in the blood in response to vaccination by bacterial products. The continuing commercial success of vaccine therapy and Wright's connections were the basis for the conversion of his laboratories in 1930 into an Institute of Pathology and Research, which later became the Wright-Fleming Institute. Throughout the fifty years he was active in medical research, Wright was continually devising new and ingenious techniques. Many of these were described in his work 'Techniques of the Teat and Capillary Glass Tube' (1912). 
Wright's labours were not confined to medical science. The operations of the human mind were never far from his thoughts, and he strove incessantly to build up what he called a system of logic that would lead to truth. The greater part of his writing on this theme survived in manuscript and was published posthumously under the title 'Alethetropic Logic' (1953) under the direction of his grandson Dr G. J. Romanes. Wright also published 'The Unexpurgated Case Against Woman Suffrage' in 1913. The book, which expanded upon his notorious letter to 'The Times' (28 March 1912), argued that women were physically, intellectually, and morally inferior to men, so that to concede them the suffrage would be harmful to the state. It drew a forceful response from Beatrice Webb in the 'New Statesman' (1 Nov 1913). 
Wright was knighted in 1906, and appointed CB in 1915 and KBE in 1919. He was elected FRS in 1906. He became a corresponding member of the Institut de France and was an officer of the order of the crown of Belgium, and a member of the order of St Sava, Serbia. He received the freedom of the city of Belfast in 1912 and was made an honorary fellow of Trinity College, Dublin, in 1931. He received honorary degrees from the universities of Dublin, Edinburgh, Belfast, Leeds, Paris, and Buenos Aires. He died on 30 April 1947 at his home, Southernwood, Farnham Common, Buckinghamshire, where his ashes were later scattered. 
Wright is now principally remembered as the model for the bombastic Sir Colenso Ridgeon in George Bernard Shaw's 'The Doctor's Dilemma' and for his outspoken opposition to women's suffrage. Yet in the early decades of the twentieth century he was perhaps the leading medical scientist of his generation and was even styled as the British Pasteur. However, the verdict on his medical work became very mixed. The development of anti-typhoid inoculation has been widely regarded as a pioneering innovation in the development of preventive vaccines made of killed bacteria, and it undoubtedly saved many lives. Against this, a jaundiced view is now taken of his system of vaccine therapy, his methods of wound treatment, and the ideas on immunity that he elaborated in the 1920s and 1930s. The gap between the trajectory of his early career and his final standing as a medical eccentric should not obscure the fact that 'The Celtic Siren' was a crucial figure in twentieth-century British medicine. 


@@@@@


doc= 37033


Wright, Charles Henry Hamilton (1836-1909), Hebraist and theologian, was born at Dublin on 9 March 1836, the second son of the ten children of Edward Wright, barrister of Floraville, Donnybrook, co. Dublin, and his wife, Charlotte, daughter of Joseph Wright of Beech Hill, Donnybrook. Edward Perceval Wright was his eldest brother. Wright was educated privately, and entered Trinity College, Dublin, on 1 July 1852. As an undergraduate he actively engaged in religious controversy and propaganda for the protestant side, and in 1853 he wrote his first work, 'Coming Events, or, Glimpses of the Future', as well as an anonymous attack on Roman Catholicism, 'The Pope the Antichrist'. He became interested for a time in Celtic philology, publishing 'A Grammar of the Modern Irish Language' (1855), but soon turned to theology and oriental languages, which remained his lifelong interest. In 1856 he won the primate's Hebrew premium, and he graduated BA with a first class in the divinity testimonium examination in 1857. He was awarded the Arabic prize in 1859, and proceeded MA in the same year, BD in 1873, and DD in 1879. He became PhD at Leipzig in 1875. 
Wright was ordained to the curacy of Middleton-Tyas, Yorkshire, in 1859, but though an earnest preacher he was unsuited to ordinary parochial work. On 23 June 1859 he married Ebba Johanna Dorothea, daughter of Professor Nils Wilhelm Almroth, governor of the royal mint in Stockholm. They had at least five sons, including Sir Almroth Edward Wright (1861-1947), pathologist; Charles Theodore Hagberg Wright (1862-1940), librarian; and Eric Blackwood Wright (1860-1940), colonial judge. He was appointed in 1863 to the English chaplaincy at Dresden, where he became acquainted with F. J. Delitzsch and other German biblical scholars and became a member of the German Oriental Society. His trenchant protestantism made him popular with some of the English residents but it offended members of the high-church party, who successfully petitioned A. C. Tait, bishop of London, to appoint an additional chaplain. In 1868 Wright became chaplain of Trinity Church at Boulogne in France, where he served not only British seamen but also German prisoners of the Franco-Prussian War, 1870-71. Thanks to his efforts the English church was repaired. 
After returning to Ireland, Wright served successively as incumbent of St Mary's, Belfast (1874-85), and of Bethesda Church, Dublin (1885-91). In 1891 he accepted the benefice of St John's, Liverpool; he retired in 1898. In 1878 Wright was elected Bampton lecturer; his lectures 'Zechariah and his prophecies' were published in 1879. In Dublin in 1880-81 he delivered the Donellan lectures, entitled 'The book of Ecclesiastes in relation to modern criticism'; these were published in 1883. He was also Grinfield lecturer in Oxford, on the 'Septuagint', in 1893, and also from 1895 to 1897. In addition he acted as examiner in Hebrew for the universities of Oxford, London, Manchester, and Wales. 
One of the last great militant protestants, Wright devoted himself with conspicuous ability to the cause of the Protestant Reformation Society, of which he was clerical superintendent from 1898 to 1907. His prolific writings against Roman Catholicism were published in pamphlet form and also in 'A Protestant Dictionary' (1904), of which he was joint editor. While his abilities were recognized even by his opponents, his personality created barriers. He was never rewarded with a more leisured clerical office and died at his London house, 90 Bolingbroke Grove, Wandsworth Common, on 22 March 1909. 
Wright's numerous biblical works included several Hebrew texts of books of the 'Old Testament', with notes, and some exegetical studies. His theology was mainly conservative, though he could accept an allegorical rather than a critical reading of the text at some points. His biblical works were not widely read. After his death a tablet was erected in St Mary's Church, Dublin, which described him, 'inter alia', as 'a knight of the North Star of Sweden'. 


@@@@@


doc= 37034


Wright, Sir Charles Theodore Hagberg (1862-1940), librarian, was born at Middleton Tyas, near Richmond, Yorkshire, on 17 November 1862, the third of the five sons of Charles Henry Hamilton Wright (1836-1909), an Anglican clergyman and theological scholar, and his wife, Ebba Johanna Dorothea, daughter of Nils Wilhelm Almroth, governor of the royal mint, Stockholm. Sir Almroth Edward Wright, the bacteriologist, was an elder brother. He was educated at the Royal Academical Institution, Belfast, before following in his family tradition at Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated BA (1885), and later proceeded LLB (1888) and LLD (1899). After his first-class degree in Greek and Latin he continued his education abroad, spending in 1888 almost a year in St Petersburg, where he lived in a professorial family and achieved fluency in Russian. Developing an antipathy to the all-apparent oppressiveness of imperial rule, he was discreetly sympathetic to nihilist aspirations. He travelled also in France, Germany, Romania, and his maternal Sweden, acquiring an unusually wide range of linguistic skills. 
In 1890 Wright became an assistant librarian of the National Library of Ireland, and in 1893 he was appointed (from among 253 applicants) secretary and librarian of the London Library, where he continued in office for forty-seven years. The independent subscription library, founded in 1841, had outgrown its converted household premises in St James's Square. Complete rebuilding was urgently necessary, and the library's catalogues were inadequate for its growing stock. Wright had limited professional experience but boundless energy. The freehold buildings were reconstructed from 1896 at a cost of $20,000, and opened in December 1898. Adjoining properties were acquired, providing space for extensions in 1922 and 1934. During his period of office the stock of books grew from 167,000 to 475,000 and the membership from 2293 to 4400. 
Even more importantly, Wright set to work on recataloguing the entire library, working long hours, and by 1903 had produced the large first volume (revised in 1913-14) of the author catalogue. Two supplements followed during his librarianship, with a third (covering the accessions of 1928-50) eventually appearing in 1953. Accompanied by four volumes of subject indexes (1909-55), this thorough, succinct, and consistent set of catalogues met the library's own needs and provided a valuable general reference tool which retains its value as a bibliographical guide. Wright, who also devised the library's unusual but serviceable classification, was from 1905 helped in his cataloguing work by his assistant (and later successor) C. J. Purnell, but the credit for its conception and execution is his alone. The subject catalogue office was adorned by a prominent notice: 'No guessing, no thinking. Accuracy, accuracy, accuracy!' 
Wright was a successful fund-raiser for building projects and for a staff superannuation fund. He was an energetic publicist for the library, which he described in a notable article as 'The soul's dispensary' ('Nineteenth Century', March 1922, and separately reprinted). Autocratic to, but respected by, his staff, he was -- with his black velvet jacket and heavy moustaches -- a familiar figure to members. His reputation grew even in his last years, when his involvement in library administration lessened. He received a knighthood in the new year's honours of 1934. 
Wright's enthusiasm for Russian literature showed itself in the growth of the library's strong collection of foreign literature, and in his frequent essays in literary periodicals. A Tolstoyan who edited two volumes of the master's uncollected stories, he drew on his wide range of British literary contacts to organize (and present) a congratulatory address on Tolstoy's eightieth birthday in 1908. The 1917 revolution elicited Wright's guarded optimism but by the time of his final visit to Russia in 1928 any idealism it had shown had expired. During the First World War Wright had been much involved with the organization of Red Cross libraries for the sick and wounded, and in translation work and lecturing. On 20 February 1919 he married Constance Metcalfe (1864-1949), daughter of Horace Lockwood, of Nunwood, Yorkshire, and widow of Tyrrell Lewis; there were no children. 
Wright held on to the librarianship to be in office for the library's centenary in 1941, but died at 6 Westbourne Street, Lancaster Gate, on 7 March 1940, and was buried at Paddington new cemetery on 11 March following. His wife survived him. Two large albums of his occasional writings, collected by a female admirer, in 1912 and later, are held by the London Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 37035


Wright, Edward Perceval (1834-1910), naturalist, was born on 27 December 1834 at Dublin, the eldest son of Edward Wright, barrister, of Floraville, Donnybrook, and his wife, Charlotte, daughter of Joseph Wright of Beech Hill, Donnybrook. Charles Henry Hamilton Wright was his younger brother. Edward was educated at home, and began to study natural history under Professor George James Allman before he entered Trinity College, Dublin, at the end of 1852. He graduated BA in 1857 and proceeded MA in 1859, taking an MA 'ad eundem' at Oxford. Wright continued his medical studies and graduated MD in 1862; he then visited the medical schools of Berlin, Vienna, and Paris to study ophthalmology. 
Although he wished to practise ophthalmic surgery, Wright spent almost his entire career within the University of Dublin. In 1857 he was appointed curator of the university museum and, the following year, lecturer in zoology, a not very exacting post which he held for ten years. While holding this position Wright simultaneously continued his medical studies and lectured in botany at the medical school of Dr Steevens's Hospital, Dublin. In 1865 and 1866, at the university, he also acted as deputy to the ailing professor of botany, William Henry Harvey (1811-1866). 
By 1866 Wright seems to have abandoned ideas of becoming an ophthalmic surgeon. In 1867 he paid a six-month visit to the Seychelles and, although his collecting apparatus was lost by shipwreck on the way out, he brought back an important collection of plants and animals. He spent the spring of 1868 in Sicily and the autumn of the same year in dredging off the coast of Portugal. In 1869 Wright was appointed professor of botany in the University of Dublin, succeeding Professor Alexander Dickson (1836-1887) who had resigned the chair in 1868 to move to Glasgow. After a little while the university also appointed Wright as keeper of the herbarium. 
Wright was a fluent, thorough, and conscientious teacher. He was 'a man of unspeculative mind' (McDowell and Webb, 242) so, while he devoted most of his energies to the arrangement of the herbarium, he did not use the collections for taxonomic studies. He spent many vacations on the continent of Europe, when evidently he collected specimens for the herbarium, and was lamed for life in a carriage accident in Switzerland. In 1872 he married Emily Shaw, second daughter of Colonel Ponsonby Shaw. The couple had no children. 
Wright was a prolific author in zoology and botany. His principal research lay in marine zoology and an early indication of this was his participation in the meetings of the British Association for the Advancement of Science; at Leeds in 1858, he, in conjunction with Joseph Reay Greene, presented a report on the marine fauna of the south and west coasts of Ireland. 
In 1854, while an undergraduate, Wright founded the quarterly 'Natural History Review' which he edited until 1866. His earliest papers, published in this journal, illustrate his diverse interests; they deal with rare Irish birds, fungi parasitic upon insects, the collecting of molluscs, and a disease of the minnow. In subsequent papers Wright covered topics as varied as native filmy ferns and the flora of the Aran Islands in Galway Bay, Irish sea anemones, sponges, and sea slugs (nudibranchs). With Alexander Henry Haliday (1806-1870), Wright described the troglodyte animals of the Mitchelstown caves, co. Kilkenny, Ireland, where they discovered three blind species including the springtail 'Lipura wrightii'. With Dr Theophil Studer he reported on the corals ('Alcyonaria') of the 'Challenger' expedition. In conjunction with Thomas Henry Huxley, Wright described the fossil Amphibia in the Kilkenny (Jarrow) coal measures. His books included English editions of Figuier's 'Ocean World' (1872) and 'Mammalia' (1875). While pursuing ophthalmological studies, Wright translated from F. C. Donders's 'The Pathogeny of Squint' (1864), and in 1865 published a paper entitled 'A modification of Liebreich's ophthalmoscope'. 
Wright was an energetic supporter of Dublin's scientific societies; he served, at various times, as secretary to the Dublin University Zoological and Botanical Association and to the Royal Geological Society of Ireland. He was a member of the Dublin Microscopical Club, the first president of the Dublin Naturalists' Field Club (1886-7), and, because he took a keen interest in archaeology, president of the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland (1900-02). He became a member of the Royal Irish Academy in 1857, and, having been elected to its council in 1870, was secretary from 1874 to 1877, and from 1883 to 1899, carefully supervising the publications. In 1883 he was awarded the Cunningham gold medal. 
After his wife's death in 1886 Wright moved into rooms in Trinity College, close to the herbarium. Owing to heart disease, he resigned as professor of botany in 1904, but continued with his post as keeper of the herbarium. He died of bronchitis at Trinity College on 2 March 1910, and was buried at Mount Jerome cemetery, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 37036


Wright, Joseph (1855-1930), philologist and dialectologist, was born on 31 October 1855 at Park Hill, Thackley, in the township of Idle, near Bradford, the son of Dufton Wright (1817/18-1866), a woollen cloth weaver and quarryman, and his wife, Sarah Ann Atkinson. His place of birth explained his later whimsical comment: 'I've been an idle man all my life, and shall remain an idle man till I die' (Wright, 1). Nothing, however, could have been further from the truth, for Joseph Wright, largely self-educated, was a man of phenomenal vigour and assiduity. In this he contrasted with his cheerful but shiftless father and took after his energetic mother, who worked hard to bring up four children in the poverty-stricken life of their small one-roomed cottage. For a short period she even had to go with her family into Clayton workhouse, where Joseph, aged five, like Oliver Twist, asked for more bread, and got it -- this being an early indication of his enterprising spirit. 
Sarah Ann, a lifelong Methodist who attended the Primitive Methodist Chapel at Windhill, had a crucial influence on her son. She gave him the example of dignity in the face of hardship, especially after her husband's death in 1866 at forty-eight, and inspired in him a desire to better himself. In later life when he had achieved academic fame she would speak with pride of 'Ahr Jooa' (our Joe), and once, when he was showing her All Souls College at Oxford, she remarked of this fine building: 'Ee, but it 'ould mak a grand Co-op!', thus illustrating how Joseph Wright was always able to keep in touch with his working-class roots in dialect-speaking Yorkshire (Wright, 2). 
Joseph Wright started to bring a little extra income into the family by getting a job at the age of six, working as a donkey-boy at Woodend quarry, Windhill, not far from his home in Thackley. He worked from 7 a.m. until 5 p.m. leading a donkey-cart containing quarrymen's tools, which he took to the smithy to be sharpened or repaired. In the following year, 1862, when he was seven, he managed to get an indoor job at Salt's, the famous mill in the model village built by Titus Salt further along the River Aire at Saltaire. Here the boy worked as a 'doffer' in the spinning department, removing full bobbins and replacing them with empty ones, for which he was soon being paid 3's'. 6died a week. Like other boys of his age he worked as a 'half-timer', attending for a while the school provided by Titus Salt. This was the only formal schooling he ever received, and here he learnt little more than arithmetic, and was not taught to read or write. 
At the age of thirteen Joseph moved to Stephen Wildman's mill at Bingley, where he worked first as a doffer, then as a wool-sorter, earning between $1 and 30's'. a week, the extra wages being vital to his mother after her husband's death. It was at this mill that the turning point came. During the Franco-Prussian War of 1870, when Joseph had to depend on a few literate workmates for news read aloud from the papers, he became determined to learn to read and write. This was accomplished, at the age of fifteen, with his only two books, the 'Bible' and 'The Pilgrim's Progress', and with help from a reasonably educated workmate, Alfred Brook. 
Joseph now started attending night school, first paying 6died a week and avidly reading the fortnightly instalments of 'Cassell's Popular Educator'. At a night school in Windhill, under John Murgatroyd, he embarked on French, followed by German and Latin. At the mechanics' institute in Bradford he studied arithmetic, geometry, and algebra. The first certificate he received was in 1875, signed by Isaac Pitman. He had gained proficiency in shorthand by taking down sermons heard at his mother's Methodist chapel, where he regularly attended morning and evening services. He also attended the Sunday school, where he organized a lending library, and was also in great demand at the popular 'penny-readings', when he recited dialect poems such as those by John Hartley. 
By running his own night school at home, charging local lads 2died a week, Wright supplemented his income: he eventually saved $40, which he spent in 1876 on a journey to Germany during a temporary closure of the mill. He walked all the way from Antwerp to Heidelberg, where at the university he studied German and maths for eleven weeks of a fourteen-week term, at which point his money ran out. On his return to England he managed to secure a post as a teacher at Springfield School, Bradford, and at the same time studied at the Yorkshire College of Science (later Leeds University). In 1879 he became a resident master at the Wesleyan Grove School, Wrexham, went to Roubaix for a while to improve his French, and finally taught at Margate. 
In the spring of 1882, having passed the intermediate exam of a London BA degree, Wright returned to Heidelberg, intending to study mathematics. He was, however, encouraged by Professor Hermann Osthoff, aware of his outstanding gift for languages, to devote all his time to comparative philology. Managing to support himself by teaching mathematics, he obtained a PhD degree three years later with a three-part oral exam and a thesis entitled 'The qualitative and quantitative changes in the Indo-Germanic vowel system in Greek'. His exceptional talent while still a student led Karl Brugmann, a prominent member of the 'Junggrammatiker', to invite him to produce an English translation of his 'Grundriss der vergleichenden Grammatik der indo-germanischen Sprachen', which was published in 1888. So Joseph Wright became part of the late nineteenth-century expansion of historical linguistics, parallel to a similar rapid growth in the physical sciences. 
In 1886 Wright moved to the University of Leipzig, where he studied phonetics, German literature, and Lithuanian. He also worked for Julius Groos, the Heidelberg publisher, supervising the issue of thirty books. In the following year he moved to London, and in 1888 was invited by Professor Max Muller to Oxford, where he was appointed lecturer to the Association for the Higher Education of Women, teaching Gothic, Anglo-Saxon and Old German. He was also appointed deputy lecturer in German at the Taylor Institution, where he prepared primers in Old High German, Middle High German, and Gothic, published by the Clarendon Press, and later became honorary secretary to the institution's curators. That he still remained close to his Yorkshire roots is shown by the publication in 1892, almost entirely in phonetics, of his 'Grammar of the Dialect of Windhill in the West Riding of Yorkshire'. Academic colleagues were said to have at first regarded this as a leg-pull, but he now began to give serious attention to all English dialects, starting the work that was to be his lasting memorial. 
Wright's one ambition was to produce a comprehensive 'English Dialect Dictionary'. The project had already been started by Professor W. W. Skeat on behalf of the English Dialect Society, founded in 1873. When Wright was appointed deputy professor of comparative philology at Oxford in 1891, Skeat was only too pleased to hand over to him the material already accumulated: an estimated million slips of paper, weighing a ton. Wright, having decided that at least a further million slips would be needed, set about organizing more than a thousand helpers in committees in various parts of the country, their task being to collect words and phrases in local dialect. Of particular interest is the committee in Bradford, Yorkshire, where he had appealed for help to a meeting at the technical college in November 1894. When the members of the Bradford committee had completed their work in 1897, having contributed 35,000 items, they decided that, rather than disband, they would form the Yorkshire Dialect Society (now the oldest of its kind in the world). Dr Wright, who became one of the society's first vice-presidents, was especially pleased, as the English Dialect Society had ceased to function during the previous year. 
In 1901 Wright was appointed professor of comparative philology as successor to Max Muller. In the ongoing laborious task of supervising publication of the dictionary he testified to the inspiration and support provided by his wife, Elizabeth Mary (1863/4-1957), daughter of Frederick Simcox Lea. They had first met when she attended his lectures at Oxford. Elizabeth did most of the secretarial work for the dictionary, which included sending out countless letters and 50,000 prospectuses. They celebrated their engagement on the day the first volume appeared, in July 1896, and they married on 6 October. Their attachment was truly romantic and their marriage especially happy in the home built by Joseph at Oxford (subsequently demolished, though the name he gave to the house, Thackley, was preserved in the name of the block of flats on the site). Contemporaries described them as 'the happiest couple in Oxford', but they had nevertheless experienced great sorrow through the loss of both their son and daughter in early childhood. 
The six substantial volumes of the 'English Dialect Dictionary' 'of all dialect words still in use, or known to be in use during the last two hundred years' (preface) were finally published in 1905 -- but at Professor Wright's own expense, as he could find no publisher willing to take the financial risk. The estimated personal cost of $25,000 was as little compared with the monumental task of preparing some 5000 pages containing 100,000 headwords with half a million quotations. No wonder he said of the dictionary that it was 'the one thing I wish to be remembered by'. This also applied to 'The English Dialect Grammar', which he considered an essential philological introduction to the dictionary, published with the final volume in 1905. Although a modern approach would favour a basis of systematic dialect surveys, with etymology for every item, there can be no doubt that Joseph Wright's colossal undertaking will always hold a unique place on the reference shelves. In the words of a Yorkshire Dialect Society resolution welcoming its appearance: 'It is undoubtedly the final 'English Dialect Dictionary', as the materials from which it is composed are fast disappearing' (Halliday, 16). 
Joseph Wright did not rest on the laurels of his lexicography. He continued to give his vigorous and methodical lectures, and to contribute to the life of Oxford, in particular playing a major part in organizing the university's first real school of modern languages, recruiting staff, creating libraries, and doubling the number of language students between 1905 and 1914. He also worked hard for the school of English, serving on the committee and organizing in 1913 one of the first courses for foreign students of English. His great love of clear and thorough teaching was expressed not only in his lectures but in a series of books written especially for students, including a 'Historical German Grammar' (1907), an 'Old English Grammar' (1908), a 'Grammar of the Gothic Language' (1910), and a 'Comparative Grammar of the Greek Language' (1912). He then revised his 'Middle High German Primer' (1917), and published introductory grammars in Old English and Middle English in 1923 and his 'Elementary Historical New English Grammar' in 1924. 
Joseph Wright's status as scholar and pioneer was recognized by his election as a fellow of the British Academy on 25 June 1904, and by the award of honorary degrees from the universities of Durham, Aberdeen, Leeds, Dublin, and Oxford, as well as his honorary membership of the Royal Flemish Academy, the Utrecht Society, the Royal Society of Letters of Lund, and the Modern Language Association of America. His prodigious output continued into old age, when he claimed he could still work fifty or sixty hours a week without feeling tired. It is not surprising that soon after arriving in Oxford a scholar who owed so much to German universities should have gained election to 'the Club': the small group of dons who wanted more prominence for research and the professoriate by comparison with college-based undergraduate teaching. Wright was still forthrightly aligning with this position in his full and detailed evidence to the Asquith commission on Oxford and Cambridge (1919-22), and could have made few friends with his claim that 'far too many of the administrative affairs of the University are in the hands of men whose minds have lost their elasticity' (Bodl. Oxf., Asquith Commission papers, box 1, MS greekLetterGammagreekLetteromicrongreekLettergamma Oxon b 104, fol. 235). His last years were saddened by the university's controversial failure in 1928 to accept his bequest of $10,000 for extending the Taylor Institution. At the age of seventy-four he succumbed to pneumonia, and died at his Oxford home, Thackley, 119 Banbury Road, on 27 February 1930. He was buried at Oxford. 
Those who knew Joseph Wright testified to the personal charm of this bearded, bespectacled, pipe-smoking Yorkshireman, who presided with his wife over regular Sunday tea parties for friends and Oxford students, offering them his 'birthday cake', home-made fruit cake baked every week. In 1925 Sir Michael Sadler described him as 'a good Yorkshireman -- hearty, simple, unaffected, affectionate, vigorous, undismayed, and one of the great scholars of the age' (Gunner, 16). The impressive thing about Joseph Wright was not only that he rose to this scholarly eminence from ragged illiteracy, but that he never allowed academic interests to obscure his origins, and enjoyed nothing better than to be able to use his native Yorkshire speech, which, like all dialects, he regarded as an authentic language, with every right to be taken seriously. 


@@@@@


doc= 37037


Wright, Sir Norman Charles (1900-1970), agricultural and nutritional scientist, was born in Reading on 19 February 1900, the second son of the Revd Francis Henry Wright, registrar of the University of Reading, and his second wife, Agnes Mary Dunkley. He was educated at Christ Church choir school, Oxford. From University College, Reading, he gained a scholarship to Christ Church, Oxford, where he obtained a fourth class in chemistry and physiology in 1922. As a Ministry of Agriculture research scholar at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, he obtained a PhD in 1925. He proceeded to an Oxford DSc in 1937. At both universities he won a college oar, which could be seen on the walls of his homes. From 1924 to 1926 he was a research assistant at the National Institute for Research in Dairying at Shinfield, Reading; the next two years were spent as a Commonwealth Fund fellow in the United States -- first at Cornell University, New York, and later, in the US Department of Agriculture in Washington, DC. 
On his return to Britain in 1928 Wright was appointed physiologist to the newly established Hannah Dairy Research Institute, Ayr, and two years later, at the early age of thirty, became its first director. While at Hannah, in 1928, Wright married Janet Robison Ledingham, eldest daughter of Dr John Rennie of Aberdeen University. They had one daughter, Mary Elizabeth. In 1936-7 Wright advised the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research in India on the development of the Indian beef and dairy industries. In 1945 he was special adviser to the government of Ceylon. In 1944-5 he was a member of the Anglo-American Scientific Mission to the Middle East Supply Centre and in 1946 was British member of the first United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) mission to Greece. In 1947 Wright succeeded Sir Jack C. Drummond as chief scientific adviser to the Ministry of Food; later he became chief scientific adviser (food) of the merged Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, a post which he held until he was invited to become deputy director-general of the FAO, based in Rome, in 1959. 
Wright was a meticulous worker and an excellent chairman. He chaired the Food Standards Committee from 1947 to 1959 and the National Food Survey Committee from 1948 to 1959. In those functions he developed an extensive knowledge of agricultural and food sciences, nutrition, and social and economic sciences. He also chaired or served on many other committees and councils, including the Agricultural Research Council (1950-55) and the Colonial Research Council (1950-54). He was successively chairman, vice-chairman, and a member of the committee for colonial agricultural animal health and forestry research from 1946 to 1959. He was chairman of the FAO programme committee in Rome from 1953 to 1959. 
Wright stayed with the FAO at their headquarters in Rome until 1963 when he returned to London and became for five years secretary of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. He was the first honorary president of the British Dietetic Association (from 1963 to 1969) and addressed the association on food and the future. He became a member of the UN advisory committee on the application of science and technology to development in 1964 and of the council of the British Nutrition Foundation and of the Nestle Foundation in 1967, holding all three appointments until his death. Wright was appointed CB in 1955, knighted in 1963, and received the honorary degree of LLD from the University of Leeds in 1967. 
Wright was wise and kind, with a keen sense of humour. He was severely red-green colour blind and in spite of an apparently strong physique he suffered much from spinal trouble. His chief recreations were travel and photography. Many of his photographs were added to the pictorial archives of the Royal Borough of Kensington. He also enjoyed playing the piano. He died on 16 July 1970 at his home, 65 Addison Road, Kensington, London. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 37038


Wright, Robert Alderson, Baron Wright (1869-1964), judge, was born on 15 October 1869 at South Shields, co. Durham, the son of John Wright, marine superintendent, and his wife, Elizabeth Middleton, daughter of John Carr, of Shields. Little is known about Wright's background, but he lived with his mother until she died. Sources refer to him as being educated privately but it is not known what he did in his late teens and early twenties, although at one point he was a schoolmaster and he probably worked with his father. At the age of twenty-four he went up to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he gained a first class in both parts of the classical tripos in 1895-6 and part two of the moral sciences tripos in 1897. In 1899 he won a prize fellowship at Trinity, which paid him $200 a year for six years and enabled him to be called to the bar in 1900, at the ripe age, for those days, of thirty-one. After the death of his mother Wright married in 1928 Marjory Avis Bullows (died 1980), an accomplished horsewoman and master of the Tedworth hounds. They had no children. 
In understanding Wright there are a number of influences to consider. It is almost certain that he had absorbed a good sense of commercial practice from his father and his early years of work. Second, his pupillage was at the commercial bar and he entered the chambers of Thomas Scrutton who was the leader of the commercial bar, which had been reinvigorated by the establishment of the commercial court (or list) in the 1890s. Although not an easy man, Scrutton was a superb commercial lawyer. He was also, for a practitioner, remarkably thoughtful on the issue of the public role of the courts, and he was concerned about how the law approached social issues. Wright's exposure to such social issues was further enhanced by his appointment as lecturer in industrial law at the newly founded London School of Economics. By the time he reached his thirties, therefore, Wright, in comparison with his peers, had been more exposed to academic law, the interaction of law and social policy, and the role of law in commercial life. 
Despite these advantages -- if such they were -- Wright's practice developed slowly, even by the slow standards of the commercial bar in those days. After ten years at the bar his practice was so modest that he considered becoming a full-time academic. It was, however, a time when Europe was gearing up for war, and suddenly shipping cases boomed. Within one year, Wright's practice went from $300 per annum to $3000 per annum. His career was launched. When war broke out in 1914 he was already forty-five, and so entitled to remain at the bar, rather than enlist. The First World War was especially lucrative for the commercial bar. Wright became an expert in war risk insurance and was in constant demand. By 1917 he had taken silk. 
Wright was no flamboyant advocate at a time when that was thought to be an asset. He was seen as primarily a presenter of facts and arguer of law. If prolix, he was persuasive, and his success grew. In 1925, at the age of fifty-six, he was appointed a judge of the King's Bench Division of the High Court and given the customary knighthood. He might have remained there or joined Scrutton in the Court of Appeal, had it not been for the lord chancellorship of Lord Sankey. Sankey was attempting to raise the quality of the judiciary, and particularly that in the final appeal court, the House of Lords. The late twenties had been a period of the retirement of the high tory law lords Atkinson, Carson, and Sumner, and the Liberal Shaw. Lord Cave (1924-8) and Lord Hailsham (1928-9), the Conservative lord chancellors, began depoliticization. In a remarkable move, Sankey (lord chancellor, 1929-35) completed the professionalization process in 1932 by translating Wright directly from the King's Bench Division to the House of Lords, without the intervening step of the Court of Appeal. Wright remained a lord of appeal in ordinary (a law lord) until 1947, although he agreed to serve as the presiding judge of the Court of Appeal (the master of the rolls) from 1935 to 1937. 
Wright was one of the few significant British appeal judges of the twentieth century. To understand his contribution, however, one has to realize that legal fashions change, and for two decades after his retirement Wright's style of judging and his broad progressive approach to law were out of fashion. At the bar in the fifties and sixties it was said 'cite Wright, but follow Atkin' (the latter being Lord Atkin of Aberdovey). This trend was consolidated by Lord Jowitt (Labour lord chancellor, 1945-51) and by Lord Simonds (Conservative lord chancellor, 1951-4). They used their formalistic approach to law to attempt to downplay the work of Wright. Thus, for many years, Wright lived in the shadow of Atkin although, in the last twenty-five years, with the return of a more progressive and purposive approach to law, the importance of Wright as a remarkable appeal judge has been appreciated. 
In some areas it is true that Wright was overshadowed by Atkin. Wright did not deliver judgments (speeches) as famous as that of Atkin's in 'Donoghue v. Stevenson' (1932). Yet Wright was responsible for providing the system of assessing damages in the new tort of negligence: 'The law cannot take account of everything that follows a wrongful act' ('The Liesbosch v. The Edison', 1933), while at the same time underlining that the new tort was indeed totally separate from contract: 'Now that the forms of action have been abolished and it is recognised that negligence is an independent tort, it is not necessary to consider if the duty is to be based on contract or whether it is based simply on the relationship between the parties. ('Lindsey County Council v. Marshall', 1936)' Wright's greatest contribution in tort, however, reflected his interest in protecting working men. He greatly restructured the nineteenth-century doctrine of common employment, while insisting that employers were under a duty to provide a safe system of work, independent of any liability under the 'Workmen's Compensation Acts': 'What is all important is to adapt the standard of what is negligent to the facts, and to give due regard to the actual conditions under which men work in a factory or mine, at the long hours and the fatigue, to the slackening of attention which naturally comes from constant repetition of the same operation, to the noise and confusion in which the man works, to his preoccupation in what he is actually doing at the cost perhaps of some inattention to his own safety. ('Wilsons and Clyde Coal Company v. English', 1937)' It was, however, in the area of contract and commercial law that, not surprisingly, Wright came into his own. He advanced the position, so alien to the formalists, that it was unreasonable to expect to develop principles of contract which applied to all factual situations ('Luxor (Eastborne) Ltd v. Cooper', 1940). He pioneered a more flexible approach to the interpretation of contract: 'the duty of the court is to construe such documents fairly and broadly, without being too astute or subtle in finding defects' ('Hillas & Co. v. Arcos', 1932). His linking of commercial law and practice covered such areas as misrepresentation ('Spense v. Crawford', 1939) but, perhaps most significantly, the principles of frustration of contract, so essential for a period of international tension and conflict. His approach could not have been more flexible: 'in ascertaining the meaning of the contract and its application to the actual occurrences, the court has to decide not what the parties actually intended, but what as reasonable men they should have intended. The court personifies for this purpose the reasonable man. ('Joseph Constantine SS Line Ltd v. Imperial Smelting Corporation', 1941)' It was this commercial and reasonable approach to contract law that so offended the high priests of formalism in the late forties and fifties.In no area was Wright more underestimated than in public law. Civil libertarians have tended to look down on him because he was in the majority in 'Liversidge v. Anderson' (1941), while Atkin dissented over the suspension of habeas corpus. Wright's explanation, however, was that the Birkett committee (advising the home secretary on cases of detention under the emergency powers) provided a more effective protection than the courts, and he was perhaps right. Certainly his broad approach to statutory interpretation made him a better constitutional lawyer than his peers. In the disastrous decision of the judicial committee of the privy council in 'Attorney-General for Canada v. Attorney-General for Ontario' (1937), where a panel chaired by Lord Atkin struck down the Canadian New Deal, including the federal social security system and the minimum wage, as he later admitted, Wright dissented. (At that time dissents could not be recorded publicly.) The dissent was appropriate; Atkin's decision led to Canada's decision to abandon appeals to London. Wright made it clear that he was of the same mind as Sankey that a constitution had to be treated as a 'living tree', while Atkin's 'watertight compartments' were alien to him. It was no doubt this same innate political sense that led Wright to take the law out of efforts to browbeat unions through the tort of conspiracy in 'Crofter Hand Woven Harris Tweed Co. v. Veitch' (1942). 
Wright's approach to law was complemented by his other public duties. During the 1930s he chaired Lord Sankey's Law Revision Committee. His work signified a new approach to law reform. In 1945 he became chair of the United Nations War Crimes Commission, charged with collecting the material for the Nuremberg trials. In 1946 he was treasurer of the Inner Temple. In 1947 he retired as a law lord, and in 1948 was made GCMG. He returned to his house in the Savernake Forest in Wiltshire, at Durley, where he maintained a rigorous schedule of riding until, at the age of ninety, he was injured in a car accident. He died at his home, Durley House, Burbage, Wiltshire, on 27 June 1964. 


@@@@@


doc= 37039


Wright, Sir Robert Samuel (1839-1904), judge and jurist, born at Litton rectory, Litton, Somerset, on 20 January 1839, was the eldest son of the Revd Henry Edward Wright, rector of Litton, and his wife, a daughter of the Revd Edward Edgell. He was educated at King's School, Bruton, Somerset, before matriculating in 1856 at Balliol College, Oxford, where he was awarded a scholarship in 1857. One of Benjamin Jowett's favourite pupils (and subsequently his close and lifelong friend) he had a brilliant university career. He gained first classes in classical moderations (1859) and in 'literae humaniores' (1860). He won university prizes for his Latin verse (1859), English essay (1861), and historical essay (1862). In 1861 he was Craven scholar. He was a fellow of Oriel from 1861 to 1880 and an honorary fellow there in 1882. The influence of Balliol and Balliol graduates may be detected at almost every stage of Wright's life, and there was a certain appropriateness in death having come to the college's most famous master while staying with his former pupil. 
Wright's sights were set on the law. He became a student of the Inner Temple in London in November 1861 and, after proceeding BCL in 1863, he was called to the bar in June 1865. But he did not immediately abandon the classics: he remained in Oxford until 1865, teaching privately and examining for the university. He edited 'A Golden Treasury of Ancient Greek Poetry' (1866) and, with J. E. L. Shadwell, 'A Golden Treasury of Greek Prose' (1870). During this period he also helped with Colonial Office inquiries into hospitals and lunatic asylums, in 1863-4, and prisons, in 1864-7, and with the Taunton commission's inquiry in 1864-6 into the need for secondary schools in towns without endowed grammar schools. 
Wright's work (and his Balliol connections) led in 1870 to his appointment as secretary to the royal commission on the truck system, whose report (1871, C.326) he had a large hand in writing. It also led to the Colonial Office inviting him to draft a criminal code for Jamaica (1877, C.1893) that might also serve as a model for other colonies. His on-the-spot investigations into evasions of the 1833 'Truck Act' by colliery owners and other employers reinforced his radical instincts (which revealed themselves also in his support for university education for women), making him a strong supporter of the trades union and land nationalization movements, while his code work led him to think hard about the principles underlying the criminal law. His elegant, lucid, and concise essay, 'The Law of Criminal Conspiracies and Agreements' (1873), for a century the classical text, reflects both concerns: it was this branch of the law that was then chiefly being deployed against organized labour. 
Although well-regarded and formally approved, the code -- and its accompanying code of criminal procedure, also drafted by Wright -- was never brought into force in Jamaica. Indeed, despite its status in the 1880s and 1890s as a model code for the colonies, it was brought into force in only four other Caribbean colonies and, across the Atlantic, in the Gold Coast (in 1892). After all the controversy surrounding the contemporary English scheme for codification based on Sir James Fitzjames Stephen's draft code of 1878, it seems to have been thought inadvisable that a colony with so blemished a recent legal history should get too far ahead of the mother country. Yet Wright's code was, in several respects, rather better than Stephen's. It was more detailed, leaving less to 'the common law', providing more definitions (especially of fault terms), and dealing more fully with the general principles governing all the individual offences. It was also more liberal in such matters as murder, attempted suicide, abortion, and sedition, and it gave wider discretion to the jury in cases of insanity. The procedure code included forward-looking provisions for a public prosecutor, for the defendant to be examined by the court, and for majority verdicts by juries, and it gave rights of appeal to both prosecution and defence. 
Wright's attention was next directed, by Earl Cairns and the newly established statute law committee, to English criminal law, but his 'Report on the consolidation [and simplification] of the criminal statutes' ('Parl. papers', 1877-8, HL, 178) was, like the Jamaican codes, lost in the codification debacle. Wright had, meanwhile, been building up a substantial practice, as much advisory as forensic, in London and on the northern circuit, and had attained sufficient standing to conduct the official inquiries into several colliery disasters. Appointment (by Sir Henry James) as junior counsel to the Treasury ('the attorney-general's devil') followed in 1883, and Wright prosecuted in that year's Fenian trials. He also appeared in the Dilke divorce case of 1886. 
An attorney-general's 'devil' himself needs a 'devil's' services. They were initially provided for Wright by H. H. Asquith, the future prime minister (and a Balliol graduate), who remembered Wright's eccentric but regular habits as a bachelor living and working in the Temple, rising early, walking to the Reform Club for his breakfast and his dinner, and, when not in court, spending all day in chambers 'with a tall hat on his head and a briar pipe in his mouth. He was an indefatigable worker and smoker', little interested in social life, though 'fond of country sports, especially shooting' (Asquith, 1.82-3). His interest in the theory of the law continued, and with Sir Frederick Pollock he published 'An Essay on Possession in the Common Law' (1883), 'a composite, not a joint, work', Wright dealing with the concept in the criminal law. Like his essay 'Conspiracies' it remains authoritative. 'An Outline of Local Government and Local Taxation', written with Henry Hobhouse, followed in 1884 and reached an eighth edition in 1937. 
Wright stood for parliament as a Liberal, unsuccessfully, for Norwich in 1884 and for Stepney in 1886. Lord Coleridge, the chief justice, and Mr Justice Bowen (both Balliol graduates), were nevertheless able to persuade the Conservative Lord Chancellor Halsbury to appoint him (on 11 December 1890) a judge in the Queen's Bench Division where there was, they said, 'a great need for a strong man... not only a lawyer, but a man of force of mind and character'. They considered Wright 'probably the ablest man at the Bar, except four or five men at the very head who do not practically count for this place, a scholar, a man of distinction' (Heuston, 44). Their expectations may not have been wholly fulfilled. Wright discomforted counsel by his 'abrupt speech and angular and peppery manner' (Asquith, 1.82-3), to which, as well as great kindness and generosity, Asquith also attested (and 'Vanity Fair', on 27 June 1891, added the charge of 'being as full of superciliousness as a good Radical should be'); however, Wright's summings-up in criminal cases were famously favourable to defendants and his sentences notably lenient. (Poachers of his own game were always proceeded against civilly, in the county court, not criminally.) Yet his reputation as a lawyer is such that his best-known decision, in the case of 'Wilkinson v. Downton' (1897), concerning liability in tort for the consequences of a practical joke that went disastrously, but unforeseeably, wrong, has always been taken to be correct, irreconcilable though it is with any known legal principle. And the House of Lords twice preferred his views to those of the Court of Appeal: in the case of 'Compania de Mocambique v. B.S.A. Co.' (1893) and in the significant case of 'Allen v. Flood' (1898), in which the legality of trade combination was at issue and where he was also in a minority among the Queen's Bench judges. He would have been better suited to the Court of Appeal, but there were few vacancies before his early death. 
Wright married in 1891, only after reaching the bench. His wife, Merriel Mabel Emily Chermside, was the daughter of a clergyman, Richard Seymour Conway Chermside, prebendary of Salisbury, and sister of Herbert Charles Chermside. Of their two sons, one died in infancy; the other, Michael Robert (1901-1976), followed his father to Balliol, and fulfilled a diplomatic career as British ambassador to Norway. Wright had bought a country estate, Headley Park, Hampshire, in the year of his marriage. The home farm at Headley was said to have been run as 'a small republic with [Wright] as permanent president. Seated under a tree, he would invite the opinion of his labourers, and decide upon the course to be pursued in greater or less accordance with the sentiments of the meeting' ('DNB', 1912). On one occasion an employee who was guilty of dishonesty accepted a short term of imprisonment in an outhouse, as an alternative to prosecution. 
Wright's radicalism made him resist knighthood for a long time, but he was finally knighted in 1891. He died on 13 August 1904 after surgery and several months' illness. He had asked that there should be no memorial, and was buried at Headley in a plain coffin which, at his request, was brought into the church in a luggage cart. 


@@@@@


doc= 37040


Wright, (James) Whitaker (1846-1904), speculator, was born in Foregate Street, Stafford, on 9 February 1846, the eldest son in the family of at least four sons and one daughter of James Wright (1815/16-1870), a Methodist New Connexion minister, and his wife, Matilda, 'nee' Whitaker ('b'. 1815/16). A short period of his childhood was spent in Alnwick, Northumberland, and he was said to have spoken with a Northumbrian burr. Aged fifteen he was a printer in Ripon, Yorkshire, where his father was minister. At the age of twenty-one he went to the United States as an assayer, and in the late 1870s participated in the mining boom at Leadville in Colorado before acquiring a mine in New Mexico. Several speculative fortunes were made and lost by him at this time. He next moved east, becoming chairman of the Philadelphia mining exchange and a member of the New York stock exchange. On 10 May 1878 he married, in Philadelphia, Anna Edith Weightman ('b'. 1861/2), with whom he had a son and two daughters. The failure of the Gunnison Iron and Coal Company exposed him to heavy losses, and he returned to England in 1889. 
In the 1890s Wright's fortunes recovered when he established himself as a company promoter specializing in overseas mining ventures. The times were propitious for a man of his experience. He could talk plausibly of mining camps, and understood the vulnerabilities of the speculative investor. He weighed 16 stone, with a massive head and neck, and his solidity inspired confidence. During 1896 he floated Lake View Consols with capital of $250,000, and formed other companies to exploit mines in Western Australia. In 1897 he consolidated his interests in a new combination called the London and Globe Finance Corporation with himself as managing director and the marquess of Dufferin and Ava as chairman. This corporation's promotion work was very profitable: typically, it acquired the Ivanhoe mine at Kalgoorlie from a small colonial company capitalized at $50,000 and refloated it in London with capital of $1 million. In 1897 Wright launched the British America Corporation with capital of $1.5 million to acquire mining interests in British Columbia and the Yukon. This company and London and Globe became jointly interested in floating mining companies, rigging the markets in their shares, and juggling their finances. 
Wright bought for $250,000 the estate of Lea Park near Godalming in Surrey. He installed an observatory, a theatre, a velodrome, a private hospital, and stabling for fifty horses. With a touch of megalomania he constantly devised new effects in architecture and landscaping: hills which obstructed views were levelled, and armies of labourers employed in lake-building. He was fond of billiards, which he played in a saloon constructed of glass beneath the wide sheets of water in his grounds. The drawing-room of his sumptuous London house in Park Lane was a replica of the Cabinet des Rois of Louis XV. He kept a yawl at Cowes with the suggestive name of 'Sybarita'. 'Everything was swagger,' according to 'Blackwood's Magazine', 'the whole thing was a gorgeous vulgarity -- a magnificent burlesque of business.' 
There were many danger signals: the Baker Street and Waterloo Railway, which was one of London and Globe's promotions, consumed $600,000; but speculators in their cupidity were convinced that they could get clear before the inevitable collapse. During 1899 London and Globe made large profits as Lake View shares rose from $9 to $28 following the discovery of a rich patch of ore. When a reaction set in, based on the knowledge that this rich find was exhausted, Wright determined to support the share price. The results were disastrous, and on 28 December 1900 London and Globe announced its insolvency. This disaster bankrupted members of the stock exchange, liquidated many of London and Globe's allied companies, and ruined countless numbers of Wright's infatuated dupes. The subsequent investigations of the official receiver disclosed that Wright's empire had rested on fraudulent accounts and balance sheets concealing deficits. Dividends paid by London and Globe had not been earned, but were provided by money pillaged from Wright's other companies. 
Although there was strong political pressure for Wright's prosecution, it was at the instigation of a creditor that in March 1903 a warrant was issued for his arrest. He had sailed four days earlier for New York, where he was arrested. After resisting extradition for some months by every legal artifice, he returned to England in August. At his trial, beginning on 11 January 1904, prosecuting counsel showed that capital of $5 million had been lost in two years, not a penny of which had reached his shareholders, while additional debts of about $3 million had been accumulated. On 26 January 1904 he was convicted on all counts, and sentenced to the maximum of seven years' penal servitude. Immediately after sentence at the central law courts in London, he went to a consulting room with his solicitor, Sir George Lewis, to whom he handed his watch saying, 'I will not need this where I am going' ('DLB'). He then swallowed cyanide and died within a few minutes. He was buried with pomp in Witley churchyard, near Godalming, on 30 January 1904. 
Wright was survived by his wife and their three children. He was the basis of Mr Ponderevo in the novel 'Tono-Bungay' by H. G. Wells (1909). 


@@@@@


doc= 37041


Wright, William Aldis (1831-1914), literary and biblical scholar, was born at Beccles, Suffolk, on 1 August 1831, the second son of George Wright (1789-1873), Baptist minister there, and his second wife, Elizabeth Higham, sister of Thomas Higham (1795-1844), the engraver. After education at the Northgate House Academy and from 1847 at the Fauconberge Grammar School, Beccles, he was admitted in 1849 to Trinity College, Cambridge, as a sub-sizar, and was nineteenth wrangler in 1854. He taught in a school at Wimbledon in 1855, returned to Cambridge, and, on the removal of the religious tests, graduated BA in 1858 and MA in 1861. 
Wright's first publication was an essay on Herrick in the 'Oxford and Cambridge Magazine' for September 1856. He found regular employment on William Smith's 'Dictionary of the Bible' (1860-63) and made his name as a scholar by his contributions to it, by his 1862 edition of Bacon's 'Essays', and by the part which he played with Henry Bradshaw in the exposure of the falsehoods of Constantine Simonides ('The Guardian', 3 Sept 1862, 26 Jan and 11 Nov 1863). In 1863 he was appointed librarian of Trinity College at Cambridge. His election to a fellowship, delayed by disagreements over his status as a nonconformist, occurred only in 1878. He was senior bursar from June 1870 (when he resigned the librarianship) to December 1895, and vice-master from February 1888 until his death. Although one of the great figures in the university, and frequently a valuable ally for the university library, he took no part latterly in university politics: he neither taught nor lectured. Few undergraduates ventured to speak to him, and even the younger fellows of his college were kept at a distance by the austere precision of his manner. His old-fashioned courtesy made him a genial host, but his circle of chosen friends was small. 
Wright's edition ('Golden Treasury' series) of Bacon's 'Essays' foreshadowed his later work in the accuracy of its text and the concise learning of its notes. He insisted on keeping the old spelling and punctuation, and was the first to point out emphatically that editors of early printed texts must expect variations in different copies of the same issue. He had used ten copies of the text which he reprinted, and found that some of the sheets were in three states, anticipating later editorial methods. He showed that the older punctuation was 'rhetorical and not grammatical' in a memorandum (unpublished), 'On the use of the comma in the annexed book' (that is, the copy of the prayer book annexed to the 'Act of Uniformity' of 1662), which he presented in 1894 to the Oxford and Cambridge university presses. 
In 1863, after the publication of the first volume of the 'Cambridge Shakespeare', Wright succeeded John Glover as joint editor with William George Clark, and brought out the remaining eight volumes from 1863 to 1866. He was solely responsible for the second edition (1891-3), which remains the great monument to his industry and accuracy. However, he was not responsible for its plan. In conversation he admitted the disadvantages of a modernized text and said that an editor who knows his business is better without a colleague. While the 'Cambridge Shakespeare' was in progress he edited with Clark the 'Globe Shakespeare' (1864; rev. 1904); and when it was complete they edited, between 1868 and 1872, 'The Merchant of Venice', 'Richard II', 'Macbeth', and 'Hamlet' in the Clarendon Press series. Thereafter Wright carried on the series alone and added thirteen plays between 1874 ('The Tempest') and 1897 ('1 Henry IV'). Besides presenting a mass of new material he was the first editor to give due attention to the Elizabethan usage of words, and the value of this series has been acknowledged by many later editors. It was in his nature to be silent about poetic beauty and dramatic genius; but learning, accuracy, and common sense combined to make him one of Britain's greatest Shakespearian scholars. 
In 1864 Wright undertook to collaborate with John Earle and Henry Bradshaw on an edition of Chaucer which ultimately became the 'Oxford Chaucer', edited by Walter William Skeat; but he retired in 1870, partly under the pressure of new duties. In 1867 he printed privately 'The Clerk's Tale' from MS Dd. 4.24 in the Cambridge University Library. His other publications during the busy years of his librarianship were an abridgement of the 'Dictionary of the Bible', called the 'Concise Dictionary' (1865); 'The Bible Word-Book', begun by Jonathan Eastwood (1866; 2nd edn 1884); the Clarendon Press edition (1869) of 'Bacon's Advancement of Learning'; and the 'Roxburghe Club' edition (1869) of Guillaume de Deguileville's 'Pilgrimage of the Lyf of the Manhode'. In 1868 he edited with William George Clark and John Eyton Bickersteth Mayor the first number of the 'Journal of Philology', and he continued as its editor until 1913. 
In 1870, when Wright became bursar of his college, he also became secretary to the Old Testament Revision Company. He missed only one of its 794 meetings from June 1870 to May 1885. His work on Smith's 'Dictionary of the Bible' had made him highly proficient in Hebrew, a study which he had begun as a schoolboy and which he continued under the guidance of S. M. Schiller-Szinessy; but he had the rarer qualification of knowing sixteenth-century English. None of the revisers could have had greater respect than he had for the English of Coverdale, and he is understood to have been largely responsible for the conservatism of the revision. (His official papers, showing every stage of the revision, are now in Cambridge University Library.) While engaged on the revision he also edited 'Generydes' for the Early English Text Society (1873-8) and contributed to Smith's 'Dictionary of Christian Antiquities' (1875-80) and 'Dictionary of Christian Biography' (1877-87). In 1887 he completed for the 'Rolls Series' his edition of the 'Metrical Chronicle of Robert of Gloucester', which he had been forced to put aside in 1870. 
From 1889 to 1903 Wright edited, as literary executor, the writings of his friend Edward FitzGerald, with whom he first became acquainted in 1868 as a result of shared interest in dialect. He worked on this project while maintaining, until 1895, his demanding position as bursar, yet he was able also to do an exacting revision of the 'Cambridge Shakespeare' and edit separate plays, as well as a 'Facsimile of the Milton MS. in the Library of Trinity College, Cambridge' (1899). He brought out FitzGerald's 'Letters and Literary Remains' in three volumes in 1889, and published the 'Letters' by themselves, with additions ('Eversley' series) in 1894, the aim of the collection being 'to let FitzGerald tell the story of his own life'. 'Letters to Fanny Kemble' followed in 1895, 'Miscellanies' ('Golden Treasury' series) in 1900, and 'More Letters' in 1901. All were combined in the final edition of FitzGerald's 'Letters and Literary Remains' (7 vols., 1902-3). Wright took care never to come between the author and the reader, but his notes are informative none the less. In all respects he provided an example of how a contemporary ought to be edited. 
Until his first serious illness, two years before his death, Wright had unwearying energy. His work after the age of seventy continued to show the same wide range; in quality it never varied. For Cambridge University Press (of which he was a syndic from 1872 to 1910) he edited 'Milton's Poems with Critical Notes' (1903), the 'English Works of Roger Ascham' (1904), and the Authorized Version of the 'Bible' as printed in the original two issues (5 vols., 1909). In 1905 he brought out the third edition of Bishop Westcott's 'History of the Bible' (undertaken at Westcott's request in 1901) and (with S. A. Hirsch) a 'Commentary on the Book of Job from a Hebrew MS. in the Cambridge University Library'. Then he turned to Anglo-Norman and presented the Roxburghe Club with an edition (1909) of the long-lost Trinity College MS of 'Femina'. For his last work he fittingly chose an edition of six English translations of the 'Psalms' from Tyndale to the Revised Version, and produced his 'Hexaplar English Psalter' in 1911, at the age of eighty. In the same year he contributed to the second Lord Tennyson's 'Tennyson and his Friends' an account of James Spedding. Since 1871 he had been engaged on an edition of Burton's 'Anatomy of Melancholy', and had succeeded in tracing all but a few of the quotations. Before his death he distributed many of his books among the Cambridge libraries. By his will he left $5000 to the University Library and $5000 to the library of his college, as well as a valuable collection of early printed books and over 150 Hebrew manuscripts. 
The amount of Wright's work is the more remarkable considering that he suffered from writer's cramp and had to learn to use his left hand. However, he allowed nothing to interfere with his methodical habits, and he faced all his tasks with an iron will. As an editor he felt it his duty to present his material in such a way that it would speak for itself. He distrusted theories and intuitions, and all the short cuts which cleverness is tempted to adopt. 'Ignorance and conceit', he said, 'are the fruitful parents of conjectural emendation', and he would quote the rabbinical saying, 'Teach thy lips to say 'I do not know''. He never forgot that he was the servant rather than the master of his material, and consistently, throughout a career of over fifty years, was the most impersonal of the great editors. A superficial reader may find his work dry, and may even think of him as a mere scholiast, but all those who are editors have continually found that Wright has taken account of facts which others have failed to see. He received the honorary degrees of LLD at Edinburgh (1879), DCL at Oxford (1886), and LittD at Dublin (1895). His one mistake was over the Squire Papers, forgeries of correspondence by Oliver Cromwell ('The Academy', 11 April and 2 May 1885; 'English Historical Review', April 1886); FitzGerald had believed in their authenticity, and for once Wright's judgement was misled by friendship. Generous in lending his books, in conversation, as in his writings, he might seem to be incapable of any display of sentiment, but the friends who were permitted to get behind his somewhat rigid sincerity found a warm heart and great depth of feeling. He died, unmarried, on 19 May 1914 in the Cambridge rooms he had occupied since 1865, and was buried in St Giles's cemetery in Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 37042


Wright, Sir (William) Charles, second baronet (1876-1950), ironmaster and steelmaker, was born at Legge Lane, Lady Wood, Birmingham, on 13 January 1876, the only son of Sir John Roper Wright (1843-1926), engineer and first baronet, and his first wife, Jane Eliza, daughter of Charles Wilson, a master mechanical engineer of Birmingham. Wright was educated privately and had begun to study for his army entrance examination when, in 1893, he decided to join his father in the steelmaking business of Wright, Butler & Co. Ltd. He at once applied himself zealously to learning the business, passing through all the production departments of the company's works in Glamorgan and Monmouthshire. During this time, in 1898, he married Maud, the daughter of Isaac Butler, one of his father's business associates and JP, of Pant-teg, Monmouthshire. 
In 1902 Wright, Butler & Co. Ltd merged with companies controlled by Alfred Baldwin (1841-1908) to form Baldwins Ltd. By 1903 Wright had become a director of Baldwins, and following the acquisition of the mothballed Port Talbot steelworks in 1906, he became manager of the Port Talbot Steel Company Ltd, where production of steel commenced in January 1907. When Alfred Baldwin died in 1908, Wright's father moved up from managing director to chairman of Baldwins, and Wright took over as managing director. This elevation within the company, and the increased responsibilities he acquired, pushed him into the forefront of the iron and steel industry and the public life of south Wales. He became a JP for Glamorgan and, in 1912, high sheriff of the county. 
Wright also maintained links with the army. In 1900 he had become an honorary captain and, in 1907, lieutenant-colonel commanding the Glamorgan Royal Field (Reserve) Artillery. In 1909 he became honorary colonel and joined the general reserve of officers, continuing in this position until 1931. Despite his military connections, Wright's major contribution during the First World War was not on active duty in the front line, but helping to control iron and steel production. On 22 June 1915 he was appointed to the Ministry of Munitions to supervise the supply and distribution of steel, but he left on 16 February 1916 to undertake military duties, among which was a special mission to Italy in connection with the supply of sheet steel for the Italian army. On 2 January 1917 he returned to the ministry as deputy director and subsequently became controller of iron and steel production on 20 August 1917. For his services during the First World War he was appointed CB in 1918 and KBE in 1920; he was also made an officer of the Legion d'honneur (France) and a knight commander of the order of the Crown of Italy. 
In 1925 Wright succeeded his father as chairman of Baldwins Ltd, and was at the forefront of the rationalization process in south Wales. Most notable was the merger of the heavy steel interests of Baldwins and Guest, Keen and Nettlefolds Ltd in 1930. Wright became chairman and managing director of the new company, the British (Guest Keen Baldwins) Iron and Steel Company Ltd (GKB). His prominent position within the steel industry was reflected in his election as president of the Iron and Steel Institute (1931-3) and as president of the British Iron and Steel Federation (1937-8). He joined the iron and steel control, Ministry of Supply, on its formation in 1939, as deputy controller, and succeeded Sir Andrew Duncan as controller in January 1940. He resigned on account of illness towards the end of 1942, but resumed the post for a few months in 1943, when his successor was likewise indisposed. For his services he was promoted GBE in 1943. 
At the end of that same year Wright resigned as managing director of GKB, subsequently resigning as company chairman in 1947. In part linked to his age and state of health, these decisions were also a consequence of further reorganization of the iron and steel industry in south Wales. As one of the architects of these and earlier changes Wright felt it was time to leave subsequent developments in the hands of younger men. He had played his part in the merger between Baldwins and Richard Thomas & Co. Ltd in 1944-5, to form Richard Thomas and Baldwins Ltd (RTB), and that, on 1 May 1947, between GKB, John Lysaght, RTB, and Llanelly Associated Tinplate Companies, to form the Steel Company of Wales Ltd. Wright ultimately severed his links with the industry on 31 March 1949, resigning as a director of GKB some seventeen months before his death, at his home, Englemere Hill, Ascot, Berkshire, on 14 August 1950 from cancer. Without issue, the baronetcy to which he had succeeded in 1926, on the death of his father, became extinct. 
A tall man with a fine presence, Wright displayed generosity, kindness, and consideration for others; but he was a hard worker and a born leader who expected, and obtained, co-operation from others. A man of action, to whom order and method came naturally, when there was work to be done he tackled it eagerly and gave quick decisions with a sure touch. While his father was acknowledged as an engineer, and is noted for his association with William Siemens in the development of the open-hearth process of steelmaking at the Landore works in south Wales, Wright is best remembered as an organizer. Although he made frequent overseas trips to keep abreast of modern technological developments, his strength was in establishing strong managerial teams, and fostering cordial relationships with key customers and politicians. 


@@@@@


doc= 37043


Wrong, George Mackinnon (1860-1948), historian of Canada, was a descendant of English and Scottish families whose efforts to recreate British rural gentry in the unfavourable environments of Barbados, New York, New Brunswick, or Upper Canada petered out just after his birth, on 25 June 1860, at his grandfather's pioneer farm at Grovesend, Upper Canada, near Lake Erie. His bookish, fanciful father, Gilbert Wrong, his mother, Christian Mackinnon, and their many dependants moved a few miles eastward to Vienna, a village which was dwindling (with the forest industries) but possessed a good grammar school, where Wrong received his early education. He then worked for a time in a bookstore in Toronto, where he also converted from Methodism to evangelical Anglicanism. 
At the age of nineteen Wrong enrolled in theology at the newly incorporated Wycliffe College, a low-church divinity school, and in 1880 in the arts course at University College in Toronto. By 1883 his energies and abilities had enabled him concurrently to complete his studies in divinity and to graduate with first-class honours in mental and moral philosophy. Although he entered holy orders and occasionally thereafter served and preached, he never held a parish but followed his scholarly bent as lecturer in ecclesiastical history and liturgics at Wycliffe and by vacation study in England and on the continent. He was actively involved in charity and social work, serving on the founding committee of the Toronto Mission Union and raising funds for various social Christian projects. In 1886 he married Sophia Hume (died 1931), the daughter of (Dominick) Edward Blake, formerly prime minister of Ontario. 
When Sir Daniel Wilson, president of Toronto University and professor of English literature and history at University College, died in 1892, Wrong applied for the chair, but was made lecturer only. Two years later he became the first professor of history at the University of Toronto. This appointment was attributed by some to nepotism by Wrong's father-in-law, who was chancellor of the university. A professor who made the charge in the press was dismissed, and his removal provoked a 'students' strike' in which W. L. Mackenzie King and Hamar Greenwood took a leading part. This and other university matters were investigated by royal commission in 1895, but Wrong was cleared of the accusation. 
Wrong's chosen role was to prod Canadians into realization and emulation of the new historical scholarship of Germany, Great Britain, and the United States by founding the 'Review of Historical Publications Relating to Canada', which from 1897 to 1919 (and from 1920 as part of the quarterly 'Canadian Historical Review') annually listed or reviewed exactingly every discoverable cogent item and made it unwise to publish uncritical history. Wrong managed to combine extensive study, writing, editorial work, public and academic responsibilities, and social activity in Canada, Great Britain, and the United States, perhaps because he rose daily at 5 a.m. Between 1894 and his retirement in 1927 he secured the recognition of history as a distinct discipline and created a separate department at Toronto, drawing heavily on Oxford for personnel and teaching methods. 
More than any other person of his day, Wrong made English-speaking Canadians aware of sound history, an achievement which was signalized by honours at home and abroad. Shortly after 1900 he and others whom he had influenced directly or indirectly began to furnish good, readable textbooks of British and Canadian history which secured recognition in the primary and secondary schools. Co-operative scholarship provided higher education and serious readers with large series of biographical and historical monographs which incorporated the best available scholarship. Wrong's editorial assistance to the Canadian publisher Robert Glasgow in the 'Chronicles of Canada' (32 vols., 1914-16) laid the foundations for Glasgow's later 'Chronicles of America' (50 vols., 1918-21), to which Wrong contributed 'The Conquest of New France' (1918) and 'Washington and his Comrades in Arms' (1921). In 1905 he played a leading role in founding the Champlain Society, whose admirable editions of original or rare historical materials reflected his editorial hand for at least twenty years. He used his retirement after 1927 for writing some long-planned books until health and eyesight began to fail him about 1940. In particular 'The Rise and Fall of New France' (2 vols., 1928) and 'Canada and the American Revolution' (1935) are very attractive examples of his style. 'A Canadian Manor and its Seigneurs' (1908), a charming product of research into the records of Murray Bay, was reprinted in 1926. 
Wrong's publications were, however, rarely based on archival research, and he was critical of excessive specialization. He was particularly influenced by Lord Acton, from whom he drew the conclusion that, although the historian must be as impartial as possible, it was also his duty to draw moral judgements from the past that could be applied to the present. His studies of Canadian history focused on two major themes. A committed imperialist and one of the founders in 1909 of the Canadian branch of the Round Table, Wrong was concerned to document Canada's significance in the evolution of the Commonwealth. His other fascination was English-French relations in Canada. He drew heavily on Francis Parkman's work, but he did not share Parkman's disdain for the 'ancien regime' in New France. None the less, in retrospect, there is little in Wrong's work that was original. That on French Canada was frequently patronizing and only slightly altered the standard interpretation of New France as an essentially conservative and backward society. As Carl Berger points out, even 'Canada and the American Revolution' -- perhaps Wrong's best-known work -- 'was anachronistic and derivative as a piece of historical scholarship' (Berger, 46). None of it is much read today. 
Wrong's marriage to his first wife provided him with access to the Canadian social elite, and their children formed an unusual Anglo-Canadian group. Margaret Christian (1887-1948) became a leader in African education; Edward Murray (1889-1928) was fellow and tutor of Magdalen College, Oxford; Harold Verschoyle (1891-1916) was killed in action; Humphrey Hume (1894-1954), after teaching history at the University of Toronto, entered the Canadian department of external affairs in 1927 and subsequently held its highest posts at home and abroad; and Agnes Honoria ('b'. 1903) married C. H. A. Armstrong, QC, of Toronto. In 1933, following his first wife's death, Wrong married Elizabeth Burgwynne. She survived him when he died, about midnight, on 28 June 1948 in Toronto. 


@@@@@


doc= 37044


Wroth, Warwick William (1858-1911), numismatist, was born on 24 August 1858 at Clerkenwell, London, the eldest son in the family of four sons and four daughters of Warwick Reed Wroth (1825-1867), vicar from 1854 to his death of St Philip's, Clerkenwell, and author of 'Sermons, Chiefly Mystical' (ed. E. Vaux, 1869). His mother, Warwick Reed's second wife, was Sophia, youngest daughter of Thomas Brooks, of Ealing, Middlesex. 
Wroth was educated at the King's School, Canterbury (1867-76), where he was a king's scholar and where he received a sound classical training. He joined the staff of the British Museum as a second-class assistant in the department of coins and medals on 22 July 1878. He was promoted to first-class assistant on 2 August 1887 and became assistant keeper (deputy to the keeper) on 27 July 1906. Promotion being almost invariably by seniority, Wroth was then in line for the keepership, but according to G. F. Hill he was unwilling to accept the restrictions attached to the post, such as residence in the museum. During his career he mainly devoted his energies to a study of Greek coins, and achieved a high reputation both in the UK and on the continent by his continuation of the catalogues of Greek coins at the museum. 
Wroth's first four volumes were compiled under the supervision of R. S. Poole and dealt with coins of eastern Greece, beginning with those of 'Crete and the Aegean Islands' (1886), and continuing with those of 'Pontus Paphlagonia, Bithynia and the Kingdom of Bosporus' (1889); 'Mysia' (1892); and 'Troas, Aeolis and Lesbos' (1894). His two subsequent volumes, 'Galatia, Cappadocia and Syria' (1899) and 'Parthia' (1903), were produced by Wroth alone. He then worked on Byzantine coinage, producing 'Imperial Byzantine Coins' (2 vols., 1908) and the coins of the 'Vandals, Ostrogoths and Lombards and of the Empires of Thessalonica, Nicaea and Trebizond' (1911). Before his death he returned to Greek coinage, and was preparing to catalogue the coins of Philip II and Alexander III, and the later kings of Macedon and Thrace. He also worked on the Roman, medieval, and English series of coins and the collection of medals, developing a wide general knowledge of the museum's collections. 
Between 1882 and 1907 Wroth also contributed to the 'Journal of Hellenic Studies', the 'Numismatic Chronicle', the 'Athenaeum', and the 'Classical Review'. He co-operated with Barclay Head in 1911 in a new edition of Head's 'Historia Numorum' (1887). Wroth also contributed memoirs of numismatists, medallists, coin engravers, and others to the 'Dictionary of National Biography' from its inception in 1885 until his death. He is said to have had 'a remarkable memory and a genuine artistic taste' (Hill and Allan, 107). While he is now regarded as an extremely competent cataloguer, he is not considered to have been a great scholar. His work tended to attract such contemporary comments as 'exact', 'scientific', and 'orderly'. He is described as 'being of a somewhat retiring disposition' (Hill and Allan, 108) and 'in consequence little known except to those who came into contact with him in his official capacity' (ibid.). He was, however, 'courteous but genial' (ibid.) to museum visitors. His spare time was spent 'extending his acquaintance with old London' (ibid.), on which he was an authority, especially as regards the eighteenth century. He owned a good collection of prints of London. With his brother Arthur Edgar Wroth he published in 1896 'The London Pleasure Gardens of the Eighteenth Century', which embodied many years' research. This was supplemented by a paper on 'Tickets of Vauxhall gardens' ('Numismatic Chronicle', 3rd ser., 1898, 73-92) and by 'Cremorne and the Later London Gardens' (1907). He had a wide knowledge of English literature. He was elected FSA on 7 March 1889 but had little involvement in the affairs of learned societies. 
Wroth did not marry. He died unexpectedly on 24 or 26 September 1911 at Charing Cross Hospital, London, after an operation for peritonitis and was buried on 30 September 1911 after a funeral service at St Andrew's, West Kensington. 


@@@@@


doc= 37045


Wrottesley, Sir Frederic John (1880-1948), judge, was born on 20 March 1880 in Hampstead, London, the third son of the Revd Francis John Wrottesley (1848-1922), then a curate in Hampstead and later vicar of Denstone, Staffordshire, a great-nephew of the first Baron Wrottesley, and his wife, Agnes Mabel Stilwell (died 1917), daughter of Frederic John Freeland. He was a kinsman of George Wrottesley. Educated at Tonbridge School and at Lincoln College, Oxford, where he was a classical scholar, Wrottesley gave to both institutions a wholehearted devotion then and later. He obtained a second class in classical moderations in 1901 and a third in 'literae humaniores' in 1903, and was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1907. He won rapid success in the charmed circle of the parliamentary bar, but his career was interrupted by the First World War when he was commissioned in the Royal Field Artillery, serving in France, attaining the rank of major, and being mentioned in dispatches. On 26 November 1915 he married Marion Cecil (died 1955), daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel William Patterson of the Duke of Cornwall's light infantry; they had no children. 
Wrottesley became a KC in 1926 and in 1930 was made recorder of Wolverhampton. In 1931 he was chairman of the gas legislation committee appointed by the Board of Trade to inquire into the working of the basic price system for gas companies, and in 1936 he conducted an inquiry into the marketing of sugar beet. His experience of the parliamentary bar familiarized him closely with many matters of local government. He was a good friend to the teachers of law and much interested in his subject from the academic angle, and he was no stranger to legal authorship: his works 'The Examination of Witnesses in Court' (1910) and 'Letters to a Young Barrister' (1930) won golden opinions from the profession. 
It was on the bench that Wrottesley's career came to its full maturity. He was appointed a judge of the King's Bench Division and knighted in 1937. Despite his learning and common sense, some doubted whether one who had practised exclusively in the parliamentary bar would acquit himself well when confronted with problems of ordinary criminal and civil law. Such fears were groundless. At the very outset of his judicial career a supreme test awaited him in the shape of a case involving that very difficult piece of legislation, the 'Truck Act' of 1831, and incidentally also a matter connected with the statute of limitation then in force. The case was 'Pratt v. Cook' (1938). His judgment on the point of the operation of the 'Truck Act' was reversed by a divided Court of Appeal which was, however, unanimous in approving his view on the period of limitation. Then in 1940 his entire judgment was restored by the House of Lords. This achievement set the seal on his judicial reputation, and he was ever afterwards regarded as a learned, careful, and just judge -- possessed of that undefinable quality, the true judicial temperament. 
Wrottesley's success on the civil side inspired professional optimism about his success on the criminal side; nor was it disappointed. His lack of previous experience of crime and criminals seemed to constitute no bar to his understanding of the problems involved. He took the trouble to study criminology, together with the history and practice of the prison system, and to get acquainted with those concerned in the daily administration of the multiplicity of matters affecting punishment and probation. By characteristic efforts he acquired a profound knowledge of the ramifications of criminal law itself, and rapidly took his place in the foremost rank of criminal judges. Perhaps the most interesting of his decisions, from a legal point of view, was 'R. v. Jarmain' (1946), where he applied what might be called the doctrine of 'follow through'. It was in a sense an extension of the doctrine of constructive crime, whereby a person who causes the death of another person in the course of committing a crime involving violence is guilty of murder; for here the crime, theft, had been committed after the death. Wrottesley, delivering the judgment of the court of criminal appeal affirming Jarmain's conviction for murder, ruled that a person who uses violent measures in the commission of a crime does so at his own risk, and is guilty of murder even though the death of the victim were caused by inadvertence and were interposed, in point of time, between the attempt at the felony and its ultimate consummation. 
In a leading case which he tried Wrottesley held that evidence of strikingly similar facts could be put before the jury provided that the evidence was more probative than prejudicial -- for example, a multiplicity or series of charges of strikingly similar criminal homosexual acts could be tried together. His ruling was upheld by the Court of Appeal ('R. v. Sims', 1946). 
In 1947 Wrottesley was raised to the Court of Appeal and sworn of the privy council, a promotion which gave rise to widespread satisfaction. But he was destined to enjoy only a short tenure for in 1948 growing ill health forced his resignation. He had, however, occupied it long enough to complete what many would regard as the crowning achievements of his career in the fields of equity and constitutional law, for he was a member of the court which prepared the elaborate judgment in 'Re Diplock' (1948). Trustees of a will had, in obedience to its provisions, distributed the testator's property among charities. This action turned out to have been premature, since one of the next of kin succeeded in convincing the House of Lords that the will did not create a valid charitable bequest. The Court of Appeal in a long and learned judgment held that the next of kin were entitled to recover from the recipients the money thus wrongly paid away. In 'R. v. Chancellor of St. Edmundsbury and Ipswich Diocese' (1948), Wrottesley read the judgment of the court, which laid down that while the King's Bench Division can issue an order for prohibition, it cannot issue an order for 'certiorari' to an ecclesiastical court. 
Wrottesley was a bencher of his inn, master of the Skinners' Company (1940-41), and an honorary fellow of Lincoln College, Oxford, which was always one of the main interests of his life, and which he was always more than ready to help with his wise advice. He was the most prudent of counsellors and the truest of friends. He died on 14 November 1948 at his home, Manor Farm, Newnham, near Basingstoke, Hampshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 37046


Wrottesley, George (1827-1909), army officer and antiquary, born at 5 Powys Place, London, on 15 June 1827, was the third son of John Wrottesley, second Baron Wrottesley (1798-1867), a landowner and astronomer, and Sophia Elizabeth (died 1880), third daughter of Thomas Giffard of Chillington Hall, Staffordshire. He was educated at the Blackheath proprietary school. After entering the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, in 1842, he obtained a commission in the Royal Engineers in 1845. He was ordered almost immediately to Ireland to assist with famine relief work, and in 1847 was transferred to Gibraltar, where he remained until 1849. In 1852 he joined the Ordnance Survey. He took part in the Crimean War, and sailed for the Dardanelles on survey work in January 1854. On the 7th of the same month he had married Margaret Anne, daughter of Sir John Fox Burgoyne. With Sir John, he went on a mission to the Turkish general Omar Pasha. He afterwards became aide-de-camp to General T. B. Tylden, the officer commanding Royal Engineers in Turkey, and in this capacity he accompanied Lord Raglan to Varna. He was engaged at Varna on plans and reports on the Turkish lines of retreat from the Danube, when he was struck down by dysentery and fever, which later caused complete deafness. In October 1854 he was invalided home and promoted to captain. On Sir John Burgoyne's return from the Crimea to the War Office in 1855 as inspector-general of fortifications, Wrottesley was appointed his aide-de-camp, and he stayed with the field marshal, acting continually as his secretary on commissions and confidential adviser until Burgoyne's retirement in 1868. He was secretary of the defence committee of the War Office from 1856 to 1860; secretary of the committee on the influence of rifled artillery on works of defence in 1859; and secretary of the committee on the storage of gun powder in magazines in 1865. In 1863, being then a major, he presided over the committee on army signalling which introduced the use of Morse code. He was made lieutenant-colonel in 1868, and on Burgoyne's retirement took over the command of the engineers at Shorncliffe. In 1872 he commanded at Greenwich, and in 1875 became officer commanding Royal Engineers at Woolwich, before retiring from the army in 1881 with the honorary rank of major-general. 
Wrottesley collected and edited 'The Military Opinions of General Sir J. F. Burgoyne' in 1859 and published 'The Life and Correspondence of Field Marshal Sir J. Burgoyne, Bart.' (2 vols.) in 1873. But his principal literary interest lay in the history of his ancestral county, Staffordshire, and, more especially, in the genealogies of its principal landed families. He was active in the campaign that led to the establishment in 1872 of the William Salt Library at Stafford to house the antiquarian collections of William Salt. In 1879 he founded with Robert William Eyton and others the William Salt Archaeological Society, now the Staffordshire Record Society; its principal aim was 'the editing and printing of original documents relating to the county of Stafford'. Wrottesley was honorary secretary from 1879 until his death. He contributed prolifically to the society's volumes, its 'Collections for a History of Staffordshire'. Five of his contributions, including full-scale histories of the families of Bagot, Giffard, Okeover, and Wrottesley, were republished separately. In his 'Pedigrees from the Plea Rolls' (1905) he reprinted material he had previously published in 'The Genealogist' and 'The Reliquary and Antiquary'. 
Wrottesley was one of the founders of the modern school of genealogy, basing family histories firmly on record evidence, exploding long-held genealogical myths, and using the legal and financial records of central government systematically to explore genealogical and political connections and personal motives unmentioned by narrative sources. John Horace Round, a great admirer and correspondent of Wrottesley, whom he remembered fondly as 'the Nestor of genealogists', said of him in an obituary notice 'no genealogist, perhaps, could claim with better reason that he placed truth foremost'. Wrottesley had, too, that other virtue of the new school, the ability to use family history and political history to illustrate each other. After Wrottesley's first wife died childless on 3 May 1883 he married, on 21 February 1889, Nina Margaret, daughter of John William Philips of Heybridge, Staffordshire. Wrottesley died at his home, 75 Cadogan Gardens, London, on 4 March 1909, and was buried in the Wrottesley vault in Tettenhall church, Staffordshire, on 8 March. His second wife, who survived him, was also childless. 


@@@@@


doc= 37047


Wyld, Henry Cecil Kennedy (1870-1945), philologist and lexicographer, was born in London on 27 March 1870, the only son of Henry Wyld, a commander in the service of the East India Company, and his wife, Louise, daughter of Benjamin Kennedy, a Scottish gentleman living in the county of Fife. His paternal grandfather, James Wyld, was a Fife landowner. 
After a year at Charterhouse School, Wyld was educated privately at Lausanne (1885-8) and then at the universities of Bonn and Heidelberg, and at Corpus Christi College, Oxford. In 1890 he married Grace Muriel (died 1954), daughter of John Proctor, an Irish landowner of Ballina, co. Mayo. They had two sons and two daughters. 
Wyld studied philology, phonetics, and linguistics at Oxford with Henry Sweet and took his BLitt degree in 1899. On Sweet's recommendation he was in the same year appointed independent lecturer in the English language at University College, Liverpool. In 1904 the newly chartered University of Liverpool elected him its first Baines professor of English language and philology. From 1902 to 1910 he also acted as special inspector in the teaching of phonetics in the training colleges of Scotland, for which he wrote 'The Growth of English' (1907). He remained at Liverpool until 1920, active in university administration, and by his teaching, lecturing, and writing became one of the foremost philologists of his generation. Most of his books and articles were written during this period, including his excellent 'Historical Study of the Mother Tongue, an Introduction to Philological Method' (1906) and 'A Short History of English' (1914) which, reissued in a third edition in 1927, enlarged considerably and revised mainly in the light of the researches of himself and his pupils, long retained its value. In 'A History of Modern Colloquial English' (1920; 3rd edn, with six short appendixes, 1936) he developed with obvious personal satisfaction, as well as with remarkable success, the technique, first evolved by his friend Robert Eugen Zachrisson of the University of Uppsala, Sweden, for investigating the chronological problems of the New English period. The book concentrated on phonology, leaving syntax and vocabulary, as he said, to other, later authors (preface, v). 
In 1920 Wyld was elected Merton professor of English language and literature in the University of Oxford, and he held his professorial fellowship at Merton College for the rest of his life. Here he completed his short 'Studies in English Rhymes' (1923), another pioneering book designed mainly for students of literature. In 1932 appeared his excellent one-volume 'Universal Dictionary of the English Language', a dictionary of contemporary usage, both literary and colloquial, which, though it imposed a 'long and laborious' task and sometimes tried his patience, stirred many of his contemporaries to think of him as a 'Johnsonius redivivus'. Its size and comprehensiveness, its methodical arrangement, its unusually full treatment of etymologies, its clear and precise definitions, together with its brief and racy illustrative sentences mostly of his own coining, gave it a lasting value. 
Wyld greatly enjoyed his lecturing at Oxford, and his pupils invariably found his exposition clear and intensely invigorating. Despite bad eyesight he continued his philological researches and added to the number of his learned articles. According to the 'Oxford Companion to the English Language' his 'Universal Dictionary' 'set a pattern followed by A. S. Hornby in the Advanced Learner's Dictionary of Current English' (Christophersen, 1135) in its use of phonetic transcriptions, detailed etymologies and illustrations of modern idiomatic use. 
In 1932 Wyld was awarded the British Academy's Sir Israel Gollancz biennial prize for his contributions to the study of English philology, and the University of Uppsala conferred upon him the honorary degree of PhD. He was also an honorary member of the Modern Language Association and of the Linguistic Society of America. 
Wyld was a tallish, well-built, broad-shouldered man, and in his youth was fond of outdoor pursuits, especially riding and hunting. In later years he was an enthusiastic gardener. His pleasant reverberating voice enhanced his excellent pronunciation of English. His ear was acute: one obituarist reported that 'he had an uncanny way of overhearing what others were saying at a distance, and he detected differences in pronunciation which could not be noted by every listener even after he had pointed them out' (D. N. S.). His easy flow of resounding words, his ready wit, his extensive knowledge of people, affairs, languages, and literatures, and, not least, his forceful personality made him a lively conversationalist and friend. His Johnsonian literary style reflected the man. He died at his home, Alvescot House, Alvescot, Oxfordshire, on 26 January 1945. 


@@@@@


doc= 37048


Wylie, Sir Francis James (1865-1952), university administrator, was born in Bromley, Kent, on 18 October 1865, the second son of Richard Northcote Wylie, businessman, and his wife, Charlotte Greenlaw. The Wylies had had a long connection with Russia. Wylie's father was a member of the bourse in St Petersburg, and his great-uncle, Sir James Wylie, had been physician at the court of the tsar. Wylie himself spent short periods in Russia during childhood, but had no special association with that country in later life. 
Wylie was educated at St Edward's School, Oxford. At the suggestion of his uncle by marriage, Edward Caird (who was then professor of moral philosophy at Glasgow and was later to become master of Balliol), the promising young man went from school to pursue his classical studies at the University of Glasgow, from where he won a Snell exhibition to Balliol. He went up to Oxford in 1884 and soon showed himself a classical scholar of mark. He took a first class in honour moderations in 1886 and in 'literae humaniores' in 1888. He was not, however, the 'mere bookworm' whom Cecil Rhodes deprecated; though of slight build he rowed in the Balliol eight and was elected to Vincent's Club and Leander. Throughout his long life he retained an alert and critical interest in rowing. 
After taking his degree Wylie spent a few months teaching at his old school and then engaged in private tutoring until, after being made a lecturer of the college in 1891, he was elected a fellow of Brasenose in 1892. There he proved himself a successful and assiduous tutor and when he died there still survived a few of his former pupils who remembered with gratitude his lectures on Aristotle's logic. He was junior proctor in 1903-4, a year which was to prove a turning point in his lifework. He cultivated a brisk diversity of interests, not the least of them in military service. It was characteristic of his dominant sense of duty that he was a zealous member of the Oxford University Volunteers. As a company commander in that corps he took part in the official obsequies of Queen Victoria. When, in the later chapter of his life, war broke out in 1914, he was too old for service in the field, but he threw himself with energy into the work of the Oxford University training corps and made a spirited contribution to its courses of instruction. 
The will of Cecil Rhodes was made public in April 1902, and the trustees appointed by it were soon busy making plans for the inauguration of the scholarships. One of the trustees was Lord Rosebery, whom Wylie had come to know as private tutor to his two sons. George Parkin had been appointed organizing secretary to the Rhodes Trust, and in February 1903 Wylie was invited, through Rosebery, to supervise the Oxford side of the system and to assume a general tutelage of the scholars in residence. It was not an easy decision to make. He had an established position in a college to which he was much attached; he was well known in the academic sphere and was about to become a proctor; he was now invited to occupy an office with no academic standing, since the Rhodes trustees were a body outside the university organism, and to assist in launching a scheme which at that time was highly experimental. The project of the Rhodes scholarships was not universally welcomed in Oxford; the university and colleges were far more inbred in 1903 than they subsequently became, and there was considerable scepticism about an influx of colonials, Americans, and Germans, who, it was feared, might lower academic standards, especially in the classics, besides making undue demands on the limited room and resources of colleges. Wylie was under no illusions about the problems which would face him, and it was again a sense of duty which prompted him to accept the trustees' invitation. He had the opportunity, which he was amply to fulfil, of doing a notable service to imperial and Anglo-American relations, and he was never the man to shrink from responsibilities. 
Wylie was soon to receive invaluable aid in his task. On 18 August 1904 he married Kathleen, daughter of Edmond Kelly, an American lawyer in Paris, where much of her girlhood was spent. Wylie had met his future wife when she was a member of Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford. For the next twenty-eight years this was to prove an ideal partnership for developing and influencing Cecil Rhodes's 'great idea' in both its administrative and its personal aspects. Four sons and two daughters were born of the marriage, the eldest son dying in childhood. The fourth son, Shaun, was elected a fellow (mathematics) of Trinity Hall, Cambridge, in 1939. One of the daughters, Vere, married an Australian Rhodes scholar, Lewis Charles Wilcher, who became in 1956 the first warden of Queen Elizabeth House, Oxford. 
The story of the growing-pains and adventurous adolescence of the Rhodes scholarships has been told vividly by Wylie himself in his contribution (pp. 59-125) -- which he wrote almost at the end of his life -- to the volume 'The First Fifty Years of the Rhodes Trust and the Rhodes Scholarships' published by the Rhodes trustees in 1955. To him, probably more than to any other individual, belongs the credit for having woven a fabric which was to become an integral part of the whole Oxford design. There were vicissitudes at first; but Wylie and his wife enjoyed the reward of seeing hundreds of young men from many far countries derive from Oxford what their benefactor had intended for them and acquit themselves with distinction in their later careers. There was none of them who did not acknowledge his debt to the Wylie influence and guidance. 
Responsibilities constantly increased with the expansion of the Rhodes network by additional scholarships which the trustees established in British areas overseas, until the number of Rhodes scholars at Oxford at any one time grew to nearly two hundred, composed about equally of British and American nationals, with a small group of Germans. After twenty-eight years of arduous service, Wylie retired in 1931, but not before he had had the satisfaction of seeing the completion of a permanent memorial to the founder in Oxford, Rhodes House, of which he became the first warden. He was knighted in 1929, on the occasion of the reunion of Rhodes scholars at Oxford when Rhodes House was formally opened, and he was elected an honorary fellow of Brasenose in 1931. 
Retirement, however, was by no means the end of Wylie's services to the Rhodes scholarships. For upwards of another twenty years he kept regular touch with his former charges. His world-wide correspondence with them was indefatigable and his personal memory and knowledge of them throughout the years were remarkable. Of the many Rhodes scholars who revisited Oxford from time to time few failed to make a pilgrimage to the Wylie home near Oxford, where perennial welcome awaited them, their kindred, and their friends. On Boars Hill, with a panorama of the Berkshire downlands spread before him, Wylie's tranquil life and temperament made light of the burden of years. He had always been a man of simple tastes, and he found continual refreshment in the Matthew Arnold country, which he knew intimately, in birds and flowers, in parish work, and in country walks which to the end of his life lost nothing of their zest and vigour. His faculties seemed to be quite unimpaired when, without warning, he died in his sleep at his home, Wootton Ridge, Boars Hill, on 29 October 1952. 
With his wife Wylie made many journeys throughout the English-speaking world on embassies for the Rhodes trustees. Three colleges in the United States -- Union College, Schenectady (1932), Swarthmore College (1933), and Bowdoin College (1933) -- conferred honorary degrees upon him. In 1945 the Rhodes trustees permanently commemorated his name in Oxford by the foundation of a Wylie prize for an essay on some aspect of the relations between the American colonies or the United States and any part of the British empire or Commonwealth. Lady Wylie died in 1969. 
C. K. Allen', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37049


Wyllie, Sir (William Hutt) Curzon (1848-1909), army officer, born at Cheltenham on 5 October 1848, was the third and youngest son of the five children of General Sir William Wyllie (1802-1891) and his wife, Amelia (1806-1891), daughter of Richards Hutt of Appley, Isle of Wight, and niece of Captain John Hutt RN (1746-1794). Both his brothers served in India -- John William Shaw Wyllie (1835-1870) ['see under 'Wyllie, Sir William] and Francis Robert Shaw Wyllie (1837-1907). The latter, born on 4 June 1837, was educated at Cheltenham College (1849-54), the East India Company's college, Haileybury (1856-7), joined the Bombay civil service, became under-secretary to the Bombay government, and died in London in February 1907. 
Educated at Marlborough College (1863-4) and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst (1865-6), Wyllie entered the army in October 1866 as ensign 106th foot (Durham light infantry). He arrived in India in February 1867, was promoted lieutenant in October 1868, joined the Indian staff corps in 1869, and was posted to the 2nd Gurkha regiment (the Sirmoor Rifles, later the 2nd King Edward's Own Gurkhas). In 1870 he was selected for civil and political employment, appointed to the Oudh commission, and served under General Barrow and Sir George Couper. 
Promoted captain in October 1878, in January 1879 Wyllie was transferred to the foreign department, serving successively as cantonment magistrate of Nasirabad, assistant commissioner in Ajmer-Merwara, and assistant to the governor-general's agent in Baluchistan, Sir Robert Groves Sandeman. He went through the Afghan campaign of 1878-80, including the march on Kandahar, with Major-General Sir Robert Phayre, and was mentioned in the viceroy's dispatches. After the war he was military secretary to his brother-in-law, William Patrick Adam, governor of Madras, from December 1880 until Adam's death in the following May, and until November 1881 he was private secretary to William Hudleston (acting governor). 
Wyllie married on 29 December 1881 Katharine Georgiana, second daughter of David Fremantle Carmichael of the Indian Civil Service, then member of the council, Madras; she survived her husband. 
Wyllie had charge of Malhar Rao, the former Maharaja Gaikwar of Baroda, from December 1881 to November 1882. He then became assistant resident at Hyderabad. Subsequently he was assistant commissioner, Ajmer-Merwara, 1883; first assistant in Rajputana, 1884; additional political agent, Kotah, April 1885; boundary settlement officer, Mewar-Marwar border, November 1886; political agent, Kotah, January 1889; officiating commissioner of Ajmer, July 1891; officiating political agent, Jhallawar, in addition to Kotah, 1891-2; resident, western states of Rajputana (Jodhpur), 1892-3; and resident in Mewar (Udaipur), November 1893 to February 1898, when he officiated as resident in Nepal. Later in 1898 he attained one of the highest appointments in the service, that of agent to the governor-general in central India. In May 1900 he was transferred in the same capacity to Rajputana, where he remained for the rest of his service in India. Made CIE in 1881, he was promoted major in October 1886 and lieutenant-colonel in 1892. 
Throughout his long and varied service in the princely states of India, and especially in Rajputana, where seventeen of the most strenuous years of his life were spent, Wyllie gained by his courtesy, charm, and above all by his character and strength of purpose, remarkable influence over the chiefs and officials of the principalities under his administrative charge. In addition Wyllie had the reputation, so dear to Rajputs, of a keen sportsman and a skilful and daring rider, who held as a trophy the blue riband of Indian sportsmen, the Hog-hunters' Ganges cup, which he won in Oudh in April 1875. 
Wyllie's example stimulated those who served under him, and it was owing to his energy and to the confidence in him of the princes and people of Rajputana that the calamity of famine during 1899-1900 was successfully overcome by the relief measures he organized. 
In March 1901 Wyllie came home on being selected by Lord George Hamilton (Conservative secretary of state for India 1895-1903) as his political aide-de-camp. Wyllie's knowledge of India and the Indian princes fitted him for the important and often delicate duties, which included advising the secretary of state on political questions relating to the princely states. Arrangements for the reception of Indian magnates at the British court were in his charge, and heavy work devolved upon him at Edward VII's coronation in 1902. He was appointed KCIE and MVO in 1902 and CVO in June 1907. 
Wyllie's official position brought him into close contact with Indian students in whose welfare he was deeply interested. He also devoted himself to associations and charities for the benefit of Indians. 
While attending, with Lady Wyllie, an entertainment given to Indians by the National Indian Association at the Imperial Institute, South Kensington, London, on the night of Friday 1 July 1909, Wyllie was assassinated, almost under the eyes of his wife, by Madan Lal Dhingra, a Hindu extremist student, whom Wyllie had helped, who suddenly fired at him with a revolver, killing him instantly. Dr Cawas Lalcaca, a Parsi physician of Shanghai, who bravely interposed to save Wyllie, was also mortally wounded. These crimes were precursors of terrorist crimes in India. Dhingra -- a Punjabi London University engineering student and political pupil of the London-based extremist Shyamji Krishnavarma -- was convicted of the double crime at the central criminal court on 23 July, and hanged at Pentonville prison on 17 August. Wyllie was buried at Richmond cemetery, Surrey, on 6 July. 
Wyllie's tragic death was felt as deeply in India as at home. Flags were put at half mast, and public offices were closed throughout Rajputana and central India on reception of the news; and on the day of Wyllie's funeral (in Richmond cemetery) a salute of thirteen guns was fired from the palace fortresses of Rajputana. Viscount Morley, the secretary of state in council, recorded 'his high appreciation of Wyllie's admirable services', and his 'profound sense of the personal loss' sustained by himself and his colleagues 'by the blind, atrocious crime'. He granted a special pension of $500 to Lady Wyllie in recognition of her husband's service and death. Memorial funds were raised in Britain and India. From the British fund a marble tablet erected in the crypt of St Paul's Cathedral was unveiled by Earl Roberts on 19 October 1910, in the presence, among others, of the three successive secretaries of state (Lord George Hamilton and viscounts Midleton and Morley) whom Wyllie had served. The balance, $2551, the Curzon Wyllie memorial fund, was entrusted to the Strangers' Home for Asiatics, Limehouse, on the governing body of which he had served. At Marlborough College there was founded a Curzon Wyllie memorial medal, to be awarded annually to the most efficient member of the officer training corps. In India the Curzon Wyllie central memorial fund committee erected at a cost of $2000 a marble 'aramgarh' (place of rest) in Ajmer, Rajputana, to provide shade, rest, and water for men and animals. Local memorials were also instituted in many of the states of Rajputana and central India. 


@@@@@


doc= 37050


Wyllie, William Lionel (1851-1931), artist and writer, was born at 67 Albany Street, London, on 5 July 1851, the elder son of William Morison Wyllie (1819/20-1895), artist, of London and Wimereux, France, and his wife, Katherine Smythe (died 1872), singer, the daughter of John Henry Benham. Brought up in London and Boulogne, he showed early artistic promise, entering Heatherley's art school in Newman Street at a very young age. In 1866 he went on to the Royal Academy Schools, and won the Turner gold medal at the age of eighteen with 'Dawn after a Storm' in 1869. He first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1868, showing 'Dover Castle and Town'. That love of the sea which was to influence his life and art so strongly soon manifested itself. From an early age, with his half-brother Lionel Percy Smythe and his younger brother Charles William Wyllie, both artists, he indulged a passion for sailing, an enthusiasm which always informed his work. The brothers freely roamed the coast of northern France where Wyllie found subjects for his earliest pictures, 'Blessing the Sea' (1876) being a notable example (Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool). In 1879 Wyllie married Marian Amy ('c'.1860-1937), daughter of Captain William O'Brien Carew of the Indian marine. They had five sons, the second and fourth of whom were killed in the First World War, and two daughters, the elder of whom predeceased her father. 
In the early 1870s Wyllie began working as an illustrator for the 'Graphic' -- a connection which lasted about twenty years -- producing black and white illustrations of topical maritime subjects. In 1883 the Bond Street art dealer Robert Dunthorne showed an interest in Wyllie's work, inaugurating the artist's lifelong association with the firm. In the same year Wyllie began to make his name with more paintings of the recent bombardment of Alexandria, for which he visited Egypt. These were exhibited at the Fine Art Society where he subsequently had a series of one-man exhibitions of his watercolours, a medium in which he was particularly skilled and prolific. During the 1880s Wyllie concentrated increasingly on views of the River Thames, its estuary, and the River Medway, particularly attracted by their more industrial aspects, as exemplified by 'Toil, Glitter, Grime and Wealth on a Flowing Tide', the first of two pictures to be acquired by the Chantrey Bequest (Tate collection). At this time he began making etchings, a process that he combined with dry-point, producing numbers of technically complex plates over a period of nearly fifty years. He was elected a member of the Royal Society of Painter-Etchers and Engravers in 1904, and a member of the Royal Academy in 1907; he was also a member of the Royal Institute of Painters in Water Colours. In 1905 he published a book on J. M. W. Turner, whom he greatly admired and emulated in his work. He also wrote books on perspective and watercolour technique. 
Wyllie spent much time at sea and did a good deal of work for the White Star shipping line. Following his move to a house overlooking the entrance to Portsmouth harbour in 1907 he became more closely involved with the Royal Navy, and it was with renewed energy that he depicted First World War scenes and events, sailing with the fleet by special licence in order to make drawings. In 1919 he spent a month on board HMS 'Revenge' at the time of the armistice. Nevertheless he continued to paint and etch a wide range of subjects until his death, and in his later years his etchings of the busy life of the port of London brought him widespread popularity. Late in life, Wyllie became increasingly interested in British naval history and the subjects it offered. As a founder member of the Society for Nautical Research he campaigned for the restoration of HMS 'Victory' at Portsmouth. He fulfilled his lifelong ambition of painting a panorama (42 ft x 12 ft) of the battle of Trafalgar in Portsmouth Dockyard; it was unveiled by George V in 1930. 
A rapid and prolific worker, Wyllie could make stylish sketches even in a small boat on a choppy sea. The golden-wedding greeting which he prized most was a telegram running: 'The navy loves you -- Acland.' Active, vigorous, brisk, and kindly, he worked and sailed right up to the time of his sudden death at 102 Fellows Road, Primrose Hill, London, on 6 April 1931. He was buried in the churchyard within Portchester Castle. His wife, who shared his passion for sailing, survived him until 1937 having in 1935 published a biography of him entitled 'We Were One'. Their eldest son, Harold, was a marine painter, and a founder member of the Society of Marine Artists. Examples of Wyllie's works may be found in the Guildhall Art Gallery, London, the Tate collection, the National Maritime Museum, Greenwich, and the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool. 


@@@@@


doc= 37051


Wyndham, Sir Charles (1837-1919), actor and theatre manager, the second son of Major Richard Culverwell ('fl'. 'c'.1820-1860) and his wife, Mary Ann, was born on 23 March 1837 at 19 Tithebarn Street, Liverpool, and was baptized on 18 July at St Peter's, Church Street (demolished 1922). The family moved to London when he was a boy. His brother died in infancy. He also had three sisters. His father's first name suggested military rank, but Major Culverwell had no connection with the army: he and his son claimed for him the profession of physician, but he does not appear to have possessed a British medical qualification, and in the directories he was variously described as watchmaker, hotelier, and victualler. The truth is in doubt. 
Charles Culverwell's education, like much of his life, was cosmopolitan. He went to boarding-schools in England, Scotland (where he took part in amateur theatricals at St Andrews), Germany, and France. In Paris he frequented the Comedie-Francaise and the Palais Royal: the acting styles of each inspired his future mastery of high comedy and farce, and the Palais Royal supplied much of his repertory, 'Englished' in adaptation. His father sent him to King's College, London, to read medicine; but the student spent all available time acting at a tiny amateur house near King's Cross and theatre-going in the West End, where first he saw the light comedian Charles James Mathews, whose style of performance was to prove as strong an influence as the Parisians. None the less he became a licentiate in midwifery and MRCS (1857), and, after experience at hospitals in Ireland and Germany, a licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries and MD in the University of Giessen (1859). Uniquely, at Charing Cross Hospital in 1903, he addressed a roomful of medical students in the dual capacity of actor and doctor; but there is no public evidence of his having employed his medical skills after 1865, and by 1883 his name had disappeared from the medical registers. 
The practice of Dr Charles Culverwell, which was set up at 3 Great Marlborough Street, London, failed. It was on 30 November 1860 -- when appearing as Captain Hawksley in an amateur performance of Tom Taylor's 'Still Waters Run Deep' at the Royalty Theatre, Soho -- that he first used the name Wyndham. The choice was apparently random, but was retained as his stage name ever after, and was ratified for all purposes by deed poll on 8 October 1886. As Charles Wyndham (and from 1902 Sir Charles) he worked his peculiar magic upon audiences in North America, Germany, Russia, and the West End of London, beguiling them with a rare and practised skill. He was tall, straight, and slender, with broad shoulders and long legs. In his youth his voice was harsh and inflexible, which for years he tried to conceal by speaking fast. His quickfire delivery and rugged good looks qualified him until middle age for the dashing young hero of Victorian farce. Then, in the final decade of the nineteenth century, when he switched to the more measured elder statesmen of Henry Arthur Jones's 'society dramas', he grew more attractive still. A slightly crooked mouth and heavy eyelids lent him a quizzical or mystified look that only enhanced his appeal. As his wavy hair turned from brown to silver his charisma increased. Seldom in fifty years on the stage did he fail to capture the men's admiration or the women's hearts. With the sole exception of Ellen Terry, no British player of his era surpassed his ability to sway the audience by the power of personal charm. Appropriately, the first time he used his new name he played a seducer. 
On 8 February 1862 Wyndham turned professional actor, reappearing at the Royalty in the title character of an anonymous trifle, 'Christopher of Carnation Cottage'. That same year he sailed for America, enlisted in the Federal army as a medical officer, and served almost to the end of the civil war. Acting Assistant Surgeon Culverwell was close to the horrors of battle. Scarcely ever would he speak of them; their effect upon him was evident, long after, in his determined support of British disabled servicemen by means of charity performances at his own theatres during the South African War and the First World War. 
Wyndham's American debut was made on 14 April 1863 at Grover's Theatre, Washington, as Osric to the Hamlet of John Wilkes Booth, who in 1865 assassinated President Lincoln. He landed the job by brandishing notices of his London performances without saying he had written them himself. For most of the rest of the war he alternated stage costume and uniform, and suffered in each. More than one theatre manager dismissed him for incompetence; but, undaunted, he set his sights in earnest on the English stage, and returned to London and to the wife he had left behind. Five years had passed since his marriage to Emma Silberrad ('c'.1837-1916) at the parish church of St Matthew, Brixton, on 27 June 1860. A merchant's child, but also a moneyed German aristocrat, she was the granddaughter of a prince of the Holy Roman empire, Baron Silberrad of Hesse. By marrying into this house of merchant princes Wyndham was spared the fear of destitution that plagued other actors. 
In the autumn of 1866, having returned to the Royalty, Wyndham danced as well as acted himself into favour as Hatchett in F. C. Burnand's burlesque of Douglas Jerrold's 'Black-Eyed Susan'. Other London engagements followed, most notably (in 1867-8) the inaugural season at the Queen's Theatre, Long Acre, with Ellen Terry, Henry Irving, and J. L. Toole. There he repeated the seducer Hawksley. London had been reached without hard apprenticeship in the stock companies of provincial towns, but it was not all advantageous. Wyndham lacked repertory experience, and hence versatility -- as he found when attempting the part of Cyrano de Bergerac (in an adaptation of Rostand's play of that name) at Wyndham's Theatre on 19 April 1900. He was in his element, though, when acting in rattling and often 'risque' farces -- such as Clement Scott's 'The Great Divorce Case' (15 April 1876), James Albery's 'The Pink Dominoes' (31 March 1877), and W. S. Gilbert's 'Foggerty's Fairy' (15 December 1881) -- especially when at the Criterion, an intimate basement theatre at Piccadilly Circus where he presided, first as co-manager, then in sole charge, from 1875 to 1899, and where he continued to have a decisive interest until his death. In 'Criterion farce', translated from French originals with names and places Anglicized, faithless husbands and suitors were seen in the most favourable light. Men in the audience smirked approvingly, and women swooned. No one was ever more able than Wyndham to commend the transgressor. He moved about the stage with perfect ease; every gesture had been rehearsed in a mirror, and to ensure a fluid use of the hands he never carried a stick. His wonderful naturalness was his greatest legacy to the next generation of actors. 
Costume pieces overtook farces at the Criterion, and for six years Wyndham concentrated on showing off his legs in tight breeches. T. W. Robertson's 'David Garrick' (in which he played Garrick, 13 November 1886), Boucicault's 'London Assurance' (as Dazzle, 27 November 1890), and eighteenth-century comedies by Goldsmith, Sheridan, and O'Keeffe were produced. 'David Garrick' became his chief piece; but many thought his finest achievement of all was the portrayal of mellow, titled men of the world, cynical but tender, in the plays that Jones moulded for him -- Viscount Clivebrook in 'The Bauble Shop' (26 January 1893), Sir Richard Kato QC in 'The Case of Rebellious Susan' (3 October 1894), Dr Carey in 'The Physician' (25 March 1897), Colonel Sir Christopher Deering in 'The Liars' (6 October 1897), all at the Criterion, and Sir Daniel Carteret in 'Mrs Dane's Defence' (9 October 1900) at Wyndham's. Charles Haddon Chambers's 'The Tyranny of Tears' (6 April 1899) and H. H. Davies's 'The Mollusc' (7 October 1907), both at the Criterion, were among other plays that exploited his charm. Wyndham's appeal to women of all ages was immense. His voice, when excited, had a catch in it, which men thought rasping. To women it was a caress. Wyndham in his sixties, on the stage at least, was the sort of man women liked to be scolded by. 
From the Criterion's profits Wyndham built Wyndham's Theatre in 1899 and the New Theatre (later renamed the Albery) in 1903, in both of which he had a managerial share to the end of his life. His was a record of continuous and simultaneous West End management that probably no actor will equal. As a manager he was indefatigable. He pioneered the 'flying matinee' -- an out-of-town performance by a company playing the same evening in London. Between 1874 and 1878 he produced numerous plays for matinees at the Crystal Palace, Sydenham, using actors who were occupied in the West End. Earlier still, in 1870, he had formed the Wyndham Comedy Company and toured the American midwest for three years with a largely Robertsonian repertory; but an American farce, Bronson Howard's 'Saratoga' (with Wyndham perpetually poised on the brink of matrimony with one girl or another), went down better. Having bought the British rights, he commissioned an adaptation, and on 24 May 1874 starred at London's Court Theatre in 'Brighton', the Anglicized version. It became Wyndham's standby. His Criterion company was in 1882-3 the first English troupe ever to reach America's west coast. He took them to the United States three more times between 1889 and 1910. In 1887 and 1888 he acted Garrick in German (his own translation), first in Silesia and Berlin, then at St Petersburg before Tsar Alexander III and the tsarina. For an English actor-manager of those days Wyndham's international experiences were exceptionally long and diverse. 
From 1905 to 1919 Wyndham served as president of the Actors' Benevolent Fund. He excelled at after-dinner speaking, and belonged to the Garrick, Savage, Beefsteak, Eccentric, and Green Room clubs, though seldom went. He also joined the Players' Club of New York. Only on the stage, however, could he relax. Keeping fit with long walks, he got away with playing Young Marlow in Goldsmith's 'She Stoops to Conquer' at the age of fifty-three and the scarcely less youthful Charles Surface in Sheridan's 'The School for Scandal' at sixty-nine; but by the time of his final appearance, as Garrick at the New Theatre on 16 December 1913, he had long suffered from aphasia, which severely affected his work, and may explain the absence (unusual for an actor-manager) of an autobiography. Occasional outbursts against subordinates, including women, belied his reputation for gallantry. 
Wyndham's wife, from whom he separated in 1897, died in January 1916. On 1 March of the same year, at Chertsey register office, Surrey, he married Mary Charlotte Moore (1861-1931), the daughter of Charles Moore, a parliamentary agent, and for a quarter of a century the widow of the dramatist James Albery. She was twenty-four years his junior. An entrancing actress of comedy, she had become his leading lady in 1885, his mistress soon after, and in 1896 his business partner. Wyndham, suffering from pneumonia and senility, died on 12 January 1919 at their home, 43 York Terrace, Regent's Park, London, survived by her and a son (Howard Wyndham, who was also a theatre manager) and daughter from his first marriage. He was buried on 16 January at Hampstead cemetery, and left a fortune of nearly $200,000. 
Both Wilde and Shaw thought Wyndham the ideal comedy actor. His stage persona was the model for John Worthing in Wilde's 'The Importance of Being Earnest' and the young heroes of Shaw's 'The Philanderer', 'Arms and the Man', 'Candida', and 'You Never Can Tell'. He was then nearing sixty. Those plays were offered to Wyndham in preference to other managers -- with the exception of 'The Importance of Being Earnest', which was dangled first before Charles Hawtrey, who could not afford it. Wyndham instantly snapped it up, but later, thinking his schedule was full, gave it to George Alexander. Had he ever produced plays of Wilde's or Shaw's, with himself in the parts conceived for him, Sir Charles Wyndham might have figured more considerably in the development of drama. As it was, he left other monuments: Wyndham's Theatre, and the establishment of English farce in a full-length form. 


@@@@@


doc= 37052


Wyndham, George (1863-1913), politician and author, was born in London on 29 August 1863, the eldest son in the family of two sons and three daughters of Percy Scawen Wyndham (1835-1911), politician and country gentleman, and his wife, Madeline Caroline Frances Eden (died 1920), the daughter of Sir Guy Campbell, first baronet. He was educated at Eton College, and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, from where he was commissioned into his father's regiment, the Coldstream Guards. He served in Egypt during the Suakin campaign of 1885: he later played a prominent role as an officer of the Cheshire yeomanry. On 7 February 1887 he married Sibell Mary, Countess Grosvenor (1855-1929), daughter of Richard George Lumley, ninth earl of Scarbrough, and widow of Victor Alexander Grosvenor, Earl Grosvenor. They had one child, Percy Lyulph, born in December 1887, who followed his father into the Coldstream Guards, and who was killed in action in September 1914. Wyndham's stepson was Hugh Richard Arthur, second duke of Westminster (1879-1953). 
Military and parliamentary service were engrained in the traditions of the Wyndham family, as in other tory county dynasties. Wyndham followed his father into both the army and the House of Commons, and served as MP for Dover from 1889 until his death in 1913. Ireland was also important to the family: Wyndham had connections with the Irish landed gentry (his uncle the second Lord Leconfield owned 44,000 acres in counties Clare and Limerick, while the seventh earl of Mayo, proprietor of 7500 acres in Kildare and co. Meath, was his cousin). He had a rather more distant, if much better advertised, connection with Irish insurgency (his maternal great-grandfather was Lord Edward FitzGerald, the rebel leader of 1798). Wyndham's first political employment came in 1887, as private secretary to Arthur Balfour (chief secretary for Ireland, 1887-91): later, when returned as MP for Dover, he served as Balfour's parliamentary private secretary. Wyndham was associated with the successes of Balfour's administration: he received a training in Balfourian strategy, and made personal connections that would serve him later in his ministerial career. 
But Wyndham possessed other social and political networks, most notably in the Souls, the aristocratic clique formed in 1887 in reaction to the philistinism and heartiness of the prince of Wales's Marlborough House set. Wyndham was central to the Souls, partly because of his family connections, and partly because of his association with Balfour, who was the guru of the group. The Souls were a carry-over from the Crabbet Club, which revolved around Wyndham's cousin Wilfrid Scawen Blunt: but Wyndham -- and also his sisters Pamela and Mary ['see 'Charteris, Mary Constance] -- were much more central to the life of the new connection than of the old. The Souls valued intellectual dexterity, physical beauty, and (though this was less explicit) high-born connections; and Wyndham satisfied each of these requirements in full. His brightness was never much in doubt, although the diffuseness of his thought and his tireless loquacity wearied his friends. His good looks caught the notice of fellow Souls and other admiring contemporaries: Margot Asquith thought Wyndham and Lord Pembroke 'the handsomest of the Souls' (Asquith, 'Autobiography', 185). However, this handsomeness was complemented by a rather dandified and jumpy manner, which irritated even his social peers, and certainly alarmed back-bench tories: Arthur Lee observed that 'the rank and file [of the party] had never cottoned to his dandified and over-polished parliamentary manners, which led one old Tory member to mutter in my hearing after one of Wyndham's Burke-conscious perorations, 'damn that fellow, he pirouettes like a dancing master'. ('Good Innings', 128-9)' Wyndham once claimed, amid the disappointments of his later career, that he was 'an artist who has allowed himself to drift into politics' (Mackail and Wyndham, 2.656). His literary and artistic ambitions have indeed sometimes been seen as an alternative to, or diversion from, his political life. This is probably a misperception. Wyndham's literary efflorescence certainly came when the tories were out of office (1892-5) and when he had been apparently passed over for ministerial preferment (1895-8). He was an admirer of W. E. Henley, and wrote extensively for Henley's newspapers, including the imperialist weekly the 'National Observer'. Wyndham also contributed to Henley's series of 'Tudor Translations', for which he edited North's 'Plutarch' (1895). Wyndham shared some of Henley's broader artistic vision, including a passion for the work of Auguste Rodin (he commissioned a portrait bust from the sculptor). His other literary or literary-historical endeavours included an edition of 'The Poems of Shakespeare' (1898), 'Ronsard and La Pleiade' (1906), and an address, given as lord rector of the University of Edinburgh, 'The Springs of Romance in the Literature of Europe' (1910). His 'Essays in Romantic Literature' were published posthumously, in 1919. 
Much of this work expressed an artistic vision which was well integrated within Wyndham's political philosophy. He was a tory romantic, who unblushingly believed that the sum of human happiness was as great in the feudal era as in his own day. He identified the governing idea of his own age as 'cosmopolitan individualism': this had suffocated the last vestiges of romance and the feudal ideal at the beginning of the nineteenth century. Cosmopolitan individualism was associated with a surfeit of democracy and with the vagaries of international finance: Wyndham was suspicious of both, and saw democracy as a precursor to 'Caesarism' and capitalism as antagonistic to his vision of Englishness. His anger at 'cosmopolitan finance' came, especially in later life, to be expressed in directly antisemitic terms. After Henley's death (in 1903) he found a receptive and stimulating audience for such speculations with Hilaire Belloc and (to a lesser extent) G. K. Chesterton. 
Imperialism, for Wyndham, was the only serious alternative to the rising menace of socialism. When (in 1898) he was appointed as under-secretary at the War Office, he had the opportunity to meld this imperialist vision with his extensive knowledge of the army. He had, in addition, two clear political opportunities: first, his superior, the secretary of state, was the marquess of Lansdowne, and thus in the House of Lords; and second, the outbreak of the South African War (in October 1899) gave his own relatively junior office an enhanced significance. The scale of the conflict, and the reverses experienced by the British in the early months of the war, made Wyndham's position at first both administratively arduous and politically vulnerable. But he defended British policy with some skill, and one speech in particular -- delivered in the Commons on 1 February 1900 -- commanded widespread admiration. 
This enhanced parliamentary standing, combined with mounting British military successes on the front, meant that Wyndham was assured of ministerial promotion. In October 1900 he was appointed chief secretary for Ireland. He was still outside the cabinet (the lord lieutenant for Ireland, Earl Cadogan, held onto this palm); but his new office was widely recognized as one of the most difficult in British politics. And his appointment -- at the age of thirty-seven -- identified him as one of the high-fliers among a remarkably talented younger generation of Conservative politicians. 
In Ireland Wyndham followed, broadly, the strategies laid down by Balfour. Some attention was paid to the social and economic welfare of the Irish people, and determined efforts were made to advance land purchase, a central feature of Balfour's administrative programme in the late 1880s. Wyndham's tenure of the Irish Office coincided with a period of centrist political speculation, both in Britain and in Ireland: a land conference, held in 1902 and uniting landlord and tenant representatives, together with the Irish Reform Association were perhaps the most tangible expressions of this -- short-lived -- consensual impulse in Irish politics. The report of the land conference, which advocated an ambitious extension of the land purchase programme, formed the basis for the 'Land Act' of 1903, known as the 'Wyndham Act': the measure has been seen as Wyndham's main achievement in Ireland, and it therefore marked the summit of his political career. He believed that the 'Land Act' represented the first of a series of legislative coups by which he and his supporters would resolve many of the central dilemmas of Irish political life. The confidence was characteristic, but misplaced. Efforts to establish a Catholic university foundered in 1904. In the summer of 1904 the Irish Reform Association produced a proposal outlining a limited form of administrative devolution for Ireland. This was soon disowned by Dublin Castle. But Wyndham's senior civil servant, Sir Antony MacDonnell, had been involved in the discussions that had preceded the publication of these documents; and it came to be believed that the chief secretary himself lay behind the initiative. Denounced by Irish Unionists (who saw a betrayal of principle) and by many Irish nationalists (who feared that a relatively consensual British administration might demoralize the national cause), Wyndham resigned office in March 1905. The devolution affair hung like a pall over the remaining years of his political career. 
Wyndham's fall raises wider issues concerning his administration of the Irish Office. He once declared, playfully, that Ireland 'can be governed only by conversation and arbitrary decisions' ('Letters', 2.6). It seems clear that he could be an incurably verbal and sometimes cussed minister. The editor of his letters, J. W. Mackail, remarked that Wyndham was a good talker but a bad listener; Margot Asquith complained perceptively that Wyndham was 'never in proportion, because he cannot take in a [third] of what he gives out -- and when he allows you to state your point of view you find yourself modifying your difference so as not to come out too crudely against his many long, keen, almost perorated convictions. (Margot Asquith's diary, 28 March 1896)' Wyndham was passionate about ideas in politics and literature. He was a man with a very keen sense of honour; but this was also compatible with a sometimes cavilling or excessively legalistic approach to the truth: Margot Asquith, again, thought him 'not only nerveless but not rigidly straight' (ibid., 28 Oct 1905). There seems little doubt in fact that Wyndham debated the idea of devolution with political friends in 1903-4, even if he finally (and belatedly) grasped the political impossibility of the venture. 
Wyndham had also, as a tory romantic, some bonds of empathy with aspects of Irish nationalism: he was certainly fired by his reading of Irish history. He had a vaulting self-confidence: 'I shall pass a Land Bill, reconstruct the Agriculture Department and Congested Districts Board, stimulate Fishing and Horse-breeding; and revolutionize Education', he announced, without conscious irony, in January 1902 (Mackail and Wyndham, 2.436). In addition he had an almost Gladstonian sense of mission with regard to Ireland: the Irish, he declared in October 1903, 'do still believe in me, and tremble towards a belief in the Empire because of their belief in me' ('Letters', 2.79). But for those Irish who already professed a belief in the empire, he and his administration had little time. Romantic Irish nationalism was closer to Wyndham's most fundamental convictions than the evangelical vulgarities, the urban grubbiness, and the commercial banalities of Ulster Unionism. 
Wyndham's obsessive and passionate temperament, combined with the thinness of his political skin, meant that the last months of his time in Ireland were marred by a physical and mental breakdown: Arthur Balfour was 'seriously alarmed' by the belief that Wyndham's nerves had been 'utterly ruined', and that he was 'really hardly sane' (Balfour to Sibell Grosvenor, January 1905, Wyndham MSS). He had pursued his desperate crusade through an adrenalin-charged and oppressive routine of work: he had come to rely increasingly on drink. By the time of the devolution crisis, he had no resources upon which to draw. His racked health was the occasion, though not the reason, for his resignation from office. This very public collapse in health (regardless of the serious political questions involved) caused lasting damage to his credibility. 
Wyndham survived the electoral decimation of the tories in December 1905, and was active in campaigning for his party throughout the later Edwardian period. He was increasingly attracted by tariff reform, and -- while publicly loyal to Balfour -- he accepted very largely the Chamberlainite prescription of protectionism and socially progressive legislation. He enjoyed a renewed prominence in 1910-11, by virtue of his significant role in the tory election campaigns in January and December 1910, and his very trenchant opposition to the 'Parliament Bill'. He was a convinced die-hard, and was bitterly disappointed by the Lords' ultimate collapse in August 1911. Thereafter disillusionment with parliamentary politics set in. Many of his later letters betray a frustration with the fudges and compromises of political life, and an increasing thirst for action: 'Let there be murder, or even rape, rather than vague aspiration, and no end achieved. Let something be done -- even to DEATH', he wrote in January 1913 (Mackail and Wyndham, 2.733). His wider cultural and temperamental affinities are illustrated by such declarations, which invite comparison (for example) with the language of advanced Irish nationalist ideologues such as Patrick Pearse. He lost faith in the future, believing that English civilization was threatened with collapse: analogies between England in 1912-13 and Constantinople in 1453 were evoked. 
Wyndham once (in January 1910) defined the 'two poles of political existence' as being the frontier and the home (Mackail and Wyndham, 2.651). Having fought and lost on different political and geographical frontiers, he turned in his last months to the home. He devoted attention to the family estate (some 4000 acres in Wiltshire) and to the problems and responsibilities of the middling landowner. Public frustrations were balanced by private joys. His beloved son was married (to Diana Lister) on 17 April 1913. His last days were spent in Paris, in the company of Lady Plymouth, and among the bookshops and restaurants of that city. He died suddenly, from a blood clot, around 10 p.m. on 8 June 1913, in his rooms at the Hotel Lotti on the rue Castiglione, Paris. 
Wyndham's reputation remains entrapped within the mire of the devolution controversy. It is possible that, had another ministerial opportunity come his way, he might have combined the bitter lessons supplied by the Irish Office with his genuine political talents to good effect: there is some evidence for believing that this was his own hope. Perhaps, however, the flaws in his judgement were irredeemable. To the end his intellect blossomed with political ideas, but remained largely barren of any wider strategic sense. Margot Asquith, an admittedly unforgiving arbiter, perhaps hit the mark when, in assessing Wyndham, she decreed that 'an imagination that can work out and foresee the results of big measures is far rarer than the imagination that creates nymphs and moons and passions and patriotism' (Margot Asquith's diary, October 1904). 


@@@@@


doc= 37053


Moore, Mary Charlotte (1861-1931), actress and theatre manager, was born in Islington, London, on 3 July 1861, the fifth child and third and youngest daughter of Charles Moore of Dublin and his wife, Haidee Sophie Acland. When Mary was born her father was a prosperous parliamentary agent, but financial ruin hit the family in 1873. Mary, aged twelve, had to collect rents from slum houses in Hoxton, an experience which taught her the value of money (and, incidentally, gave her a reputation in later life for stinginess). Her education was interrupted by lack of money though she did attend Warwick Hall, Maida Vale, when a German couple needed someone to accompany their daughter to the school. She learned a little German, which would be useful during her career. 
Although untrained, Mary Moore could sing and at fifteen she joined the chorus of 'The Bohemian Girl' and 'Little Doctor Faust' (by H. J. Byron) at the Gaiety Theatre. On 12 June 1878, aged sixteen, she married the dramatist James Albery (1838-1889); they lived for a time in his bachelor chambers in Southampton Street off the Strand. Three sons were born and they moved to Fairlawn, Stone, Greenhithe, Kent. They subsequently returned to London, taking 11 Bentinck Terrace facing Regent's Park. This was not a wise move, being close to the temptations of the West End which Albery was unable to resist. For the second time in her life Mary experienced a collapse in family fortunes; by the mid-1880s James Albery, owing to ill health and alcoholism, could no longer write, so Mary had to support him and the children. She had known Charles (later Sir Charles) Wyndham (1837-1919) when he commissioned Albery to adapt 'Dominos roses' and other French plays, so she nervously approached him for work. He was so shocked by her changed appearance that he doubted whether he could engage her. When he did it was as an understudy on tour. Mary quickly realized that he did not intend to do more than this (out of kindness) and pay her $4 a week. She told him she must be allowed to appear if her career was to progress. Wyndham gave her two small parts in farces at the Criterion Theatre and when he saw what she could do he gave her the leading part of Lady Amaranth in John O'Keeffe's 'Wild Oats', in which he played Jack Rover. When he followed this with a revival in November 1886 of T. W. Robertson's 'David Garrick', with Mary as Ada Ingot, their stage partnership was established. With this encouragement her good looks returned and she retained her slim figure for many years. They played 'David Garrick' at Sandringham and were invited to take it to Berlin, where they played in German. Wyndham was fluent in the language but Mary had to study. One German critic commented: 'Miss Moore does not speak our language as well as her talented companion, but with what a consoling charm!' (Moore, 60). They also played -- in German -- before the tsar in St Petersburg. 'David Garrick' would be their most enduring production. 
The Alberys separated four years before James's death from cirrhosis of the liver in 1889. When an obituarist accused Mary of neglecting him, she was tempted to sue, but received a written apology. 
Recognizing that Mary Moore had a superior head for business, Wyndham sealed their business partnership in 1896 and together they planned to enlarge their empire by building two theatres on land occupied by old houses between Charing Cross Road and St Martin's Lane. The marquess of Salisbury, then prime minister, was the ground landlord, and stated that no theatres should be built there unless they were for Charles Wyndham, whose acting he admired; Wyndham's Theatre opened in 1899 and the New Theatre in 1903. 
Mary Moore was a woman of good sense who excelled at playing the opposite -- the sillier the woman the better, and such parts were written for her by Henry Arthur Jones in 'The Case of Rebellious Susan' (1894), 'The Liars' (1897), and 'Mrs Dane's Defence' (1900), and by Hubert Henry Davies in 'Mrs Gorringe's Necklace' (1903) and 'The Mollusc' (1907), in which she gave a remarkable performance, seldom moving from the sofa on which she reclined. As Irene Vanbrugh, who appeared with her in 'The Liars', said of her: she 'still held without effort after a number of years the title of the perfect 'ingenue'' (I. Vanbrugh, 'To Tell my Story', 1949, 38). 
The acting partnership continued until 1913; Wyndham also preserved a youthful spirit and figure until failing memory compelled his retirement at the age of seventy-six. Mary acted little without him. On 1 March 1916, after the death of Wyndham's wife, she married her business partner in order to be able to take care of him. After Wyndham's death in 1919 she made one successful appearance in a new play and then devoted herself to managing her theatres (she founded Wyndham Theatres Ltd in 1924) with the assistance of her stepson, Howard Wyndham, and her son, Bronson Albery. When no one attempted to write a biography of Wyndham she wrote her own memoirs, 'Charles Wyndham and Mary Moore' (1925), which her family insisted should be privately printed as they feared the prejudice against a mistress. In her last years she suffered a disfiguring illness and died in London on 6 April 1931. 


@@@@@


doc= 37054


Carington, Charles Robert Wynn-, marquess of Lincolnshire (1843-1928), politician and landowner, was born in Whitehall, London, on 16 May 1843, the elder son of Robert John Carrington (formerly Smith), second Baron Carrington, and his second wife, Charlotte, younger daughter of Peter Robert Drummond-Burrell, twenty-first Baron Willoughby de Eresby. Educated at Eton College and, from 1861, at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1863, Carrington entered the Royal Horse Guards (captain 1869, retired 1878). His careers were those of great landowner and Liberal politician, and he combined the two with unwavering conviction over half a century of radical social and political change that drew almost the entire aristocracy into the Conservative Party and saw its power rapidly wane. In 1865, at the age of twenty-two, Carrington was returned to the House of Commons unopposed for his home town of High Wycombe, taking the Liberal whip. On the death of his father three years later he succeeded to the peerage as third Baron Carrington and to an estate of 26,000 acres, predominantly in Buckinghamshire and Lincolnshire, the maintenance and improvement of which were lifelong preoccupations. In 1878 he married the Hon. Cecilia Margaret Harbord (1856-1934), daughter of Charles, fifth Baron Suffield; they had one son and five daughters. In 1880 Carrington and his brothers took the surname Carington; this did not affect the spelling of the peerage title. 
For the next sixty years after succeeding to his title Carrington held a succession of posts spanning the political, royal, and imperial spheres. In 1875-6 he accompanied the prince of Wales (later Edward VII) on his Indian tour as aide-de-camp. He was a government whip and a court official -- as captain of the gentlemen-at-arms -- in the last four years (1881-5) of Gladstone's second ministry. From 1885 to 1890 he was governor of New South Wales, establishing a pattern of aristocratic 'constitutional monarchy' in the self-governing white colonies that was to endure until the inter-war years of the next century. On his return to England he was elected a Progressive (Liberal) member of the newly established London county council for the working-class ward of West St Pancras, taking an active part in LCC business and retaining his seat until 1907. Between 1892 and 1895 he again held court office, as lord chamberlain, in Gladstone's final ministry and in that of Rosebery, his cousin. At Gladstone's request he also chaired a controversial royal commission on Welsh land tenure, which reported in 1895, deftly deflating radical land agitation in the principality while encouraging landowners to meet moderate demands for allotments, smallholdings, improved rural housing, and rent abatements. In 1895 he was created Earl Carrington; the next year he took the additional surname of Wynn. 
Carrington continued to advance the cause of land reform until the First World War, pioneering smallholding and cottage-building schemes on his own estates. By 1914 a quarter of the total estate was let as allotments or smallholdings. Rural regeneration was Carrington's principal goal. His policies were the stock-in-trade of late Victorian and Edwardian new Liberal reformers. In a wider view, they were but one incarnation of a 'back-to-the-land' movement persisting from the industrial revolution to the present day. However, behind them lay a concern to modernize and popularize the great estates -- and so underpin their survival in the democratic age. Like Gladstone, his mentor, he saw progressive reform as the friend, not the foe, of the aristocracy and traditional social forces if carried through with confidence by the elite itself. 
Campbell-Bannerman appointed Carrington president of the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries in his Liberal ministry of 1905, a post he continued to hold under Asquith until 1911. Carrington was responsible for two allotments and smallholdings statutes in 1908, which extended rights to tenants and labourers. Neither measure was seriously injurious to landowners, but both bitterly antagonized the tory peers, who saw them as the thin end of a socialistic wedge leading to expropriation. As such they were part of the backdrop to Lloyd George's 'people's budget' of 1909, which Carrington supported as a moderate measure necessitated by a projected budget deficit, but which the House of Lords rejected as an act of immoral confiscation. The rejection led to the constitutional crisis of 1909-10, in which Carrington's close links with the royal family were an asset to Asquith. He supported the proposed creation of peers to force the House of Lords to accept the 'Parliament Bill'. On the accession of George V in 1910, he exercised the office of lord great chamberlain, fighting with characteristic vigour to sustain his claim to the largely honorific office (which came through his mother) against other aristocratic claimants to the post. 
In 1911 Carrington moved to the non-departmental post of lord privy seal, retiring from the government a year later as marquess of Lincolnshire. His later years brought a succession of disappointments: the death of his only son in war in 1915; the ravages suffered by the great estates, which led him to dispose of some three-quarters of his estates between 1919 and 1924; and the decline of the Liberal Party which, by his death, had become a marginal political force. His retreat from land was but one act in an aristocratic stampede; however, in common with most of his fellow peers, his personal income rose as he moved into stocks. Lincolnshire's dedication to Liberalism and the cause of rural development remained undiminished to the end, and as lord lieutenant of Buckinghamshire from 1915 to 1923 he found a new outlet for his energies. His reaction to the general strike of 1926 typified a whig political outlook formed in the early Victorian era. He condemned the strike in public, but subscribed $50 to the Miners' Women and Children Relief Fund, and dismissed more extreme forebodings with his recollection of the Chartists' 1848 demonstrations in London, 'when gamekeepers sat in the Hall with loaded guns between their knees... but the Charter is now practically the law of the land'. He left three unpublished works, based on his extensive diaries, a life of Edward VII in three volumes, a life of Lord Rosebery in two volumes, and a volume of recollections. 
Having earlier sold his ancestral home, Wycombe Abbey (which became a private girls' boarding-school), Lincolnshire died at his home, Daws Hill House, High Wycombe, on 13 June 1928. The barony (but not his other titles) passed to his younger brother, Rupert Clement George ('b'. 1852). 
Carrington's political role was greater than his tenure of second-rank cabinet offices in the Campbell-Bannerman and Asquith governments might suggest. As a lifelong friend of Edward VII, as a close associate of successive Liberal leaders, as a colonial governor, as one of the few great landowners to remain loyal to Gladstone after the home-rule split of 1886, and as an indefatigable activist among the small band of Liberal peers thereafter, he had an abiding influence on the policy and tone of the late Victorian and Edwardian Liberal Party. He also helped to keep it respectable in royal quarters as, in government before the First World War, it engaged in increasingly fierce conflicts with the Conservative Party and the House of Lords -- conflicts in which Edward VII and George V were forced to take a decisive role, and did so in a spirit of strict neutrality. 


@@@@@


doc= 37055


Wynyard, Diana (1906-1964), actress, was born at 96 Woolston Road, Forest Hill, London, on 16 January 1906, the daughter of Edward Thomas Cox, master printer, and his wife, Margaret Campbell Thomson. She was educated at Woodford School, Croydon. Gifted by nature with a good voice, she went in turn to two notable teachers to have it trained, and at the age of nineteen she launched herself on the professional stage. Her blonde beauty served to get her a walk-on part at the Globe in 1925 and in the same year she was taken on tour by Hamilton Deane; in just under a year she played nearly thirty parts, mainly in light comedy. Other touring engagements followed which kept her well employed until, in August 1927, she joined the much admired Liverpool repertory company under the direction of William Armstrong. There she remained for two years, playing increasingly important parts in plays of increasing weight and gaining steadily in experience and skill until, in September 1929, she was ready to make her London debut and to secure a considerable success. The theatre was the St Martin's, and the play was 'Sorry You've Been Troubled', one of a series of amusing pieces written by the American dramatist Walter Hackett for his wife, Marion Lorne, a comedienne of a markedly individual personality. Diana Wynyard's part in this piece was of no great importance, but it needed to be played with assurance, charm, and distinction. So well did the young actress rise to the challenge and so exceedingly beautiful did she look while doing so that a startled London first-night audience took her to its heart upon the spot. 
Wynyard was soon established as a leading lady in the West End and she was in constant demand. The plays for which she was required were still light in texture, but gradually she showed a certain ambition for more serious work. A visit to America in 1932 resulted in her first Hollywood movies, 'Rasputin and the Empress' (1932) and 'Cavalcade' (1933), for which she was nominated for an Academy award. In 1933, returning to London, she played Charlotte Bronte in Clemence Dane's 'Wild Decembers', taking over the management for part of the run. In 1934 she scored a notable success and a long run in 'Sweet Aloes'. In 1937, having succeeded the American actress Ann Harding as Candida in the play of the same name by G. B. Shaw, she went with the role to Paris, the production having been chosen to represent the British stage in the Paris Exhibition. This was followed, later in the same year, by another Shaw heroine -- Eliza Doolittle in 'Pygmalion' at the Old Vic. For the next ten years she maintained her high reputation with appearances in such plays as Noel Coward's 'Design for Living' (1939), 'No Time for Comedy' (1941), 'Watch on the Rhine' (1942), and, on tour for the Entertainments National Service Association, Patrick Hamilton's 'Gaslight' (1943), of which she had made a memorable film in 1940, and 'Love from a Stranger' (1944). 
In 1948 Wynyard took a step that was to transform her career and lift her name to a higher plane than any at which she had previously aimed. The governors of the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre, who were engaged in a campaign to raise the standard of Stratford acting, invited her to join the company. Up to that point, in a stage career of over twenty-six years, she had shown no ambition to become a classical actress, her sole appearance in a Shakespeare part having been at Liverpool as Titania. She had, however, valuable assets for the task -- an excellent voice, a good sense of character, and quick intelligence. She accepted the invitation, and very soon showed that the decision was a right one. She served the company for the seasons of 1948 and 1949 and in 1949-50 she went with them to Australia. During that time she excited admiration in a very wide range of parts; the list included Gertrude in 'Hamlet', Portia in 'The Merchant of Venice', Katherine the shrew, Hermione in 'The Winter's Tale', Desdemona, Lady Macbeth, Beatrice in 'Much Ado about Nothing', Helena in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream', and Queen Katherine in 'Henry VIII'. She repeated her performances of Hermione in London in 1951 and of Beatrice in 1952. She was appointed CBE in 1953: proof of the profound impression that she had made. 
Diana Wynyard was married twice: first in 1943 to film director Carol Reed (1906-1976); second in 1951 to Tibor Csato (1906-2003), physician. Both marriages were dissolved. She died in St Paul's Hospital, Endell Street, London, on 13 May 1964. 


@@@@@


doc= 37056


Allan Wyon (1843-1907) joined the firm in 1872. The three brothers followed their father successively as chief engraver of seals. Allan Wyon completed and brought to publication his brother Alfred's 'The Great Seals of England' (1887). He died at his home, 33 Parkhill Road, Hampstead, on 25 January 1907. 



@@@@@


doc= 37057


Yapp, Sir Arthur Keysall (1869-1936), young people's welfare organizer, was born at Orleton, near Leominster, on 12 March 1869, the son of Richard Keysall Yapp (1828/9-1873), farmer, and his wife, Jane Gammidge. For many generations his forebears had farmed in Herefordshire, and his father lived there on his own land. All his life he retained the simplicity and instincts of a countryman. His mother, youngest child of Timothy Gammidge, a Congregational minister, exercised a great influence on the lives of her three children. The father died when his elder son, Arthur, was four years old, and the family moved to Leominster. Educated at home and at the Hereford County College, Yapp entered a local firm of agricultural engineers, devoting his spare time to temperance and mission work. It was not until he was twenty-one, however, that he was first attracted to the Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA) when the local branch invited him to become its honorary secretary. To this work he gave his leisure, and two years later (1892) came a call to service as a full-time general secretary of the Derby YMCA. In 1898 he left Derby in order to undertake the extension of the YMCA work in Lancashire, where he became a pioneer in developing YMCAs in volunteer camps (1901) and, later, initiated a programme with the Territorial Force. In 1901 he married Alice Maude, second daughter of Thomas Hesketh Higson, of Southport; they had a son and a daughter. 
Yapp's leadership extended throughout the north of England where in fields of widely different character he was gradually building up an experience that was to give him unique equipment for his later responsibilities. In 1907 he was invited by the Manchester YMCA to superintend its new building enterprise and to become its first general secretary. In 1912 Yapp went to London as secretary of the National Council of YMCAs, Incorporated. The movement had already gone some way towards freeing itself from its rather narrow early traditions, and at the outbreak of the First World War he inaugurated the war emergency service which was to spread throughout the world, bringing the association into a new phase of opportunity and responsibility. The red triangle sign, symbolizing spirit, mind, and body, was introduced in 1914 by Yapp. Through his inspiration, within ten days of the outbreak of war, 250 centres of rest and recreation were at the service of the forces, and before it had run its course there were more than 10,000 centres on the fighting fronts. 
In 1917 Yapp was appointed KBE and was invited by Lloyd George to take charge as honorary director of the food economy campaign, and for six months a heavy programme of travel and public speaking was added to his work. In 1918 he visited the United States of America, and in the post-war years went twice to India and once round the world. After the war there was a steady development of new branches at home, and in the days of industrial depression he threw the weight of the national movement behind the work in distressed areas. 
For not less than fifteen years Yapp worked eighteen hours a day and seven days a week. In 1929 he retired from active leadership owing to ill health, and became deputy president of the YMCA, which position he held until his death. He died suddenly at Chobham Road, Woking, on 5 November 1936 after visiting the YMCA there. He was buried at Orleton. 
An evangelical churchman from early youth, Yapp preached in churches and chapels of all denominations, and was the first layman to speak from the pulpits of Canterbury and other cathedrals. He had a fine presence with an attractive personality and a keen sense of humour, and was a lifelong teetotaller and non-smoker. An eloquent speaker and an admirable organizer with unbounded energy and initiative, he gave his life to Christian service, with a devotion to youth in which he firmly believed. 
G. L. Clapperton', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37058


Yarrow, Sir Alfred Fernandez, first baronet (1842-1932), marine engineer and shipbuilder, was born at 2 Bury Court, St Mary Axe, London, on 13 January 1842, the elder and only surviving son of the merchant Edgar Williams Yarrow ('bap'. 1805) of Barnsbury, London, and his wife, Esther Lindo (died 1889), daughter of Moses Lindo, a West Indies merchant. He was of Jewish descent on his mother's side and his parents' courtship was prolonged by his mother's reluctance to upset her family by marrying a Christian. The marriage only took place, in Holborn, London, in late 1838, after her parents' death. Yarrow's relationship with his mother was one of mutual devotion and was particularly intense after his father's death and in the early stages of his business career. 
Educated privately and at University College School, London, Yarrow was apprenticed to the firm of Ravenhill, Salkeld & Co., marine engine builders, at the age of fifteen. In these early years he spent much time with his friend James Hilditch, who shared his practical and inventive turn of mind. They attended Michael Faraday's lectures at the Royal Institution and installed a private telegraph line between their homes. Together they patented several inventions in 1861, including a steam carriage and a steam plough. One consequence was that Yarrow became the London representative of a firm of agricultural engineers while he continued to seek new business opportunities. 
In 1865 Yarrow went into partnership with a Mr Hedley, establishing a works at Folly Wall, Isle of Dogs, Poplar, London. Initially a general engineering concern, the repair of river vessels led them to build steam launches in substantial numbers from 1868. The partnership with Hedley was dissolved in 1875 and on 24 March of that year Yarrow married Minnie Florence Franklin (1852/3-1922). They had three daughters and three sons; the youngest son was killed in action in 1915. 
Yarrow rapidly developed the business after 1875. Shallow-draught river and lake boats, such as the 'Ilala', were built for use in Africa, and vessels were generally prefabricated for easy carriage and reassembly on site. The enthusiasm for torpedo boats by the world's navies was a huge boost to Yarrows and the subsequent development of destroyers was equally beneficial. The Yarrow water tube boiler, a design of classic simplicity, was another development, stemming from dissatisfaction with the performance of existing boilers. They were installed in warships from 1887 and found to be lighter and more economical. 
In 1897 the business was incorporated as a limited liability company, Yarrow & Co. Ltd. Despite the success that the company enjoyed, Yarrow perceived that the Thames was in decline as a shipbuilding river and that a move was necessary in order to remain competitive. Between 1906 and 1908 the enterprise was moved to Scotstoun, on the River Clyde, a site chosen after careful deliberation. The choice may well have been influenced by the proximity of the deep-water measured mile at Skelmorlie. By 1913 Yarrow was ready to leave the business in the hands of the next generation and he retired to Hampshire until the outbreak of the First World War brought a swift return to work. In the ensuing conflict the shipyard built twenty-nine destroyers and Yarrow himself took responsibility for the development of shallow-draught gunboats for use in Mesopotamia. In 1916 he received a baronetcy for his war services. He was further honoured in 1922 when he became a fellow of the Royal Society, and in 1924 when he received the honorary degree of LLD from Glasgow University. On 2 December 1922 he married his second wife, Eleanor Cecilia Barnes (1871/2-1953), daughter of Goodwin Barnes, a coal proprietor. 
A consummate businessman, and an enlightened and patriarchal employer, Yarrow was equally driven by the intellectual challenges which arose from his work. The problem of excessive vibration, caused by reciprocating ships' engines, was reduced by a method of balancing which became known -- using the names of those who had collaborated on it -- as the Yarrow-Schlick-Tweedy system. Yarrow was also interested in practices such as speed trials for ships and the use of new materials such as aluminium and mild steel which allowed the saving of weight in construction without the loss of strength. Another development was that of the hinged flap which, when placed across the propeller tunnel of shallow-draught vessels, closed the gap between the top of the tunnel and the water-line. This brought about a complete immersion of the propeller and generated greater power than would have been the case with a partial immersion. 
A considerable benefactor, many of Yarrow's donations went to fund projects related to shipbuilding. He gave $20,000 to build a test tank for ship models at the National Physical Laboratory at Teddington, which opened in 1911, while in 1923 he gave $100,000 to the Royal Society to establish research professorships. He founded and endowed the Yarrow Home for Convalescent Children at Broadstairs, Kent, and gave generously to the London Hospital. $24,000 went to the Nurses' Training Home at Govan, in Glasgow, and towards the provision of nurses in remote areas of Scotland. Other recipients of his giving included the British Association for the Advancement of Science, the Institution of Naval Architects, and Girton College, Cambridge. Yarrow enjoyed a lively old age until his death at the Savoy Hotel, the Strand, London, on 24 January 1932; he was buried at Highgate cemetery. 
Alfred Yarrow's eldest son, 
Harold Yarrow served as chairman and managing director of Yarrows for forty years; his decision to diversify into land boiler production enabled the company to survive a period in the 1920s when naval contracts all but ceased. He also maintained the family's charitable tradition, being involved in the foundation of the Princess Louise Scottish Hospital at Erskine, Renfrewshire, for disabled former servicemen, a concern that followed naturally from the contribution that the shipyard had made in the production of artificial limbs during the First World War. He died on 19 April 1962 at Overton, Kilmacolm, Renfrewshire. Continuity was maintained both in business and charitable concerns by the succession of Sir Eric Grant Yarrow, third baronet ('b'. 1920), to the company chairmanship on his father's death. However, though Yarrows continued until 1990 to be the main shipyard for the construction of naval frigates, it had ceased to have a separate existence, having been taken over by the General Electric Company. 


@@@@@


doc= 37059


Yate, Sir Charles Edward, baronet (1849-1940), administrator in India and politician, was born on 28 August 1849 at Holme-on-Spalding Moor, Yorkshire, the eldest of the four sons of Charles Yate (1804-1860), fellow and dean of St John's College, Cambridge, and vicar of Holme-on-Spalding Moor, and his wife, Jane Anne (died 1900), daughter of Arthur Campbell, writer to the signet, of Catrine House, Ayrshire. In November 1867, after five years at Shrewsbury School, Yate joined the 49th Royal Berkshire regiment, then based in India, as an ensign. In 1871 he was admitted to the Bombay staff corps and subsequently transferred to the Indian political service. For some years an assistant political superintendent in Rajputana, he wrote chapters on Mewar and Partabgarh for the third volume of the 'Rajputana Gazetteer' (1880). 
Yate was gazetted captain in 1879 and during the Second Anglo-Afghan War, in 1879-80, returned briefly to military duty, commanding a detachment of the 29th Bombay infantry. As a member of General Roberts's staff, he was on the march from Kabul to the relief of Kandahar in August 1880 and remained as political officer in charge of the city until its evacuation in May 1881. From 1884 to 1886 he was attached to the Afghan boundary commission, a posting which supplied him with the material for a volume of descriptive letters, 'Northern Afghanistan' (1888). In March 1885 Yate was British representative at Panjdeh, an oasis on Afghanistan's western frontier, when Russian troops invaded and threatened to embroil Britain in a war on Afghanistan's behalf. On 29 March, in a dramatic gesture of hospitality which typified his tendency to respond to a situation in terms of its protagonists, Yate invited the Russian officers to dine with him between the two lines of opposing soldiers. Notwithstanding the exchange of champagne toasts in no-man's-land, the Russians seized the disputed territory at dawn the following day. For his boundary work, Yate was made CSI in 1887 and CMG in 1888. 
In 1889 Yate became the British consul at Muscat. From 1890 to 1892 he served as the political agent in Baluchistan, and in 1893 he was appointed British commissioner for settlement of the Kushk Canal question on the Russo-Afghan frontier. From 1893 to 1898 he was based at Mashhad in Persia as agent to the governor-general to Khorasan and Sistan. Although he later complained of having been denied the honours that a more prominent posting in Afghanistan would have afforded him, nevertheless his years in Mashhad spawned another descriptive book, 'Khurasan and Sistan' (1900). 
In 1898 Yate returned to India to a series of temporary postings in Rajputana. In the following year, on 18 March, he married Charlotte Heath (died 1936), youngest daughter of Joseph Hume Burnley, charge d'affaires at Dresden, with whom he had a son, who died in childhood, and two daughters, Lois ('b'. 1900) and Adelaide ('b'. 1904). In 1900 Lord Curzon appointed Yate chief commissioner of British Baluchistan. Yate relished the personal authority allowed to him in Baluchistan and was especially happy working under Curzon, whose vision of a stronger and more worthy empire he shared. Upon his retirement, in 1904, a clock tower and fountain were erected in his honour at Quetta by public subscription. He was gazetted colonel in 1901 and retired from the army in 1906. 
Yate returned to England in 1904, hoping, as he put it to Curzon, 'to join in the fray on behalf of Imperialism as opposed to Little Englandism'. After two unsuccessful contests, at Pontefract (1906) and Melton Mowbray (January 1910), he was elected in December 1910 Conservative MP for the Melton division. In speeches renowned for their bluntness and brevity, he pilloried the advocates of political reform in India, in particular Edwin Montagu, Liberal secretary of state for India from 1917 to 1922. Yate was for many years a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society. In 1921 he was made a baronet. He retired, reluctantly, from parliament in 1924, whereupon he moved from his constituency residence, Ashfordby House, Leicestershire, to Madeley Hall, Shropshire, home to the Yate family for several generations. He died there on 29 February 1940, aged ninety, and was survived by his daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 37060


Yeats, John Butler (1871-1957), painter, was born on 29 August 1871 in London, at 23 Fitzroy Road, north of Regent's Park, the fifth child and youngest son of the painter John Butler Yeats (1839-1922) and Susan Mary Pollexfen (1841-1900). He was the brother of William Butler Yeats (1865-1939). He never used the name Butler, only the initial B, and in his early years was known as Johnnie. Both his parents were of Irish protestant families. The Yeatses were impoverished gentlefolk with pretensions to some landholding in Thomastown, co. Kilkenny, which was lost through John Butler Yeats's bad management; they settled in Dublin in the mid-nineteenth century. At that time the Pollexfens were a merchant family established in Sligo in the milling and shipping business. 
Jack Yeats spent his early years both in London and in Sligo. His father, who trained as a barrister, became an artist in London and had moved the family there after the birth of the eldest child, William Butler Yeats. He was unsuccessful as a painter, and the family, who faced shortages of money, lived in various lodgings. This persuaded his wife to spend lengthy periods of time with her parents in Sligo. Jack Yeats's early experiences were of travel, and his love of the sea, which was to inspire many of his paintings, developed during voyages in his grandfather's ships from Liverpool round the northern coast of Ireland to Sligo. 
By the age of nine Jack had settled in Sligo in the care of his grandparents, an arrangement that was to last until he went to art school in 1887. He claimed that Sligo was a formative influence in his life and that he rarely painted a picture 'without a bit of Sligo in it'. He worked hard at school, was competitive and successful in most subjects (contrary to the opinion voiced by his father), and showed an early facility in drawing, particularly in caricature. He was a happy child, in marked contrast with his brother, William Butler Yeats, who was moody and introspective, and rather frightened of his grandfather. Jack, on the other hand, was particularly fond of William Pollexfen, and seems to have exercised a youthful authority over this powerful and forbidding man of the sea. In his youth Pollexfen had commanded a coaster called the 'Dasher', and he told Jack stories about the sea and pirates that inspired his early drawings, his plays for children, and his later paintings, many of which show an outstanding grasp of seafaring life. Of his vast output of paintings, watercolours, and drawings a very substantial number draw their inspiration and subject matter directly from the Sligo life. The powerful, bearded figure of a seafaring man often features in his work. 
Unlike his brother and sisters Jack Yeats was surrounded by comfort and security, lived in a large house with servants and grooms, and travelled about with his grandfather in a pony and trap. He returned to London to enrol as an art student in 1887, first at the South Kensington School of Art, under Professor Brown, and then at Chiswick School of Art, in Bedford Park, to which area the family had moved. He is recorded as being at the West London School of Art from 1890 to 1893 and also at the Westminster School of Art from 1890 to 1894. Yeats, however, found nothing strange about studying in a number of institutions, but he did find quite uncongenial the straitened circumstances at home. These included the burden of having to contribute to the family income. He escaped into the world of his own art and into the entertainment world of the Buffalo Bill Cody shows at Earls Court, near one of the houses in which the family lodged, and drew cowboy subjects obsessively. While an art student he witnessed the efforts of his brother and two sisters to earn money to keep the family together, and by 1888 he was himself contributing drawings to publications such as 'The Vegetarian'. He was also privately commissioned to design menus and doilies, and he began selling drawings directly through a shop in Piccadilly. He was influenced in his early work by Randolph Caldecott and Phil May, and also greatly admired the art of Thomas Hood. He led an independent existence at Bedford Park and was the least troubled of the Yeats children. He had a great sense of fun and got on well with everyone, with the possible exception of his father, towards whom he displayed reserve on account of the blame that he placed on his father's head for the failing health of his mother, who found the family's tribulations too much to bear. 
In the early 1890s Yeats determined on marriage. He had met Mary Cottenham (Cottie) White ('c'.1869-1948) in 1889; she was a fellow student at Chiswick and came from a well-to-do family with Isle of Man connections. In 1891 he announced his intentions to his father and was released from financial obligations to the family, since he was now saving for his own and Cottie's future. He was already surprisingly successful as a freelance illustrator and comic artist, and as a sporting artist recording athletics and racing scenes around the country. In the years when all the members of the Yeats family contributed to the expenses of running the home his contribution tended to outstrip that of his siblings. 
Jack and Cottie were married on 23 August 1894 in Gunnersbury and went on honeymoon to Dawlish. They moved into a house in Chertsey, and Jack continued to find employment as an illustrator in both freelance and regular commissioned work: Cottie was also an accomplished painter in watercolours. Though they lived frugally they enjoyed additional income through a family settlement made on Cottie during her lifetime. Within a year they had decided to move to the west of England. The Pollexfens had originally come from Devon, and Jack discovered an old and dilapidated cottage in Strete, 4 miles south of Dartmouth. It was reconstructed, more land was acquired, and an old barn was repaired as a studio overlooking the Gara river. It took almost two years to complete the move to Strete. 
In their new home Yeats prepared for his first exhibition, which was held in London's Clifford Galleries late in 1897. Much of the work consisted of drawings and watercolours of life in the west of England. Scenes of racing, boxing, fairgrounds, cider-making, children, and animals made up a substantial number of works, and the critical success was resounding. In 'Table Talk' P. G. Konody wrote: 'quite apart from the exquisite humour of these sketches, there is another reason which makes them quite remarkable and worthy of attention. They show an astounding capacity for grasping and retaining the impression of certain short moments' (Arnold, 68; a good example is 'Waiting', reproduced in Arnold, p. 69, fig 72). Thirty-nine individual publications noticed the show, many of them warmly praising the talent of the drawing and the life in the subject matter. Over a quarter of the works shown were sold, and Yeats's talent was noticed by the playwright and patron of the arts Augusta, Lady Gregory. She was on the lookout for Irish artistic talent and wanted Yeats, like his brother, to become involved in the Irish artistic revival of the late nineteenth century. 
Initially Yeats had no intention of returning to Ireland; his wife did not favour the idea, and he was reticent about a literary movement that was becoming dominated by his elder brother. He did return, however, to work, and travelled in the west of Ireland, painting in watercolours and filling sketchbooks with anecdotal drawings of people and places. He loved the odd and the unusual. Fights, disputes -- such as 'Let me See Wan Fight!' (reproduced Arnold, p. 79, fig. 84) -- parades, circus giants and dwarfs, and above all scenes at race meetings and fairs repeatedly captured his imagination and provided him not only with subject matter for paintings but with illustrations that he was able to sell, for example, to the 'Illustrated London News'. He held his first exhibition in Dublin in 1899 and, like his London debut, it was widely mentioned and in very positive terms; the writer and painter George Russell wrote in the 'Dublin Express': 'These sketches of the West of Ireland reveal a quite extraordinary ability in depicting character and movement' (Arnold, 85). His title for both shows referred to 'Life in the West of Ireland' -- the title of his book of illustrations published in 1912. 
In 1900 Yeats's mother died, worn out both physically and mentally by the difficult life imposed on her by her husband's ineffectual and self-indulgent behaviour. Yeats, who was greatly upset by her death, commissioned the plaque in St John's Church in Sligo, pointedly leaving out the name of his father from those listed as having placed it in the nave. 
From the late 1890s until 1910, when Jack and Cottie moved to Ireland and settled in Greystones, in co. Wicklow, they regularly visited the country and spent time in the west. They stayed with Lady Gregory at Coole Park, revisited Sligo, explored Donegal, went to co. Kerry, and became marginally involved in the Irish literary revival in Dublin. With his close friend John Masefield, Yeats played games along the Gara river, constructing cardboard boats that Masefield furnished with equipment and even, at times, little engines. They bombarded and sank their own creations, Masefield writing vigorous lyrics about each vessel, Yeats producing drawings. 
In 1905, through contact with the editor of the 'Manchester Guardian', Masefield obtained for Jack Yeats and John M. Synge a commission to report on the congested districts in Galway, Connemara, and Mayo. Synge wrote about their experiences, Yeats did the illustrations. The friendship flourished; they were like-minded men, contemplative, independent, reticent. Synge sought Yeats's help with certain costume aspects of his play 'The Playboy of the Western World', and Yeats was able to suggest the appearance and clothing of the hero, drawn from his experience of race meetings on Bowmore Strand, in Sligo, when he was a boy. 
The two Yeats sisters, Susan Mary (Lily) Yeats and Elizabeth Corbet (Lollie) Yeats ['see under 'Yeats, Susan Mary], moved to Dublin, where they were later joined by their father. There they set up the Cuala Press and the Dun Emer Guild and became engaged in fine printing, embroidery work, and other cottage-industry activities. Somewhat reluctantly both William Butler Yeats and Jack Yeats were drawn into their sisters' ventures, and Jack produced broadsheets that were coloured by hand. In 1908 their father left Dublin for New York. As with most of the movements in his life it was meant to be a temporary shift of territory, but he never returned. His son Jack was not a great traveller but he did go to New York in 1904 (he had a liking for American stories of adventure). There he met Mark Twain, whom he greatly admired, and the lawyer John Quinn, who bought some of his early watercolours and drawings. 
So far Yeats's career as a painter had taken a rather limited course. His abilities as a watercolourist were not matched when he turned to oil painting, for which he had studied inadequately, in part as a result of the Yeats family's financial needs while he was at art school. His deficiencies told in the early years of the twentieth century; until 1915 his canvases lack any convincing colour sense. When engaged in the representation of human figures, as he was with the series of oil paintings used as illustrations to 'Irishmen All' (1913), by George Birmingham (the pseudonym of Canon James Owen Hannay), he achieved strength of design, a clear line, and good chiaroscuro. But he was still drawing in paint, and it worked less well when he produced landscapes; early examples, such as 'The Police Sergeant' (reproduced Arnold, p. 179, fig. 157), are often unsubtle and rather flat. 
In 1913 Yeats was chosen for the Armory show in New York, and sent to it one of his great early paintings, 'The Circus Dwarf' (1912; priv. coll.; reproduced Arnold, p. 362, colour plate 5). He had already shown the work in London, in 1912, to some critical acclaim. In an article about Yeats in 1913 the art critic for 'The Star', A. J. Finberg, wrote: 'The people Mr Yeats is interested in are a rough, hard-bitten, unshaven, and generally disreputable lot of men. His broken-down actors practising fencing, his 'Circus Dwarf'... are subjects no other artist would have chosen to paint'. It is unlikely that other painters would have painted the political subjects that attracted Yeats but politics were very much part of Irish life, and he was increasingly identifying his work at this time with the events heralding the Easter Rising. Gun-running was one of these, a by-product of it his poignant study of pity, 'Bachelor's Walk: in Memory' (also known as 'In Memory', 1915; priv. coll.; reproduced Arnold, p. 192, fig. 160), which shows a flower girl placing flowers on the spot in the street where a person was shot down by British soldiers who had unsuccessfully tried to prevent the Howth landing of arms. Later political works included 'Communicating with Prisoners' (1924) and 'The Funeral of Harry Boland' (1922; both Sligo Museum and Art Gallery). 
Yeats's work in oils did not sell, and from a commercial point of view his and Cottie's decision to settle in Ireland had not been a success. In 1915 he had a nervous breakdown, which lasted into 1917. He had been made an associate of the Royal Hibernian Academy in 1914 and a full academician in the following year. He was recognized for the originality of his vision and for his increasingly central role as a painter of Irish life at a time when nationalism demanded icon-makers, and his recovery was helped by this growing sense of a role in Dublin and in Irish society. He painted views of the city ('A Westerly Wind', 1921; priv. coll.), its characters, its sporting events ('Singing the Dark Rosaleen, Croke Park, 1921'; priv. coll.). The country was going through the turmoil of the war of independence, the Anglo-Irish treaty, the civil war, and the grim political antagonisms that characterized the early 1920s. During this time Yeats produced a growing number of large and increasingly confident works. They show crowds attending sporting events at Croke Park; women singing in the street, in bars, or in trains; theatrical subjects; men of the streets, including newspaper-sellers and pavement artists. His early concept for exhibitions, 'Life in the west of Ireland', broadened into a succession of works that depicted the life of his country. 
Yeats was fifty when Ireland became independent. Never directly involved in politics himself, he was nevertheless deeply affected by the civil war and, as a result of meeting Eamon de Valera in Paris at the Irish Race Congress in 1922, became and remained sympathetic to his political views and those of his followers. In this respect his thinking diverged from that of his brother, who had supported the treaty and become a member of the senate. At the congress Jack Yeats gave his only lecture, 'Modern aspects of Irish art' (published in Dublin in 1922). This he managed to do without naming a single painter. 
Yeats sided with modernism, which in Dublin in the early 1920s had a distinctive meaning. In the absence of a strong artistic tradition based on academic art the arrival in the city of modernist principles -- of abstraction, of a movement that related to European painting rather than to London -- was successful. Yeats sided with the artists, led by Paul Henry, who formed the Society of Dublin Painters and became one of their number. He met Oskar Kokoschka, and they became friends. He derided the dominance of Paris and London in artistic life generally; this had been a theme of his Paris lecture, and he expressed it in respect of Picasso, suggesting that he 'would be more thrilling to his time and generation if he had jumped straight out of Spain without the use of Paris' (MS letter to Thomas MacGreevy, 8 Dec 1925; TCD). MacGreevy, who was Yeats's great champion at the time as well as a modernist, writer, and poet, crossed swords with Thomas Bodkin, a more conventional art critic, over the direction that Yeats was taking and the magnitude of his contribution to modern art and thought in Dublin. This led to public controversy. Dublin in the early 1920s was described as 'the Athens of Pericles', and it was a truthful insight into the ferment of thought and debate about the cultural life of the new state. Yeats was happy to be part of this, and his exhibitions -- he showed work in New York, Rome, Pittsburgh, London, and Liverpool throughout the decade -- gave him the opportunity to represent more and more widely his chosen theme of Irish life. 
During the 1920s Yeats became increasingly conscious of stylistic restrictions in his work. He was still having difficulties with colour and with the reconciliation of tone and compositional balance. He sought freedom, and it was not available to him in the more conventional techniques that he was employing. He dealt with the matter summarily. He abandoned his old palette and chose a new one, using primary colours quite freely; rich inflexions of colour were achieved with a freely handled impasto, substituting the palette knife and fingers for the brush. He chose to work on large canvases, and within them quite often to present a close focus on the subject matter; large horses' heads and strong-faced Irish men and women filled large picture areas. Characteristic was his use of ultramarine and cobalt blue in generous representation of shadow and of distant horizons. Cadmium yellow and alizarin crimson, used at times direct from the tube, produced works that caused former critics of the lameness of his earlier work to marvel at this extraordinary rejuvenation. (see, for example, 'Glory', 1946, and 'Freedom', 1947; both priv. coll.; reproduced in Arnold, pp. 369, 371, colour plates 12 and 14.) 
But though Dublin marvelled at Yeats's work the resources to buy it were thinly spread in Irish society, particularly among those interested in modernism, and it did not sell at all well. Yeats's output, substantial during the 1920s, fell off in the following decade, and in a mood of self-doubt he turned to writing. He produced a number of volumes -- 'Sligo' (1931), 'The Charmed Life' (1938), 'The Amaranthers' (1936), 'The Careless Flower' (1947) -- and had high hopes of becoming a successful writer. He had similar aspirations for the plays that he wrote during the 1930s. 
In 1941, through the intervention of John Betjeman, who suggested the idea to Kenneth Clark, Yeats was invited to show at the National Gallery, in London, with William Nicholson. The exhibition, opened on new year's day 1942, was a singular success and critical acclaim raised Yeats's stature greatly in Ireland. At the end of the Second World War he was given a retrospective exhibition in Dublin, and became in his last years a revered artistic figure. His output was vast. He painted more than 1100 works in oil, over half of them in the last twenty years of his long life. He died in Portobello Nursing Home, in Dublin, on 28 March 1957, Cottie having predeceased him, in 1948. The members of the government of the day, led by Eamon de Valera, and the main opposition parties turned out for his funeral and stood on the pavement as his coffin was brought from the church. He was buried on 30 March in Dublin's Mount Jerome cemetery. 
No Irish painter matched Jack B. Yeats at the end of his life, and his reputation continues to grow. In 'The Painters of Ireland, 1660-1920' (1978) Anne Crookshank and the knight of Glin pronounced him 'without doubt, the greatest Irish artist of the first half of the twentieth century' (p. 285). In singling out 'In Memory' (1915), they include Michael Rosenthal's comment that this picture 'has become a symbol of the archetypal Irish woman mourning her lost men, both literally in wars and rebellions, and metaphorically through the piercing sadness of constant immigration' (ibid.). Yeats's artwork is now the focus of study by Irish cultural historians for its record of travellers, peasants, life in the west of Ireland, and larger themes of Irish cultural and national identity. Hilary Pyle's 'catalogues raisonnes' of his oil paintings (1992) and of his watercolours, drawings, and pastels (1993) followed her biography, 'Jack B. Yeats' (1970; 2nd edn, 1989). His cartoons and illustrations have been the subject of separate studies. Yeats's work has been exhibited separately in, for example, 'Jack B. Yeats: the Late Paintings' (Arnolfini Gallery, Bristol, and Whitechapel Art Gallery, London, 1991), 'Jack B. Yeats: a Celtic Visionary' (Manchester City Art Gallery, 1996), and jointly with other artists in 'Aspects of Irish Art' (Columbus Gallery of Fine Arts, Ohio, and elsewhere, 1974). 'The Selected Writings of Jack B. Yeats', edited by Robin Skelton, appeared in 1991. Some years after Yeats's death Thomas Kinsella celebrated his life and that of Eamon de Valera, two very different early twentieth-century Irish public figures, in his poem 'The Last'. Yet Yeats, like the figure in his painting 'The Folded Heart', remains an intensely private man. 


@@@@@


doc= 37061


Yeats, William Butler (1865-1939), poet, was born on 13 June 1865 at 1 George's Ville, 5 Sandymount Avenue, Dublin, the eldest child of John Butler Yeats (1839-1922) and Susan Mary, 'nee' Pollexfen (1841-1900). His father was then still a barrister; shortly he would -- to the discomfiture of his wife, and still more of her family -- give up the law for the uncertain life of a portrait painter in bohemian London. 
The Yeats family was, in Irish parlance 'Ascendancy', but not grand: clergymen, lawyers, Dublin Castle officials rather than landowners, married into a wide cousinage across the Irish protestant world. They were proud of their descent from the great Norman clan of the Butlers, and preserved the name in their christenings, but connections with the ducal Ormond line are tenuous at best. By the 1860s their position in the world had declined. Here as elsewhere W. B. Yeats's life is emblematic of its time, since this process reflects a wider slippage; the newly confident Irish Catholic bourgeoisie were advancing into social and professional redoubts from which they had been excluded by the privileged minority. A reaction to this conditioned the stuffy and self-conscious world of protestant Dublin, against which the young Yeats would chafe just as his father had done. 
Yeats's mother's family, the Pollexfens of Sligo, were a different stock: also descended from gentry forebears, but originating in Devon. In the 1830s Yeats's maternal grandfather, William Pollexfen, had joined a branch of the family already settled in Sligo, married a cousin, and with another cousin William Middleton founded a prosperous shipping and milling business (with a profitable sideline in, among other things, wreckage rights). The Pollexfens were business people, property developers, and town councillors -- ornaments of that forgotten class, the Irish Victorian bourgeoisie. They reacted with bafflement and hostility to the charming but unreliable John Butler Yeats -- a brilliant talker, and eventually a first-rate painter, but cursed with a congenital inability to finish a painting or repay a debt. 
W. B. Yeats and his younger surviving siblings -- Susan Mary Yeats, called Lily (1866-1949), Elizabeth Corbet Yeats, or Lollie (1868-1940) ['see under 'Yeats, Susan Mary], and John, known as Jack, Butler Yeats (1871-1957) -- grew up conscious that their father's way of life was deeply disapproved of in Sligo, where they spent much of their childhood being looked after in the Pollexfen household. They all became distinguished artists in their own fields; and, significantly, they all succeeded by employing their Pollexfen qualities of thrift, common sense, and hard concentration along with the Yeats flair and vision. Looking at his eldest son's first work, and recognizing a true poetic voice, John Butler Yeats produced what his son later claimed was the only compliment to turn his head: 'By marriage with a Pollexfen we have given a tongue to the sea-cliffs' ('Autobiographies', 23). 
It was not, however, an easy, nor even a particularly precocious, ascent to Olympus. When W. B. Yeats (known to his family and intimates as Willie, a name he detested) was two, the family moved to London, living at a variety of lodgings before settling in the Bedford Park area of Hammersmith, then a kind of ghetto for aesthetes and artists. However, the children continued to be shipped back to Sligo for long intervals, travelling on small vessels belonging to the family firm. W. B. Yeats's earliest education was at a dame school in Sligo, and through coaching from family friends: a slow learner in some subjects, and a spectacularly idiosyncratic speller all his life, he none the less showed remarkable if wayward intellectual capacity early on, as well as a constitutional shyness which he learned to conceal beneath a mannered public pose. Both these characteristics -- intellectual and psychological -- were influentially shaped by his father's stimulating but aggressive didacticism. In London Yeats attended the Godolphin School in Hammersmith from 1877 but in 1881 John Butler Yeats once more transplanted the family back to Dublin. Here, the future poet completed his education at the Erasmus Smith high school, and subsequently -- like his sisters -- attended the Metropolitan School of Art from 1883 to 1885. By then he was writing copious but unpublished poetry; he first appeared in print in the 'Dublin University Review' of March 1885, with some brief lyrics, followed later that summer by a Shelleyan verse drama called 'The Island of Statues'. 
By then Yeats was serving another apprenticeship too, in the circle of intellectuals who met at the Contemporary Club organized by the protestant nationalist C. H. Oldham, editor of the 'Dublin University Review'. This actually had nothing to do with the strict unionist confines of Trinity College, Dublin, where Oldham was rather uncomfortably employed. Home rule politics were anathema in most Trinity circles, and these were the years of Parnell's growing ascendancy -- and of the land war, which put paid to the few remaining rents coming to John Butler Yeats out of the small family properties in co. Kildare. He was himself a home-ruler (though he preferred Parnell's predecessor Isaac Butt -- a family friend -- to the icy and enigmatic Chief); both J. B. Yeats and his twenty-year-old art student son were regulars at Oldham's Club from its origins in late 1885. Through these eclectic gatherings they met the returned Fenian intellectual John O'Leary, once literary editor of the firebrand 'Irish People' and still connected with nationalist journalism. 
The young Yeats was already noted for his 'poetic' character, alternately vague and intense, and for the charisma lent by his dreamy good looks and passionate outbursts of eloquence. Pronouncing accurately that Willie Yeats was the only club member who possessed literary genius, O'Leary was an invaluable connection to literary outlets like 'The Gael' as well as Irish-American publications run by his political friends, such as John Boyle O'Reilly's 'Boston Pilot'. The nature of Yeats's very early published verse certainly owes something to the kind of journal where he knew he could get it published. None the less it seems clear that the young Yeats adopted what was called at the time 'advanced' nationalism, and may have taken the Fenian oath about 1886 before returning to London, with the rest of the family, early in 1887. This was not, however, incompatible with a belief in home rule, and -- after Gladstone's adoption of the cause in 1886 -- a settled expectation that it was inevitable. Later in life W. B. Yeats would recall that the cultural revolution which -- in his view -- brought about the actual revolution of 1916-21 began after the shattering fall of Parnell in 1891. But in many ways the political and literary initiatives embraced by Yeats and his friends in the 1880s, such as the Young Ireland literary societies, should be seen as the creation of a cultural agenda in anticipation of a coming independence, achieved through the constitutional efforts of the apparently all-conquering Parnell. 
None the less the appeal of Fenianism was emotionally powerful for a young Irishman moving in literary circles in London, whose background of 'declasse' protestantism and uncertain location necessitated a firm claim on Irish identity. Tutored by O'Leary in the Irish version of classical republican virtues, introduced by the same cicerone to the poetry of Samuel Ferguson, excited by the Romantic and mythic histories of Ireland's 'Heroic Age' recently published by Standish James O'Grady, and moving in literary-nationalist circles already frequented by people like Katharine Tynan and the young Douglas Hyde, Yeats was firmly convinced of the need for an Irish cultural initiative which would advance a style of writing definitively national both in form and content, and create from local traditions a sustaining 'mythology'. It would take many years to refine this ideal -- years which, from one view, might be interpreted as representing a progressive process of depoliticization as well. Certainly in the late 1880s, as Yeats helped to form societies like the Irish Literary Society of London, planted out poems and reviews in an increasingly wide variety of journals, and logrolled indefatigably on behalf of his literary circle, he was developing a theory of literature which would move beyond the flyblown models of the early nineteenth century popularized by Thomas Davis and the Young Ireland movement. Significantly, the only Irish poet of the era whom Yeats continued to respect aesthetically was the maverick James Clarence Mangan (also a key influence on the young James Joyce), though in these years he also discovered a respect for the 'square-built power' of early nineteenth-century Irish fiction written by William Carleton and John and Michael Banim. By contrast, the influence on him of the great Romantics, notably Shelley, would remain as a subterranean stream, resurfacing as late as the 1920s. He also marked down William Blake as a master early on, and with Edwin Ellis produced a large-scale commentary on Blake's prophetic writings in 1893. While often erratic and idiosyncratic, it helped establish the importance of Blake's esoteric verse. 
However, Yeats himself isolated as a key moment in his poetic development his famous early poem 'The Lake Isle of Innisfree'. It was initially composed in mid-December 1888, at the time he was preaching to his circle the need to 'make poems on the familiar landscapes we love not the strange and rare and glittering scenes we wonder at -- these latter are the landscape of Art, the rouge of nature' (to Katharine Tynan, 21 Dec 1888, 'Collected Letters', 1.119). Published in 1890, it achieved immediate success -- still pursuing him around the world, to his irritation, forty years later. His 'prentice works in Dublin, often in the form of verse drama, had been inspired by the 'strange and rare and glittering', which still affects his first collection, 'The Wanderings of Oisin', in 1889; his best writing of the 1890s would follow the form set by 'Innisfree', with its deceptively simple language and dramatic personal interventions. But the poems of this period, culminating in the consummate 'symboliste' collection 'The Wind among the Reeds' (1899), possessed -- especially to an English ear -- their own strangeness too, derived not only from Yeats's deliberate Celticism but also from his equally considered occultism. 
Though this commitment had its Celtic dimension too, it serves as a useful reminder that Yeats's life was from early on divided firmly between his Irish sojourns and a London base. The Yeats family's move to London during the poet's early childhood paralleled that of many others; it also happened at a time when, as George Bernard Shaw mordantly recalled: 'every Irishman who felt that his business in life was on the higher planes of the cultural professions, felt that he must have a metropolitan domicile and an international culture: that is, he felt that his first business was to get out of Ireland. (G. B. Shaw, 'The Matter with Ireland', 1902, 10)' Yeats knew this, but he also knew the uncertainty of dislocation. In London he became a central figure in the bohemian circles where literary fashion, apprentice 'decadence', and supernatural experimentalism met and often overlapped. Life in Bedford Park may have been dogged by family tensions and unpaid butchers' bills, but it was also characterized by a circle of acquaintance which included Oscar Wilde and his mother as well as William Morris (in whose workshop Lily Yeats was trained) and George Bernard Shaw. In his early twenties Yeats was already moving easily from this world to that of the young writers around W. E. Henley, or the poets who met as the Rhymers' Club in the Cheshire Cheese pub in Fleet Street (including Lionel Johnson, Ernest Dowson, and John Davidson), and on to theosophist circles around Madame Helena Petrovna Blavatsky. Though incapable of speaking French, from the 1890s Yeats was also dropping in and out of various Parisian subcultures, and experimenting with hashish and mescal. He later fixed all these worlds memorably in his 'Autobiographies', placing them in their time with a delicate sense of distancing which never quite becomes ridicule; George Yeats later remarked that she was always astonished by her husband's uncanny sense of how things would look to people afterwards. At the time these cultural underworlds served, for this most autodidactic of intellectuals, as a kind of alternative university. 
This was especially true of occultism. From his time at the high school in Dublin Yeats had been interested in various exotic and mystical theories and ideas of spiritual life, from Indian philosophy to Baron Reichenbach's notions of 'Odic Force'; together with his lifelong friend George Russell (who wrote as 'AE'), he helped import theosophy to Dublin. This synthesis of spiritual enquiry, incorporating the vogue for eastern mysticism but allowing for Darwinism, briefly magnetized a surprising range of the artistic intelligentsia. Yeats later claimed that its chief charm for him was Blavatsky's entertaining personality, with her cynical Russian humour, taking the form of irreverent mockery of her most humourless and devoted disciples. But though he fell out with the theosophists, they provided an important staging post in his journey towards the kind of occult society which most closely answered his emotional and psychological requirements. He found this, more or less, in the Order of the Golden Dawn. 
Despite the impression given by Yeats's autobiographical writings (and several commentaries on his life), this was not an 1890s rite of passage that petered out about the turn of the century, but an involvement that stayed with him for most of his life. The order was devoted to magical researches rather than the achievement of mystical transcendence. Built on sub-Rosicrucian and cabbalistic foundations in 1887-8, by the time Yeats was initiated on 7 March 1890, it was evolving a complex structure of hierarchies, liturgy, training processes, and examinations. The combination of secret society and intellectual obstacle race appealed to him (as to many other former theosophists); he proceeded through its grades and rituals, devoted an astonishing amount of time to it, used it to focus his wide-ranging reading in mystic and occultist writings, and through it formed some of his most important friendships and associations. It seems likely that the charisma conferred on him within the order, under his adopted name of 'Demon Est Deus Inversus', helped create the hieratic and lofty persona which would come to characterize him in the outside world as well (and correspondingly irritate his family and older friends, like Russell). It gave him the authority he always sought; it also affected his relationships with women. Sexually uncertain until a comparatively late stage of his life, and concealing a lack of confidence beneath the pose of unworldly 'fin de siecle' poet, he could use his authority in occult matters to assert himself over the kind of women who appealed to him -- strong-minded, unconventional, and dramatic personalities as they generally were. This was true of Olivia Shakespear (1863-1938), the married novelist with whom he began a love affair in 1896, of the actress Florence Farr, and perhaps most of all of (Edith) Maud Gonne (1866-1953). 
A year younger than Yeats, Gonne was the daughter of an English army officer stationed at the Curragh; motherless and lonely, she adopted the cause of Ireland early on, in the form of revolutionary nationalist politics. Since she was a strikingly beautiful former debutante, with the height and presence of a Valkyrie, and after her father's death possessed a large private fortune, her political extremism brought her rapid notoriety in Dublin circles. She none the less managed to keep the other side of her life, based in Paris, comparatively secret: in 1887 she began a long liaison with the right-wing French politician and journalist Lucien Millevoye, by whom she had two children (the first conceived not long after she met Yeats). Yeats first met her -- or so he believed -- when she arrived at his family's house on 30 January 1889, bearing an introduction from John O'Leary, and 'the troubling of my life began' ('Memoirs', 40). She persistently stated that they had in fact met some time before, at his father's Dublin studio. But for him, that London encounter was a 'coup de foudre': his rather tepid and dutiful love interest in acquaintances like Katharine Tynan was replaced by a long-sustained passion for someone who seemed at once a heroine from a Shelleyan romance and a personification of Ireland at its most bewitching. She returned his friendship, shared his interests in the occult and mystic life, and deeply admired his poetry, but refused to give him more -- without, as yet, revealing the reasons. None the less their association on the astral plane remained intense; they shared visions of previous incarnations and would in 1898 achieve through telepathetic dreaming -- in Yeats's view at least -- a mystic marriage. 
The pattern of their relationship was set early on. While repeatedly begging her to marry him, Yeats believed that she was consecrated to 'Ireland'; though the extremism of her politics alarmed him, he followed nervously a step or two behind, and his support of her through the many vicissitudes of her life over the next thirty years or so was unfailing. In some ways the relationship -- enslavement to a magically beautiful and unattainable 'princesse lointaine' -- was so exactly appropriate for the nature of his poetry that it is easy to assume a certain amount of contrivance in his infatuation. But his notebooks, drafts, horoscope studies, private letters all bear witness to the depth and obsessiveness of a passion continually recreated, as he himself would write, like 'the phoenix', however often he thought he had laid it to rest. 
Maud Gonne supplies part -- though not all -- of the motivation behind Yeats's immersion in Irish political and cultural activity during the early 1890s. His efforts to commandeer the Irish Literary Society in Dublin, and to control the publication of an 'Irish Library' of canonical texts, led to intense in-fighting in 1892-3, from which he withdrew bruised; his efforts to capture Irish cultural initiatives on behalf of the neo-Fenian and Parnellite elements lost out to the more politically adept and ideologically moderate faction led by the septuagenarian Young Irelander Charles Gavan Duffy and Yeats's old companion T. W. Rolleston, who had defected to the moderates and was not forgiven for it. At the same time, the experience concentrated Yeats's enterprise to define a culture that would be definitively Irish, unmaterialistic, politically nationalist, and culturally avant-garde, and his key writings of the early 1890s demonstrate this. They also reflect the connection between folklore and occult divination which characterized Yeats's side of the movement, epitomized in his widely influential collection of prose pieces 'The Celtic Twilight' (1893). 
But Celtic revivalism also raised an issue just coming into prominence: the possibility of an Irish literary culture which would be un-English yet written in the English language. The Gaelic League, formed at just this time (1893), declared that this was an impossibility. Yeats made episodic efforts to learn Irish but quickly abandoned them -- through a congenital inability to learn languages, rather than a considered response. His reiterated argument that a new Irish literature could be forged in English was decried by many 'advanced' nationalists in the cultural arena. His political-spiritual credo was declared through the poetic manifesto 'To Ireland in the Coming Days', published as a kind of preface to 'The Countess Kathleen and Various Legends and Lyrics' (1892), and implicitly addressed to Maud Gonne as well as to his nationalist detractors. Though the next decade was to prove him right, he -- and several of his literary friends and allies -- would become proportionately distanced from conventional 'advanced' nationalist politics in the process. 
This is exactly what seemed to be happening in the mid-1890s, when Yeats published his selected 'Poems' (1895), which saw the start of his lifelong commitment to weeding and rewriting his early work into a canon. His approach, as Hugh Kenner has put it, was that of 'an architect, not a decorator; he didn't accumulate poems, he wrote books', each collection a polished and coherent whole (H. Kenner, 'The sacred book of the arts', 'Gnomon: Essays on Contemporary Literature', 1958). The mid-1890s also saw a temporary cooling in his relationship with Gonne; his close involvement in the new literary journal 'The Savoy' with his friend the symbolist poet and critic Arthur Symons; and the start of his love affair (and lifelong friendship) with Olivia Shakespear, reflected in some of the haunting love poetry of 'The Wind among the Reeds' ('The Shadowy Horses', 'Michael Robartes Remembers Forgotten Beauty'). Other 'answering' poems like 'Aedh Wishes his Beloved were Dead' clearly evoke his hopeless passion for Gonne. All this put London rather than Dublin at the forefront of his divided life between 1895 and 1897. But the last years of this key decade saw a dramatic intensification of his Irish activity, both political and cultural: Maud Gonne returned to the centre of his life, he became involved in the Fenian politicking around the commemoration of the 1798 rising, and he embarked on the theatrical enterprise which dominated his life for the next decade and brought him the most enduring and fruitful friendship and collaboration of his life so far. 
The years 1897-8 saw a frantic round of political meetings, plotting on committees, and planning for a large-scale commemoration of the revolutionary tradition in Irish politics, all timed for the summer of 1898. Maud Gonne was a leading light (using the contacts made and publicity coups staged in the counter-jubilee demonstrations of 1897), and Yeats himself advanced to prominence as president of the '98 Centennial Association of Great Britain and France, in which guise he began to appear in police reports. Part of the reason for his excitement was a parallel burst of occultist activity. Astrological portents and prophecies had foretold great things for the Celtic revivalist movement at the end of the century, coinciding with similar revelations among the Celticist avant-garde in Scotland, Brittany, and elsewhere; with Russell and others, Yeats and Gonne had begun to plan a new Celtic Mystical Order, constructing elaborate rituals and symbolical codes, and planning a centre in the holy land of the west of Ireland. National and spiritual liberation were to coincide in a new age, which would begin late in 1898. This was reflected in the poems of vision and apocalypse which he wrote at this time ('The Unappeasable Host', 'The Valley of the Black Pig', 'The Secret Rose'), as was his private expectation that Maud Gonne would at last come to him as lover and wife. It did not fall out as foretold. The 1798 commemoration activities, though they probably put in train a long-term revival of the Irish Republican Brotherhood, seemed at the time rather a damp squib. And while Yeats did receive an apocalyptic revelation just before Christmas 1898, it took the form of Maud Gonne's telling him about her secret life -- and secret family -- in Paris. While it can be conjectured that she may have been clearing the way for their relationship to progress to a different level (her affair with Millevoye had recently foundered), it was put to him -- and received on his part -- as presenting the clinching reason why she could never marry him. His shock and disillusionment, vividly reflected in his letters of the time, were immense. 
Significantly, however, these letters were poured out to another woman whose very different relationship to the young poet would have an almost equal effect on his life. Yeats's friendship with Augusta Gregory (1852-1932) had developed quickly from their meeting at Edward Martyn's Galway castle in the summer of 1896; her neighbouring house, Coole Park, became almost literally Yeats's second home from 1897, when he began the practice of spending summers there which would last thirty years. But she brought him far more than the background of 'order and labour' which he craved, and against which much of his finest work would be written. For Gregory's part, having married a much older man (Sir William Gregory, the retired politician and colonial governor) and been widowed young, the friendship with the dazzling young poet developed into a literary and theatrical collaboration, and launched her on a career of playwriting and theatrical management which put her at the centre of the developing cultural renaissance in Dublin. She was already independently interested in collecting rural folklore and superstitions, and unlike Yeats she spoke Irish. Here too they collaborated, going from cottage to cottage (where the poet's black garb meant he was sometimes mistaken for a proselytizing clergyman). Thirteen years older than Yeats (who always addressed her as Lady Gregory, though she called him Willie), she had a severe appearance and an imperious manner which concealed a passionate temperament, boundless energy, and tremendous powers of organization and perseverance; she was also capable of a racy and cynical humour. All her qualities were put to work for Yeats's benefit, and he paid poetic tributes to this most enduring of his friendships, which 'So changed me that I live, Labouring in ecstasy' ('Friends', written in January 1911). 
Lady Gregory came to occupy such a central role in Yeats's life that friends and family tended to grumble at the way his natural impetuousness and enthusiasm became overlaid by a certain hauteur and arrogance, as well as a growing idealization of the eighteenth-century Ascendancy tradition which Gregory, for him, represented. It is likely, however, that these qualities were also cultivated as a defence against the derisive sniping which Yeats always attracted from Dublin's literary quidnuncs. A distant attitude may also have provided necessary armour in the enterprise of an Irish Literary Theatre, which Yeats, Martyn, and Gregory planned in 1897 and which -- thanks largely to Gregory's indefatigable lobbying for support among the influential -- opened on 8 May 1899 with Yeats's play 'The Countess Cathleen'. This play, dealing with a saintly aristocrat who gives up her soul to the devil in order to save her people from starving, had been written ten years before, but much adapted in the interval -- partly to incorporate aspects of his relationship with Gonne. The ensuing furore about its supposedly blasphemous content set the tone for the theatre's fortunes. Run on a shoestring, and without a permanent base, the movement incorporated the talented theatrical producer Willie Fay and his actor-director brother Frank, as well as drawing on the experience of dramatic groups organized by Maud Gonne and her friends. Many of the original company were idealistic (and radical) nationalists. Gonne herself at first supported the Irish National Theatre Society, electrifying audiences with her 1902 performance in the nationalist allegory 'Cathleen ni Houlihan', jointly written by Yeats and Gregory (though it appeared under his name alone). A year later, however, Gonne left the society in protest against the plays of J. M. Synge. By then, in any case, the old Irish Literary Theatre was evolving into the Abbey Theatre company, inaugurated on 27 December 1904 and named after its permanent home, which had been provided by Yeats's wealthy fellow initiate of the Golden Dawn Annie Horniman. The reorganization also involved a triumvirate of directors, Yeats, Gregory, and Synge, wielding dictatorial power over their highly talented (and often resentful) company, and frequently finding themselves at odds with the irascible Horniman, who was romantically obsessed with Yeats. The positive result was a disciplined, innovative, and highly influential institution, which undertook tremendously successful tours in Britain and America, survived many cliffhanging crises (including the eventual departure of Horniman and her subsidy), and finally (1926) became one of the world's first state-subsidized theatres in an independent Ireland. 
The effect of this involvement on Yeats's creative and personal life was immense. His first (and last) writing was in dramatic form; he was deeply stage-struck, having already seen his early play 'The Land of Heart's Desire' produced in Bedford Park on 29 March 1894 as a curtain-raiser to Shaw's 'Arms and the Man'. During the first decade of the twentieth century nearly all his creative effort was channelled into the theatre. His immense correspondence is dominated by questions of organization, production, and direction; he followed the Wagnerian experiment at Bayreuth from a distance, and embarked on a long-lasting preoccupation with the innovative set designs of Gordon Craig, who made a set of screens to create abstract effects for Abbey productions; and he threw himself into playwriting. The results ranged from collaborative efforts with George Moore ('Diarmuid and Grania', 1901) and Gregory ('Cathleen ni Houlihan', 'The Pot of Broth', both 1902) to allegorical works like 'The King's Threshold' (1903) and 'Where there is Nothing' (1904); he also wrote 'On Baile's Strand' (1904), introducing the legendary Gaelic hero Cuchulainn, around whose life he would develop a cycle of plays, written in several forms. Dramatic form, indeed, remained a problem: the early verse plays are perhaps the least effective, but from 1915 Yeats began experimenting with elements of the Japanese Noh drama, using masks, choruses, and abstract sets, but capable of dealing with concrete themes like Irish resistance to British rule ('The Dreaming of the Bones', 1919). There were also less successful comedies attempting to blend nihilism with farce, like 'The Player Queen', commissioned by Mrs Patrick Campbell (whom the poet-playwright approached with mingled terror and fascination) and much rewritten over a ten-year period; and a lengthy Wagnerian verse drama called 'The Shadowy Waters', never finished to his satisfaction. Yeats apprenticed himself to writing plays with all his characteristic passion and commitment, but it could be argued that real success eluded him until the short plays he wrote in his last decade -- notably 'The Words upon the Windowpane' (1930), where his hero Jonathan Swift speaks through a medium's mouth to riveting dramatic effect, and 'Purgatory' (1938), which consummately employs Yeatsian themes of repetition, history, and violence. 
It is none the less true that Yeats's theatrical involvement developed the declamatory and increasingly colloquial tone of his verse, as well as his ability as ventriloquist: the form of dramatic dialogue recurs in his verse from this period, and he continued to invent personae to express his poetic voice (Michael Robartes, Crazy Jane, Ribh the hermit, and possibly his occult 'familiar', Leo Africanus). Through the theatre he also developed one of the most influential literary friendships of his life, with the playwright John Millington Synge, whose astonishing plays formed the centre of the Abbey's avant-garde repertoire. Though there were always tensions between the two men, Yeats's admiration for the work of his enigmatic and reticent colleague was unstinting; he also recognized the shock value of Synge's uncompromising work, and its value as literature that was at once distinctively Irish and distinctively modern. Synge's work, and the angry reactions to it in Dublin, also focused Yeats's mind on his own relationship to conventional Irish nationalism. Synge's early death (1909) remained a defining point in Yeats's life, and he is an abiding theme in poems such as 'The Fisherman'. After Maud Gonne's marriage in February 1903 to an ostentatiously unmystical Irish Republican Brotherhood man of action, John MacBride, Yeats felt less tramelled by the beliefs of his youth; when Gonne left her violent husband after a short and abusive marriage, the fact that the nationalist world took his side against hers compounded Yeats's (though not Gonne's) disillusionment with Fenian pieties. His own nationalism became more and more 'sui generis', and his quarrels with the guardians of piety more and more aggressive. The stage of the Abbey provided the arena for the most celebrated of these confrontations. Plays like 'The King's Threshold' and 'Where there is Nothing' may be read as commentaries on the artist's relation to the politics of his day; he certainly abandoned his hopes of a revolutionary apocalypse after 1900, and avoided Fenian support groups set up in the aftermath of the South African War. Most of all, he opposed what he felt to be the ideals of Irish culture advanced by Arthur Griffith's Sinn Fein movement from about 1905. And if the first half of Yeats's life pivots round one great emblematic confrontation, it is the row over Synge's play 'The Playboy of the Western World' in 1907, when Yeats pitted himself and the Abbey Theatre against what he saw as know-nothing pietism and intolerance. The play's opponents are often represented as the outraged Dublin bourgeoisie; but Yeats identified them specifically as Sinn Feiners, and said so. 
In his essay of 1910, 'J. M. Synge and the Ireland of his Time', which is a first instalment of autobiography masquerading as an elegy for his friend, Yeats clearly constructed the arguments for a kind of nationalism which would be at once inclusive, imaginative, and realistic. Arthur Griffith (once a friend to the theatrical movement, now an enemy of the Abbey and Yeats) had described 'The Playboy' as 'a vile and inhuman story told in the foulest language we have ever listened to from a public platform... the production of a moral degenerate who has dishonoured the women of Ireland before all Europe' ('Sinn Fein', 2 February 1907). Both the play and its proponents were, in a word, un-Irish and anti-national. Yeats, in opposition, cited his own revolutionary record in Fenian organizations and accepted the directly political implications of the 'Playboy' controversy, arguing (in a particularly sinewy and subtle way) that the nineteenth-century Young Ireland conventionalities no longer answered the questions of identity posed by modern Ireland. The invention of tradition, and 'images for the affections', had done their work of confidence building, and Irish national rhetoric must advance beyond chauvinism and defensiveness: 'Even if what one defends be true, an attitude of defence, a continual apology, whatever the cause, makes the mind barren because it kills intellectual innocence; that delight in what is unforeseen, and in the mere spectacle of the world, the mere drifting hither and thither that must come before all true thought and emotion. A zealous Irishman, especially if he lives much out of Ireland, spends his time in a never-ending argument about Oliver Cromwell, the Danes, the penal laws, the rebellion of 1798, the famine, the Irish peasant, and ends by substituting a traditional casuistry for a country. ('Essays and Introductions', 1961, 314)' By 1910 Yeats had redirected into the theatre his belief in ritual, his desire to educate an Irish public away from English materialism to intellectual independence, his ability to dominate committees and set up organizations. These qualities were also displayed in his periodic efforts to exercise a decisive influence over his sisters' enterprise, the Cuala Press, not always to their pleasure. At forty-five he was determined to turn his energies back towards verse and to spend less time running the Abbey. In Dublin he sustained for some years a discreet love affair with Mabel Dickinson, an amateur actress and 'medical masseuse'; it ended in 1913, when she pressed for marriage on the basis of an unfounded pregnancy scare. But throughout he remained close to Gonne, and their relationship went through a particularly intense phase late in 1908, when they briefly became lovers at last, before reverting to the spiritualized bond which Gonne preferred: a 'mystic marriage'. Yet up to 1917, and his sudden marriage, she still haunted his poetry: 'Her Praise'. 'His Phoenix', and, 'The People' were all written in 1914-15. 
In 1908, aged only forty-three, Yeats had produced an eight-volume 'Collected Works'; though intended as clearing the ground in order to advance, it was a risky gesture. But by now he was a major figure in the literary firmament. Appositely for someone both preoccupied by the doctrine of the mask, and very conscious of the need for self-presentation, Yeats remained a favourite subject for artists all his life. His striking looks as a young man, with his raven hair, olive skin, and dreamy gaze, are preserved in many portraits: notably by his father (1900), William Strang (1903), Augustus John (1907), and Charles Shannon (1908). He was the subject of distinguished photographs by Alvin Langdon Coburn, Alice Broughton, and others, and was sculpted by Kathleen Bruce (1908) and Albert Power (1918). He was a favourite subject for caricature by masters such as Beerbohm and Dulac. The frontispieces to the volumes of his 'Collected Works' run the gamut of images by John, Sargent, Mancini, Shannon, and J. B. Yeats: 'nobody will believe they are the same man', Yeats wrote to John Quinn, 'and I shall write an essay upon them and describe them as all the different personages that I have dreamt of being, but have never had the time for'. His omnivorous juvenile reading and the education of his father's studio had refined his critical powers and the weight and originality of his work as literary critic has never quite won its due. His contribution to the study of Blake, Spenser, Shelley, and Shakespeare is decisive, besides his reinstatement of near-forgotten Irish figures such as Carleton, Mangan, and Ferguson. Yeats was also behind the great success of Rabindranath Tagore, whose work he powerfully advocated (and subtly edited); the award of Nobel prize to Tagore in 1913 marked one of Yeats's great triumphs of literary entrepreneurship. 
By 1914 Yeats, in his fiftieth year, was at a crossroads in life; old adversaries like George Moore thought he had written himself out. He had become a celebrated figure in English as well as Irish literary life. The years up to the First World War saw him become an established lion in the London social safari, sought after by hostesses like Lady Cunard, lunching at the Asquiths', an influential member of Edmund Gosse's academic committee of the Royal Society of Literature, the recipient of a civil-list pension from 1910 (for which 'advanced' Irish nationalists refused to forgive him). In 1915 he turned down a knighthood. He had achieved enormous success on the American lecture tour circuit, making extended visits in 1903-4, 1911, 1914, 1920, and 1932. He was a firm supporter of the 'Home Rule Bill', passed, with difficulty, by 1914, but suspended for the duration of the war, and made some eloquent speeches supporting it; but his Fenian connections had apparently lapsed. His life remained divided between Coole in the summers and his celebrated Bloomsbury rooms in Woburn Buildings, where he held court on Monday evenings, for much of the rest of the year. During the winters of 1913, 1915, and 1916 he spent much time in an Ashdown Forest cottage, accompanied by the young American poet Ezra Pound (who married Olivia Shakespear's daughter Dorothy) as secretary and amanuensis. Pound and Yeats certainly influenced each other, though the traffic was not as one-way as the American liked to suggest; from the early 1900s Yeats's verse had been striving towards the colloquial voice, as well as the ellipsis and condensation, which bewildered some critics when he published his path-breaking collection 'Responsibilities' in 1914. The bitter interrogations of poems like 'To a Wealthy Man...', 'September 1913', and 'To a Shade' were also inspired by a series of public controversies in Irish life, where Yeats had opposed what he saw as the philistinism of the new Irish bourgeoisie -- notably over the vexed question of municipal support for a modern art gallery to house the pictures offered by Gregory's nephew, the art dealer and connoisseur Hugh Lane -- an issue left hanging when Lane went down with the 'Lusitania' in 1915, leaving the disposition of the paintings legally (though not morally) uncertain. 
Yeats's distancing from conventional nationalism, his disillusionment with modern Irish life, and his apparent absorption into the English establishment, should all be borne in mind as the background to his response to the shattering Irish rising of Easter 1916. It was as much of a shock to him as to most other people, and his first reaction -- as he wrote to Gregory on 11 May -- was that 'all the work of years has been overturned, all the bringing together of classes, all the freeing of Irish literature and criticism from politics' (11 May 1916, 'Letters', 613). With the execution of the insurgents he began to feel an unwilling admiration for the self-sacrifice of those involved -- who included John MacBride, Maud Gonne's estranged husband. Yeats's feelings (and their ambiguity) are powerfully interrogated in the key poem 'Easter 1916', composed between the execution of the insurgents in May and the end of September. It was circulated in a privately printed edition but not published for four years -- partly because he feared jeopardizing the cause of reclaiming Lane's picture collection for Ireland (a campaign in which he and Gregory were lobbying English politicians), partly because his own feelings were in the process of crystallization. 'Easter 1916', in its intellectual complexity, subtle shifts of mood and form, and use of internalized dialogue, marks a new level in Yeats's 'political' poems; but it was also a last, elegiac appeal to Gonne to turn from fanatical abstractions and join him in a celebration of life. At the same time his sympathies were moving towards the revolutionary cause even before the Lloyd George government mounted its campaign against the IRA in 1920 by means of the 'black and tan' mercenary forces, which Yeats assailed in poems and speeches. By the time of the rising he was already negotiating to buy the ancient Norman tower of Ballylee in Galway, near Coole; during the Irish revolution of 1916-21 he decided to move back to his native country and, as he had put it early on, 'begin building again'. 
In the same period Yeats's private life also went through dramatic upheavals: in 1916 he was a 51-year-old bachelor, by the end of 1921 he was married and the father of two children. During the summer of 1916 he visited Gonne at her seaside house in Normandy. After MacBride's death he had asked her to marry him once more, and she had once more refused. He was in any case deeply preoccupied with her daughter by Millevoye, Iseult (1894-1954) ['see 'Stuart, Iseult], now a fascinating (and strikingly beautiful) young woman of twenty-two, who admired him deeply; by 1917 the 52-year-old poet had become entranced by her, and that summer he proposed marriage, which she refused. He subsequently turned to another much younger woman: Bertha Georgie Hyde-Lees (1892-1968), known as George, whose mother was married to Olivia Shakespear's brother. She was a close friend of Dorothy Pound, and had collaborated on spiritualist researches with Yeats, which had become infused with romantic interest by late 1915. However, Yeats's obsession with Iseult persisted, and his marriage to George on 20 October 1917 came as a total surprise to most of their acquaintance. It also brought him very near to a total breakdown. The triangle of women in his life (Maud-Iseult-George) recurs in his poems of the time, lightly disguised, and stands behind the play 'The Only Jealousy of Emer'; he was also deeply affected by the repetition of a pattern set in the 1890s, when he had been torn between his affair with Shakespear and the unattainable but disruptive image of Gonne. 
Astrological calculations had played a part in Yeats's conviction that he would marry in 1917; foretold or not, it was a fortunate decision. George Yeats was highly intelligent, good-humoured (if slightly acerbic), sophisticated, and quietly unconventional. She created the first settled home the poet had known (helped by her independent means), guarded his increasingly uncertain health, and proved a heaven-sent collaborator in his work as well: preserving drafts, editing his work posthumously, and above all recharging his occult researches for nearly ten years by means of concentrated experiments in 'automatic writing', first employed as a method of assuaging his doubts and self-reproaches in the first days of their sudden marriage. She was also well aware of -- as she put it -- 'the strange, chaotic, varied and completely unified personality that you are' (1 Jan 1935, priv. coll.). 
This was just as well. Strikingly, Yeats not only remained friends with most of his past lovers, he also relied heavily on mutually supportive friendships with women. This often involved an implicitly sexual element: extraordinarily attractive all his life, he had a way of lending himself out to the fantasies of others and then withholding himself while they stayed in thrall. His marriage did not mean an end to this kind of relationship, and intense collaborative friendships, in some cases developing into love affairs, continued to be a feature of his later life -- notably with Margot Ruddock, Ethel Mannin, Dorothy Wellesley, and Edith Shackleton Heald. But his marriage remained near the centre of his life, bringing him a great period of emotional and imaginative fulfilment. It is symbolically marked by the publication by Cuala of his landmark volume 'The Wild Swans at Coole' a month after his wedding, but it is the extended version brought out by Macmillan in 1919 which stands as a coded autobiographical record of these eventful years. Criticized by some for uneven language and wilful obscurity, it was seen by more far-sighted commentators as his most significant advance since 'The Wind among the Reeds'. The title-poem in fact revisits his 1890s themes of personal alienation and emotional deprivation, but in severely beautiful language, without a touch of ornateness. The same qualities appear in 'The Fisherman' where the poet claims not only an elite status but an ideal audience: '
All day I'd looked in the face 

What I had hoped 'twould be 

To write for my own race 

And the reality; 

The living men that I hate, 

The dead man that I loved, 

The craven man in his seat, 

The insolent unreproved 

' There is also a series of poems written before the upheavals of 1917 which celebrate Gonne's departed beauty and indomitable spirit, and some heartfelt lyrics inspired by his feelings for Iseult. 'In Memory of Major Robert Gregory' is the most substantial of Yeats's elegies for his friend's son, killed in the war, but it is also a sombre meditation on his own acquisition of a wife and a house, at a time of life when old friends and associations were falling away from him. Above all, 'Solomon and Sheba', 'The Phases of the Moon', and 'The Double Vision of Michael Robartes' reflect or even record the insights brought by George Yeats's mediumship. 'The Wild Swans at Coole' commemorates a period of emotional turmoil as well as occult revelation. 
However, politics were withheld from the volume, in the shape of the pro-rising poems written after 1916. These were cautiously published from 1920, and collected in 'Michael Robartes and the Dancer', published in 1921, embodying further fruits of this new phase in his life, while the philosophical pattern-making precipitated by George's insights were processed into 'A Vision' (1926, revised 1937). But the summit of Yeats's creative achievement in these years is represented in 'The Tower' (1928). This volume, decorated with one of Thomas Sturge Moore's most beautiful cover engravings, depicting Ballylee and its reflection, brought together the poems quarried out of new sources, expressed in new language. At the same time, as Richard Ellmann remarked of the breathtaking opening poem 'Sailing to Byzantium', Yeats had in a sense been writing them all his life. Thus that poem is a distillation of his well-established themes of human old age, the mutability of nature, and the eternity of art -- but viewed quizzically through the prism of a millennial Byzantium created from his supercharged imagination and wide if erratic reading. As such, it has magnetized a phalanx of scholars but retains the quintessential Yeatsian combination of mystery and accessibility: '
That is no country for old men. The young 

In one another's arms, birds in the trees, 

-- Those dying generations -- at their song, 

The salmon-falls, the mackerel-crowded seas, 

Fish, flesh, or fowl, commend all summer long 

Whatever is begotten, born, and dies. 

' 
'The Tower' also contains his two great sequences about history and violence, inspired by the Bolshevik as well as the Irish revolution -- 'Nineteen Hundred and Nineteen' and 'Meditations in Time of Civil War'. The first interrogates 'the present state of the world' (its original title) through a complex commentary on cyclical history and personal disillusionment: '
We, who seven years ago 

Talked of honour and of truth, 

Shriek with pleasure if we show 

The weasel's twist, the weasel's tooth. 

' 'Meditations' meanwhile, suggests, doubtfully enough, that the apocalyptic horses of destruction can herald a new creativity and growth, arising out of the wreckage of a superficially assured civilization. A volume that also includes 'Among School Children' and 'All Souls Night' has to be reckoned at the height of his achievement. While the personal voice is as dominant as ever, Yeats also demonstrates a new ability to raise abstruse philosophical questions in a language at once mobile, exploratory, and economical. He thought it the best book he had written, and he was right. 

'The Tower' also contains 'Leda and the Swan', written five years before, and already notorious. That recurring theme of the birth of civilizations through acts of violence was cast into shadow by the immediacy of the erotically charged imagery when Yeats published it in 'To-morrow', a short-lived magazine edited by Iseult and her husband, Francis Stuart (1902-2000), which had successfully outraged Irish Catholic piety. This was a deliberate strategy: Yeats also contributed an anonymous editorial, designed to provoke the self-righteous. From the early days of the new Irish Free State he set himself up as the scourge of artistic and literary censorship, not always with the approval of fellow protestants who preferred not to rock the boat. 
Though the Yeatses first lived in Oxford after their marriage, George had encouraged her husband's instinct to return to Ireland and from early 1922 they divided their time between a Dublin town house and the tower at Ballylee. The Irish civil war rumbled in the background, and its reverberations echo in 'Meditations in Time of Civil War', written at this time: '
We had fed the heart on fantasies, 

The heart's grown brutal from the fare; 

More substance in our enmities 

Than in our love; O honey-bees, 

Come build in the empty house of the stare. 

' The upheavals of Irish politics also brought Yeats back into public life. In 1923 he was nominated to the senate of the new Irish Free State, where he took an active role over the next five years, chairing the committee appointed to choose a new coinage for the country, and making celebrated speeches against the imposition of Catholic social teaching in Irish constitutional law. He used his public position on occasions like the Tailteann games (August 1924), as well as his platform in the senate, to further the cause. But the tide of opinion was against him, and the attitudes he struck during the 1920s and 1930s would be held against him in perpetuity. At the same time his espousal of artistic freedom and celebrated pronouncements against the prohibition of divorce (1925) conferred a special position in Irish public life. And though he saw himself as seeking, and finding, an 'Anglo-Irish solitude', he could not stop throwing himself into public controversy when the opportunity arose. 
In another key poem, 'Among School Children', Yeats described himself during his senate years as 'a smiling public man', but the smile was not always in evidence. As a politician and a poet he was always conscious that there was an audience to be addressed; this could be both a strength and a weakness. Significantly, 'Among School Children' ended by posing profoundly unanswerable Neoplatonic questions; for the centre of his imaginative life remained far from politics, a fact amply if rather mystifyingly demonstrated in 'A Vision', published in 1926. Relying on the interrogations and reflections pursued through George's automatic writing, this strange book codified human archetypes and historical cycles into a framework based on the twenty-eight phases of the moon; arcane philosophy had in some measure replaced the magical quests and rituals of the Order of the Golden Dawn, though he kept up his connection with that organization as late as 1922. In both these involvements his wife's influence was discreet but decisive: her wide reading in esoterica inform the resourceful responses which make up the vast corpus of 'Automatic Script' analysed by scholars. 'A Vision' is an attempt to fashion a personal philosophy, and to codify historical change, on lines that have been described as 'Gnostic-Apocalyptic'. It might also be seen (in a private description of Oliver St John Gogarty's) as 'a geometrical rendering of the emotions, a mixture of Einstein and myth' (unpublished letter to L. A. G. Strong, 26 Jan 1926, University of Texas at Austin). Several of its preoccupations had been aired in the two essays on art and the spiritual life published as 'Per amica silentia lunae' in 1918: George had seen the proofs during the first days of their marriage, and her 'instructors' had clearly taken them to heart. When writing 'Per amica' Yeats had characteristically written to Craig: 'I used to think, when I was a boy, that no man should be permitted to public life till he had written first: an account of the world to come; second: a practicable scheme for the perfection of this world, and sworn to the two. (unpublished letter, 4 Sept 1917, Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris)' This neatly expresses his enduring belief in the interconnectedness of supernatural and everyday life, which tended to bewilder his more earthbound acquaintances, but was deeply rooted in his early devotion to Swedenborg and more especially William Blake -- an admiration that never left him. 
At the same time, the strength of Yeats's work -- and some of his finest poetry was written in the 1920s -- was also rooted in direct personal experience. It is not coincidental that he was simultaneously continuing his reflective 'Autobiographies', and still fighting hard battles over the Abbey Theatre (notably regarding the new dramatic genius Sean O'Casey, whose early plays provoked riots reminiscent of the reaction to Synge, but who broke with Yeats and Gregory when they turned down his experimental anti-war play 'The Silver Tassie' in 1928). 
Yeats's international status was recognized by the award of the Nobel prize in 1923, which brought him some financial capital for the first time in his life; the lecture which he gave on the occasion, published in 'The Bounty of Sweden', stands as one of his most influential essays in autobiography. Augustus John's second portrait, of 1930, depicts Yeats in his maturity, with his disciplined mane of white hair and pugnacious lower lip. He was by now one of Dublin's great established figures, both in his own right and as the representative of the cultural renaissance which -- it was generally held, and unequivocally stated by Yeats himself in his speech receiving the Nobel prize -- had set in motion the Irish revolution and war of independence. Long ago, in 1913, he had emphasized to Gregory that future generations would see their era of Irish history through their own biographies, and so it was coming to be. Gregory herself died of cancer in 1932; Yeats, who had stayed with her at Coole through her last months, had lost one of the rocks of his existence, as well as the house he loved more than any other. (Taken over by the Forestry Commission, it was allowed to rot and was eventually demolished, a fate Yeats himself had proleptically dealt with in his lapidary poem to Gregory and her influence, 'Coole Park, 1929'.) He and George moved out of central Dublin in 1932 to a small country house with a large garden at Rathfarnham, beneath the Dublin mountains; he had already stopped going to Ballylee, and from 1927 was spending some of each winter in southern Europe for the sake of his health; in 1928 he had considered settling in Rapallo for good. He suffered from high blood pressure, as well as recurrent arthritis; his chest and heart gave frequent cause for alarm. He was severely ill in November-December 1929, when a haemorrhage of the lungs was followed by Malta fever, collapsed again from January to March 1935 with congestion of the lungs, and early in 1936 was threatened by acute sclerosis and kidney problems. When his doctor (and fellow poet) Oliver Gogarty read him a letter from his Spanish doctor describing him as 'an antique cardio-sclerotic of advanced years', Yeats allegedly responded that it sounded a more sonorous title than lord of Lower Egypt. 
Yeats's failing health makes the febrility and energy of his work during his last decade all the more remarkable. This energy was also reflected in surges of excitement about political issues. Though he was fully committed to the Free State, Yeats's years in the senate had not given him a high opinion of the workings of representative democracy; his naturally elitist inclinations were reinforced by the authoritarian and arcane world of occult researches, and a dislike of what he saw as the devaluation of culture in the post-war world. In Irish terms, he was still a passionate believer in the necessity of a distinctive national culture, grounded in essential Irish traditions rather than pinchbeck materialism imported from England; but he now looked for those traditions in the work of eighteenth-century luminaries of the Ascendancy like Bishop Berkeley, Edmund Burke, and perhaps most of all Jonathan Swift. Long before, in 'Reveries over Childhood and Youth' (1915), he had rejoiced in 'all that joins my life to those who had power in Ireland' ('Autobiographies', 22); his celebration of traditional authority took a political swerve in 1933, when he became interested in the proto-fascist movement started by General O'Duffy, known as the 'blueshirts'. Yeats actually wrote some embarrassingly bad poems to be used as marching songs but rapidly distanced himself from the movement when it became clear that it stood for principles very different from those he had hoped for. Neither the fervent Catholic pietism nor the anti-intellectualism of the blueshirts and their leaders could appeal to someone who had fought so manfully against the literary censorship imposed by the Free State; the movement's real impetus came from the farming interest who felt disadvantaged by government economic policies, and from political elements antipathetic to the former revolutionary Eamon De Valera, who had just assumed power democratically, after opposing the treaty in arms only ten years before. Neither of these issues meant much to Yeats: he was nearly seventy and in some ways a man of the 1890s still and his wish had been to see the revival of a poetic and anti-modern Ireland, the 'dream of the noble and the beggar-man'. 
At the same time Yeats was not immune to the currents of right-wing thought sweeping Europe; long a devoted reader of Nietszche, he devoured Spengler's 'Decline of the West', became a member of the Eugenics Society, and from the early 1920s issued periodic denunciations of parliamentary democracy as redundant, quoting -- if not necessarily endorsing -- Mussolini. (Some of his intemperate pronouncements on modern politics were published in 'On the Boiler' eight months after his death.) He was also a frequent visitor to Italy, where he resumed his old friendship with Pound, wintering in Rapallo in 1928 and 1929, and speaking at the fourth congress of the Alessandro Volta Foundation in Rome in October 1934. He accepted the Goethe-plakette from the city of Frankfurt in the same year, but this was purely a recognition of the first German performance of 'The Countess Cathleen'. He occasionally expressed ill-advised approval of some features of the new Nazi regime, though he never visited the country. But this does not necessarily add up to fascist politics (indeed, his speech at the Roman congress stressed the necessity of artistic freedom); he was ironic about Pound's political excesses and (unlike friends such as Maud Gonne, Iseult Stuart, and Oliver Gogarty) never subscribed to any form of antisemitism. Though he refused to join his friend Ethel Mannin in her campaign to liberate Carl von Ossietzsky from Nazi Germany in 1936, it seems likely that this was because he disapproved of using a Nobel prize nomination in such a directly political way. 'Do not try to make a politician of me', he wrote to Ethel Mannin in 1936 ('Letters', 850-51): 'even in Ireland I shall never I think be that again -- as my sense of reality deepens, and I think it does with age, my horror at the cruelty of governments grows greater, and if I did what you want I would seem to hold one form of governments more responsible than any other and that would betray my convictions. Communist, fascist, nationalist, clerical, anti-clerical are all responsible according to the number of their victims. I have not been silent; I have used the only vehicle I possess -- verse. If you have my poems by you look up a poem called 'The Second Coming'. It was written some sixteen or seventeen years ago and foretold what is happening. I have written of the same thing again and again since... I am not callous, every nerve trembles with horror at what is happening in Europe. 'The ceremony of innocence is drowned'.' Yeats also emphasized to Mannin that he remained 'a Fenian of the school of John O'Leary'. Certainly his opposition to Britain's record in Ireland remained powerful, and was rekindled by the controversy over Roger Casement, executed for treason after the 1916 rising after agitation for a pardon was short-circuited by the release of his alleged homosexual diaries. Casement, like Parnell, recurs in Yeats's pungent late ballads, symbolizing nobility done down by 'baseness'. But his last years, like his early life, were divided between England and Ireland. In Dublin he had tried to construct a circle of sympathetic and talented literary friends, meeting regularly at his house -- the kind of 'cenacle' on which he had always depended. They included his oldest friend George Russell as well as the younger writers Frank O'Connor and F. R. Higgins whom he also brought into the Abbey organization, and the Irish Academy of Letters which Yeats and Shaw set up in 1932, drawing violent chauvinist abuse from the 'Catholic Bulletin' and elsewhere. But in several ways the intellectual atmosphere of De Valera's Ireland was uncongenial to him -- and he to it, as reflected in a series of virulent attacks on 'Pensioner Yeats' and his 'Sewage School' of poetry. And Yeats's appetite for the exotic remained undimmed: in 1934-5 he became almost as excited about the reflections of the Indian sage Shri Purohit Swami as he had been over Rabindranath Tagore twenty-five years before. He wrote the introduction to the Swami's autobiography and spent the winter of 1935-6 in Majorca with him, hoping to achieve a fruitful collaboration in spiritual and literary terms. But the episode ended disastrously: Yeats suffered his most serious illness yet, his latest admirer, Margot Ruddock, followed them to the island and produced a spectacular nervous breakdown, while an embittered female camp follower of the Swami's was only just dissuaded from precipitating a scandal. 
Now seventy, Yeats continued to rage against old age -- which, as he ironically pointed out to Olivia Shakespear, he had been denouncing since 'The Wanderings of Oisin', written in his early twenties. He defied it on one level by engaging in literary controversy -- notably over his idiosyncratic choice for the 'Oxford Book of Modern Verse' in 1936, which combined an eccentric approach to canon making with an 'Introduction' that is actually a masterly instalment of intellectual autobiography. There were also passionate friendships with younger women; much of his time from the mid-1930s was spent staying in Sussex with Wellesley or Heald. In April 1934 he underwent the celebrated Steinach operation (actually a unilateral vasectomy) with a view to prolonging (or restoring) his potency. The physiological effect was doubtful, but his powers were certainly -- and miraculously -- exercised at full stretch in the poetry of his last years. This is often savage, hard, and clear in the manner he had declared to be his ideal from the turn of the century, but only intermittently embraced. Sequences like the 'Crazy Jane' poems turned back to the ballad metres and even the demotic Irish personae of his very early verse, but put them to aggressively modern use; philosophical lyrics like 'Long-legged Fly' used the cyclical ideas derived from a lifetime's speculative reading with a challenging economy and beauty. His rediscovery of themes from Indian philosophy also suggested the mystical and symbolic use of sexual desire and ecstasy. The best of his late poetry explores the myths humanity lives by, and anchors them in his own experience. At the same time he continued the interrogation of the creative process which he had been engaged in since 'Adam's Curse' (1904). Finally, in 'The Circus Animals' Desertion' he produced perhaps his most consummately expressed artistic autobiography: '
Those masterful images because complete 

Grew in pure mind, but out of what began? 

A mound of refuse or the sweepings of a street, 

Old kettles, old bottles and a broken can, 

Old iron, old bones, old rags, that raving slut 

Who keeps the till. Now that my ladder's gone, 

I must lie down where all the ladders start, 

In the foul rag-and-bone shop of the heart. 

' The declamatory note of his 'Last Poems' is not always successful, and the lines can ring as alternately over-contrived, ragged, and jarring; nor are his ventures into demotic saltiness always happy. (F. R. Higgins, who advocated poetry that could be sung to Irish folk tunes, had a lot to answer for.) But at best this final achievement confirmed his claim to rest at the forefront of modernism, having started as an ornament of the blue-and-silver 1890s and the 'Celtic note'. The note of 'curious astringent joy' which he attributed to Nietszche and to Blake also sounds through his late testaments, and at such junctures he makes good his sustained artistic effort to break through into the 'desolation of reality'. 
When Yeats wrote 'The Circus Animals' Desertion' he had not long to live. His health necessitated a long stay in the south of France from January to March 1938. Back in Ireland, he saw the publication of 'New Poems', and the production of his play 'Purgatory' which opened at the Abbey on 10 August with sets designed by his daughter Anne; it was accompanied, gratifyingly, by a theological controversy. But in December he was back on the Riviera, where he died at Roquebrune on 28 January 1939. He was writing to the end. His last play, 'The Death of Cuchulain', and his last two poems, 'Cuchulain Comforted' and 'The Black Tower', hark back to the Gaelic legendary themes of forty years before. But 'Cuchulain Comforted' is also a Dantean vision of transformation and departure into the shades, written when Yeats knew he was dying. In a sense, he choreographed the performance of his death as well as his life. 'Last Poems and Two Plays' was published the following July. Shortly afterwards, the world descended into war, and the removal of Yeats's remains from Roquebrune, where they were initially interred on 30 January 1939, to his desired burial place in Sligo was postponed until nine years later, when he was interred 'under Ben Bulben', as dictated in the epitaph poem he wrote for himself. In 1939 his obituarists quarrelled about his place in Irish -- or in English -- letters; most expressed mystification at the tone and direction of his late poems; many harked nostalgically back to the musical clarity of his early verse, and some denounced him as from the pulpit. But in 1948 an Irish navy corvette brought his coffin back to Galway harbour, where it was conveyed to what would be rechristened 'Yeats country' and was on 17 September 1948 buried in Drumcliff, co. Sligo. The ceremony, attended by Irish government ministers who included the son of Maud Gonne and John MacBride, effectively proclaimed W. B. Yeats as pre-eminent national poet. The controversy over whether his remains had, in fact, been correctly identified in Roquebrune added a mythic flavour, suggestive of King Arthur or Charles Stewart Parnell. But it did not detract from the symbolism of the re-interment. 
Yeats is now seen as one of a handful of Irish writers whose influence and example helped create twentieth-century modernist literature in the English language; but unlike that of James Joyce or Samuel Beckett (not to mention Oscar Wilde and George Bernard Shaw), his life remained intimately intertwined with the biography of his country. The period spanned by Yeats's birth and death delineates the exact period of Ireland's turbulent development towards political independence through a nationalist movement which moved between constitutional and extremist modes; as T. S. Eliot put it, Yeats was 'one of those few poets whose history is the history of their own time, who are part of the consciousness of an age which cannot be understood without them' ('The poetry of W. B. Yeats', reprinted in J. Hall and M. Steinman, eds., 'The Permanence of Yeats', 1950, 34). From the very beginning of his long literary career, his poems provided phrases which rang in the national mind and provided keys to Irish experience ('I will arise and go now, And go to Innisfree'; 'Romantic Ireland's dead and gone, It's with O'Leary in the grave', 'A terrible beauty is born', 'Things fall apart, the centre cannot hold'). Yet it is the difficulties and tensions of Yeats's relationship to Irish history and Irish identity, dramatized both directly and indirectly in some of his best writing, which give his poetry much of its dynamic tension. His huge international reputation is securely based on the mystery and grandeur of his late verse and the poignancy of his love poetry, but he first came to fame as the exotically Celtic poet of a 'new' nationalist Ireland: almost single-handed, he made Irishness culturally fashionable. Spearheading a great cultural renaissance, he moved into his maturity as the voice of his country, memorializing her heroes, sitting as a senator in her independent parliament, dying full of years and honours. 
Yet throughout his career Yeats sustained an angry, quarrelsome, ambivalent relationship with his native country; and for his first fifty years he lived more in England than Ireland, a pattern recurring at the end of his life. His early poems on Celtic and faery themes became and remained canonical, but he was attacked in Ireland for the decadence, occultism, and sensuality of his verse and the arrogant iconoclasm of his public utterances -- and, indeed, his personal style. His reputation was violently fought over for years after he died, and much of this quarrel revolved around the issue of whether 'England' or 'Ireland' should claim him. If this seems difficult to understand now, with pilgrims guided through co. Sligo in the footsteps of his poetry and a thriving tourist industry concentrated around every Irish resonance set up by his verses, his life and background do much to explain it. 
Yeats's posthumous reputation is more monumental, and less assailable, than some of his contemporaries would have expected. During the Second World War his work went out of print, and through the 1950s Yeatsian studies were the province of a few dedicated and highly distinguished scholars -- such as Cleanth Brooks, A. N. Jeffares, T. R. Henn, and most of all Richard Ellmann. However, interest in his life was sustained by Allan Wade's edition of letters and Macmillan's publication of several volumes of prose writings organized by his widow, while Peter Allt and Russel Alspach's heroic 'Variorum' editions of poems and plays demonstrated clearly the depth of attention that needed to be paid to Yeats's endless revisions in search of a canonical text. From the 1960s his philosophical interests, and the occultist underpinnings behind much of his work, began to arouse serious interest, reflected in the work of F. A. C. Wilson, Giorgio Melchiori, James Olney, and others. His place in Irish history and political influence was examined by the new wave of Irish historians, notably Conor Cruise O'Brien and F. S. L. Lyons. By the 1970s the Yeats 'industry' was working full-scale; the massive project of a full-scale annotated 'Collected Letters' was under way, two scholarly 'Annuals' of Yeats studies came into existence, and the annual Yeats summer school in Sligo set a much imitated example. The deeply complex question of Yeatsian texts (complicated by the poet's own apparent authorization of different editions in the 1930s) has sparked a long controversy about the canonical version of his poetry, and has been illuminated by the publication of scholarly editions of the much revised manuscripts behind his various collections. Even a certain 1980s reaction against Yeats's work, as affected by what Seamus Deane termed 'the pathology of literary Unionism', simply added fuel to the blazing interest in his work and life. He had always been supreme among modern Irish poets and his international standing has equally been recognized as one of the great innovators of modern poetry, who developed a voice so unique as to inhibit as well as to inspire those who came after him. Early on, defending his constant poetic revisions, he had declared that he must 're-make' himself: in the process he helped re-make both his own country and world literature. 


@@@@@


doc= 37062


Yeo, Gerald Francis (1845-1909), physiologist, was born in Dublin on 19 January 1845, the second son of Henry Yeo of Ceanchor, Howth, JP, clerk of the rules in the court of exchequer, and his wife, Jane, daughter of Captain Ferns. Yeo was educated at the Royal School, Dungannon, and at Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated moderator in natural science in 1866, proceeding MB and MCh in 1867. In 1868 he gained the gold medal of the Dublin Pathological Society for an essay on renal disease. After studying abroad for three years, a year each in Paris, Berlin, and Vienna, he proceeded MD at Dublin in 1871, and became next year MRCP and MRCS Ireland. For two years he taught physiology in the Carmichael school of medicine in Dublin. 
Yeo was appointed professor of physiology in King's College, London, in 1874, and in 1877 assistant surgeon to King's College Hospital, becoming FRCS England in 1878. However, he resigned his clinical appointment in 1880 in order to devote his time to physiology. He delivered for the College of Surgeons the Arris and Gale lectures on anatomy and physiology in 1880-82. He used the lectures to illustrate how far experimentation had advanced the cause of science in the previous thirty years. Yeo did much good work with David Ferrier, a fellow professor of neuropathology at King's College, on the cerebral localization in monkeys, work which was then entirely new, but brought them threat of prosecution for vivisection. As Ferrier had not been allowed a vivisection licence under the 1877 act it was Yeo who did the operative work. 
Yeo is perhaps best known as being the first secretary of the Physiological Society, of which he was one of the founders in 1875. At first this was mainly a mutual protection society against the intrigues of antivivisectionists, but later became a learned society. Yeo conducted the society's affairs with tact and energy (although he was an indifferent minute taker) until his resignation in 1890, when he was presented with a silver tea service. In conjunction with K. H. Kronecker of Bern, Yeo inaugurated the international physiological congresses which were held triennially; the first met at Basel in 1891. 
Yeo was elected FRS in 1889. He resigned his chair of physiology at King's College in 1890 and received the title of emeritus professor. He then retired to Totnes, Devon, and later to Fowey, where he devoted himself to yachting, fishing, and gardening. Yeo married first, in 1873, Charlotte, the only daughter of Isaac Kitchin of Rockferry, Cheshire (she died childless in 1884); and second, in 1886, Augusta Frances, second daughter of Edward Hunt of Thomastown, co. Kilkenny, with whom he had one son. 
Yeo, who spoke several languages, was a fluent speaker with a rich brogue. He was good-natured, generous, full of common sense. His 'Manual of Physiology for the Use of Students of Medicine' (1884) was a useful and popular textbook. He contributed numerous scientific papers on bile, heart muscle, skeletal muscle, and heart sounds to the 'Proceedings and Transactions of the Royal Society' and to the 'Journal of Physiology'. He died at his home, Austin's Close, Harbertonford, Devon, on 1 May 1909. 


@@@@@


doc= 37063


Thomas, Forest Frederic Edward Yeo- (1902-1964), special operations officer, was born in London on 17 June 1902, the eldest son of John Yeo-Thomas and his wife, Daisy Ethel Burrows. The Yeo-Thomas family, which had connections with the Welsh coalmining industry, had established itself in Dieppe in the middle of the nineteenth century. 'Tommy' was sent to the Dieppe Naval College where he early learned to defend his British nationality. Later he went to the Lycee Condorcet in Paris until war broke out in 1914. In spite of all his father's efforts to prevent it, he was determined to take part in the war and was accepted as a dispatch rider when the United States joined in. In 1920 he joined the Poles against the Bolsheviks; was captured and sentenced to death; but managed to escape by strangling his guard the night before his execution was due. 
Returning to France, Yeo-Thomas eventually settled down to study accountancy. There followed a variety of employments until in 1932 he became secretary to the fashion house of Molyneux. When war broke out in 1939 he at once tried to enlist, but the two years he had added to his age in the first war now told against him. Eventually he managed to join the Royal Air Force with the rank of sergeant. He completed radar training and was in one of the last boats to leave France when that country fell. In October 1941 he was commissioned and sent as intelligence officer to the 308 Polish squadron at Baginton. But he was determined to return to occupied France and eventually, in February 1942, with the help of a well-known newspaper and a member of parliament, he was taken into Special Operations Executive. Here he became responsible for planning in the RF French section which worked in close association with General de Gaulle's Bureau Central de Renseignements et d'Action (BCRA). It was at this time that he was given the 'nom de guerre' the White Rabbit. 
After the fall of France small groups of resisters had sprung up all over the country, but they were unco-ordinated, ignorant of each other's identities, purposes, or, often, whereabouts. It was essential that these efforts should in some way be knit together to work towards the same end. In February 1943 Yeo-Thomas and Andre Dewavrin, known as Colonel Passy, the head of BCRA, were parachuted into France to join Pierre Brossolette to investigate the potential of resistance groups in the occupied zone. They succeeded in uniting the various groups in allegiance to de Gaulle, pooling their resources to organize a secret army which would spring into action on D-day. From this mission the three men safely returned in April. But in June the leader and a number of other members of the Conseil National de la Resistance were arrested and its work seriously disrupted. To help restore the situation Yeo-Thomas and Brossolette in September returned to France where movement and meeting together had become much more difficult. In November Yeo-Thomas, concealed inside a hearse, slipped through the controls, and was picked up by Lysander. Brossolette remained behind. In England, Yeo-Thomas's urgent demands for supplies for his organization took him finally to the prime minister, Winston Churchill. This interview produced a considerable increase in aircraft for RF section and consequently in weapons and supplies for the resisters in France. 
When in February 1944 Yeo-Thomas heard of Brossolette's capture, he arranged to be parachuted into France yet again in order to replace him and also to try to organize his escape. Another visit by one so well known to the Germans as 'Shelley' was courting disaster, which did indeed befall Yeo-Thomas. He was arrested in Paris and his long period of torture and imprisonment began: in Fresnes, Compiegnes, Buchenwald, and Rehmsdorf. Throughout his appalling tortures he said nothing of any value to the enemy. Despite several bold but unsuccessful attempts, he maintained his resolution to escape. At Buchenwald, in September 1944, when allied agents were being liquidated, he persuaded the head of the typhus experimental station to allow three agents to exchange identities with three Frenchmen who were already dying. Yeo-Thomas, Harry Peuleve, and a Frenchman were selected; Yeo-Thomas, in his new identity, was transferred to Rehmsdorf as a hospital orderly. When the camp was evacuated in April 1945 before the advancing allies he organized an escape from the train when men were engaged in burying those who had died on the journey. Yeo-Thomas was among the ten who succeeded in getting away. Starving, desperately weak from dysentery and other illnesses, he was captured by German troops, posed as an escaping French air force prisoner of war, and was sent to the Grunhainigen Stalag. He again organized an escape with ten others who refused to leave him when he collapsed and finally helped him to reach the advancing American forces. 
Yeo-Thomas was among the most outstanding workers behind enemy lines whom Britain produced. He was stocky, well built, athletic (he had boxed in his youth), and his blue eyes had a direct and fearless look. His sense of humour revealed itself in a ready smile which, on occasions, broke into open laughter. His character was exactly suited to his task. He was quick-witted and resourceful, and his endurance under hardship was supreme. He received the George Cross, the Military Cross and bar, the Polish cross of merit, the Croix de Guerre, and was a commander of the Legion d'honneur. Battered and permanently injured in health, he returned to Britain to be cared for devotedly by Barbara Yeo-Thomas, formerly Barbara Joan Dean. A marriage had ended before war broke out, two children remaining in France with their mother. 
After helping to bring to trial several Nazi war criminals Yeo-Thomas returned to Molyneux in 1946 but in 1948 ill health forced him to resign. After a period of recuperation he was appointed in 1950 as representative in Paris of the Federation of British Industries. There, in a different way, he still worked for Anglo-French rapprochement. But his sufferings had taken their toll and he died at his home, 3 rue des Eaux, Paris, on 26 February 1964. His wartime exploits formed the basis of a best-selling memoir, 'The White Rabbit' (1952), by Bruce Marshall. 
James Hutchison', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37064


Yerbury, Francis Rowland (1885-1970), architectural administrator, was born on 19 November 1885 at Cricklewood, London, the youngest son of Francis William Yerbury, clerk, and his wife, Lucy Stinchcomb. His father died early, leaving his widow to bring up the family. An uncle paid for the education of Yerbury's two elder brothers, who went to good schools; Frank was not so fortunate, a circumstance which seemed to affect him throughout his life for he was rarely at ease in intellectual circles. Even among his chosen professional friends, such as architects and designers, he always regretted never having become an architect himself. In the hope that he might achieve this aim, he had accepted at the age of sixteen the post of office boy at the Architectural Association (AA) in Tufton Street, Westminster. 
Yerbury did not in fact leave the AA until his retirement thirty-six years later, for when the secretary of the association died suddenly in 1911, Yerbury was appointed to succeed him and thus began his distinguished twin careers as a builder of a great school of architecture and an influential proponent and photographer of modern European building. Indeed, Yerbury became, for his architect friends in London, their prime source of information on and contact with the contemporary architecture and architects in the Netherlands, Germany, Denmark, and Sweden. His excellent photographs of modern European buildings were widely published and his many illustrated books about his travels abroad were avidly read by generations of students to whom contemporary European architecture was still an unknown quantity. Among his books were 'Modern European Buildings' (1928), 'Modern Dutch Buildings' (1931), and 'Small Modern English Houses' (1929). While acting as the leading publicist for new continental architecture, Yerbury made a great number of friends in architectural circles abroad which were to last throughout his life and even took him on an official mission to Sweden during the Second World War to reassure his Swedish friends about the state of British morale. That he had to travel in the bomb bay of a Mosquito aircraft only reinforced his message. In recognition of his contributions to international understanding and architectural appreciation he had been made a commander of the Swedish royal order of Vasa (1929) and became a knight of the Danish royal order of the Dannebrog (1951). 
As its increasingly respected secretary, Yerbury helped successive presidents and principals, especially Robert Atkinson and Howard Robertson, to build the Architectural Association into a leading centre for architectural education, discussion, thought, and controversy. Under his guidance the AA school even began to challenge the inter-war supremacy of the Liverpool school of architecture, where his friend C. H. Reilly was the professor. While at the AA, Yerbury encouraged a colleague, J. K. Winser, to organize a building materials samples room, which was eventually to lead to a third career for Yerbury: out of that modest collection of samples for the benefit of the AA students grew the first building centre for the architectural profession as a whole. Vincent Vincent, a director of Bovis Ltd, a well-known firm of building contractors, first saw the possibilities in Yerbury's samples room, having recently visited the Architects' Samples Bureau in New York, a commercial information service on building materials. Together Vincent and Yerbury created the Building Centre in 1931 as a non-profit-distributing educational enterprise to assist all concerned with the building industry from materials suppliers to contractors, architects, surveyors, and clients alike. By 1937 the new centre, having moved from its first home in the Conduit Street headquarters of the Royal Institute of British Architects to its own premises in Store Street, had become almost a full-time preoccupation for Yerbury. Accordingly, in that year he resigned from the AA to devote himself to directing and developing the Building Centre in London, which in due course was to become a model for other cities and indeed for other countries. At the time of Yerbury's death there were nearly 100 similar centres in operation around the globe. 
Yerbury was a convivial, gregarious man, with a flair for international friendships, a great love of travel, and a real talent as a photographer. He was also reputed to be an excellent raconteur and a pillar of his favourite Arts Club in Dover Street. As one of the earliest English discoverers of modern Danish design (he wrote a short monograph on Kaare Klint's furniture in 1929), he was a staunch supporter of the British Design and Industries Association, of which he became a vice-president. He was elected an honorary associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1928 and was made an OBE in 1952. He married on 28 August 1913 Winifred Constance ('b'. 1888/9), daughter of Henry Bendall; she survived him with a son and a daughter. Yerbury retired from active work in 1961 and died at Newbury on 7 July 1970. 


@@@@@


doc= 37065


Yonge, Charlotte Mary (1823-1901), novelist, was born at Otterbourne House, near Winchester, Hampshire, on 11 August 1823, the only daughter and eldest child of William Crawley Yonge (1795-1854), magistrate, and Frances Mary Bargus (1795-1868). Both parents were from clerical families. William's marriage was conditional upon his renouncing his career as a soldier and the Devonshire attachments of his upbringing to tend the Otterbourne estate bought by Frances's mother in 1819. Charlotte was educated at home, initially by her mother, 'on the Edgeworth system'. Her father taught her classics and mathematics, and she helped to educate her brother, Julian (1830-1892). A visiting tutor instructed her in French and Spanish, but music and art were neglected. Her father's belief in higher education for women accompanied by his conviction that their talents should be employed only under the guidance of a mature Christian male authority shaped his daughter's thinking: she remained emotionally dependent upon his approval. At the age of seven she was encouraged to teach in the village Sunday school her father had started, and taught both morning and afternoon sessions until a fortnight before her death. Less formal contacts with the villagers were not encouraged. 
This cloistered upbringing developed Charlotte's deep veneration and imaginative yearning for the more extended family life she glimpsed during annual visits to 'cousinland', the network of Devon relatives. The imaginary life created for her family of sixteen dolls soon took written form in the 'Chateau de Melville' (1838), begun two years earlier as a French exercise and sold at a bazaar for the benefit of the village school: her favourite form, the family saga, could be seen in embryo here, its characters surviving and developing to reappear in subsequent novels. The successive generations of her fictional heroes and heroines are constantly evaluated by their capacity to practise the Christian values of self-sacrificial love, obedience, humility, and submission within the demanding confines of domestic relationships. 
The conservatism and respect for authority learned in Charlotte's earliest years, received a boost from the induction of John Keble to the adjacent living of Hursley in 1836. Although perceived as one of the leaders of the new Tractarian party, Keble had renounced academic life in Oxford for the pastoral concerns of a country living, and represented his part in the campaign for the recognition of the spiritual authority of the Church of England as merely a continuation of his own father's teaching of the high-church tradition. 'Pro ecclesia Dei' became Charlotte's motto. Keble prepared Charlotte for her confirmation in 1838, the formative experience of her spiritual life ('Musings', 1871, iii), as her novel 'The Castle Builders, or, The Deferred Confirmation' (1854), amply demonstrates. Keble, who distrusted all manifestations of self-aggrandizing cleverness or personal charisma, found an ideal pupil in the intensely reserved but precociously gifted Charlotte. The Kebles also introduced her to music and drawing. Keble became both her spiritual confessor and a rigorous editor of her manuscripts. His emphasis on reserve in communicating religious knowledge was to help her avoid the crude polemics of much contemporary religious fiction and his encouragement of her writing, as an instrument to be used in God's service, legitimated the creativity of a woman whose instincts and training might otherwise have led to its suppression. The complex tensions between temperament, conscience, and authority fed into the scrupulously moral agonizing that characterizes her fiction and can also be seen in her decision to discourage any biography in her own lifetime, on the grounds that 'her mother would not have liked such a thing to be done', while leaving Christabel Coleridge with the impression that she was being fed the information necessary to enlarge a truncated autobiography into a posthumous memoir (Coleridge, viii). 
Shortly after Keble's arrival, Charlotte Yonge's father embarked upon a programme of church building: St Matthew's, Otterbourne, was consecrated in 1839, a sister church at Ampfield provided in 1841, and Keble's church at Hursley replaced in 1847. The building and consecration of a new village church provided the theme for her first published novel, 'Abbeychurch, or, Self Control and Self Conceit' (1844). 
The family council which had acknowledged the propriety of Charlotte Yonge publishing this work simultaneously decreed that any profit should be donated to charity. She had already become an inveterate writer, recording daily incidents and discussing her work in progress with her correspondents. One friend, Marianne Dyson, twenty years her senior, elicited much of Charlotte's first educational writing for her village girls' school at Dogmersfield, near Winchester. Charlotte's contributions to Ann Mozley's 'Magazine for the Young', launched in 1842, were also directed at readers from the lower classes. The 'Monthly Packet', with Charlotte as its first editor and controlling influence, was aimed at wealthier private schoolrooms: over the years the younger relatives and friends, such as the young Mary Arnold (Mrs Humphry Ward), whose writing for privately circulated magazines she had encouraged, were invited to become contributors. 
An unpublished story by Marianne Dyson provided the germ for Charlotte Yonge's greatest success: 'The Heir of Redclyffe' (1853). During the tale's gestation it was discussed at length with her mother and friends and had its style honed by her father. J. W. Parker published the novel after its initial rejection by John Murray (who did not publish fiction). The work embodied Tractarian teaching through demonstrating the gradual success of religious discipline in transforming Guy Morville, a Byronic youth, into a saintly, domesticated, self-sacrificing hero. The young Pre-Raphaelites William Morris and Dante Gabriel Rossetti were inspired by this modern interpretation of knightly endeavour and Charlotte's brother Julian, who had joined the rifle brigade in 1852, found 'nearly all the young men in his regiment had a copy'. The profits were donated to Bishop Selwyn of New Zealand to finance the 'Southern Cross', a new missionary schooner, for the Melanesian Islands. Ethel May, of 'The Daisy Chain' (1856), and its sequel, 'The Trial' (1864), offered a pattern for middle-class Christian girls: she has to renounce her masculine intellectual aspirations and learn to channel her energies into the more appropriate feminine roles of home-maker, and educator of the poor. Charlotte's thinking on gender was based on theological conviction: 'I have no hesitation in declaring my full belief in the inferiority of women, nor that she brought it upon herself' ('Womankind', 1877, 1-2). $2000 of the profits from 'The Daisy Chain' went to the building of St Andrews College, Kohimarama. 
Julian Yonge, whose army career had been cut short by ill health, brought a wife, some ten years his junior, home to Otterbourne in 1858. By 1862 his family had expanded, so Charlotte and her mother moved to a neighbouring house, Elderfield. This period also witnessed new developments in her writing: 'The Dove in the Eagle's Nest' (1866), a novel set in medieval Europe, was accompanied by other historical studies such as 'The Book of Golden Deeds' (1864), 'Biographies of Good Women' (1865), and her most intensively researched book: 'The History of Christian Names' (1863). 
In the aftermath of her mother's distressing death from 'softening of the brain' Charlotte Yonge became an exterior sister of the Anglican educational order at Wantage, Berkshire, founded by the Revd William Butler, a former curate of Dogmersfield. Apart from a brief trip to Dublin in 1857, she had travelled very little, but in 1869 she went to Paris with her brother and his wife, and visited her translator, Mme de Witt, whose family lived with her father, the former prime minister Guizot, in Normandy. With her parents and Keble dead, and upon the retirement of Keble's long-serving curate, Charlotte had suddenly to confront a new authority in the village when a married clergyman, representing more recent Tractarian thinking, was appointed. These factors conspired to render 'The Pillars of the House' (4 vols., 1873), the most concentrated expression of her own views: following the varied fortunes of the thirteen children of the Revd Edward Underwood, it also discusses such topical religious questions as the importance of fasting and confession. 
Charlotte Yonge's interest in Tractarian missionary work made her the appropriate biographer when her cousin, John Coleridge Patteson, bishop of Melanesia, was murdered by South Sea islanders ('Life of John Coleridge Patteson', 2 vols., 1874). Missions in South Africa also interested her: she devoted the profits of a novel, 'New Ground' (1868), to the Mackenzie mission set up to commemorate Charles Mackenzie, a Keble protege, who died in the course of his proselytizing work as bishop of central Africa. The 'Monthly Packet' was used to broadcast the needs of the missionary effort abroad and her novels broke an earlier literary mould by presenting missionaries as gentlemanly Christian heroes. The attitude her characters display to the work of the mission field is a further gauge of their virtue. In old age she extended her interests to the Far East and 'The Making of a Missionary' (1900) employed the Boxer uprising to produce its climax. In September 1873 her brother's youngest sister-in-law, Gertrude Walter, a chronic rheumatic, moved from the big house to Elderfield, to become 'Char's wife', or secretary-companion, until Gertrude's death in 1897 (Coleridge, 270). This tie, combined with Charlotte's heart condition, further restricted her travel and range of visitors. 
Charlotte Yonge was planning a substantial endowment for St Matthew's, Otterbourne, separated from the parish of Hursley in 1875, when, in 1876, a coal-mining speculation of her brother's failed and she was required to bail him out. When writing had been her vocation she had abstained from writing fiction during Lent: now it became her profession. Despite the sale of her early copyrights, Julian was forced to sell the family estate in 1885 and move to London, but a niece remained as wife of Henry Bowles, who was to become the new incumbent of Otterbourne in 1890. The year 1885 also saw the death of her close friend Bishop George Moberly, whose family she had known since 1835, when he came to Winchester College as headmaster. By the end of the decade she was persuaded to accept Christabel Coleridge as co-editor of the 'Monthly Packet': this did not prevent its publisher, A. D. Innes, from requesting her resignation in 1893, thus lending a bitter-sweet flavour to the seventieth birthday celebration the magazine's readers had planned for her. She devoted their gift of $200 to a lich-gate for Otterbourne church. A further collection in 1899, the year in which the 'Monthly Packet' folded, enabled her to found a scholarship at Winchester high school to send girls to Oxford or Cambridge. 
Always adept at keeping several projects running concurrently, Charlotte Yonge wrote over 200 works of fiction and non-fiction, in addition to articles for her own and other magazines, making her the Tractarian movement's most important lay voice as well as its most comprehensive chronicler. She died of pleurisy, after a short illness, at Elderfield on 24 March 1901, and was buried on the 29th at the foot of John Keble's memorial cross in Otterbourne churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 37066


Yorke, Albert Edward Philip Henry, sixth earl of Hardwicke (1867-1904), politician, was born at the British embassy in Paris on 14 March 1867, the only son in the three children of Charles Philip Yorke, fifth earl (1836-1897), and his wife, Lady Sophia Georgiana Robertina Wellesley (died 1923), daughter of the first Earl Cowley. The prince of Wales, afterwards Edward VII, was his godfather. Styled Viscount Royston until 1897, he was educated at Eton College (1881-4), and served as honorary attache at the British embassy in Vienna from 1886 to 1891. His father (Champagne Charlie) had squandered a fortune and the family's estates were put up for sale in 1891. In the following year Royston became a member of the London stock exchange, and in 1897 a partner in the stockbroking firm of Basil Montgomery & Co., succeeding to the earldom upon the death of his father in May 1897. In 1898 he was elected as a moderate (Conservative) member of the London county council, representing West Marylebone, and also acquired the largest part of the ownership of the 'Saturday Review'. 
Hardwicke gained significant political notoriety through a series of events played out in the House of Lords in 1899 and the following year. He was vehemently opposed to the erection of a statue of Oliver Cromwell near the entrance to the house and in August 1899 he took the opportunity, when there were only nine peers present in the house, to move a motion censuring the Salisbury government over this matter. Despite the appeals of the lord chancellor, Lord Halsbury, Hardwicke pushed the issue to a division, and the government was formally censured by five votes to four. Henry Lucy regarded this as most 'deplorable' behaviour, and when Hardwicke raised the matter again in the following session, Halsbury, 'trembling with indignation', condemned him for adding 'neither to the dignity of the House nor to respect for the decisions of Parliament' (Lucy, 367). 
In November 1900 Hardwicke was appointed parliamentary under-secretary for India. The following month he again came to prominence in the Lords, this time through allegations of a conflict between his business and political interests. He had been permitted by Salisbury, upon taking his position in government, to retain his connection with the stock exchange. This unusual arrangement was immediately seized upon by Lord Rosebery as an opportunity to attack the ethics of the government, claiming that Hardwicke's case risked creating a precedent 'full of peril to the interests of the country' ('The Times', 30 Nov 1904, 6). Hardwicke was forced to explain to the house that his 'financial embarrassments' (Searle, 50) meant that he was unable to forgo the income from his business connections. 
In the office of government itself, Hardwicke was a hard-working and effective under-secretary, and he was transferred, in the same role, to the War Office in August 1902. But here again he found controversy, through his chairmanship of a committee formed to report on the establishment of a formalized intelligence division. In its recommendations the committee went 'some way beyond their original brief' (Gooch, 25) and demanded sweeping changes throughout significant parts of the office. This was 'rejected comprehensively' by senior officials (ibid., 26), and Hardwicke pursued the matter to the War Office council where, however, the matter was allowed quietly to lapse. 
In 1903 Hardwicke returned to the India Office, again as under-secretary. He died suddenly of heart failure on 29 November 1904, at his home, 8 York Terrace, Regent's Park, London, and was buried at the Marylebone borough cemetery, East Finchley, Middlesex, on 3 December. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 37067


Yorke, Francis Reginald Stevens (1906-1962), architect, was born at 38 West Street, Stratford upon Avon, on 3 December 1906, the only son of Francis Walter Bagnall Yorke (1879-1957) and his wife, Mary Ann Stevens. After attending Chipping Campden School, Yorke followed his father into the architectural profession and entered the Birmingham School of Architecture, where he completed his course in 1930. Among his fellow students were several other remarkable men, including Frederick Gibberd, Colin Penn, Richard Sheppard, and Robert Furneaux Jordan, at a time when awareness of modern architecture was beginning in England. He completed some agricultural workers' cottages at Webheath, near his home town of Redditch, Worcestershire, in a simple vernacular style, in 1930. That same year, on 13 September, he married Thelma Austin Jones ('b'. 1906/7), a fashion model; they had twin daughters. Although the couple never formally separated, it was an unhappy marriage because of Yorke's tendency to have simultaneous affairs with several women, often members of his office staff, during the week, while his wife took to drink and lived in the country. Her sister Margaret married Yorke's architectural assistant (and later partner) T. Randall Evans, who came from New Zealand. 
Known as Kay or K, Yorke was able to attract and often inspire people of talent, and the warmth and charm of his personality endeared him to a huge circle of friends. A great beer drinker, he looked and dressed like a gentleman farmer, which he became when after the Second World War he kept and bred his own herd of dairy cattle. He had a powerful, chunky frame, a countryman's clear, ruddy skin, and mischievous, puckered eyes, attractive to men and women alike. 
After entering the profession at a time of severe economic depression, Yorke set up practice in London about 1930 but concentrated on architectural journalism as a contributor to the 'Architects' Journal' on technical matters and building products, travelling abroad and establishing contacts with European modernists, particularly in Czechoslovakia and Germany. These contacts were the basis for his book 'The Modern House', published by the Architectural Press in 1934 and reprinted several times. It is a well-informed international survey, in photographs and drawings, of the flat-roofed houses which were just beginning to be built in England, although the text is almost entirely technical in content. It includes the designs for Yorke's first significant modern building, the small concrete house Torilla at Nast Hyde, Hertfordshire (1934-5). In other similar projects Yorke showed a matter-of-fact attitude to modernism. His partnership with the Hungarian-born architect Marcel Breuer, from 1935 to 1937, was formed partly to enable Breuer to practise in Britain as a refugee from Nazism. Projects were undertaken separately within the partnership, and a house in Sea Lane, Angmering, Sussex (1936), is one of several works attributable to Breuer. They worked together on a project for a 'city of the future', exhibited as a model at the Ideal Home Exhibition in 1936. Other clients included Eton College and Flower's Brewery of Stratford upon Avon, for whom Yorke, in collaboration with his father, designed a terrace of workers' cottages in Birmingham Road. These humble buildings, with walls of brick rather than concrete, and monopitch roofs, were more significant for Yorke's future direction than Torilla (for which he is better known), and indicative of a growing maturity in English modernism. In 1937 Yorke published 'The Modern House in England', similar in style to his earlier book, and prefaced by a long quotation from the arts and crafts architect W. R. Lethaby. He collaborated with Frederick Gibberd on 'The Modern Flat' (1937) and with Colin Penn on 'A Key to Modern Architecture' (1939). From 1935 he used his technical and organizational knowledge to edit the annual publication 'Specification', which listed building products. 
Yorke spent the early part of the war in a team of architects building factories and hostels for the Ministry of Supply. Later he became a researcher for the Ministry of Works on technical matters, and became interested in models for prefabricated housing. In 1944 he proposed an architectural partnership (initially without any formal terms of agreement) with Eugene Rosenberg, a Czech Jewish refugee whom Yorke had helped after his arrival in Britain. They invited Cyril Sjostrom (later Mardall) (1909-1994), an Anglo-Finnish architect with a specialism in prefabrication in timber, to join the practice. The Yorke, Rosenberg, and Mardall partnership was established in the years following the end of the war, and its first significant buildings were completed in 1947. Each partner tended to take charge of particular projects, but there was an intention to achieve a consistency of outlook, with emphasis on efficient production and use of new building products for industrial and transport buildings, hospitals, housing, and educational buildings, mostly in the public sector. All three partners shared an interest in contemporary art and gave commissions through their building projects to Henry Moore (the implementation of the 'Family Group' at Barclay School, Stevenage, 1950), William Scott, F. E. McWilliam, Kenneth Rowntree, Michael Rothenstein, and Louis Le Brocquy. Yorke encouraged the designer and art teacher Peggy Angus to produce designs for repeating patterns on tiles, made by Carters of Poole. These he used effectively in school buildings, such as the Susan Lawrence School which formed part of the Lansbury Estate, Poplar, as a showpiece of 'live architecture' in the 1951 Festival of Britain. 
Virtually all Yorke's school buildings up to 1956 used the prefabricated system developed by Hills of West Bromwich, often enlivened with blank end-walls of rough local stone. In such blends of industrial methods and good natural materials Yorke reunited his arts and crafts home background (the family home at Redditch was said to be redolent of William Morris) with his commitment to modernism. In designing the Ladyshot housing area in Harlow New Town (1951-5) Yorke virtually repeated his pre-war terrace at Stratford. His approach to design often seemed casual. He did not spend much time in the office, and delegated almost everything to office staff -- recruiting some talented young designers, who before long began to rebel against the lack of new ideas. Yorke was ready to encourage them, however, and the commission for Gatwick airport (1955-8) became an important moment of transition. David Allford and Brian Henderson were responsible, under Yorke, for designing the terminal, with its glass walling, marble floor, and crisp detailing, integrating road and rail transport links. Gatwick showed English modern architecture catching up again with international standards, now dominated by America, but the building has now been so altered that this is difficult to appreciate. 
Yorke designated Allford, Henderson, and Randall Evans as partners before his early death. In his last years he was personally involved in designing new offices for the firm at 1 Greystoke Place, London, completed in 1961, a cool infill building clad in white tiles beside a historic graveyard near Chancery Lane, with a rooftop penthouse flat to house his art collection and the rosettes won by his prize cattle and as a setting for office parties, from which wives were always excluded. Shortly after being appointed CBE he died of cancer of the throat on 10 June 1962 at St Thomas's Hospital, London, which his firm largely rebuilt during the next decade. 


@@@@@


doc= 37068


Yorke, Warrington (1883-1943), parasitologist, was born at Lancaster on 11 April 1883, the eldest of the six children of the Revd Henry Lefroy Yorke, a Wesleyan Methodist minister, and his wife, Margaret Warrington. He attended University School, Southport, and Epworth College, Rhyl, before studying medicine at Liverpool University. Here he was awarded the Senior Lyon Jones scholarship and the Derby exhibition in clinical medicine. He qualified MB ChB in 1905, MD in 1907, and MRCP in 1929; he was elected FRCP in 1934. In 1906 he was elected to the Holt fellowship in physiology and worked under Charles Scott Sherrington, at whose suggestion he joined the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine in 1907. Two years later he was sent with Wakelin Barratt to Nyasaland to investigate twenty cases of blackwater fever. On his return in 1909 he was appointed research assistant to Anton Breinl at the Liverpool school's Runcorn laboratory, and he became its director a few months later. 
During 1911 and 1912 Yorke was in Northern Rhodesia on the British South Africa Company's sleeping sickness commission. He showed that the tsetse fly, 'Glossina morsitans', was the transmitter of Rhodesian sleeping sickness, and that wild animals formed a reservoir of the infection. This work was carried out almost simultaneously with the researches of Sir David Bruce in Nyasaland. From 1914 until 1929 Yorke was Walter Myers professor of parasitology and from 1929 until his death he was the Alfred Jones professor of tropical medicine at Liverpool. He was honorary assistant physician for tropical diseases in the Liverpool Royal Infirmary from 1920 to 1929 and full honorary physician from 1929 to 1943. In 1916 he married Elizabeth Annie Greening; they had a son and a daughter. 
Yorke's work on the trypanosomes and nematodes, and his later work on the chemotherapy of parasitic diseases, earned him an international reputation. He was very active in societies and committees, twice serving as vice-president of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. In 1927 he served on the chemotherapy committee of the Medical Research Council, and in 1935 he was on the malaria commission of the League of Nations. He was awarded the Chalmers memorial gold medal of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene in 1925 for his services to tropical medicine, and he was elected FRS in 1932. 
In the Second World War, Yorke served in the Royal Army Medical Corps and was stationed in Malta, where he conducted courses for service medical officers going abroad to tropical countries. Yorke was the author of a monograph on 'The Nematode Parasites of Vertebrates' (1926) in collaboration with Philip Alan Maplestone, and of some 165 reports and papers, the majority of which appeared in the 'Annals of Tropical Medicine and Parasitology'. His researches contributed greatly to a better understanding of tropical diseases. 
Yorke was vivacious, direct, and questioning. Casual observers found him coldly analytical, but friends and colleagues knew him as kind and helpful. The 'British Medical Journal' described him as the 'fountain-head and moving spirit' of the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine ('BMJ', 585). Yorke died at his home, 4 Bryanston Road, Prenton, Birkenhead, on 24 April 1943 and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 37069


Youl, Sir James Arndell (1811-1904), pisciculturist, born at Parramatta, New South Wales, on 28 December 1811, was the son of John Youl (1773-1827), a Church of England clergyman, and his wife, Jane Loder (died 1877). As a child he accompanied his parents to Van Diemen's Land, his father having been appointed in 1819 military chaplain at Port Dalrymple and first incumbent of St John's, Launceston. James was sent to England to be educated at a private school near Romford, Essex. After returning to Van Diemen's Land he took up residence at Symmons Plains, which he inherited on the death of his father in March 1827. There he became a successful agriculturist and in 1837 county magistrate. On 9 July 1839, at Clarendon, he married Eliza, the daughter of William Cox, an army officer and settler in Australia. She died on 4 January 1881, leaving four sons and eight daughters. 
In 1854 Youl returned to England to live permanently, at Clapham Park, London. He interested himself in Tasmanian and Australian affairs. From 1861 to 1863 he was honorary agent in London for Tasmania, and for seven years was honorary secretary and treasurer of the Australian Association. In that capacity he was instrumental in improving the mail service to Australia and getting the Australian sovereign made legal tender throughout the British dominions. He was acting agent-general for Tasmania in 1888, and was one of the founders in 1868 of the Colonial Society, later the Royal Colonial Institute, and took an active part in its management until his death. 
But it is with the introduction of salmon and trout into the rivers of Tasmania and New Zealand that Youl's name is mainly associated. After many failures he at length discovered an effective method of packing the ova so that they survived a sea voyage of more than 100 days. In 1864 the first successful shipment to Tasmania was made, and for several years afterwards Youl was engaged with others in sending out shipments to Tasmania and Victoria, and, after 1868, to New Zealand. In 1866 he was awarded the gold medal of the Societe d'Acclimatation and in 1868 the medal of the Acclimatization Society of Victoria. In 1874 he was made CMG and in 1891 KCMG. On 30 September 1882 he married Charlotte, the widow of William Robinson of Caldecott House, Clapham Park, and the younger daughter of Richard Williams of Philipville, Belgium. Youl died on 5 June 1904 of senile decay and bronchitis at his residence, Waratah House, King's Road, Clapham Park, London, and was buried in Norwood cemetery. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 37070


Young, Sir Allen William (1827-1915), merchant navy officer and polar explorer, was born at Twickenham on 12 December 1827, the son of Henry Young, of Riverdale, Twickenham. After being educated at home he joined the merchant service in 1842 and rose quickly. During the Crimean War he transferred from the 'Marlborough', an East Indiaman, to the command of the troopship 'Adelaide', but remained in the merchant service. In 1857, when Francis Leopold McClintock was fitting out the yacht 'Fox' in order to follow up the discoveries of John Rae bearing on the fate of the expedition of Sir John Franklin, he chose Young as navigating officer. Young declined any salary and contributed $500 to the cost of the expedition. During the two years spent in following Franklin's tracks, Young made notable sledge journeys, exploring about 380 miles of new coast line, including the southern and western coasts of Prince of Wales Land and both shores of Franklin Strait. He also discovered McClintock Channel, but was unable to cross its rough ice. In 1860 he had command of the 'Fox' in the north Atlantic telegraph expedition, which surveyed a telegraph route between Europe and America via the Faeroes, Iceland, and Greenland. He visited the east coast of Greenland, but, believing it to be impracticable for a cable route, did not land. He sailed on for the west coast, landed with Rae (who was in charge of the land part of the expedition), and ascended to the ice cap near Julianehab; but he returned on deciding that a telegraph line could not be carried across Greenland. He next went to China to assist Admiral Sherard Osborn in equipping the Chinese navy, and commanded the gunboat 'Kwangtung' during the Taiping uprising, 1862-4. In 1871 he was commissioner to the Maritime Congress at Naples, and in 1875 he was present at Suakin, on the Red Sea, as commissioner of the National Aid Society. 
With the object of assisting the government Arctic expedition which set out in May 1875 under the command of George Strong Nares, Young took his steam yacht 'Pandora', with a crew of thirty-one men, to Baffin Bay. He tried to make the north-west passage, but was stopped by heavy ice in Peel Strait. On the return journey he picked up George Nares's dispatches from the Carey Islands, bringing home the latest news of Nares's expedition. The next year he again took the 'Pandora' north, continuing his efforts to pass through the north-west passage, and in spite of great difficulties landed dispatches for Nares at Cape Isabella and Littleton Island. On his return he sighted Nares's ships homeward bound off Cape Farewell. In June 1882 he commanded the whaler 'Hope', chartered with government help, in order to search for the explorer, Benjamin Leigh Smith, who had sailed for Franz Josef Land in July of the previous year. Nares and Young were instrumental in launching the relief expedition and in August 1882 the 'Hope' found Leigh Smith and his party at Matochkin Shar, on the west coast of Novaya Zemlya, which they had reached in boats after the destruction of their vessel off Franz Josef Land. 
Young was knighted in 1877 for his services to Nares's expedition and was created CB in 1881 and CVO in 1903. He also held orders from the crowns of Denmark, Sweden, Austria, and the Netherlands. He was a commander in the Royal Naval Reserve (1862) and a younger brother of Trinity House. A member of the wealthy brewing family Young, he was well connected. Lillie Langtry and her husband were guests on his yacht at Cowes and he introduced her to the prince of Wales, one of his close friends. 
Young died at the York Hotel, 11 Albemarle Street, London, unmarried, on 20 November 1915 after a long illness. He was buried in Brookwood cemetery, near Woking, Surrey. He wrote comparatively little and had a strong dislike of publicity. He contributed to the 'Cornhill Magazine' in 1860 an account of his experiences in the 'Fox' expedition in search of Franklin, and was the author of 'The Cruise of the Pandora' (1876) and 'The Two Voyages of the Pandora' (1879). He died leaving over $35,000 and his wealth, skill, and pleasant personality all contributed to the success of his Arctic journeys. 


@@@@@


doc= 37071


Young, (Edward) Hilton, first Baron Kennet (1879-1960), politician and writer, was born in London on 20 March 1879, the fourth child and third son of Sir George Young, third baronet (1837-1930), and his wife, Alice Eacy, 'nee' Kennedy (died 1922), widow of Sir Alexander Lawrence. His childhood was darkened by the death of a beloved sister, Eacy, and lightened by a family printing press on which his picaresque novel, 'The Count', was printed when he was nine. In 1893 he went to Eton College, where he joined the army class, then the only way to study science, and became its captain. After a short time studying chemistry under William Ramsay at University College, London, he went in 1897 to Trinity College, Cambridge, whence he emerged in 1900 as president of the Union, editor of the 'Cambridge Review', and with a first in natural sciences. His friends were G. M. Trevelyan, E. M. Forster, and the circle which later became known as Bloomsbury. It was to him that Bloomsbury turned in 1914 for evidence that their pacifism antedated the war. 
Having left chemistry for law Young was called by the Inner Temple in 1904. He held a few briefs, but it did not take. After a short period studying international law at the University of Freiburg he found a truer line of progress as a writer and journalist about finance and as a Liberal Party worker. He was assistant editor of 'The Economist' from 1908 to 1910, and organized free trade unions in Yorkshire and the City of London. In 1910 he became City editor of the 'Morning Post' and London correspondent of the 'New York Times' financial supplement. In 1912 he published 'Foreign Companies and other Corporations', and in 1915 'The System of National Finance' which, reissued in 1924 and 1936, remained the standard textbook until 1939. 
Young joined the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve in 1914. His war service was varied, including spells with the Grand Fleet, with the naval mission to the Serbian army on the Danube and its evacuation to Corfu, with light cruisers on the Harwich station, and with naval siege guns ashore on the Belgian beach at Nieuport les Bains. For this last he was awarded the DSC and the Croix de Guerre. In 1918 he volunteered for the blocking of Zeebrugge and, serving in the 'Vindictive', commanded a gun turret until his right arm was wounded; it was later amputated. From this battle he acquired a bar to his DSC, forty years of intermittent pain, and the beautiful half-uncial script he learned to write with his left hand. When he had recovered he volunteered for service in Russia, where he found himself in command of an armoured train fighting a war of head-on confrontation with Bolshevik trains coming up from Vologda. For this he was appointed to the DSO. In 1920 he published a book of war memoirs, 'By Sea and Land', which traces his movement from a not deeply considered patriotism to the constructive internationalism which later sent him as a national delegate to the League of Nations. 
Twice before the war Young had stood unsuccessfully for parliament as a Liberal; in 1915 he had been returned unopposed in his absence at a by-election in Norwich. At the 1918 general election he was returned as a 'free Liberal', but soon threw in his lot with Lloyd George. He gained the ear of the House of Commons with speeches mainly on finance, and became financial secretary to the Treasury in 1921. After the election of 1922 he became chief whip of the Lloyd George Liberals, was sworn of the privy council, and regulated the disordered finances of his party. He lost his seat in 1923 but regained it in 1924. 
Socialism he would not have, and when in 1926 Lloyd George propounded a land policy which he thought socialistic, Hilton Young left the Liberals and became an independent. At the time of the general strike, believing that socialism and direct action could be effectively met only by a single party, and that this could never again be the Liberal Party, he joined the Conservatives. By agreement with his constituents he kept his seat until the general election in 1929, and was then returned for the Sevenoaks division of Kent, which he held until 1935. He was appointed GBE in 1927. 
During the Labour government of 1929-31 Young attended the Conservative shadow cabinet and attained a leading position in debate in the house. He was also general editor of a group of journals, of which the 'Financial News' was the chief. In 1931 he became minister of health in Ramsay MacDonald's National Government. His main job was slum clearance and rehousing. His policy was to confine subsidies to clearance, thereby encouraging local authorities to attack that vigorously, while stimulating private builders to provide new houses by releasing them from subsidized competition. The policy produced unprecedented progress with both clearing and building. But it was unpopular with the left because of its emphasis on the private builder, and alienated important interests on the right because it did not compensate slum landlords. 'You do not', he said, 'compensate the butcher for selling fly-blown meat when it is seized.' Young was responsible for the 'Town and Country Planning Act' of 1932, the first to apply to all 'developable' land, and for a 'Housing Act' (1935) which was the first to lay down standards of accommodation and provide for their enforcement. 
When Ramsay MacDonald resigned in 1935, Hilton Young accepted a peerage as Lord Kennet of the Dene and took no further part in politics. The name Kennet was taken from the river by which he had a cottage in Wiltshire. 
The unusual breadth of Kennet's early training -- science, law, finance, and journalism, as well as politics -- had made him a valuable negotiator and committee chairman. He was British representative at The Hague conference on credits for the Soviet Union in 1922, and a member of the British delegation to the League of Nations assemblies in 1926, 1927, 1928, and 1932: a natural fruit of his thinking about war. He headed a British mission to Poland (1923-5) which laid the foundation of a balanced budget and got the zLoty through some of its early difficulties. He did much the same for Iraq in 1925 and 1930, designing the Iraqi currency and chairing the Iraq currency board in London for many years. In 1925-6 he chaired the royal commission on Indian finance, which stabilized the rupee and drew up the constitution of the Indian Reserve Bank. In 1928 he chaired a mission to east Africa which advised on the closer union of the British territories there, drawing up a plan which was partially adopted over the years. 
At home Kennet chaired the 1925 departmental committee on the constitution of the University of London, and was the first lay member (for the crown) of the General Medical Council (1926-31). He refused appointments which would have entailed his leaving parliament. 
During the Second World War, Kennet chaired the joint committees of the Treasury and the Ministry of Labour which administered the exemption from military service of civil servants, workers in financial institutions, and university teachers. From 1939 to 1959 he chaired the Capital Issues Committee, which administered the control of investment throughout the economy. For all this work he accepted no payment, public or private, and it was his practice to write his own reports. 
At different times Kennet was also chairman and director of many commercial and financial corporations, among them English Electric, Hudson's Bay, Denny Mott and Dickson, Union Discount, British Bank of the Middle East, and Equity and Law Life Assurance. After 1935 his working life was passed mainly in the City, where he was known as a specialist in reordering the finances of companies standing in need of it. His varied presidencies included the Royal Statistical Society, the Association of Technical Institutions, the Poetry Society, the Gas Federation of Great Britain, the Association of Municipal Corporations, and the National Association of Youth Clubs. 
Kennet's leisure interests were old books, which he collected -- principally Venetian incunabula and first editions of the English philosophers -- and birds, about which he published a book of essays, 'A Bird in the Bush' (1936), illustrated by his stepson Peter Markham Scott. He also published a book of verse, 'A Muse at Sea' (1919), reprinted with additions as 'Verses' in 1935. One became an anthology piece: 'A boy was born at Bethlehem'. He was an enthusiastic small-boat sailor until his sixtieth year, sailing single-handed in a stricter sense of the word than is usual, and a good swimmer and diver. He was a spirited draughtsman, usually for political or didactic purposes. All the special skills required to maintain an active physical life with one arm he carefully learned and maintained. 
Kennet was of compact build and average height, handsome in youth, with curly dark hair and straight nose, alert and courteous in white-haired age. He was on affable terms with his eldest brother, Sir George Young, fourth baronet (1872-1952), the eccentric diplomat and historian of Turkish law, and on terms of affection with his next brother, Geoffrey Winthrop Young, the mountaineer and writer. 
Kennet was brought up in a rather rigid broad-church family but, under the influence of G. E. Moore and Bertrand Russell at Cambridge, abandoned Christianity for an aesthetically flavoured humanism. Face to face with death in 1914 he felt the need for a stricter system, and studied Spinoza among shellbursts. He remained a Spinozan pantheist until his death. Towards the end of his life he wrote essays for private circulation, tracing this philosophical development and examining the defects of democracy in general and the House of Commons in particular. He held that the chief threat to the welfare of a community comes from the excesses of extremists both left and right, and that it is the duty of rulers to counteract them by leaning right or left as the times require. Spinoza was his philosopher; 'Trimmer' Halifax his statesman. 
Kennet was at home in scholarship, in administration, and in debate, but never in party politics. These he held in contempt, and it showed. A reserved manner and a certain caustic integrity prevented his achieving the highest political offices. He had a measure of the brilliant contrariety characteristic of his family, but balanced it with a genial empiricism of his own. He called himself a jack of all trades: his admirers called him an 'uomo universale'. 
In 1922 Young married (Edith Agnes) Kathleen Scott (1878-1947), the sculptor. Although entered into late in life, the marriage was singularly successful, their temperaments being nicely complementary: hers passionate and intuitive; his quizzical and rather reserved. He died at his home, The Lacket, Lockeridge, in Wiltshire on 11 July 1960, and was buried at Overton parish church, near Marlborough. 
His only child, Wayland Hilton Young, second Baron Kennet (1923-2009), politician, was born on 2 August 1923 at 174 Buckingham Palace Road, Victoria, London. He was educated at Stowe School and Trinity College, Cambridge. His undergraduate career was interrupted by the Second World War, during which he served with the Royal Navy from 1942 to 1945. After the war he completed his degree, served in the Foreign Office, and worked as a journalist, including as correspondent in Rome and north Africa for 'The Observer' (1953-4), theatre critic for 'Tribune' (1957-8), and a columnist for 'The Guardian' (1959-64). On 24 January 1948 he married Elizabeth Ann Adams (1923-2014), author (as Elizabeth Young), and daughter of Bryan Fullerton Adams, naval officer. They had five daughters and a son. A Labour supporter and a keen internationalist, he served, after succeeding his father as Lord Kennet, as a delegate to the parliamentary assemblies of the Western European Union and the Council of Europe (1962-5), and much later as a nominated member of the European parliament (1978-9) and the North Atlantic Assembly (1997-9). He also served as parliamentary secretary at the Ministry of Housing and Local Government (1966-70) and opposition spokesman on foreign affairs and science policy (1971-4). He wrote a number of books advocating international arms control but was opposed to the unilateral disarmament movement, and it was in part the ascendancy of unilateralists within the Labour Party and in part the party's anti-European turn which led to his defecting to the newly formed Social Democratic Party (SDP) in 1981. He served as first SDP chief whip in the House of Lords (1981-3), and first SDP spokesman in the Lords on foreign affairs and defence (1981-90). In 1982 he edited 'The Rebirth of Britain', the most convincing statement of the SDP's intellectual case. When the bulk of the SDP merged with the Liberal Party to form the Liberal Democrats in 1988 he declined to follow, and he later returned to the Labour Party, on the grounds that it had returned to social democratic principles; but he was a constant critic of Tony Blair's foreign policy and found no preferment within the party (and indeed was not one of the hereditary peers slated either for election back into the House of Lords or for appointment also as a life peer). He was involved in numerous organizations, especially those relating to architecture, environmental issues, and the heritage of Wiltshire. He was the author of some seventeen books (some with his wife, Elizabeth); perhaps his best known was 'The Profumo Affair' (1963), though there were also weightier books on Italian culture and politics, arms control, and architecture. He divided his life between his inherited properties in Lockeridge, Wiltshire, and 100 Bayswater Road, London, where J. M. Barrie had written 'Peter Pan'. He died on 7 May 2009 at St Mary's Hospital, Westminster, of pneumonia and heart failure, and was survived by his wife and their six children. 
Wayland Kennet', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37072


Young, Francis Brett (1884-1954), novelist, was born on 29 June 1884 at The Laurels, Halesowen, Worcestershire, the eldest son of Thomas Brett Young ('b'. 1855), a doctor, and his wife, Elizabeth (Annie) Jackson (1858-1898), daughter of John Jackson, a surgeon of Somerby, Leicestershire. From 1895 until 1901 he was educated at Epsom College, Surrey, where he won the Sands Cox scholarship to the University of Birmingham. In 1907 he gained a first-class medical degree and settled in practice at Brixham, Devon. 
On 28 December 1908 Brett Young married Jessie, later Jessica (1883-1970), daughter of John Hankinson, a farmer; she was a teacher of physical training who later became a concert singer. 'In between epidemics' he began to write novels, his first, 'Undergrowth', co-authored with his brother Eric and published in 1913. It was followed a year later by 'Deep Sea', spoken of as 'the Fisherman's 'Bible'', and in 1915 by 'Dark Tower', praised for its 'almost Jamesian subtlety of narrative method' ('The Times', 30 March 1954). In these early novels he drew heavily on his work as a GP for the substance of his fiction, a trend which was to continue throughout his career, as all his novels are semi-autobiographical. His pre-war fiction enjoyed respectable reviews, and each book sold on average 2000 copies. 
When the First World War broke out, Brett Young joined the Royal Army Medical Corps and served with the 2nd (Rhodesian) regiment in Jan Smuts's campaign in east Africa. 'Marching on Tanga' (1917) was inspired by his experiences and is one of the best depictions of east African life, but the campaign took a heavy toll on his health. In 1918 he was invalided out with the rank of major, and he and his wife moved to Capri. 
While convalescing Brett Young published 'The Crescent Moon' (1918) and 'Poems, 1916-1918' (1919), both influenced by his war experiences. In Capri he began to write his first essentially west midland stories, and after the publication of several unremarkable novels the appearance of 'Portrait of Clare' in 1927 signalled the beginning of his career as a best-selling writer. It was his first great commercial success, won him the James Tait Black memorial prize, and was adapted for the stage in 1946 and made into a film in 1949. The 'New Statesman' commented that 'We have to go back sixty years for any parallel in size and subject to this entirely English tale' (Young, 151). A year after 'Portrait of Clare' the publication of 'My Brother Jonathan' repeated this success, and in 1948 it was also made into a film; it was serialized on BBC television in 1985. The sales from the two novels enabled the Youngs to leave Capri and settle in the Lake District in England. 
Between the wars Brett Young produced at least one novel a year, works which appealed to both the general public and the critics. John Masefield saw him as 'the most gifted, most interesting mind amongst the younger men writing English' (Young, 146). His novels, however, suffered from their great length -- most were over 600 pages long -- and their repetitiveness of plot and character. His belief that a medical training and a doctor's career were the best ways for a novelist to learn about humanity began to backfire; as it has been calculated that, up to and including 'White Ladies' (1935), there were no fewer than thirty-three doctors of medicine in his work, an average of 3.38 per novel (Twitchett, 281). 'A Man about the House' (1942; adapted for film in 1947) was his last novel to enjoy anything like the success of his writing of the late twenties; and 'The Island' (1944), an ambitious verse history of England from the viking invasion to the latest Nazi attempt, was largely ignored. He was awarded the honorary degree of DLitt from the University of Birmingham in 1950. 
After the Second World War Brett Young retired to South Africa on medical advice, as he was suffering from a weak heart. He and his wife settled at Santici Montagu, near Cape Town. He died of heart failure at Tamboers Kloof Nursing Home, Cape Town, on 28 March 1954. His widow took his ashes to England, where they were placed in Worcester Cathedral. Despite his earlier success, 'His death passed almost unnoticed by the literary press' (Church, 13). 


@@@@@


doc= 37073


Young, Geoffrey Winthrop (1876-1958), mountaineer and educationist, was born on 25 October 1876 in London, the second son of Sir George Young, third baronet (1837-1930), and his wife, Alice Eacy (1840-1922), daughter of Evory Kennedy, a Dublin physician, and widow of Sir Alexander Hutchinson Lawrence, first baronet. He was the third of four children. (Edward) Hilton Young was his brother. He was educated at Wymondley, Marlborough College (1890-95), and Trinity College, Cambridge (1895-8), where he studied classics (BA 1898, MA 1902), and was awarded the chancellor's medal for English verse in 1897 and 1898. He then studied the French and German languages in Europe, including a period in Geneva and a year at Jena University (1899-1900). 
Geoffrey Young was one of the most famous British mountaineers before the First World War. He began climbing mountains as an undergraduate and popularized collegiate roof climbing with the jocular 'The Roof-Climber's Guide to Trinity' (1899), and the literary 'Wall and Roof Climbing' (1905). His many notable first ascents in the Alps included several ridges in the Zermatt district that became known as Younggrat. His pre-war climbing is perhaps best remembered for his description in 'On High Hills' (1927) of the first ascent of the south face of the Taschhorn in 1906, with Franz Lochmatter, Josef Lochmatter, Valentine John Eustace Ryan (died 1947), and Josef Knubel (1881-1961), who was frequently Young's guide. In 1907 he began organizing climbing retreats during Easter at the Pen y Pass hostel in Snowdonia, and this annual event brought together the leading British climbers for many years. Many of his companions and pupils died climbing, and he personally recovered the bodies of Donald Robertson (1879-1910) near Pen y Pass, Humphrey Owen Jones (1878-1912) in the Alps, and Hugh Rose Pope (died 1912) in the Pyrenees. Another of his proteges, George Mallory, disappeared on Everest in 1924. 
Young's career in education began in 1900 with brief periods teaching at various schools. In 1902 he was appointed tutor in modern languages at Eton College. There he introduced several students to climbing, including Marcus Beresford Heywood (1886-1947). In 1905 Young was dismissed from Eton for a homosexual liaison (Hankinson, 67), and became an HM inspector of secondary schools. Although he enjoyed this work, he once again resigned from it abruptly in 1913. His diaries during these years record the tension between his public probity and private pleasures in the homosexual underworlds of Berlin, Paris, and Soho (ibid., 129). During 1913-14 he retreated to an Italian villa to write about mountaineering, and lived briefly with Wilbert Spencer, a Cornish boy who was killed in action in 1915. 
Young served in Belgium and France as a war correspondent for the 'Daily News' during July-September 1914, and his dispatches were collected in 'From the Trenches' (1914). From October 1914 to July 1915 he founded and commanded the Friends' Ambulance Unit in Flanders, and served mostly at Ypres. In August 1915 he joined his close friend George Macaulay Trevelyan and Philip Noel-Baker to form the first British ambulance unit for Italy, which he commanded until January 1919. He was severely wounded on 31 August 1917 at the battle of Monte San Gabriele, and his left leg was amputated above the knee. He was mentioned in dispatches and received the order of Leopold from Belgium, was a member of the Legion d'honneur of France, received the order of the crown of Italy, and the British campaign medal. He married Eleanor 
(Len; died 1994)
, an actress, the youngest daughter of William Cecil Slingsby, on 25 April 1918 at St George's, Hanover Square. They had a son, Jocelin, in 1919, and a daughter, Marcia, in 1925, but Geoffrey continued to have homosexual affairs after their marriage (Hankinson, 210). 
After the war Young also continued to write and to climb with only one leg. He published 'Mountain Craft' (1920), a manual of mountaineering technique, and 'On High Hills' (1927), on his pre-war ascents, both of which inspired the next generation of climbers. Most inspirational were his climbs with a custom-designed peg-leg. After ascending Monte Rosa in 1927, over the next few years he climbed Wellenkuppe, Matterhorn, Petits Charmoz, Requin, and Grepon. He resolved to give up climbing while on the summit of Zinal Rothorn in 1935, and described these ascents in 'Mountains with a Difference' (1951), winner of the W. H. Heinemann prize for 1952. 
Young served as consultant in the humanities for Europe to the Laura Spelman Rockefeller memorial (1925-9) and the Rockefeller Foundation (1929-33), for which he earned $10,000 a year and spent long periods in Geneva, Paris, and Berlin. In this capacity he proposed what became the Abraham Lincoln Stiftung, dispersed grants to French historians, and met Kurt Hahn, whose innovative school in Salem, Germany, included outdoor sports in the curriculum. After Hahn fled the Nazis in 1933, Young helped him start Gordonstoun School on the Moray Firth and the Outward Bound schools. Young was chair of the Gordonstoun board, and he recommended the school to Prince Philip of Greece (later the duke of Edinburgh), who became one of its earliest students. From 1932 to 1941 he was Thomas Wall reader in comparative education at the University of London. As president during 1941-3, he rejuvenated the Alpine Club from its Edwardian torpor and played a crucial role in founding the British Mountaineering Council, a national federation of climbing clubs. He published several volumes of poetry, including 'Collected Poems' (1936), a non-climbing autobiography, 'The Grace of Forgetting' (1953), and contributed to 'Snowdon Biography' (1957), a history of climbing in Wales. He received an honorary DLitt from Durham University in 1950. 
Later in life Young referred to himself as an 'elderly celebrity, second-class' (Hankinson, 2). Although only 5 feet 9 inches tall, he usually cut an imposing figure, with lambent eyes, bushy moustache, pipe, monocle, fedora or beret, and cascading cloak. He admired vitality above all else, and contemporaries were impressed by his forceful personality. Apart from the period when he worked for the Rockefeller Foundation, his personal finances were often precarious. In 1955 he and his wife moved into Grovehurst, Horsmonden, Kent, the first home they ever owned. He died of stomach cancer on 6 September 1958 at a nursing home, 48 Holland Park, Kensington, London. After he was cremated, his ashes were scattered on the peaks above Pen y Pass. 


@@@@@


doc= 37074


Young, George, Lord Young (1819-1907), lawyer and politician, was born on 2 July 1819 at Dumfries, the only son of Alexander Young of Rosefield, Kirkcudbrightshire, procurator fiscal of Dumfriesshire, and his wife, Marian, daughter of William Corsan of Dalwhat, Kirkcudbrightshire. He was educated at Dumfries Academy and thence proceeded to Edinburgh University. His intellectual powers were great enough to see him included in the honours list of the junior Scots law class of 1837. After a reportedly severe apprenticeship he was admitted as an advocate at the Scottish bar in December 1840. In July 1847 he married Janet (1829-1901), daughter of George Graham Bell, advocate, of Crurie, Dumfriesshire. They had four surviving sons, all in the legal profession, and six daughters. One of these daughters, Lily, married Lord Mackenzie, also a judge in the court of session. 
As an advocate Young was one of the most brilliant and successful court pleaders of his day. Described as having a tall, striking figure, an unfathomable face, 'luminous, piercing eyes' and a 'resonant, incisive voice', he inspired 'the conviction that he was born to lead and not to follow' ('Juridical Review', 209-10). This powerful character showed in his style of pleading, which was carried on with the bench as between equals and in which he apparently refused to stoop to win verdicts by flattery or wheedling. Deliberate in his method, he seems to have adopted a coercive rather than a persuasive approach. He earned a reputation as merciless cross-examiner, who excelled in difficult and desperate cases. 
Whatever criticisms he attracted, Young's practice prospered and his success was paralleled by his official career. He was appointed advocate-depute in 1849 and became sheriff of Inverness in 1853. From 1860 to 1862 he was sheriff of Haddington and Berwickshire. In 1857 he acted as junior counsel to John Inglis at the celebrated trial of Madeleine Smith for murder. Their successful conduct of her defence was due partly to Young's skill in its preparation. In this trial he was, as in others in this period, on the opposite side of the case to James Moncreiff. From November 1862, when he was appointed solicitor-general for Scotland in Lord Palmerston's government, he also worked under Moncreiff as lord advocate. Linked in the public mind as a result of their contribution to the development of Scottish education, the contrast between the two men was in fact marked. Young's forceful style as an advocate was coloured by a matter-of-fact coolness that could shade into sarcasm. Moncreiff, on the other hand, was fiery and eloquent. In a working relationship which was apparently not harmonious, Young was less than loyal to a man he is said arrogantly to have regarded as his intellectual inferior. 
In 1865 Young was elected unopposed to parliament as the Liberal member for Wigtown burghs. His Liberalism was of the undogmatic kind and he canvassed support as an unashamed Palmerstonian. He continued as solicitor-general after Palmerston's death until the Russell government resigned in July 1866 and was appointed to the same office by Gladstone after the Liberal election victory in December 1868. Seemingly impatient for Moncreiff to move on, his opportunity came in November 1869 when he was himself appointed lord advocate. Young's tenure in this office was certainly the high point in his career. He ruled Scottish MPs with a verbal rod of iron and, though most of his attempts to pass legislation were frustrated, his achievement in finally passing a measure to create an effective national system of education in Scotland was a lasting monument. Although there is no doubt that the ground for the 'Education (Scotland) Act' of 1872 had been long prepared by his predecessor, the passage of this particular measure owed a lot to Young's drive and flexibility. In effect he 'solved' the religious question by leaving the management of schools to locally elected boards and therefore ensured that a system, which embodied compulsory elementary education supported by public funds and which stood the test of time, was at last put in place nearly twenty years after Moncreiff had first made the attempt. 
In a parliament dominated by Irish land, English education, and army reform, Scottish business was otherwise marginalized. Although he was responsible for the 'Public Health Act (Scotland)' in 1871, among the problems Young could not solve were the tenant farmers' grievances of hypothec and ground game, a failure which was to contribute to the poor Liberal showing in the Scottish counties at the 1874 election. Despite more than one attempt, Young was also unable to get very far with legislation to clarify and make sense of the Scottish law of entail. These difficulties do not appear to have turned Young's thoughts, as was the case in some of his Liberal parliamentary colleagues, towards a reform of the system of Scottish administration involving the appointment of a Scottish secretary. On the contrary, Young was reported to have contemplated the abolition of the court of session, for example. This would have been motivated partly by a desire to save money, but it would also have reflected his belief in the assimilation of the Scottish and English judicial systems. 
Young was himself known and well regarded in English legal circles. In 1869 he was called to the English bar at the Middle Temple, London, of which he was made a bencher two years later. What were described as his bleak, inscrutable face and his thin compressed lips were said to be familiar to students at the Middle Temple, as he dined there during term time on regular visits to London, a habit he maintained for the remainder of his life. 
At the 1874 general election Young initially, and very narrowly, lost Wigtown burghs. Poor treatment of the sheriff of Lanarkshire, Henry Glassford Bell, and the opposition of local Orangemen were held up at the time as significant contributory factors in this result. In the event, after an investigation the seat was eventually awarded to Young, but he had in the meantime agreed to become a judge of the court of session, taking his seat in March 1874. 
Over the succeeding thirty-one years, until his resignation in 1905, Young earned a reputation with the public for his disregard of precedent, as well as for his sardonic wit and impatience. In the eyes of the legal profession his defects almost certainly outweighed his strengths and these may help to explain why he ended his career as an ordinary member of the second division of the court's inner house. Just as he had reportedly terrorized witnesses in cross-examination as counsel and refused to soothe deputations when lord advocate, so now as a judge Young, with a mixture of equity and dispatch, bludgeoned advocates into brevity and tried to manage their cases for them. One advocate was even said to have asked him if he would like to call his next witness. He had little respect for legal precedents if he thought they were unjust, and put much emphasis on simplifying underlying principles of jurisprudence, of which he was credited with having a firm grasp. Young frequently dissented from his colleagues, could show intolerance with those he thought were litigating over trifles, and was reported to have taken his dislike for authority to the extent of trying to block the application of a House of Lords' judgment in a case involving the Free Church. By contrast he was usually lenient in judging criminal cases, and his common-sense approach to procedure was applauded as a contribution to efficiency. 
Young wrote his own opinions which, lacking in terseness and finish, were seen as reflecting a spoken style, an echo of the voice of an advocate in the position of a judge. At the bar he had acted, between 1842 and 1850, as a reporter of court of session cases for 'Dunlop's Reports'. The demands of his growing practice led him to give this up and in accordance with the usual custom he wrote nothing for separate publication after he became a judge. Overall, his career on the bench could be said to have reflected his frustrated ambition. He was rumoured to be ready to step down from the bench when Gladstone returned to office in 1880, because he missed life in London and the conscious exercise of power involved in holding political office. 
Young, who was praised by his friends as capable of disinterested kindness and of being able to draw people out in conversation, could also snub and offend. He became famous for witty -- the victim might have said sarcastic -- sayings, which caught the attention of London as well as of Edinburgh society. Some may not even have originated from him, but Young was credited with them anyway. Thus, for instance, the gift of half a million pounds, given by James Baird to the Church of Scotland, was described as 'the heaviest insurance against fire on record', and a Free Churchman appearing before him in court was told he might be a good man in spite of his denominational allegiance. Young was an admirer of Tennyson and counted among his friends Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman and above all Lord Rosebery. His summers were regularly spent at Silverknowes, near the Rosebery estate at Dalmeny. Among the honours conferred on him were his appointment as a privy councillor in 1872. He was created LLD by Edinburgh University in 1871 and by Glasgow in 1879. 
Two years after Young resigned from the bench, on one of his visits to London he fainted, fell, and broke a rib, in the Middle Temple. He had been in robust good health until late in life, which he attributed to his hobby of walking. After a month's illness he died in a London nursing home on 21 May 1907. He was buried in St John's Episcopal churchyard in Edinburgh on 24 May. At the time of his death Young was praised as having been a powerful and successful advocate. As a judge he was seen, depending on the standpoint of the commentator, either as wilful and oblivious to precedent, or as forceful and humorous, and at his best when dissenting. His historical significance lies in his achievement in bringing to fruition James Moncreiff's efforts to create a compulsory national system of education in Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 37075


Young, Sir George, third baronet (1837-1930), civil servant, was born at Formosa Place, Cookham, Berkshire, on 15 September 1837, the eldest of the five sons of Sir George Young, second baronet (1797-1848), and his wife, Susan (1804/5-1895), daughter of William Mackworth Praed, serjeant-at-law. William Mackworth Young was his younger brother. The family had a strong naval tradition. His great-grandfather Sir George Young was an admiral; his grandfather Sir Samuel Young FRS, the first baronet, began his career in the navy, and his father rose to the rank of captain before his retirement from the service. 
Young, who succeeded his father to the baronetcy in February 1848 at the age of ten, was educated at Eton College, where he won the Newcastle medal in 1855. In the following year he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, where he regarded the second classes which he obtained in the classical and mathematical triposes (1859) as a setback to his fellowship ambitions. After a period of intense self-analysis, he set about a course of reading in preparation for the fellowship examinations. He remained at Cambridge for a further three years, being elected president of the Cambridge Union in 1860, studying classics and philosophy. In 1861 he gained the Le Bas prize for an essay on the history of Greek literature in England, which was published in 1862, the year of his third and successful attempt at a Trinity fellowship, an outcome which illustrated his remarkable tenacity of purpose. At Eton and Cambridge, A. C. Swinburne, G. O. Trevelyan, Henry Jackson, Henry Sidgwick, Richard Jebb, Edward Bowen, and Leslie Stephen were among his friends. His enthusiasms and outlook were those of the Liberal intelligentsia of the 1860s. With the Sidgwick brothers he was one of the founders in 1864 of the Ad Eundem Club, which brought together reform-minded graduates of Oxford and Cambridge, was later a member of the Radical Club, and, in 1876, was organizer with James Bryce of the Eastern Question Association, which attacked the Disraeli government's handling of the Bulgarian crisis. He supported the campaign for repealing religious tests at the ancient universities, writing a pamphlet on the question in 1868, and contributed an article, 'The House of Commons in 1833', to the academic reformers' manifesto, 'Essays on Reform' (1867). He shared Stephen's strenuous athleticism and was an intrepid alpinist until, in 1866, he and two of his brothers attempted to climb Mont Blanc without a guide. One of his brothers was killed and Young never climbed there again. 
Young was called to the bar by Lincoln's Inn in 1864 but never practised at the law. He unsuccessfully stood for parliament as Liberal candidate for Chippenham in November 1868. Like many of his university contemporaries he was given official employment by the Gladstone administration. In April 1870 he was named, along with Charles Mitchell and W. E. Frere, one of three royal commissioners to inquire into the conditions of indentured Chinese and Indian labourers, who had been brought in to work the sugar plantations of British Guiana after the abolition of slavery. During the commission's investigations Young took part in an exploratory expedition to the recently discovered Kaieteur Falls on the Potaro River. The commission's report of February 1871 recommended changes to the system of indentured labour, and Young was given the task of drafting a new immigration ordinance, which marked the beginning of a series of reforms. 
On his return to England, Young married (10 October 1871) Alice Eacy (1840-1922), 'a beautiful, witty, and most lovable woman' ('DNB'), the daughter of Evory Kennedy, a distinguished Dublin physician, and widow of Sir Alexander Hutchinson Lawrence, bt. They had three sons and a daughter, Eacy, who died in childhood. In the summer of 1871 he became one of six assistant commissioners employed by the royal commission on friendly societies, and two years later completed a survey of voluntary self-help institutions in the southern and eastern counties of England. After another unsuccessful attempt to enter parliament, standing for Plymouth in February 1874 (he was defeated twice more in that constituency, in April and June 1880), he was secretary to the royal commission on the Factory and Workshops acts (1875-6), a prelude to his major work as secretary to the Bessborough commission on the working of the 1870 'Irish Land Act', set up by the second Gladstone administration in June 1880. He was responsible for drafting the commission's report, published in 1881, which made radical proposals for increasing the rights of tenants in Ireland. In 1882 Lord Frederick Cavendish, the chief secretary for Ireland, invited him to become his private secretary; Young's telegram of acceptance was in Cavendish's pocket when he and T. H. Burke were murdered in Phoenix Park, Dublin. 
Later in 1882 Young was appointed by Gladstone, initially on a temporary basis, as a charity commissioner responsible for carrying out the reorganization of educational charities provided for under the 'Endowed Schools Acts'. After careful investigation, the commissioners set about redistributing the endowments in each area of the country to provide for different grades of secondary schools. Some radicals attacked the commissioners for diverting endowments away from the education of the poor. After Joseph Chamberlain and Jesse Collings denounced the commissioners' scheme for Alderman Dauntsey's charity in West Lavington, Wiltshire, as a misappropriation of funds intended for the benefit of agricultural labourers, Young defended their policy before a parliamentary select committee in 1886. He later claimed that none of the schemes for which he had charge was ever overturned or altered on a point of law; but his belief in his own integrity and the rightness of his decisions, combined with a certain patrician confidence, 'made him a difficult colleague and an uncompromising adversary' ('DNB'). He has, however, been shown in a more favourable light for his effective work in ensuring that a portion of charitable endowments was used for the benefit of girls' schools. He was also a supporter of the movement for women's higher education in Cambridge, favouring the admission of women to degrees. From 1875 he was a member of the council of University College, London (and president, 1881-6), taking a prominent part in the Association for Promoting a Teaching University for London. 
Young's position on the Charity Commission was made permanent, and in 1903 he was made chief charity commissioner for England and Wales. He retired in 1906. During his civil service career he found recreation in literature. In 1888 he published an edition of the poetry of his uncle, Winthrop Mackworth Praed. He was admired for his skill as a translator of verse; he produced 'The Dramas of Sophocles Rendered in English Verse, Dramatic and Lyric' (1888) and 'Poems from Victor Hugo in English Verse' (1901). He enjoyed a vigorous retirement, remaining active in local government in Berkshire, where he promoted the charter for Reading University. In his nineties he published 'An English Prosody' (1928) and 'Homer and the Greek Accents' (1930). A tall, bearded figure, with an impressive appearance and 'a somewhat formidable manner' ('The Times', 5 July 1930), given to making his strong opinions known, he was the last survivor of the mid-Victorian academic Liberals. In his ninety-second year he wrote to 'The Times' to correct a premature announcement of his death. Young died at Formosa Fishery, Cookham, Berkshire, on 4 July 1930. He was succeeded as baronet by his eldest son, George (1872-1952), who held diplomatic and other government positions, and was a Labour parliamentary candidate; the younger sons were Geoffrey Winthrop Young, the educationist, and (Edward) Hilton Young, first Baron Kennet, the politician and writer. 


@@@@@


doc= 37076


Young, George Malcolm (1882-1959), historian, was born at Charlton, Kent, on 29 April 1882, the only son of George Frederick Young, waterman, later a steamer master, of Greenhithe, and his wife, Rosetta Jane Elizabeth Ross. A scholar of St Paul's School, he became captain of the school. A scholar of Balliol College, Oxford, in the year (1900) in which William Temple was elected to an exhibition, Young gained a first in classical honour moderations (1902) and a second in 'literae humaniores' (1904), having rowed in the second torpid. He was elected a fellow of All Souls in 1905 and became a tutor at St John's College (1906-8). In 1908 he joined the Board of Education, then under the sway of Sir Robert Morant, to whom he remained devoted. Young became a junior examiner in the universities branch; then, in 1911, the first secretary of what was to burgeon into the University Grants Committee. In 1916 he joined the newly formed cabinet office. Appointed CB in 1917, he was chosen as joint secretary of the new and short-lived Ministry of Reconstruction. He accompanied Arthur Henderson, then a member of the war cabinet, as secretary on his notorious visit to Russia in 1917, where Young met Francis Lindley, at that time counsellor in the British embassy. He went with Lindley to Archangel and later accompanied him to Vienna when Lindley went there as minister. In Vienna, Young was for a time a director of the newly founded Anglo-Austrian Bank: 'a curious anaemic-looking man', not mixing readily but already recognized by his younger British colleagues as 'a great scholar with a wide range of knowledge and a wonderful command of the English language'. 
Abandoning the public service in the early post-war disillusion, Young decided to devote himself to writing, but nothing could remove that intense interest in education which shone throughout all his work. He was at heart a born teacher, thirsting to impart the results of his own sharp and constructive thoughts bred of a wide and deep reading in a formidable variety of subjects. Yet he was in no hurry. Although his essay 'Victorian history' had caught discerning eyes in 1931, it was not until he was fifty that he published his first book, 'Gibbon' (1932), a work of 'pietas' but inspired also by a desire to impress upon the new biographers that neither Freud nor Marx had yet explained why there should be great men. He noted in Gibbon that 'sense of place' which he himself displayed. He made his home in Wiltshire where at the Old Oxyard at Oare near Marlborough he fell upon the antiquities of Wessex, not forgetting 'pond barrows', with far more knowledge and no less eagerness than his favourite John Aubrey had done. He shared house with his lifelong friend Mona Wilson (1872-1954), the civil servant and author; there she took charge of all those details of everyday life in which Young himself was oddly helpless and dependent. Surrounded in this neighbourhood by many cronies, including a bevy of former ambassadors, Young became, alongside Miss Wilson with her short fireside pipe, the centre of intellectual gossip and a dispenser of fascinating talk drawn from the resources of an astonishing memory. Urban in origin and urbane by disposition he was no less at home with countrymen and the railway workers of Swindon. He took pleasure in finding himself a tory and 'no Tory of whatever rank or class ever thought of a merely moneyed man as his social equal'. 
At the perceptive invitation of Oxford University Press, no doubt at the instigation of Humphrey Milford, Young edited the two volumes of 'Early Victorian England' which appeared in 1934 and to which he himself contributed that final summary chapter which brought his especial quality to the attention of a wider and delighted public; this essay he developed into 'Victorian England: Portrait of an Age' (1936), by which he will be remembered. What was important in history was, in his view, 'not what happened, but what people felt about it when it was happening'. Young had the industry, the learning, the memory, and above all the penetration to disentangle the main themes from the confused Victorian clamour. His advice to the historian was 'to go on reading until you can hear people talking'. He did not add that an interpreter of his talent, erudition, and perception -- or with the gifts of his revered F. W. Maitland -- might still be needed. Embedded in Young's writing was more food for thought than the common reader had been accustomed to encounter. Nor was his aim objective; even in narrative he would not forgo comment, with an epithet, an adverb, a tone of voice. His Clio was a muse with a sting. 
After 'Charles I and Cromwell' (1935), an essay in detection published before his developed Victorian masterpiece, came 'Daylight and Champaign' (1937), a collection of essays and reviews -- many of them reprinted from the literary periodicals such as the 'Sunday Times', to which Young was by now a valued contributor. There, and in other reprints, which included addresses such as his Romanes lecture on Gladstone in 1944, in his 'Today and Yesterday' (1948) and in 'Last Essays' (1950), he found elbow-room for good talk, addressed purposely to the middlebrow, about literature, persons, and manners. Unbuttoned, he might be colloquial, give full play to his humour, even show off a little since he was enjoying himself, yet literature remained a very serious matter for him, as were the duties of the clerisy and the continuity of civilization. He was deeply concerned with language as a means of communication; good speech he deemed 'the first political art'. A university he regarded as 'a place where young men and women educate one another by conversation, under the guidance of people a little older, and, more often than they might imagine, somewhat wiser than themselves'. 
Young was a trustee of the National Portrait Gallery (from 1937) and of the British Museum (1947-57), a member of the Standing Commission on Museums and Galleries (from 1938), and of the Historical Manuscripts Commission (from 1948); all this work lay very close to his being and, until his health began to fail, he gave it much attention and thought. His was a slight figure with a scholarly stoop; he had a longish, inquisitive nose, eyes twinkling well ahead of a coming quip, an unusual manner of clearing his throat, a voice warm and vibrant. He was a shy man and, because sensitive, sometimes sharp: an intellectual who lived by his deep if hidden affections. Mona Wilson's death not long after the war, then the sale of the Oxyard, were blows from which he never recovered, but he built himself a new existence on his re-election in 1948 to All Souls, which provided him with a familiar and congenial refuge. He became a member of the royal commission on the press (1947-9) and he received honorary degrees from Durham (1950) and Cambridge (1953); and -- what he valued most -- an honorary fellowship at Balliol in 1953. 
His last book, 'Stanley Baldwin' (1952), had been undertaken reluctantly, at Baldwin's own request. As he grew closer to his subject, Young was clearly somewhat taken aback by his discoveries, and it is not a satisfying book; Young's touch had begun to fail him. In 1956 he published, in collaboration with W. D. Handcock, 'English Historical Documents, 1833-74', but Young's part in the volume, undertaken in 1947, was small. An invitation to lecture in Athens, which he had never visited, for a while renewed his flagging spirits, then a cloud descended on him and his death in the Thames Bank Nursing Home, Goring, Oxfordshire, on 18 November 1959 was a genuine release. 
Young has been called a 'pantomath', a comment not displeasing to him. If he was not quite that, it was well said of him that few writers have said so many good things upon so many subjects. He lived up to his own definition of the historian as 'one for whom the past keeps something of the familiar triviality of the present, and the present has already some of the shadowy magnificence of the past'. 
L. E. Jones E. T. Williams', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37077


Young, Sir Hubert Winthrop (1885-1950), army officer and administrator, born at Wrexham on 6 July 1885, was the second of the four distinguished sons of William Mackworth Young (1840-1924) of the Indian Civil Service, and lieutenant-governor of the Punjab, and his second wife, Frances Mary (died 8 March 1932), daughter of Sir Robert Eyles Egerton. His father and maternal grandfather were both lieutenant-governors of the Punjab. His brothers included Gerard Mackworth-Young (1884-1965), civil servant in India and archaeologist, and Sir Mark Aitchison Young (1886-1974), colonial governor. Having been educated at Eton College (1898-1902), where he was a scholar, and the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich (1902-4), he was commissioned in 1904 in the Royal Garrison Artillery (lieutenant 1907). He intended to transfer to the Indian army and eventually into the Indian political service, and was advised to study Arabic to facilitate his later learning Persian or Urdu. After being posted to Aden in 1907 he studied Arabic there. He was invalided from Aden, and in England studied Arabic with a Baghdadi coach, before qualifying as an interpreter in Arabic in July 1908. In the same year he transferred to the 116th Marathas, Indian army. Returning from leave in 1913 he travelled via Syria and Iraq and at Carchemish stayed with T. E. Lawrence, there as an archaeologist. This made a deep impression on both men and had an important influence on Young's career. 
When appointed adjutant of the 116th Marathas in 1913 Young was given by the colonel scope for his exceptional abilities. He transformed the battalion, increasing efficiency and morale by his energy, organizing ability, and knowledge of the men, his design of a smart 'pagri', and the composition, with the Indian officers, of marching songs celebrating the great Maratha exploits (one, 'Ek sau solah mahrataja', became very popular). When war came in 1914 Young worked at army headquarters for a while, but he returned to his regiment and served on the north-west frontier. In 1915 he was sent to Mesopotamia where he served as assistant political officer (1915-17) and was chiefly responsible for the construction of the Shaybah 'bund'. He was transferred to the local resources department in 1917 as deputy director (1917-18), and was mentioned in dispatches for speeding up grain deliveries. 
At Lawrence's request Young was transferred to the Hejaz operations in March 1918 as general staff officer, grade 2 (GSO2). He organized transport and supplies for the composite force which cut the railway behind the Turkish army just before Allenby's final attack. He was mentioned in dispatches, and received the DSO (1919), and order of El Nahdha, third class. After a short period as president of the local resources board in Damascus (1918), he took leave to England. In 'Seven Pillars of Wisdom' (1926) Lawrence praised Young as energetic, capable, and strong-willed, 'a regular of exceptional quality... rising, as ever, to any occasion' (Lawrence, 524, 577). 
Young served in the new eastern department of the Foreign Office (1919-21), where his Arab experience helped form the policy eventually adopted in Iraq. He was assistant secretary in the Middle East department, Colonial Office, from its formation in 1921 until the end of 1926. He was colonial secretary, Gibraltar (1927-9), counsellor to the high commissioner for Iraq (1929-32), and envoy-extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary in Baghdad (October and November 1932). After this he was governor respectively of Nyasaland (1932-4), Northern Rhodesia (1934-8), and Trinidad and Tobago (1938-42). In his last post, at the most important of the Lend Lease bases, he attempted to safeguard the interests of the colony and his own authority as governor in the presence of a considerable American air, land, and naval force. In this difficult task he fell foul of an unsatisfactory and unco-operative American commanding officer, whose reports about Young led to complaints by General Marshall to Winston Churchill in Washington in 1942. In the interests of harmonious relations at this critical time, Churchill instructed the colonial secretary in February to replace him. He was given no opportunity to defend himself. His health prevented him from accepting another post, and much of his heavy wartime work in Trinidad was done despite a warning heart attack. 
In the colonial service -- though like other colonial officials of the period, his policy-making was much constrained by the Colonial Office -- he was noted for energy and foresight in helping to develop air communications, and for his sympathy with indigenous interests, which did not, however, cause him to neglect those of the European community. At a time when the settlers were being attacked by London critics, and were pressing for amalgamation of the Rhodesias, in Northern Rhodesia Young considered the settlers beneficial, tried to encourage secondary industries, and favoured closer co-operation among the Rhodesias and Nyasaland, and the creation of a new association, British Central Africa. He negotiated with the other governors and with settler leaders, but the Colonial Office forbade any step likely to lead to amalgamation or federation of the Rhodesias. He increased the role of the settler-elected unofficial members of the legislative council, and defended against London critics his administration's policies on African employment, arguing that these were affected by the underlying financial constraints on African education. He identified himself with provisions for the constant review of labour conditions and with the development of social services and the establishment of trust lands for Africans. In Trinidad, labour, hospitals, and housing occupied his special attention. Young was created CMG in 1923, was knighted in 1932, and appointed KCMG in 1934. After retirement he engaged in relief work, notably as European regional officer for the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration (1944-5); for this he was made a commander of the order of Orange Nassau in 1949. In 1945 he unsuccessfully contested Harrow West as a Liberal, and in 1947 Edge Hill, Liverpool. He served on the board of the Royal Free Hospital, London, from 1945 and was chairman from 1946 until his death; he was also chairman of the consultative council of the Southern Electricity area. On 7 February 1924 Young married Margaret Rose Mary, daughter of Colonel Frank Romilly Reynolds RE; they had three sons. 
Young had many talents. He wrote well, as his book 'The Independent Arab' (1933) showed; he talked well, was an excellent linguist, a gifted amateur pianist and organist, and keen chess-player. Intellectual and man of action, he was fertile in ideas and determined in implementing them. He appeared formidable, and was sometimes overbearing; but his moral courage made him at least as stiff with his superiors, if he thought their policy mistaken, as with anyone else. Kind-hearted, he was sympathetic to the underdog and devoted to the public service. 
He died at Evora, Portugal, on 20 April 1950 and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 37078


Young, Sir Robert Arthur (1871-1959), physician, was born on 6 November 1871 in the Norfolk village of Hilborough, the only son of William Young, labourer, and his wife, Hannah Elizabeth Ann Fairs, who when registering the birth signed her name with a mark. After attending Westminster city school and King's College, London, Young became a medical student at the Middlesex Hospital. He obtained his BSc with a first class in physiology in 1891 and his MB in 1894, and he became a licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries in a period when the quill pen was still used and the doctor carried his stethoscope in his silk hat. He was elected a member of the Royal College of Physicians in 1897 and a fellow in 1905. After obtaining his MD, London, with gold medal (1895) and doing postgraduate work at Vienna, he settled in London as a consulting physician. He was appointed to the Middlesex Hospital, the Brompton Hospital, and later the King Edward VII Sanatorium at Fenhurst, near Midhurst. In 1912 Young married Fanny Caroline Phoebe (died 1944), daughter of Robert Muirhead Kennedy, of the Indian Civil Service; they had one son. 
A chest specialist at that time had to rely entirely on observation and the patient's story, aided only by the five senses. Of this personal technique Young became one of the greatest exponents medicine has ever known. He was incapable of superficiality and with extraordinary tenacity would relentlessly pursue each sign and symptom until he penetrated its meaning. Even when X-ray diagnosis became general, he never consulted the film until he had carried his personal methods as far as they would go. 
In his large consulting room in Harley Street, which was over-furnished with cupboards and clocks, Young sat at an overcrowded desk and inscrutably pursued his remorseless clinical routine. Nothing was allowed to come between him and the patient, and he never gave up until he had used every available method and discovered all he needed. His remarkable clinical sense was built on memory and observation and he certainly understood that the physician's role includes giving not merely a diagnosis but some comfort and hope. His practice flourished long after he retired in 1936 from the Middlesex Hospital and even after the age of eighty he gave a sound opinion. Before George VI underwent an operation for lung cancer in 1951 Young was the leader in a group of eminent clinicians summoned to advise. 
Young was chairman of innumerable societies and committees, notably the National Association for the Prevention of Tuberculosis. He was an excellent leader, governing the proceedings with suavity and an extra sense of what was being thought round the table. He was an accomplished conciliator, adept in the formula which unites. Large affairs did not attract him, and he kept clear of medical controversies over the National Health Service. 
Young had a rather hieratic manner, sedulously cultivated as a young man, which mellowed greatly in later life, though his speech kept a touch of unctuous sentiment belonging to an earlier period. He made a considerable fortune from medical practice in an age when this was an accepted measure of professional success. His private passion was collecting. Over the years a prodigious accumulation of china, glass, prints, clocks, and old instruments filled his rooms. He had not much artistic sense and preferred the quaint rather than the enduring. He cherished every object and nothing was ever allowed to go. 
'R. A.' (as Young was affectionately known) was of medium height with a large, impressive head, and eyes which seemed to penetrate to the depths, though they also flickered with kindly reassurance. He never missed a medical banquet and kept up his committee work, full of industrious goodwill, until a week before his death. 
Young's prodigious industry and impressive personal qualities brought him wide recognition. He was Harveian orator (1939) of the Royal College of Physicians; and both the Society of Apothecaries and the Royal Society of Medicine gave him their gold medals. He was appointed CBE in 1920 and knighted in 1947. He died in London on 22 August 1959. 


@@@@@


doc= 37079


Young, Sydney (1857-1937), chemist, was born at Farnworth, Lancashire, on 29 December 1857, the third and youngest son of Edward Young JP, a Liverpool merchant, and his first wife, Anne Eliza Gunnery. He was educated at Southport (privately) and at the Royal Institution, Liverpool. At Owens College, Manchester, he studied chemistry under Sir Henry Roscoe and Carl Schorlemmer, matriculating at London University in 1877 and graduating as an external student in 1880. Young then worked under Fittig at Strasbourg and obtained the London DSc in 1883. In those days he was a good swimmer and skater, did some climbing, and painted in watercolours. 
In 1882 Young was appointed lecturer in chemistry under William Ramsay at University College, Bristol. He had already published some work, but he now joined Ramsay in a most fruitful partnership which lasted until 1887, when Ramsay was appointed to the chair of chemistry at University College, London, and Young succeeded him at Bristol. Their researches involved accurate measurements of the vapour pressures of solids and liquids at various temperatures, and the examination of the relevant thermodynamic equations. They published more than thirty papers arising from the work of these five years. Many of these are classics of accurate physico-chemical investigation. 
From 1887 to 1904 Young, with a succession of collaborators, carried out many studies of the physical properties of pure liquids and of the behaviour of mixed liquids when distilled. Initially the emphasis was on the determination of the vapour pressures, specific volumes, and critical constants of a series of pure liquids, with the particular aim of testing the generalizations of van der Waals regarding corresponding temperatures, pressures, and volumes. Later there was interest in the relationship between physical properties and molecular structure in homologous series and with different functional groups. Young devoted particular attention to the paraffin hydrocarbons; the problems of obtaining pure samples of these led to his investigations of distillation and to the construction of improved forms of the necessary apparatus. With such apparatus he was able to separate pure samples of some of the constituents of American petroleum. 
In 1893 Young was elected FRS: his youngest half-brother, the Revd Alfred Young, was elected in 1934 as a mathematician. In 1896 Young married Grace Martha, daughter of James Kimmins, of Stonehouse, Gloucestershire. They had twin sons born in 1897: Sydney Vernon was killed in action at Ypres in 1915; Charles Edgar survived the war and ultimately became headmaster of Rossall School. In 1904 Young succeeded J. E. Reynolds in the chair of chemistry at Trinity College, Dublin. This appointment involved a large increase in his administrative and teaching duties, so that his output of original work was greatly reduced, but from time to time he published articles and books. His 'Fractional Distillation' had already appeared in 1903, and 'Stoichiometry' followed in 1908, with a second edition in 1918. In 1922 came 'Distillation, Principles and Processes', which was written in collaboration with various experts, and included chapters on the distillation of petroleum, coal tar, alcohol, and so on. Young also wrote for the revised edition (1921-7) of 'Thorpe's Dictionary of Applied Chemistry' the articles on 'Distillation', 'Sublimation', and 'Thermometers'. His publications extended from 1880 to 1928. 
In 1904 Young was president of the chemical section of the British Association's meeting at Cambridge. He received the honorary degree of ScD from Trinity College, Dublin, in 1905 and that of DSc from Bristol University in 1921. He was a founder fellow of the Institute of Physics, and became a fellow of the Institute of Chemistry in 1888. He was vice-president of the Chemical Society from 1917 to 1920, and a member of the advisory council of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research from 1920 to 1925. From 1921 to 1926 he was president of the Royal Irish Academy. In 1928 he resigned from his chair and retired to live outside Bristol. After a very brief illness Young died at the Chesterfield Nursing Home, Bristol, on 8 April 1937. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 37080


Young, William Henry (1863-1942), mathematician, was born in London on 20 October 1863, the eldest son of Henry Young, a grocer and a member of the Turners' and the Fishmongers' companies, and his wife, Hephzibah, daughter of John Jeal. He attended the City of London School and went up in 1881 as a scholar to Peterhouse, Cambridge. He took his degree as fourth wrangler in 1885, his friends having expected him to be higher in the list. In later years he related that he would not restrict the width of his interests (intellectual and athletic) by the intensive preparation necessary to become senior wrangler. Instead of sending in an essay for a Smith's prize as most young mathematicians did, he competed for and won a prize for theology. 
Young was a fellow of Peterhouse from 1886 to 1892 but he held no permanent office in either the college or the university. He established himself as a very successful tripos coach and taught or examined in some public schools for a few years. On 11 June 1896 he married Grace Emily (1868-1944), daughter of Henry Williams Chisholm, warden of the standards; she was known thereafter as Grace Chisholm Young. They had three sons and three daughters, two of whom, Rosalind Cecilia Tanner and Laurence Chisholm Young, continued their parents' work in pure mathematics and received honorary degrees. 
In 1897 Christian Felix Klein, under whom Grace had studied at Gottingen, travelled to Cambridge to receive an honorary degree and his visit set the seal on a resolution which he had urged at the Youngs' wedding, for them to acquire a wider outlook on mathematics. The Youngs moved to Gottingen for some months. They then lived in Italy with their first child for more than a year, and Young wrote his first papers, on multi-dimensional geometry; they developed the insights made in the book 'Flatland' (1882) by Edwin Abbott, his old schoolteacher. After meeting Klein in Turin, the family returned in September 1899 to Gottingen, where they made their home until 1908. They then moved to Geneva, and from 1915 their permanent home was in or near Lausanne. Young mastered many languages, and he twice travelled round the world. 
While the family lived on various investments Young took posts for part of the academic years: some teaching and coaching at Cambridge; special lecturer at the University of Liverpool from 1906 to 1913; Hardinge professor of mathematics at the University of Calcutta from 1913 to 1919; and finally professor at the University College of Wales at Aberystwyth from 1919 to 1923. For Calcutta he wrote, but did not finish, a long comparative report on university mathematics education in many countries. He did hardly any research until he was in his late thirties, but between 1900 and 1924 his activity was intense and he wrote three books and more than 200 papers. His wife collaborated officially in two of the books and a number of the papers, prepared many others for publication, and checked proofs, while continuing her own research. As joint researchers they constituted the first significant husband-and-wife team in mathematics, and they operated at the top level for a quarter of a century. One curious feature is that after Grace drew him into research from the coaching treadmill Young then displayed the stronger creative gift. 
Towards the close of the nineteenth century it was broadly true that the processes of mathematical analysis could be carried out provided that continuous functions only were encountered: artificial restrictions had to be made to handle discontinuities. The time was ripe for new ideas to transform the subject, and Georg Cantor's point set topology provided the techniques needed. A group in Paris round Emile Borel and Jacques Hadamard took this as a speciality, and Henri Lebesgue made a spectacular contribution in 1902 with a definition of the integral which was more general than those developed hitherto. 
Following Klein's advice the Youngs had transferred to this topic in 1900 after the foray in geometry, and in 1904 Young found definitions of measure and integration different in form from Lebesgue's, but equivalent in essentials. The anticipation by two years was a blow but Young recognized it magnanimously -- 'the Lebesgue integral' is his own phrase -- and set himself wholeheartedly to develop the theory of integration. He made several contributions, notably his treatment of the Stieltjes integral and his method of monotone sequences. The Youngs' book 'The Theory of Sets of Points' (1906) was the first textbook in English on the subject and is recognized as a classic; an extended posthumous edition appeared in 1972. 
There are two other fields in which Young's powers are shown at their highest. In the first of these, the theory of Fourier series and other orthogonal series, he proved theorems of striking simplicity and beauty. Moreover, he initiated many lines of thought which were worked out more fully by younger men, notably G. H. Hardy and J. E. Littlewood. The second field -- and therein lay what was probably his most fundamental work -- was the differential calculus of functions of more than one variable. This is well expounded in his Cambridge tract (1910), but perhaps the best tribute to it is that the Belgian analyst Charles de la Vallee Poussin rewrote part of his 'Cours d'analyse infinitesimale' in 1912 in accordance with Young's treatment. 
The immediate and abiding impression which Young gave was one of restless vitality; it was shown in his gait, his gestures, and his words. His appearance was striking: in early married life he grew a beard, red in contrast with his dark hair, and he wore it very long in later years. Many stories were current about him, all turning on his mental and physical energy. Young did not meet the recognition he deserved, due in part to his late start, and in part to a certain conservative hostility to the modern theory of real functions -- a theory which few Englishmen in the early years of the twentieth century understood. Even when his profundity and originality were better appreciated, he was passed over in elections to chairs in favour of men who might be expected to be less exacting colleagues. 
Young gained the ScD at Cambridge in 1903, was an honorary doctor of the universities of Calcutta, Geneva, and Strasbourg, an honorary fellow of Peterhouse (1939), fellow (1907) and Sylvester medallist (1928) of the Royal Society, De Morgan medallist (1917) and president (1922-4) of the London Mathematical Society, and president of the International Union of Mathematicians (1929-36). In this latter post he tried hard to raise the international community spirit among mathematicians, to build upon the reconciliation with Germans at the International Congress at Bologna in 1928, but he met with much apathy. 
The fall of France in 1940 found Young at Lausanne, and he remained in Switzerland, unhappy and restive, until his sudden death at Chateau Corcelles, Chavornay, Canton de Vaud, on 7 July 1942. 


@@@@@


doc= 37081


Young, Sir William Mackworth (1840-1924), administrator in India, was born at Cookham, Berkshire, on 15 August 1840, the third son of Captain Sir George Young, second baronet (1797-1848), RN, of Formosa Place, Cookham, and his wife, Susan (1804/5-1895), daughter of William Mackworth Praed, serjeant-at-law, of Bitton Court, Devon. Sir George Young, third baronet (1837-1930), was his eldest brother, and Winthrop Mackworth Praed (1802-1839), poet and politician, was a maternal uncle. Young, known throughout his life as Mackworth, was a scholar of Eton College and of King's College, Cambridge, and a fellow of King's from 1863 to 1869. He joined the Indian Civil Service in 1862, and in December the following year was posted to the Punjab as an assistant commissioner. It was a felicitous assignment: the Punjab service had a history of evangelicalism and easily accommodated Young's own commitment to missionary endeavour. He became a member of the Church Missionary Society corresponding committee for the Punjab and Sind. His first marriage, on 17 August 1869, to Isabel Maria (1841/2-1870), daughter of Charles Boileau Elliott, rector of Tattingstone, Suffolk, was performed by John Barton of the Church Missionary Society. Unhappily, Isabel died in the following May, two weeks after giving birth to a daughter, Isabel Mary. 
Young was quickly singled out for secretariat work. In 1875 he became settlement secretary to the Punjab financial commissioner, in 1878 acting superintendent of Kapurthala, and in 1880 chief secretary to the Punjab government, in which post he remained for seven years. On 21 April 1881 he married Frances Mary (died 1932), daughter of his chief, Sir Robert Eyles Egerton. Egerton thought highly of his son-in-law's abilities, but although Young officiated in several important posts, including that of provincial home secretary (1888), he repeatedly missed out on the best appointments. In 1893-4 he presided over the Indian hemp drugs commission, and in September 1895 was made resident of Mysore, a princely state in southern India. Finally, in March 1897, Lord Elgin appointed him lieutenant-governor of the Punjab, the post he had coveted most, and promoted him to KCSI (he had been made a CSI in January 1890). 
Young's lieutenant-governorship was dominated by two issues: the administration of the north-west frontier and the transfer of land from indebted peasants to urban trading castes. On the latter subject, Young argued that the laws of political economy should be applied regardless of societal differences, but in the face of the government of India's enthusiasm for intervention he drew up a bill which allowed for a minimum of legislative interference. In October 1900, when it came before the central legislative council, he spoke against it but did not vote on it, a compromise which in Lord Curzon's eyes had neither the merit of loyalty nor that of conviction. 
Young's accommodating demeanour and thin, almost ascetic, appearance belied a tenacious and inflexible nature. In Curzon, however, he met his match, especially on the subject of the north-west frontier. Young was jealous of encroachments on his authority, but Curzon was determined to free the frontier from the Punjab's lumbering administrative machinery. In September 1900, frustrated by Young's touchy reaction to criticism, Curzon sent his proposals for a separate frontier agency direct to the secretary of state for India in London without first consulting Young. Young was furious; while he did not expect support from his own frontier specialists (each of whom, hoping to be chosen chief commissioner of the new province, had privately told Curzon to go ahead), he had expected to have sufficient warning to rally old Punjab hands in London against Curzon's plans. His ire stemmed in part from being comprehensively outmanoeuvred by the viceroy. 
Relations worsened in the summer of 1901 when Young learned that Curzon intended to shift the Punjab's summer capital from Simla. In a widely reported speech at a Masonic banquet, Young let it be known that he looked forward to 'a hill station where the full glare of the Supreme Government might be softened by distance'. He apologized almost instantly for his indiscretion, but although Curzon accepted the apology graciously, he henceforth spurned Young's social invitations because of what he insisted was the vituperative backbiting of Young's wife. Young was a courteous and scholarly man with a fine ear for music, and an evening at the gubernatorial residence, Barnes Court, was considered one of Simla's more refined social offerings. The viceroy's refusal to go there pitched Simla society into turmoil and deeply offended Young. Upon leaving India in February 1902 he rebuffed Curzon's farewell courtesies, observing bitterly that he had publicly dishonoured him and his wife. 
In retirement, Young settled at St Leonards and, despite capricious health, became vice-president of the Church Missionary Society, chairman of the Church of England Zenana Missionary Society and of the Church Education Corporation, and a member of the Central Board of Missions. He died on 10 May 1924 at his home, Lerryn, Weybridge, and was buried on 13 May at Weybridge parish church. He was survived by the daughter of his first marriage, and by his second wife and four sons and a daughter from his second marriage: the eldest son, Gerard Mackworth-Young (1884-1965) of the Indian Civil Service, was a director of the British School of Archaeology at Athens; the second, Major Sir Hubert Winthrop Young (1885-1950), was governor of Nyasaland, Northern Rhodesia, and Trinidad and Tobago; the third, Sir Mark Aitchison Young (1886-1974), was chief secretary of Palestine and governor of Barbados, Tanganyika, and Hong Kong; the youngest was Norman Egerton Young (1892-1964), of the Treasury and government director of the Suez Canal Company; the daughter of his second marriage, Lucia Katherine Young, married Arthur John Beamish and was an associate of the Royal College of Music and a professional singer. 


