@@@@@


doc= 37082


Younger, George, first Viscount Younger of Leckie (1851-1929), brewer and politician, was born on 13 October 1851 at the Brewery House, Bank Street, Alloa, Clackmannanshire, the eldest of six children of James Younger (1818-1868) and his wife, Janet (died 1912), elder daughter of John McEwan, of Alloa. Robert Younger, Baron Blanesburgh was his younger brother. Educated at Edinburgh Academy and, briefly, at the University of Edinburgh, Younger at the age of sixteen succeeded his father as head of the family brewing business, George Younger & Son, established by his great-great-grandfather. On 10 June 1879, he married Lucy (died 26 May 1921), daughter of Edward Smith, MD, FRS, of Harley Street, London, and Heanor, Derbyshire; they had three sons. 
Younger was a member of the Clackmannanshire county council from 1890 to 1906 (convenor, 1895-1906); a member of the royal commission on the licensing laws in 1896; vice-president of the County Councils Association of Scotland in 1902-4; and president of the National Union of Conservative Associations of Scotland in 1904. After unsuccessfully contesting Clackmannan and Kinross (1895, 1899, 1900) and Ayr burghs (1904), he was elected Unionist MP for Ayr burghs in 1906, representing it until 1922. He was recognized as a capable debater in the Commons, notably when opposing the 'people's budget' in 1909. He became a respected and popular Scottish whip, and was a candidate to succeed Lord Balcarres as Unionist chief whip in 1913. He was awarded a baronetcy in 1911. Younger achieved historical significance, however, not as a parliamentarian but as a party organizer and adviser to successive party leaders. In 1911 Arthur J. Balfour, the Unionists' leader, appointed Younger to a blue ribbon committee to reform the party organization, which created the posts of party chairman and treasurer. These officers were to take over from the chief whip management and fund-raising for the unionist central office and the party outside parliament. As Scottish whip, Younger retained considerable autonomy, managed several Unionist by-election victories, and in 1914 was one of ten Unionist leaders to sign the new year's message to party activists. 
In 1917 Younger succeeded Arthur Steel-Maitland as party chairman. He whipped into shape a party machine seriously weakened by the war, appointing new constituency agents and London office staff. He prepared energetically for the general election expected to follow the 1918 'Reform Act', which more than doubled the electorate. After parliament was dissolved in November 1918, he revised and edited the so-called 'coupon letter' issued by prime minister David Lloyd George and Unionist leader Andrew Bonar Law to the official Coalition Liberal and Unionist candidates. Younger looked upon the coalition as a necessary evil to keep a possible labour-socialist government from power. He regretted the issuing of the coupon to many Coalition Liberals, as it forced Unionist candidates to stand down after nursing their constituencies, with his help, for years. He was especially irritated that his subordinates had mistakenly assigned six Scottish coupons to the Coalition Liberals. However, he heatedly denied Liberal charges that he had outmanoeuvred Lloyd George and the Coalition Liberal chief whip, Frederick Guest, in a 'Scottish grab' of constituencies for the Unionists. The 1918 election campaign, resulting in the return of many unattractive 'hard-faced men', prejudiced Younger against the new parliament. He hoped for Unionist withdrawal from the coalition once the latter had implemented its pledge to reform the House of Lords into a powerful second chamber. 
Between 1919 and 1921 Younger worked closely with the Unionist chief whip, Sir Robert Sanders, a tory squire who largely shared his negative view of the coalition. Although Younger asked to be relieved as party chairman after his wife's death in 1921, Austen Chamberlain, the new Unionist leader, persuaded him to stay on. Younger had been on excellent terms with Chamberlain's predecessor, Bonar Law, a fellow Scot, but the new leader treated him rather coolly. Younger was also disturbed by Chamberlain's admiration for Lloyd George and his support for Unionist-Coalition Liberal fusion into a new centre party. 
Differences between Chamberlain and Younger came to a head in January 1922, when the latter strongly opposed Lloyd George's plan to seek an early new mandate for the coalition. Although Chamberlain himself criticized this strategy, he was indignant when Younger attacked the scheme in the Unionist press. To the annoyance of Lloyd George and Chamberlain, Younger also sent a circular letter to Unionist constituency chairmen warning that the prime minister's scheme would split their party from top to bottom. 
Younger again clashed with Chamberlain in September 1922. The Unionist leader now supported Lloyd George's call for an election. Younger realized that Lloyd George and Chamberlain wanted to preclude a probable vote by the forthcoming Unionist annual conference to withdraw from the coalition. Infuriated by Lloyd George's abuse of royal honours and his attempt to exploit the Chanak crisis with Turkey to stay in power, and convinced that the coalition ministry would not reform the House of Lords, Younger determined to use his influence to bring down the government. During early October 1922 he worked closely with Stanley Baldwin, Sir Arthur Griffith-Boscawen, Sir Samuel Hoare, and other anti-coalitionists within the government and the Unionist parliamentary party. Younger (assisted by Sanders, now a junior minister) was the chief liaison between these Unionist rebels and Bonar Law, whom he was trying to persuade to lead the revolt. 
It was Younger, more than anyone else, who induced Bonar Law to attend the decisive meeting of the Unionist parliamentary party at the Carlton Club on 19 October 1922 and to furnish the moral support needed to jettison the coalition. In the election campaign that followed, his command of the party machine was strengthened rather than weakened by Lord Birkenhead's gibe that he was the cabin boy who had taken over the ship. Younger's fear that the Unionists could obtain no more than a small majority of seats, and might even lose, was proved unduly pessimistic by the election results. 
In 1923 Younger exchanged the party chairmanship for the office of treasurer, and went to the Lords as first Viscount Younger of Leckie. His power and influence within the Conservative Party (as it was again called) remained high during the next six years. To obviate another financial scandal such as had clouded the tenure of the previous treasurer, Lord Farquhar, he arranged that party funds should be safeguarded in a complicated system of trusts. He also insisted that the party chairman should be responsible for raising party funds. He argued strongly for the utmost probity in party money-raising, and its divorce from the honours list. He was pleased when his protege, J. C. C. Davidson, assumed the chairmanship in 1926, and they worked together amicably. Although frequently critical of Stanley Baldwin's party leadership, Younger staunchly supported him as an obstacle to revival of the coalition spirit. 
Younger died of a heart attack, while attending the theatre in London, on 29 April 1929, and was buried at Alloa. His successor as second viscount was his eldest son, James Younger (1880-1946). Two other sons had been killed in action, the second in the South African War and the third in the First World War. Younger was chairman of the family brewing firm until his death, and was also a director of the National Bank of Scotland, Lloyds Bank, the North British and Mercantile Insurance Company, and the Southern Railway. At the time of his death he was lord lieutenant of Stirlingshire and vice-lieutenant of Clackmannanshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 37083


Younger, Robert, Baron Blanesburgh (1861-1946), judge, was born at Alloa, Clackmannanshire, on 12 September 1861, the fifth son of James Younger (1818-1868), of the well-known family of brewers, and his wife, Janet (died 1912), daughter of John McEwan. His eldest brother was George Younger, first Viscount Younger of Leckie. Educated at the Edinburgh Academy and at Balliol College, Oxford, Younger gained a third class in classical moderations in 1881 and a second in jurisprudence in 1883. In 1884 he was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in London and entered the chambers of John Gorell Barnes as a pupil. Later he transferred locally, to Lincoln's Inn, where he devilled for some years for Henry Burton Buckley. 
Younger's career was helped by his successful advocacy and his legal competence. In 1900 he took silk, and as a leader he came to be well liked. In 1915 he was appointed a judge of the Chancery Division in succession to Sir Thomas Rolls Warrington and received the customary knighthood. His next move was to the Court of Appeal in 1919, in succession to Sir Henry Edward Duke. Finally, after Lord Cave became lord chancellor in 1922, Younger succeeded him in 1923 as a lord of appeal, with a life peerage as Baron Blanesburgh of Alloa. It has been said that his career was largely a tribute to his personality and the charm it radiated. He was a cultivated man with a love of books, painting, and music, something his wealth allowed him to pursue without restraint. 
As a judge Younger was competent rather than distinguished. As a lord of appeal he sat from 1923 to 1937. It was a time when Atkin, Macmillan, and Wright held sway, but Blanesburgh was overshadowed by his peers. His vision of the role of an appeal judge was to look for the current law. He saw little role for any creative function in the final Court of Appeal and he favoured a narrow view of contract ('Bell v. Lever Bros', 1932). His preferred solution was to leave any change in the law to parliament, as in 'Harett v. Fisher' (1927). For Younger the search for the 'ratio decidendi' was all: 'I agree, of course, at once, that by the 'ratio decidendi' of that case -- if it can be discovered -- and by the decision itself -- whether its 'ratio decidendi' can be discovered or not -- your Lordships are as much bound as is at least every English Court' ('Great Western Railway v. The Mostyn (owners)', [1928] AC 57, 99). Formalism was all. As the years passed, however, Blanesburgh's narrow views irritated his colleagues. In 1935, in a memorandum to the incoming Lord Chancellor Hailsham, his fellow law lord, Lord Dunedin, said of him: 'You will 'not' as Sankey did, refuse his resignation' (Heuston, 481). Eventually poor eyesight forced him out in 1937. 
Apart from the law, Younger was involved in various public service activities during the First World War. In May 1915 he was appointed a member of an advisory committee set up to deal with claims by enemy subjects in the United Kingdom for exemption from internment or deportation. In September 1915 the Home Office appointed him chairman of a committee on the treatment by the enemy of British prisoners of war. Younger was also chairman of a committee established in 1920 to advise on applications from ex-enemy nationals for release of their property. Probably his most arduous public service was rendered from 1925 to 1930 as principal British representative on the reparation commission under the treaty of peace with Germany. For his public services he was appointed GBE in 1917. 
The ample means which he enjoyed enabled Younger to gratify his generous instincts by many benefactions. He was, in turn, honoured for his distinction. He became a bencher of Lincoln's Inn in 1907 and was treasurer in 1932. Balliol College, of which he was made an honorary fellow in 1916 and in 1934 visitor, had special reason for gratitude since he helped renovate the dining hall and chapel. Oxford University made him an honorary DCL (1928), and from the universities of Edinburgh (1919) and St Andrews (1929) he received the honorary degree of LLD. He was also chairman of the delegates of King's College, London (1929-44), prime warden of the Goldsmiths' Company (1931-2), and chairman of the Royal Caledonian Schools. He died, unmarried, at his Sussex home, the Grey Friars, Winchelsea, on 17 August 1946. 


@@@@@


doc= 37084


Younghusband, Sir Francis Edward (1863-1942), explorer, geographer, and mystic, was born on 31 May 1863 at Murree, India, the fourth of the five children of Major (later Major-General) John William Younghusband and his wife, Clara Jane, daughter of Robert Grant Shaw; he had two brothers and two sisters. He was educated at Clifton College and at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, and was commissioned in the 1st (King's) dragoon guards in 1882, then stationed at Meerut, India. 
Younghusband made his name as an exploring soldier and imperialist. His was a classic British imperialism, not shy of exercising brute power, but more typically presenting itself as a paternalistic endeavour, helping 'lower' races while furthering Britain's cause against imperial rivals. The empire exemplified his principle of 'unity in difference', in which the 'advanced' races dictated terms for all. In 1886 he accompanied a seven-month expedition to Manchuria. In Peking (Beijing) in March 1887 he met his superior Colonel Mark Sever Bell, and the two men obtained leave to return to India by separate land routes. Younghusband, alone with hired guides, spent seven months crossing the Gobi Desert to Hami, and over the Himalaya via Kashgar and the Muztagh Pass to Kashmir. The crossing of this 19,000 foot pass was a rite of passage which heightened his sense of being a lone Englishman carrying 'England's mission' into new territory. In a letter of 1901 to his friend Henry Newbolt he would write: 'The Empire must grow: we can't help it' (French, 156). On returning to London in April 1888 Younghusband lectured to the Royal Geographical Society; he was elected their youngest fellow, and awarded the founder's medal in 1890. In 1889-91 he consolidated his role as a trekking arm of empire in the border zones of British India, Russia, China, and Afghanistan, and recorded these journeys in 'The Heart of a Continent' (1896). In 1891 he was appointed CIE; in August 1892 he became political officer in Hunza; and in 1893-4 he was political agent in Chitral, overseeing British interests in the region. Replaced in 1894, he returned as the 'Times' correspondent with the Chitral relief force in 1895. His long leave from 1895 to 1897 was spent as the 'Times' correspondent in Rhodesia and Transvaal, recorded in 'South Africa of Today' (1897). He later regretted his part in the Jameson raid on Johannesburg against the Boer government as a mercenary undertaking. 
In August 1897 Younghusband married Helen Augusta, the eldest daughter of Charles Magniac MP, of Colworth, Bedfordshire; they had a son who died in infancy and a daughter, Eileen Louise Younghusband, born in 1902. Younghusband returned to India with his wife in November 1898. After a year in administration he became political agent at Deoli, and in 1900 was awarded the kaisar-i-Hind gold medal. In 1902 Curzon appointed him resident in Indore, and in 1903 leader of a mission to Tibet to establish British political and commercial interest, and to survey the region, a focus of Anglo-Russian rivalry. Younghusband entered Tibet in December 1903. With a mainly Indian fighting force, eventually exceeding 10,000, he advanced in stages towards Lhasa. A massacre of 700 Tibetans at Chumi Shengo in April 1904 caused disquiet in Britain. After further bloodshed he rode into Lhasa in August. Crowds clapped his entry; Younghusband took as a welcome what was a Tibetan gesture to ward off an evil spirit. The government considered he had exceeded his instructions by negotiating a treaty, signed on 7 September 1904 and regarded the treaty itself as damaging to Anglo-Russian relations. A renegotiated treaty, finally agreed in 1906, drastically reduced Britain's commitment to and power over the region. In Verrier's view (1991) Younghusband was politically naive, pursuing a chivalrous quest rather than a strategic mission, and exceeded his brief even by advancing to Lhasa. French (1994) presents the Tibet mission as the embodiment of empire at its overstretched zenith. Younghusband was in effect reprimanded in 1904 by the award of the low honour of knight commander of the Indian Empire. He recounted the mission in 'India and Tibet' (1910). He was made knight commander of the Star of India in 1917. 
In 1905 Younghusband received honorary degrees from Cambridge (DSc) and Edinburgh (LLD). In 1906 he returned to central Asia as resident in Kashmir, retiring to England in 1910, where he joined the Conservative general election campaign. He reflected on his imperial career in 'The Light of Experience' (1927), and the autobiographical romance 'But in our Lives' (1926). In 1912 he received an honorary LLD from Bristol University. In the First World War, after an unsuccessful attempt to set up a travellers' battalion, he prepared daily news telegrams for the India Office, and in 1916 founded the Fight for Right society, for whom Sir Hubert Parry set Blake's 'Jerusalem' as a rallying hymn in their campaign for the continuation of the war. Younghusband's interest in central Asia and India remained. He was a founder and later vice-president (1934-42) of the Royal Central Asian Society, and chairman of the India Society for eighteen years. He modified his bullish imperialism, however, and, after the publication in 1930 of 'Dawn in India', became known as a progressive advocate of a managed shift towards Indian self-government. 
From 1910 religion and philosophy played an increasing role in Younghusband's public life. His first predominantly spiritual text, 'Within' (1912), was a vitalist mix of science and spirit written in convalescence after being hit by a car in Belgium. 'Mutual Influence' followed in 1915. He drew inspiration from Eastern religions as well as Christianity, especially in his linkage of mysticism and sex. Younghusband's imperialism sought a mutual exchange of Western 'civilization' and Eastern spirituality. His was a philosophically speculative religion, and he was a member of the Aristotelian Society from 1910, and president in 1924-7 of the Patrick Geddes-inspired Sociological Society. His presidential address on 'The sense of society' appeared in the 'Sociological Review' (17.1-13) for 1925. He was vice-chairman of the religion and ethics branch of the League of Nations Union, League of Nations' representative at the Parliament of Religions in Calcutta in 1937, and chairman of the Society for the Study of Religions. In 1930, inspired by seeing the Oberammergau passion play, he became chairman of the interdenominational Religious Drama Society, founded by Olive Stevenson. The society sponsored conferences, drama schools, and touring productions. Younghusband remained chairman until death; in 1930 he published a play, 'The Reign of God'. The Religious Drama Society was anticipated by the Sacred Drama Society of his bizarre utopian religious fantasy, 'The Coming Country' (1928), which is peopled by characters such as Percy Veerance and Golden Promyss. In 1936 Younghusband founded the World Congress of Faiths to bring together the chief world religions in a communion for peace. He presided at meetings and wrote circulars to members until his death. For Younghusband the divide was less between Christian and heathen, than between religious and faithless; the villains in 'The Coming Country' are rationalism, secularism, and materialism. 
A sense of religion as universal lay at the heart of Younghusband's mysticism. A member of the Church of England, he had worshipped with other Christian denominations, and engaged with other faiths on his travels. He sought a direct mystical encounter with a divine and feminized nature, and often recounted a formative moment outside Lhasa in 1904 when he felt himself 'boiling over with love for the whole world' (French, 252). He outlined his nature-mysticism in his 1920 presidential address to the Royal Geographical Society on '''Natural beauty and geographical science',' GJ', 1920, 56.1-13, and in 'The Heart of Nature' (1921), 'Mother World' (1924), 'The Living Universe' (1933), 'Modern Mystics' (1935), and 'Vital Religion' (1940). His outdoor mysticism demanded action as much as introspection, and sought the mystical through the visible world in a way both metaphorically and literally visionary. 'The Coming Country' proposed a 'new faculty' of 'endsight': 'a kind of spiritual television' (p. 9). His mysticism, linking science and spirit, was presented not as misty unreason but as the clearest insight into the material world, serving evolution by anticipating future higher states. Evolution advanced through disciplined joy, a progressive ecstasy achieved by mystics alone, and by others in sexual union within marriage. 'Wedding' (1942), written with his mistress, Madeline Lees, with whom he harboured thoughts of siring a new God-child, offered a guide to such married love. 
Younghusband's spiritual journeys were conducted in the language of Himalayan exploring; he could describe an intensive reading course in philosophy as 'bracing' (Seaver, 277). This practical mysticism was reflected in his presidency from 1934 of Richard St Barbe Baker's practical and spiritual forestry group, the Men of the Trees. The mystic could offer socio-spiritual unity and leadership. 'The Heart of Nature' foresees a 'naturalist-artist' who might lead human evolution from 'Homo sapiens' to 'Homo mysticus'. 'Modern Mystics' presents exemplary Hindu, Muslim, Roman Catholic, and protestant mystics, male and female, recalls his enthusiasm in 1905 for the 'mass mysticism' of the Welsh revival, and looks for a future 'master mystic'. The espousal of joy, struggle, and the evolutionary leaving-behind of 'sluggards' (p. 279) prompts an admiring reference to Mussolini. 
Younghusband's mysticism did not shy from speculation. 'Life in the Stars' (1927) is subtitled: 'An exposition of the view that on some planets of some stars exist beings higher than ourselves, and on one a world-leader, the supreme embodiment of the eternal spirit which animates the whole'. 'The Living Universe' posits a planet, Altair, on which live higher beings, who embody his ideal characteristics of family, team spirit, leadership, ecstasy, struggle. His astro-theology fits a general pattern of ascendancy in his thought. Star-gazing prompts many a spiritual reflection and advance is typically ascent. The mountains of central Asia, recalled in 'Wonders of the Himalaya' (1924), were the key landscape of his life. Immanent and transcendent, the 'holy Himalaya' envelop and rise above, a mystical immensity landscaped in his image of God. 
Younghusband promoted British expeditions to Everest, chairing the Mount Everest committee formed by the RGS, of which he was president in 1919-22, and the Alpine Club. Mountaineering exercised mind, body, and spirit, and through it a rising British masculinity might scale for empire and humankind the heights of nature. A founder member of the Himalayan Club in 1928, he recalled Everest attempts in 'The Epic of Mount Everest' (1926), and 'Everest: the Challenge' (1936). Had Everest been conquered in his lifetime, there would have been a hole in his philosophy: ascendancy depended on there being something left to scale. 
Younghusband retained a late-Victorian masculine sense of himself and others. Shorter than the 5 feet 5 inches he claimed, he sported a prominent moustache throughout adult life. His biographers present a determined individual committed to the camaraderie of the couple, family, troop, nation, empire, and world -- yet who found it hard to get close to others. His ideal leaders and heroes resolve the tensions between individualism and collective organization in the regiment, exploring party, and climbing team. In his Everest writings physical heroism is projected onto others; elsewhere he himself is the hero in his own landscape, with action and environment feeding off one another. Younghusband remained loyal to his ideal of England/Britain (the two were symbolically equivalent for him) throughout his life. In the Second World War he fire-watched in London, and melted his medals down for the war effort. French suggests that Younghusband's intense care for humanity as a whole coincided with an ironic neglect of individuals close to him, notably his wife and his sister Emmie. His marriage lacked emotional depth: Helen Younghusband led a quiet and melancholy home life (from 1921 to 1937 at Westerham, Kent), while her husband ranged around the country and the globe. In 1939 he met Madeline Lees, thirty-two years his junior and mother of seven children, with whom he conducted a passionately mystical affair until his death. 
Younghusband was erroneously reported dead by 'The Times' in 1891. On 20 July 1942, after addressing the World Congress of Faiths in Birmingham, he was taken ill and suffered a stroke a few days later. He died of cardiac failure at Madeline Lees's home at Post Green, Lytchett Minster, near Poole, Dorset, on 31 July 1942, and was buried in the village churchyard. Since his death Younghusband has attracted sporadic attention. Early works, notably Seaver's 1952 biography, are informative but hagiographic. Later work is more critical: military historians such as Verrier (1991) have presented the Tibet mission in less flattering light. French's 1994 account shows Younghusband less as a hero than as a fascinating embodiment of the contradictions and eccentricities of the imperial age. Matless (1991) and Bishop (1989), drawing on Younghusband's mystical environmental writings, similarly stress complex contradiction rather than straightforward heroism, seeing mysticism, exploration, and imperialism as connected spheres. 


@@@@@


doc= 37085


Yoxall, Sir James Henry (1857-1925), educationist, was born on 15 July 1857 at Redditch, Worcestershire, the eldest son of Henry Houghton Yoxall, fishing tackle manufacturer, and his wife, Elizabeth Smallwood. At the age of thirteen he left what he called his small, pinched Wesleyan school in Redditch to become a pupil teacher, first at the Wesleyan school in Bridgehouses, Sheffield, then at the Pyebank School under the Sheffield school board. He won a queen's scholarship, and from 1876 to 1878 attended Westminster Training College in London, for which the examining inspector was Matthew Arnold, whose writings long influenced him. 
Yoxall returned to Sheffield and was employed by the board first as an assistant master, then from 1887 as headmaster of the Sharrow Lane School, which became famous -- even though 'payment by results' was still in force -- for its academic, artistic, and sporting achievements. He married in 1886 Elizabeth (1858-1925), daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel William Coles RE; she had trained at the National School of Cookery, London, and taught domestic subjects at Sheffield schools. They were to have one son and two daughters. As a member of the National Union of Elementary Teachers, Yoxall established his reputation at the Cheltenham conference of 1888 when, with T. J. Macnamara, he organized the so-called 'symposium of the indefatigables' to boost membership. He became vice-president, then acting president in 1891, and president and general secretary in 1892. Retaining the latter post, he gave up teaching. 
At the Leeds conference of 1892, what had now become the National Union of Teachers (NUT) resolved to advance its aims by sponsoring its leaders as members of parliament. Having unsuccessfully contested Bassetlaw as a Liberal in that year, Yoxall was returned for Nottingham West in 1895, just as he was completing his duties as a member of the Bryce commission on secondary education. Incorporated into the commission's report was his memorandum, based on NUT policy, advocating the reform of both the central and local administration of publicly provided education. The incoming Unionist government created a central ministry (the Board of Education) in 1899; replacing the school boards, set up under 'Forster's Act' of 1870, proved more difficult. Sir John Gorst's bill of 1896 failed; it also almost split the union. Nevertheless Yoxall and his fellow NUT MPs, Ernest Gray (Unionist) and Macnamara (Liberal) persisted. They encouraged A. J. Balfour to make another attempt and gave him every assistance in refining the successful 'Education Bill' of 1902 (which invested the administrative counties and county boroughs with educational responsibilities at both elementary and post-elementary levels), winning general approval for their effective participation in the parliamentary process. 
Over the next few years Yoxall was closely concerned in monitoring the implementation of the new 'Education Act' and its counterpart for London, passed in 1903. Against union expectation the Board of Education, under its permanent secretary R. L. Morant, assumed a directive stance, encroaching upon the autonomy of the new local authorities. Resisting Morant's plans for selective post-elementary education, Yoxall referred to the terms in which the consultative committee's report on higher elementary schools (1906) was cast as 'snobbish and caddish to the last degree'. He sought instead to secure equal opportunities for children transferring from elementary to secondary schools. Five years later Morant's apparent approval of derogatory comments about elementary school educated local inspectors, expressed in the board's so-called Holmes circular, left, according to Yoxall, a hundred thousand teachers aggrieved that they had been unjustly condemned and held up to ridicule. A mass meeting organized by the NUT hastened the permanent secretary's resignation. 
Much of the latter part of Yoxall's career as general secretary of the NUT was taken up with teachers' salaries and pensions. A salaries committee of the union, set up in 1913 to advance the adoption of a national scale, launched a campaign which won support from some 150 local authorities. Suspended as the war began, it was renewed in July 1916 in response to a general rise in wages and supported by strikes. During the second reading of H. A. L. Fisher's 'Education Bill', in March 1918, Yoxall urged the president of the Board of Education to secure salaries, promotions, and pensions for teachers on civil service lines. The existing pension scheme, originally set up with Yoxall's support in 1898, was reorganized on a non-contributory basis by the 'Teachers (Superannuation) Act' of 1918. In September the following year Fisher established, under the chairmanship of Lord Burnham, the standing joint committee on a provisional minimum scale of salaries for teachers in public elementary schools, with Yoxall (who had resigned his parliamentary seat as the war ended) as joint secretary as well as NUT spokesman. National salary scales were duly agreed (except by some women teachers who now aspired to equal pay) but they were soon under attack from the government which, as the post-war boom ended, strove to amend the new superannuation scheme and to reduce salaries. Yoxall, giving evidence in 1922 to the parliamentary select committee on teachers in grant-aided schools (superannuation) pointed out that teachers had accepted low salary scales on the assumption that the pension question was settled. The government, however, was adamant. The NUT was obliged to accept new superannuation terms and a reduction of 5 per cent in teachers' salaries. Consequently 1923 was a year of strikes. At the Scarborough conference, the following April, Yoxall resigned as general secretary. 
Yoxall received honorary MAs from Cambridge (1899) and Oxford (1907) during NUT annual conferences. From June 1909, the year in which he was knighted (he was the first elementary school teacher to receive this honour), until April 1924 he edited 'The Schoolmaster', the union's weekly journal. Since his student days, Yoxall had been a prolific writer. Besides magazine articles, he published school textbooks (for example, 'The Pupil Teacher's Geography', 1891) and several novels, including 'The Romany Stone' (1902), 'Smalilou' (1904), and 'Chateau Royal' (1908). A keen traveller and collector, he had a developed interest in the decorative arts. In 'The Schoolmaster' he wrote a regular column entitled 'Books and pictures'; 'Collecting Old Miniatures' and 'Collecting Old Glass, English and Irish' appeared in 1916. He and his wife settled at Kew, where she was active in local affairs and organizations, including the Social Purity Crusade and the National Suffrage Union. She was a co-opted member of the local education committee, a manager of Darell Road School, and, from 1919, Richmond's first woman magistrate. 
Slightly above medium height, well built, with a beard, Yoxall remained to the end of his life an alert, sociable, and sympathetic figure. As Isabel Cleghorn, later first woman president of the NUT, said in 1903: 'they all loved Mr Yoxall. He was so tactful, so kindly, so gracious and helpful to anyone who went to him' ('The Schoolmaster', 11 April 1903). He died of influenza at his home, Springfield, 20 Kew Gardens Road, Kew, Surrey, on 2 February 1925. Lady Yoxall died on 18 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 37086


Yule, George Udny (1871-1951), statistician, was born at Morham, near Haddington, East Lothian, on 18 February 1871, the youngest of the three children surviving infancy of Sir George Udny Yule (1813-1886) ['see under 'Yule, Sir Henry] of the Indian Civil Service, and his wife, Henrietta Peach, daughter of Captain Robert Boileau Pemberton, of the Indian army. Sir Henry Yule, the geographer of India, was his uncle. 
Yule was educated at Bayswater, London, at Dunchurch near Rugby, and at Winchester College; he was intended for the Royal Engineers but objected, and instead studied civil engineering at University College, London, which he entered at the age of sixteen. As there was then no engineering degree he left after three years without graduating. He spent two years as an apprentice in private engineering works, but in 1892 he went to study physics at Bonn University. While at University College he had become acquainted with Karl Pearson, then professor of applied mathematics, and in 1893 Pearson offered him a job as demonstrator. He was promoted to assistant professor of applied mathematics in 1896; and this marked the beginning of his interest in statistics. 
In 1899 Yule married May Winifred, daughter of William Hayman Cummings, principal of the Guildhall School of Music, but the marriage was not a success and in 1912 it was annulled. There were no children. In consequence of his marriage he gave up his post in University College and took up more remunerative work as assistant to Sir Philip Magnus, superintendent of the department of technology of the City and Guilds Institute. Yule was, however, able to keep up his statistical work in the evenings and in 1902 he was appointed Newmarch lecturer in statistics at University College, holding the two posts concurrently until 1909. His new duties included lecturing in the evenings to a small class, largely of civil servants, and these lectures provided the foundation of his 'Introduction to the Theory of Statistics' (1911), which became a standard textbook and by 1932 had run through ten editions and been translated into Czech in 1926. Revised in collaboration with Maurice Kendall, it achieved widespread popularity. 
In 1912 Yule accepted the newly established university lectureship in statistics at Cambridge and concurrently became statistician to the school of agriculture. He was made a member of St John's College in 1913, elected a fellow in 1922, was college director of studies in natural sciences from 1923 to 1935, and lived in college for almost the whole of the rest of his life. In 1915-19 he was seconded as a statistician to the director of army contracts and later worked with the Ministry of Food; he was appointed CBE in 1918. 
Yule had great influence on the early development of modern statistics, particularly on experimentation in biology and agriculture, and analysis of vital and industrial statistics. His main contributions in the theoretical field were concerned with regression and correlation, with association, particularly in 2x2 contingency tables, with time-series, with Mendelian inheritance, and with epidemiology. He was elected FRS in 1921. He played a very active part in the affairs of various scientific societies, such as the Royal Anthropological Institute and in particular the Royal Statistical Society, of which he was honorary secretary (1907-19) and president (1924-6); he was awarded the society's Guy gold medal in 1911. He was elected to honorary membership by the statistical societies of America, Czechoslovakia, and Hungary, and contributed numerous papers to the 'Journal of the Royal Statistical Society', 'Biometrika', and the 'Proceedings' of the Royal Society. 
Yule did not regard himself as a great mathematician, but he had a very clear idea of what could and could not be accomplished by mathematical analysis. In his early years he was a good friend of Pearson, and had Pearson been more accommodating they might have become an ideal team, for in many ways their abilities were complementary. But as Yule wrote in his obituary of Pearson, 'Those who left him and began to think for themselves were apt, as happened painfully in more instances than one, to find that after a divergence of opinion the maintenance of friendly relations became difficult, after express criticism impossible' ('Obits. FRS', 2, 1936, 101). 
Yule was a quiet and unassuming man, appreciated for his wide knowledge and interests and his kindly and gentle nature. In politics he was a strong Conservative. He was not ambitious, regarding freedom to pursue his intellectual interests as of more importance than name or fortune. He was a man of varied and surprising attainments: he had marked literary interests, and composed humorous verses in Latin and English. In his fifties he developed a keen interest in motoring, with a taste for fast driving; and on his retirement he took up flying, bought his own aeroplane, and obtained his pilot's 'certificate A' when nearly sixty-one. When nearing retirement he resumed the study of Latin with a view to reading in the original 'De imitatione Christi', St Augustine's 'Confessions', and Boethius's 'De consolatione philosophiae'. The first of these led to consideration of the authorship controversy and to other works of Thomas a Kempis. This suggested to him the idea of using statistical methods to provide evidence of authorship and in 1944 he published 'The Statistical Study of Literary Vocabulary'. 
After his retirement Yule continued to take an active part in college affairs, but in 1935 his heart gave serious trouble and thereafter he was compelled to be physically inactive. He died in the Evelyn Nursing Home, Cambridge, on 26 June 1951. 


@@@@@


doc= 37087


Zangwill, Israel (1864-1926), writer and advocate of Jewish causes, was born on 21 January 1864 in Ebenezer Square, Houndsditch, Whitechapel, London, the second of the five children of Moses Zangwill (1836?-1908), an itinerant pedlar, glazier, and rabbinical student, and his wife, Ellen Hannah Marks, a Polish Jewish immigrant. His father, according to J. H. Udelson, 'born evidently in a small Russian Baltic town, is said to have escaped czarist conscription and arrived in Britain in 1848, at the surprising age of twelve' (Udelson, 60). Israel quickly demonstrated high ability at school in Bristol, where his parents were living after moving from Plymouth. They then settled in London, where he won awards at the Jews' Free School, Bell Lane, Spitalfields. He was articled there as a teacher, and remained until 1888 when he was twenty-four. Four years earlier, in 1884, he had received his degree with honours in French, English, and mental and moral science from London University where he had attended evening classes. 
Many of the contradictions and paradoxes in Zangwill's life and work have their origin in the incompatibility between his parents. His pious, observant father was a scripture reader in the synagogue, and in the 1890s left his family to live and pray in Jerusalem where he was supported by Zangwill. His mother was less religious than her husband and was remembered by her third and youngest son, Louis Zangwill (1869-1938), 'as a Tartar', living with whom 'must have been hard for Moses Zangwill, who wanted a quiet life, prayer and study' (Leftwich, 90). She was also more freethinking and independent than her husband, was the dominant force in the home, and was ambitious for her children. 
By June 1888 Zangwill had resigned from his teaching position to become a journalist on the staff of the newly founded weekly newspaper the 'Jewish Standard'. He wrote a weekly column for this newspaper until 27 February 1891, four months before it folded. Another reason for leaving the Jews' Free School was his collaboration with his fellow pupil teacher Louis Cowen on the novel 'The Premier and the Painter' (1888), published under the pseudonym J. Freeman Bell. It dealt with political rebellion and love and went into three editions by the end of the 1890s. Zangwill's first solo success, 'The Bachelors' Club' (1891), was a sequence of short stories linked to appear as a novel, and introduced 'three central Zangwillian motifs: the irony of life, the fragility of idealism, and the utility of even delusive ideals' (Udelson, 74). Some of these stories, and of those later collected as 'The Old Maids' Club' (1892), first appeared in 'Ariel, or, The London Puck', a comic journal edited by Zangwill which folded in February 1892. He also wrote for Jerome K. Jerome's 'The Idler' -- the two had become friends at London University -- and Zangwill's 'The Big Bow Mystery' (1891), with its non-Jewish settings and characters, appeared serially in the 'London Star' (1891) and attracted a wide audience. 
Notable among the myriad of miscellaneous articles Zangwill wrote, 'English Judaism: a criticism and a classification' ('Jewish Quarterly Review', 1, July 1899) consigned traditional Orthodox Judaism to the dustbin of history while also rejecting the new Reform Judaism: 'There is something touching and sublime in the common belief of a people in an apparent impossibility, in the ultimate return of its national hero, in the recovery of its golden glories... something pathetic in its simple faith and credulous hope, as a mother who clasps her dead child to her breast and will not let it go.' Such apparent contradictions attracted the attentions of the backers of the newly founded Jewish Publication Society of America which commissioned him to write a Jewish novel. The result, 'Children of the Ghetto' (1892), with its powerful realistic depiction of ghetto life, established Zangwill as a spokesperson for Jewry within and outside the Jewish world. His 'Ghetto Tragedies' (1893), 'The King of Schnorrers: Grotesques and Fantasies' (1894), and 'Dreamers of the Ghetto' (1898) similarly presented the realities of Jewish ghetto life. 'The Master' (1895) continues to explore immigrant life and the 'conflict between the demands of the artist's life and the moral values in which he was raised to believe' (Rochelson, 371), though this time using a non-Jewish setting split between Nova Scotia and London. 
The year 1895 marked a watershed in Zangwill's personal life. At a reception he met Edith Ayrton (1875-1945), the daughter of the distinguished electrical engineer and physicist William Edward Ayrton FRS (1847-1908) and stepdaughter of Ayrton's second wife, also a distinguished physicist, Phoebe Sarah (Hertha) Marks Ayrton (1854-1923). Edith's mother, Matilda Charlotte Chaplin Ayrton (1846-1883), one of the first women's medical doctors in Britain, had died in 1883 and Edith was brought up by Hertha, who was Jewish. Edith attended Bedford College, London University. Author of six novels, 'Barbarous Babe' (1904), 'The First Mrs Mollivar' (1905), 'Teresa' (1909), 'The Rise of a Star' (1918), 'The Call' (1924), which focused on the emancipation cause, and 'The House' (1928), she married Zangwill in a civil register office ceremony on 26 November 1903. Their marriage was a happy one, and they had three children: Ayrton Israel 
(George; 'b'. 1906)
, who became an engineer and worked in Mexico; Oliver Louis Zangwill (1913-1987), who became professor of experimental psychology at the University of Cambridge (1952-81); and Margaret (1910- 'c'.1990), who suffered from a mental condition and was institutionalized. 
Zangwill became deeply involved with the Zionist cause, in its internal politics and infighting. He travelled widely, speaking and writing on its behalf. At the seventh Zionist conference in Basel in 1905 he made impassioned pleas to the delegates to accept the scheme to resettle Jews in east Africa: as he said, 'Palestine proper has already its inhabitants.... better Zionism without Zion than Zion without Zionism' (Udelson, 177). In the aftermath of the vicious pogroms raging in eastern Europe Zangwill, Theodor Herzl, and others were primarily concerned to rescue and resettle Jews anywhere, but these plans were rejected by various Zionist conferences. As Udelson summarizes: 'From 1901 to 1905 [Zangwill] was an advocate of official Herzlian Zionism; from 1905 to 1914 he was the driving force behind insurgent Territorialism; and from 1914 to 1919 he was the leading Western advocate of a Palestine-centred Jewish nationalism' (ibid., 164). Much of Zangwill's energy between 1905 and 1914 was devoted to the 'Galveston plan', which was supported by wealthy New York Jews of German origin and involved getting thousands of persecuted Jews out of eastern Europe and resettling them in the west and midwestern United States. 
Ideological and personal rivalries caused Zangwill to break with the Balfour declaration of 2 November 1917. Initially he had supported this declaration of a homeland for the Jewish people in Palestine, but he had come to believe that the Balfour declaration did not make adequate arrangements for the Arab populations there. At the 1919 Paris peace conference he advocated resettlement of these populations in a 'new and vast Arabian kingdom' (Udelson, 188). Disillusioned with what he regarded as British establishment duplicity and by internal dissension in Zionist politics, his last years were spent railing against those who he thought had betrayed his hopes for the future of the Jewish people and for the survival of their culture. In 1920 he wrote in a letter to 'The Times' of 16 January: 'What is now being concocted in Paris [that is, a League of Nations mandate] is a scheme without attraction save for mere refugees, a scheme under which a free-born Jew returning to Palestine would find himself under British military rule, aggravated by an Arab majority in civic affairs. (Udelson, 189)' Zangwill was angular, tall, gaunt, and bespectacled, and was a witty, powerful and epigrammatic speaker who attracted large audiences on both sides of the Atlantic. In addition to his novels he translated the Hebrew liturgy into English and wrote poetry and twenty dramas -- many of which were adaptations from his novels. His most famous play was 'The Melting Pot', produced in Washington, DC in 1908, in New York in 1909, and in London in 1914. A political play, it advocates the message of tolerance and the assimilation of minority groups into the wider community. In 'Too Much Money' (1918) he explores another of his favourite themes -- the corrupting power of wealth. 
Broken in health, Zangwill spent his last years tended by his wife at their home in the Sussex countryside at Far End, East Preston. He died of pneumonia on 1 August 1926 at Oakhurst, a nursing home in Midhurst, Sussex. He was cremated at Willesden Green, London on 5 August, following a service conducted by the rabbi of the Liberal Jewish synagogue at St John's Wood, London. His ashes are at the Liberal Jewish cemetery, Willesden. His friend and contemporary Alfred Sutro observed that: 'under a somewhat truculent exterior he was curiously unselfish and tender-hearted.... A fiery spirit, a man who all his life followed a great idea, he was fitly apostrophized by Rabbi Wise in his funeral address 'Flame thou wert, to flame thou hast returned'. ('DNB')' 



@@@@@


doc= 37088


Zimmern, Sir Alfred Eckhard (1879-1957), internationalist, was born in Surbiton, Surrey, on 26 January 1879, the only son of Adolf Zimmern, China and East India merchant, and his wife, Matilda Sophia Eckhard. His father's family were liberal-minded German Jews who had migrated to Britain in the wake of the 1848 revolution, while his mother was of Huguenot ancestry. Zimmern's family background gave him an easy and exceptional familiarity with continental Europe and its languages. Although he had an early interest in Zionism, he grew up a Christian. Educated at Winchester College and at New College, Oxford, Zimmern was an outstanding classical scholar, and obtained first classes in honour moderations (1900) and 'literae humaniores' (1902). In 1902 he was awarded the Stanhope historical essay prize, and published a study of Henry Grattan. He remained at New College for a year as lecturer in ancient history, and from 1904 to 1909 as fellow and tutor. With a natural gift for teaching, Zimmern became involved, from 1907, in working-class education, and was an inspector of the Board of Education in 1912-15. Wanting more time to write, Zimmern left New College in 1909. Financed by his father, he travelled to Greece, where he wrote 'The Greek Commonwealth' (1911), a study of fifth-century Athens, which quickly won a worldwide reputation. In it Zimmern presented an idealized account of Greek values, and drew parallels between the ancient and modern worlds. 
Zimmern was 'a man of considerable imagination and a keen sense of the tendencies of international politics' (Miller, 160). In 1905, after hearing the news of the first major victory of Japan over Russia, he went into his ancient history class at Oxford and said that he was going to lay aside Greek history for that morning to speak about 'the most historical event which has happened... in our lifetime, the victory of a non-white people over a white people'. Twenty years later he identified the causes of war as being threefold: relations between the white and non-white peoples; the economic issue of the 'haves' and the 'have-nots'; and the problem of nationality, 'between the peoples who consider themselves culturally superior and those whom they despise' (ibid., 161). 
Zimmern believed that it was both necessary and possible to outlaw war. During the First World War he wrote on the causes of war for the American liberal journal 'The New Republic'. From 1917 he worked in the Ministry of Reconstruction, and in 1918-19 in the political intelligence department of the Foreign Office. A founder, in 1920, of the Institute of International Affairs (Chatham House), he was a leading figure in those circles advocating national self-determination, the establishment of a league of nations to prevent future wars, and the federation of the British Commonwealth. In July 1917, at the first annual meeting of the League of Nations Society, he proposed a treaty making 'war a crime in any circumstances' (Markwell, 280). Zimmern was the author of a Foreign Office memorandum which was the basis of the 'Cecil draft' for the organization of the League of Nations which the British took to the Paris peace conference of 1919. Like Keynes, Zimmern severely criticized the reparations clauses of the treaty, but he approved of the political settlement. 
In 1919-21 Zimmern was Wilson professor of international relations at the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth -- the first such appointment anywhere in the world. His time there was cut short by his marriage on 31 March 1921 to French-born Lucie Anna Elisabeth Olympe Barbier (1875-1963), daughter of Pastor Maurice Hirsch Flotron and previously the wife of a fellow professor at Aberystwyth. She was a noted musician, and had helped popularize French music in England. Although Zimmern had learned Welsh and was a popular lecturer, 'the distinction of having acquired the language was more than outweighed by the opprobrium of having acquired the lady, and so he was prevailed upon to resign' (Markwell). In 1922-3 Zimmern and his wife visited the USA, where he taught at Cornell University and completed 'Europe in Convalescence' (1922), in which he castigated the policies of Lloyd George. In the general election of October 1924 he stood unsuccessfully as a Labour candidate for Caernarfon against Lloyd George himself. 
Zimmern spent the rest of the decade working mainly in Paris and Geneva. In 1926-30 he was deputy director of the League of Nations' Institute of Intellectual Co-operation (the forerunner of UNESCO) in Paris; from 1924, for many years, he and his wife conducted a summer school of international relations in Geneva. These schools were extremely popular, and allowed him the opportunity to observe closely the sessions of the league. The publication of 'The Third British Empire' (1926) reflected his keen interest in the evolution of the British empire into the (British) Commonwealth, which he saw as a model for internationalism. By 1929 he had also published three collections of essays. His wife played a significant role in the development of his views. 
Zimmern was a 'cautious' idealist (Rich, 79). While a believer in the chances of positive change in international affairs, and an advocate for the role of educated public opinion in bringing about those changes, he stood apart from those internationalists who placed their faith in world government. He regarded such views as naive and as taking too little account of the realities of nationalism. In 1933 he condemned the Oxford Union's 'King and Country' motion, which he believed 'helped to intensify the reign of terrorism in Germany' (Markwell, 281). 
In 1930 Zimmern was appointed the first Montague Burton professor of international relations at Oxford. In 1936 he published 'The League of Nations and the Rule of Law', and was knighted shortly afterwards. This book is Zimmern's most significant work, but is flawed through being time-bound, dominated by the events and spirit of its day. Its most striking aspect was Zimmern's belief in a continuing movement towards progress in international affairs. Although Zimmern was a pioneer in the development of international relations as an academic discipline, by the 1930s his writings 'began to bear more resemblance to idealist propaganda than serious academic concern' (Rich, 81). 
Zimmern remained in his Oxford post until 1944. During the Second World War, when Chatham House moved to Oxford, he worked in its foreign research and press service, which did much work for the Foreign Office. When this service moved to London in 1943, Zimmern became its deputy director until 1945. He served as secretary-general of the constituent conference of UNESCO in 1945, was first executive secretary and later adviser to the preparatory commission for UNESCO, and remained a force on behalf of the organization during his final years in the USA. 
Zimmern's replacement as secretary-general of UNESCO by Julian Huxley left him with a sense of grievance. In 1947 he left Europe for good, taking up the post of visiting professor at Trinity College, Hartford, Connecticut. He was director of the Hartford study centre for world affairs from 1948. From 1950 he also taught at the American International College, Springfield, Massachusetts. Zimmern's idealism now embraced the role of the USA in the cold war, identifying it with the rule of law in the world. He died at Avon, Connecticut, on 24 November 1957 and was survived by his wife, a daughter, and a stepdaughter. 
Of short stature and full-faced, Zimmern was warm and persuasive in personal contact, and remained vigorous until the end of his life. His thinking was neither especially deep nor distinctive, yet he attained extraordinary influence at the peak of his career in the 1920s, when journalists labelled him 'the ideal Prime Minister' (Markwell, 280). 


@@@@@


doc= 37089


Zulueta, Francis de (1878-1958), jurist, was born on 12 September 1878 in the Spanish embassy in London. His father, Don Pedro Juan de Zulueta, was a member of the Spanish diplomatic service; his mother, Laura Mary, daughter of Sir Justin Sheil, at one time British minister in Persia. Although a Spaniard by birth, and a cousin of Cardinal Merry del Val, he was only one-quarter of Spanish blood: his father was on one side Scottish, descended in the female line from Brodie M'Ghie Willcox, one of the founders of the P. & O. Steam Navigation Company. The Zuluetas, a Basque family, settled in Cadiz in the eighteenth century, had left Spain on account of their liberal opinions and later established a business in London where for much of the nineteenth century they served as the agents of the Spanish government. Don Pedro felt himself so much at home that in order to remain permanently in London he resigned from the Spanish diplomatic service. His son regarded himself as British rather than Spanish. 
Zulueta was educated at Beaumont College, Berkshire, and the Oratory School, Edgbaston, and went with an open scholarship to New College, Oxford, where he was placed in the first class in classical moderations (1899), 'literae humaniores' (1901), and jurisprudence (1902). He was elected to a prize fellowship at Merton in 1902, won the Vinerian law scholarship in 1903, and was called to the bar by Lincoln's Inn in 1904. In 1907 he returned to New College as a tutorial fellow and from 1912 to 1917 was All Souls reader in Roman law. 
On the outbreak of war in 1914 Zulueta felt himself so closely identified with Britain that he became naturalized, obtained a commission in the Worcestershire regiment, and served in France. On his return to Oxford in 1919 he was appointed to the regius chair of civil law at All Souls, which he held until 1948. In 1915 he married Marie Louise (died 1970), daughter of Henry Alexander Lyne Stephens, of Grove House, Roehampton; they had one son, Sir Philip Francis de Zulueta. 
A first-rate classical scholar, Zulueta had also the good fortune to be one of the earliest members of the seminar of Paul Vinogradoff, the first to be established on continental lines in Oxford. He always admitted his deep indebtedness to Vinogradoff and the methods of research inculcated by him. The fruit of this work was an essay, contributed in 1909 to Vinogradoff's 'Oxford Studies in Social and Legal History', 'Patronage in the later empire'. Thereafter he published much less than his contemporaries desired and expected. He became in truth too learned to see opportunities for originality in a well-tilled field; and his scepticism in matters of legal scholarship not only led him to leave questions open which others might have answered, but to entertain a radical and very un-Catholic disbelief in natural law. He was out of tune with the dominant school of Romanistic research, then devoted to the search for interpolations in the corpus juris, which he regarded as piling hypothesis upon hypothesis and encouraging anyone who practised it not to admit the unsoundness of any theory he had once adopted. He is also reported to have said to a younger friend, 'Don't read, or you won't write'. It was characteristic that much of his most valuable work is to be found in his bibliographical contributions to the 'Journal of Egyptian Archaeology'. One of his colleagues once likened him to a person with a big bunch of keys: he might not be able to tell you what you wanted to know but he would certainly be able to tell you where to find it. His relative unproductiveness was perhaps partly due to an unfortunate occasion, during his period of teaching at New College, when a number of undergraduates, finding their stock of combustible materials running out, burnt the papers he had prepared for a forthcoming book. This rankled, though in the end he came to think that the enforced rewriting had resulted in a much better book. However surprising it may have been to those who knew him later, he was at that time rather unpopular, being less able than subsequently to control a naturally quick temper. 
In 1927 Zulueta edited for the Selden Society Vacarius's 'Liber pauperum'. But he will be best-known to ordinary students by three most useful works: his little edition of the 'Digest' titles on ownership and possession (1922) for use by BCL candidates, his 'Roman Law of Sale' (1945), and his edition of the 'Institutes of Gaius', of which the text and translation appeared in 1946 and the commentary in 1953. In all these he displayed a conciseness of utterance which is often disconcerting, not only to the elementary student, but which on more diligent perusal discloses the products of his profound erudition. 
In lecturing Zulueta believed in systematic exposition which did not perhaps show him at his best. Temperamentally he was better fitted to the more explosive method appropriate to informal instruction or to revision lectures in which he could assume a general knowledge of the subject and needed only to draw attention to interesting points which had probably been neglected. 
A devout Roman Catholic, Zulueta actively supported the Oxford University Catholic Association and the local branch of the Society of St Vincent de Paul. His religious convictions made him effective in helping Polish refugees during the Second World War although they were not so exclusive as to preclude his doing just as much for Jewish and other refugees. They prompted his intervention in Malta's constitutional controversy in the 1930s and combined with his intense conservatism to make him an ardent supporter of General Franco in the Spanish Civil War. 
As a young man Zulueta had taken a prominent part in sport. Those who knew him later remember his handsome face and figure, the natural courtesy of his manners, perfect in his relations with all sorts of people and especially with children, and his great usefulness, with a knowledge of many languages, in dealing with foreign scholars. He was a loyal colleague whose sound legal instinct was displayed not only in his own special field and whose shrewdness and sagacity in discussions of policy and of ways and means were highly prized by his colleagues on the board of the faculty. His helpfulness to scholars of all ages even extended to the humble but exacting tasks of the editor and translator. He received many honours, including fellowship of the British Academy, an honorary fellowship of Merton, an honorary doctorate of Paris and of Aberdeen, and fellowship of the Accademia dei Lincei. Zulueta died at his home, 85 Cadogan Gardens, London, on 16 January 1958. A list of his publications is prefixed to 'Studies in the Roman Law of Sale' (1959), dedicated to his memory and edited by David Daube. 
F. H. Lawson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37090


Lincoln, Aaron of (d. 1186), financier, was the greatest Jewish moneylender in twelfth-century England. Of his life before 1165 nothing is known. He was probably born before 1130, and if so, the place of his birth was probably London, with which he also had close associations in the last twenty years of his life. But the centre of his business enterprises was clearly Lincoln, then the major city in the north and east of England. 
A Jewish community was flourishing in Lincoln by 1159, when its existence is first recorded. A loan to Robert de Chesney, bishop of Lincoln from 1148 to 1166, could conceivably date Aaron's residence in the city somewhat earlier, in the 1140s; he was clearly well established there by 1165, when Henry II's repayment of a loan to him marks Aaron's first securely dated appearance in the records. Aaron lent modest sums to the crown over the next ten years, but took no part in the London-based consortia of Jewish moneylenders from whom the crown borrowed so heavily and disastrously in 1177. Loans to the crown never constituted a major part of Aaron's business, however, and after 1169 he ceased to be a primary crown lender, concentrating instead on building up his own vast financial network of agents and clients from his Lincoln base. 
It was during Aaron's lifetime that Jewish moneylending developed in England on a large scale, an achievement to which Aaron's own extraordinary success must have contributed greatly. Credit systems in England were already highly sophisticated by the 1160s, as the surviving records of the Christian William Cade attest. Aaron's operations, however, were much more extensive than those of any previous lender, Christian or Jewish. By the 1180s his network of financial agents reached into almost every shire in England; his clients ranged from the king of Scots and the great religious houses to the local parish priests of Lincoln; and his business interests involved not only mortgages, but also the purchase and sale of discounted bonds, pawnbroking, property development, and commodity brokering. He was also instrumental in establishing a new Jewish community at York. 
Upon Aaron's death in London, early in April 1186, the king confiscated his entire estate. Most of his treasure was lost in the channel on its way to the king in France, but his bonds were sent to the exchequer, where a special committee, known as the Scaccarium Aaronis, was charged with their collection. Five years later, when the remaining bonds were transferred to the regular exchequer rolls for collection, they amounted to $15,000 in face value, owed by more than 430 debtors. The total value of Aaron's estate on his death is unknown, but it may have amounted to as much as $100,000 in cash, treasure, and bonds. 
Aaron had at least three sons, Elijah (Elias), Haim (Vives), and Isaac, and perhaps a fourth son, Abraham. His brother Baruch (Benedict), his sister's husband, Jacob, and their son, Baruch, also participated in Aaron's business dealings, as did his own sons. All continued to live in Lincoln after 1186 except perhaps Isaac, whose house in London was in the king's hands by 1213. None, however, approached the eminence of Aaron of Lincoln. 
Robert C. Stacey', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37091


Abendana, Isaac (d. 1699), Hebraist and book collector, was born in Spain and was taken at an early age to Hamburg, Germany. By 1660 he had completed rabbinical studies and by his own account sought the 'wisdom of medicine' (Katz, 'The Abendana brothers', 36) at the University of Leiden in the Netherlands. Isaac and his brother Jacob Abendana clubbed together to produce Hebrew books for the Christian market, and they thereby became acquainted with some of the most eminent Christian Hebraists of the day. Having been approached by Adam Boreel -- who with John Durie and Samuel Hartlib in England hoped to persuade a learned Jew to translate the 'Mishnah', the Hebraic core of the 'Talmud', into Latin -- Isaac Abendana arrived in Oxford on 3 June 1662 and presented himself to Edward Pococke and other prominent Hebraists there. Yet it was John Lightfoot, Christian Hebraist at Cambridge, who secured an academic position for Abendana, and from 1663 until 1667 he was on the payroll of Trinity College, Cambridge, working on his translation of the 'Mishnah'. He seems to have left Trinity in less than friendly circumstances, possibly because his bookselling came to overwhelm his scholarly duties, but by 1669 he was once again with a proper position, this time as an employee of the university itself. By the time of his final payment in 1676 Isaac Abendana had completed translating the 'Mishnah' into Latin, nearly thirty years after the project first began to be discussed in the Hartlib circle, although his labours were never published. 
Accordingly Abendana left Cambridge and moved to Oxford, spending much of the period between 1681 and 1685 in London, where his brother Jacob was leader of the Sephardi community. From 1689 Isaac served as lecturer in Hebrew at Magdalen College, Oxford, a position he held until his death ten years later. During his Oxford years Isaac Abendana became known as a resident authority on all matters Jewish and as the chief purveyor of Hebrew books, a situation he consolidated by inventing the Oxford diary, which in his original form included not only information relevant to university men but also a yearly essay on some aspect of Jewish religion and culture. These essays made the almanacs widely sought after even when their immediate practical use had passed, and they were later published in book form. 
Isaac Abendana died on 17 July 1699 while visiting his friend Arthur Charlett, master of University College, Oxford, who informed the antiquary Thomas Tanner that 'Old Abendana rising at 4 to see me, having lighted his Pipe, fell down dead' (Katz, 'The Abendana brothers', 46). A merchant Jew passing through the town conveyed Abendana's body to London for burial, putting an end to a thirty-seven-year Oxbridge career, during which time he had a virtual monopoly on Hebrew studies at the two universities. 
David S. Katz', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37092


Abendana, Jacob (c.1630-1685), leader of the Sephardi Jewish community in London, was born in Spain and was taken with his brother Isaac Abendana to Hamburg, Germany, as a child. Jacob studied at the Yeshiva de los Pintos at Rotterdam, and at the age of twenty-five he was already a rabbi in Amsterdam. As early as 1660 or 1661 he was in contact with Adam Boreel, the continental Christian Hebraist of the circle dominated by John Durie and Samuel Hartlib, who commissioned him to translate the 'Mishnah', the Hebrew part of the 'Talmud', into Spanish. After finishing this task Jacob collaborated with his brother Isaac to put out in 1662 an edition of the 'Mikhlal yofi', Solomon ibn Melik's thirteenth-century commentary on the 'Bible', with Rabbi Jacob's own supercommentary. The work was published with the approbations of Christian scholars, including the celebrated Jean Buxtorf the younger, which was a new departure for Jewish authors of a Hebrew book. Jacob Abendana followed up this success with a Spanish translation of Judah HaLevi's twelfth-century 'Kuzari', which was published in 1663 and was dedicated to Sir William Davidson, the English resident in Holland. 
By the beginning of 1668 Jacob had joined his brother Isaac in England, and with him he set about selling Hebrew books to a devoted clientele that included Henry Oldenburg, Robert Boyle, and Thomas Barlow of the Bodleian Library. During this visit to London the Jewish community there gave Abendana a gift equivalent to the yearly salary of the congregation's rabbi, perhaps in the hope that he would stay. In fact he returned to Amsterdam, but in 1681 he agreed to serve as leader of the English Sephardi community, which had been so generous to him years before. In that year he was host to the Princess Anne, who came to the synagogue during passover, the first occasion on which a member of the royal family visited the Jews at prayer. 
Jacob Abendana died in London in 1685; he had no children. Although his Spanish translation of the 'Mishnah' was never published, and indeed is now lost, when Surenhusius began publishing his own Latin version at Amsterdam in 1698 he paid tribute to Abendana's work. 
David S. Katz', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37093


St Victor, Achard of (c.1100-1171), abbot of St Victor and bishop of Avranches, was born in England and educated in France, as revealed in an early collection of Victorine epitaphs -- 'Huius oliva domus, Anglorum gloria cleri' -- and in another, later, epitaph, which begins, 'Anglia me genuit, docuit me Gallia' (Bonnard, 1.204). He became an Augustinian canon at St Victor, Paris, probably in the lifetime of Master Hugh (died 1141), the founder of the school of St Victor. As one of Hugh's successors in that school, Master Achard took part in the theological controversies of the 1150s, emerging as a sharp critic of Peter Lombard. 
In 1155 Achard became abbot of St Victor: several letters and charters attest his financial vigilance and the practical support that he received from the English pope, Adrian IV ('r'. 1154-9). His election in 1157 to the see of Sees -- which had an Augustinian chapter -- was vetoed by Henry II. But on 27 March 1161 Achard was consecrated bishop of Avranches, and in that capacity was on much improved terms with the king. He assisted at the baptism of Henry's daughter Eleanor in 1161, and at the translations of dukes Richard I and II of Normandy at Fecamp in 1162 and of Edward the Confessor at Westminster in 1163. As a diocesan bishop he was on good terms with his learned and active neighbour Arnulf, bishop of Lisieux (died 1184). His later epitaph suggests that he had a good knowledge of canon law: 'legis doctorem tenuit illa' (namely Gallia). Achard died on 29 March 1171. He was a generous patron of Lucerne (in the diocese of Avranches), the Premonstratensian house in which his tomb and a fine, though damaged, contemporary effigy can still be seen. 
Achard's two theological treatises, the 'De Trinitate' and the 'De discretione animae spiritus et mentis' (both ed. E. Martineau, 1987), probably belong to the 1140s or the early 1150s. They reflect the debates and use the terminology of contemporary Paris in a way that the work of Master Hugh does not; yet Achard is doctrinally conservative, and essentially unsympathetic to the drift towards organized secular schools and (within his lifetime) the University of Paris. His doctrinal position is further and usefully clarified in fifteen sermons ('Sermons inedits', ed. J. Chatillon, 'Textes Philosophiques du Moyen Age', 17, 1970), which presumably belong to his years as abbot and bishop. 
Margaret Gibson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37094


Ackerley, Joe Randolph (1896-1967), writer and literary editor, was born on 4 November 1896 at 4 Warmington Road, Herne Hill, south London, the younger son and second of the three children of Alfred Roger Ackerley (1863-1929), fruit importer, of London, and his mistress, Janetta Katherine Aylward (1864-1946), an actress. His parents married in 1919. He was educated at Rossall School, Fleetwood, Lancashire, and at Magdalene College, Cambridge, where he obtained a third class in English in 1921, having abandoned law after a short time. His education had been interrupted by the First World War, in which he served on the western front as an officer in the 8th battalion of the East Surrey regiment. Twice wounded, he was captured in May 1917 and subsequently exchanged into internment at Murren in Switzerland. These experiences, and the death in action of his elder brother, Peter, resulted in a pronounced strain of melancholy in his character. 
In 1922 Ackerley received an appreciative letter from E. M. Forster about his long meditative poem 'Ghosts'. This led to an enduring friendship, the closest of Ackerley's life. It was at Forster's suggestion that Ackerley spent five months in India as companion-secretary to the eccentric maharaja of Chhatarpur. 
The anthology 'Poems by Four Authors' (1923) contained ten poems Ackerley had written while an undergraduate, and in 1925 the play based upon his experiences as an internee, 'The Prisoners of War', was produced in London. Its 'difficult' themes (the war and homosexuality) made it a 'succes d'estime', but although he was hailed as a coming dramatist, he never completed another play. 
In 1928 Ackerley became an assistant producer in the talks department of the BBC. Through Forster he had acquired a wide circle of literary acquaintances, many of whom he recruited to make broadcasts on the radio. In 1932 he edited 'Escapers All', derived from a series of talks given by men who had escaped from prisoner-of-war camps. That same year he also published 'Hindoo Holiday', based on his Indian diaries. In spite of many excisions on the grounds of libel and obscenity, the book's sly humour and brilliant character-drawing ensured excellent sales and consolidated his reputation. 
In 1935 Ackerley became literary editor of 'The Listener', a post he held for twenty-four years. He wanted the magazine to be 'in the vanguard of contemporary thought, the forefront of the battle' and commissioned reviews, articles, stories, and poems which reflected this. 'I think that people 'ought' to be upset', he wrote; 'I think that life is so important and, in its workings, so upsetting that nobody should be spared' ('Letters', 115). This was a policy which led to many disagreements with his timid employers, and he waged a vigorous guerrilla campaign against the prudery and philistinism of the BBC hierarchy. His integrity, charm, tact, and an insistence upon the highest standards led to his being widely considered the finest literary editor of his generation. 
Ackerley flouted convention both in and out of the office. Strikingly good-looking and energetically homosexual, he conducted a long but conspicuously unsuccessful search among working-class men for 'the Ideal Friend'. His father's life had also been sexually unorthodox, for he had kept a second mistress and fathered three daughters whose existence was discovered by Ackerley only after his father's death. Ackerley's crusade to tell the truth, however uncomfortable and inconvenient that might be, arose from his belief that his relationship with his father had been compromised by their inability to confide in each other. 
In 1956 Ackerley published 'My Dog Tulip', a shockingly frank and funny portrait of his Alsatian bitch, Queenie. The story of how he acquired her from a petty criminal and gradually transferred his love from man to dog is told in his novel 'We Think the World of You' (1960), which won the W. H. Smith award. Although unconsummated, this relationship was undoubtedly the most satisfactory of his life and resulted in his passionate advocacy of animal rights. 
In retirement Ackerley revised what was to be his masterpiece, a 'family memoir' begun in the 1930s which was eventually published as 'My Father and Myself' (1968). He lived in considerable squalor and acrimony in a small flat at 17 Star and Garter Mansions, 6 Lower Richmond Road, Putney, London, with his 'three bitches': Queenie, his ageing Aunt Bunny, and his emotionally unstable sister, Nancy. After the death of Queenie in 1961 he became increasingly morose. Although disenchanted with the human world, he turned his misanthropic gloom to good account in witty and self-deprecatory letters. He died from a coronary thrombosis on 4 June 1967 at his home in Putney and was cremated at Putney Vale crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 37095


Balsham, Adam of (1100x02?-1157x69?), logician, was born in Balsham, near Cambridge, on the estate of his father, whose family came from Beauvais in France. About 1120 he left England for Paris, at that time the goal of many young Englishmen who aimed to study the arts and theology. By 1132, the date of publication of his major work, the 'Ars disserendi', Adam, who cannot now have been much less than thirty, was established as the master of a school, teaching on the Petit Pont which links the Ile de la Cite with the Left Bank. When after several years of studying in France the need to earn a living obliged John of Salisbury to take up teaching young noblemen, he felt the need for frequent revision courses; in this context he became closely acquainted with Adam of Balsham, whom he praises for his acute mind, his wide learning, and his outstanding knowledge of Aristotle. John passed on to Adam his own pupil, Guillaume de Soissons, who had devised an instrument to detect logical fallacies. Yet John's grateful appreciation of Adam's helpfulness did not prevent his strongly criticizing the latter's cynical principle of teaching, whereby (in John's eyes) he cultivated an unnecessarily complicated approach to logic in order to enhance his own reputation; moreover, John took care to stress that Adam had never been his own teacher. But the lifelong affection for Adam and his school shown by Alexander Neckam, a prominent scholar who was Adam's pupil three decades later, suggests that John's criticisms may not have been entirely fair. 
Fragments of treatises by Adam of Balsham on transubstantiation and on the Trinity, presumably composed about 1145, have come to light. These theological writings may account for the fact that, about 1146, Adam became a canon of Paris Cathedral. As such he took part in the Paris synod of 1147, presided over by Pope Eugenius III, at which Bishop Gilbert of Poitiers defended himself against charges of heretical doctrines concerning the nature of God and the Trinity. Adam, along with Hugues de Champfleury, the king's chancellor, testified under oath that they had heard Gilbert utter the incriminating propositions. Bishop Otto of Freising, an admirer of Gilbert, expressed himself astonished that men so learned contented themselves with an oath instead of producing rational arguments. In 1148 Adam appeared again, with well-known masters, at the Council of Rheims, when Bernard of Clairvaux's accusations against Gilbert were fully discussed. 
The 'Ars disserendi' of Adam of Balsham claims to be the first systematic approach to logic produced in recent times, one which replaces the antiquated language of the current textbooks, their inaccurate translations, and their artificial terminology. It sets out to revive the art of discourse through discussion, rather than exposition. Novel in its approach and in its extensive use of Aristotle's 'Topics', and above all of his newly translated 'Sophistical Refutations', its acute examination of ambiguities and fallacies started the discussion of a subject that engaged philosophers during the next three centuries. The earliest known English logician, Adam was the first to stress the importance of careful attention to language as a safeguard against faulty thinking. Though disliked by many of his contemporaries, Adam of Balsham attracted many young students to his school. In his 'Entheticus' John of Salisbury criticizes them for their disrespectful attitude towards older scholars and their boastful claim to originality. But as late as the beginning of the following century the school remained active, commanding the loyalty of masters like Gilles de Corbeil and, above all, Neckam, who more than fifty years after the event remembered Adam's correcting Thierry of Chartres's wrong reading of a passage in Aristotle's 'Sophistical Refutations'. Neckam praises the teaching of the school, criticizing only its indulgence in logical casuistry. 
Adam of Balsham also wrote a treatise of a different kind, 'De utensilibus ad domum regendam' (sometimes from its opening words called 'Phalae tolum'), composed after returning on a visit to his native village, which he had left twelve years before. It is his response to criticism by a friendly colleague, Master Anselm, who had reproached him for his vacuous prose. Adam displays a wealth of forgotten words, taken from ancient authors (mostly from Isidore of Seville, but also from Aulus Gellius and some glossaries), to show the appropriate terms for objects of everyday use. He does so by a detailed description of his family home: the courtyard, the stable with its horses, the house itself, an elaborate meal with his many relatives (followed by the appearance of lyre players and pipers), the collection of arms in a tower, the barns, the kitchen, the women's quarters with the clothes and ornaments they contained. Though he mixes facts with imagination, he provides a lively picture of an early twelfth-century English country house. 
It is not known when Adam of Balsham died. The day of his death -- 6 August -- but not the year is given by the obituary of the abbey of Notre-Dame-du-Val, in the diocese of Paris. Alexander Neckam, who arrived in France in 1175 at the age of seventeen, and entered the school of the Petit Pont shortly afterwards, refers to Adam's star as still shining in his own time. But his statement shows only that the memory of the school's founder remained alive. It does not provide information about the date of Adam's death, and is much more likely to refer to the life of the school, still flourishing when those of other famous masters had disappeared. In the absence of any conclusive evidence, the precise date of Adam's death must be left open, between the late 1150s and the late 1160s. 
On the authority of Du Boulay's 'Historia universitatis Parisiensis', Adam of Balsham has been frequently confused with another Master Adam, also a canon of Paris, who became bishop of St Asaph and died in 1181. This second Adam is usually referred to as Adam the Welshman; the name under which Du Boulay confused the two men, Adam Angligena, was his own invention. 


@@@@@


doc= 37096


Adams, William (1823-1904), engineer, was born in Limehouse, London, on 15 October 1823, the second son and third child in the family of three sons and two daughters of John Samuel Adams, clerk of works to the East India Dock Company, and his wife, Jean Walker. He was educated privately in Margate. 
In 1841 Adams was apprenticed as a machinery fitter with Miller and Ravenhill, shipbuilders at Orchard Wharf, Blackwall, London. In 1846 he joined the firm of Charles Blacker Vignoles (1793-1875) as a draughtsman and, two years later, Philip Taylor, shipbuilder, in Marseilles and Genoa, working as a marine engineer there and in ships of the Royal Sardinian Navy. Adams married Isabella, daughter of Charles Park, mechanical engineer, at Genoa in 1852. They had seven sons and three daughters. 
Adams returned to Britain later in 1852 and planned the North London Railway's Bow locomotive and carriage works, becoming locomotive and carriage superintendent in 1854. To deal with its rapidly increasing commuter traffic, in 1855 Adams introduced new high-capacity suburban trains with continuous brakes, probably the first in Britain. He was also first to use coal gas for train lighting in 1862. New passenger locomotives of greater power, of 4-4-0 tank type, from 1865 embodied his patent two-axle guiding bogie with lateral movement controlled by springs. This greatly improved their smoothness of travel over curves and allowed higher speeds without risk of derailment. It was one of the major developments in locomotive design and was adopted worldwide. 
In 1873 Adams took up a similar appointment with the Great Eastern Railway. He modernized their Stratford works, using largely American labour-saving machines and equipment which, in many cases, enabled process costs to be reduced five- to tenfold. In 1878 he pioneered the introduction of 2-6-0 type freight locomotives in Britain and, as consultant to the London, Tilbury, and Southend Railway, 4-4-2 passenger tank locomotives, which were highly successful and were built in enlarged form over the next fifty years. 
On becoming locomotive superintendent of the London and South Western Railway in 1878, Adams rapidly introduced urgently needed, more powerful, and reliable locomotives for passenger, suburban, and freight traffic, which were robust in construction and elegant in outline, especially the outside-cylindered 4-4-0 express type. A major development, patented by Adams and his nephew Henry in 1885, was the Vortex steam exhaust system which increased combustion efficiency and locomotive power. It was applied to over 500 locomotives in Britain, France, and Austria. Adams retired because of ill health in 1895. 
Adams was a kindly man who took a keen interest in his staff and his fellow men. He was musically talented, with a fine bass voice like his father. While with the North London Railway he persuaded its directors to provide suitable accommodation for concerts and evening classes at the Bow and Bromley Institute. He was a member of the Institutions of Civil and Mechanical Engineers and a founder member of the Association of Railway Locomotive Engineers. Adams died on 7 August 1904 at Hillrise, Amersham Road, Putney, London. 
George W. Carpenter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37097


Aglen, Sir Francis Arthur (1869-1932), official in the Chinese service, was born at Mulgrave House in Scarborough on 17 October 1869, the son of Archdeacon Anthony Stocker Aglen, later rector of St Ninian's, Alyth, Perthshire, and his wife, Margaret Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Stephen Mackenzie, surgeon. He was educated at Marlborough College, and in 1888, on the advice of Sir Robert Hart, he joined the Chinese maritime customs service of which Hart was the head. That service played an important part in the economy of China, providing the government with its most reliable source of revenue, and underwriting the large foreign loans upon which it was dependent. 
Between 1888 and 1900 Aglen served in a number of posts in Peking (Beijing), Amoy (Xiamen), Canton (Guangzhou), and Tientsin (Tianjin); in 1897 he was appointed to the rank of commissioner. Shortly after the Boxer uprising broke out in 1900 he was posted to Shanghai as officiating inspector-general while Hart was a refugee in the British legation under siege in Peking. In 1906 Aglen married Senga Marion, daughter of Professor Sir Isaac Bayley Balfour, regius keeper of the Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh. They had three sons and two daughters; she died at sea in 1925. 
Between 1901 and 1910 Aglen served as commissioner in Nanking (Nanjing) and Hankow (Hankou) and as chief secretary at the inspectorate-general, Peking. After a dispute with the Chinese authorities Hart left China on leave in 1908 and never returned, although he remained titular head of the customs service until his death in 1911. In 1910 Aglen became officiating inspector-general, and on Hart's death was appointed head of the service by the Chinese government. 
During Hart's time the responsibilities of the customs had been concerned only with collecting duties and preventing smuggling; Chinese officials were responsible for banking the revenue and for using it to service loans and other financial obligations to foreign governments for which it was security. However, Aglen's appointment as inspector-general coincided with the anti-Manchu revolution of 1911-12, which caused the administrative arrangements of the Chinese to break down. Faced by these unprecedented difficulties, Aglen arranged for the safety and integrity of customs revenue by placing it in foreign banks in his own name. This was intended to be a temporary measure, but it was so successful that the Chinese authorities gave it formal recognition for the whole of Aglen's term as inspector-general (1911-27). In fact, in 1914 he was entrusted with the task of servicing loans guaranteed by customs revenue earmarked for that purpose. He was appointed KBE in 1918. 
As political conditions in China became increasingly chaotic during the 1920s Aglen found his responsibilities becoming not only more onerous but also more difficult to carry out without coming into conflict with one or other of the Chinese factions making demands upon him as custodian of revenues of which he was in sole charge. His problems came to a head in 1927 when he was instructed by the Chinese government to collect surtaxes on foreign trade to which the treaty powers had not agreed, although the charges had been approved in principle during the Peking tariff conference of 1925-6. Aglen refused to allow his officers to collect these duties until they had been formally approved. In consequence, despite protests from the diplomatic corps, the Chinese government dismissed him from his office on 31 January 1927. In that year he became GCMG. Aglen also received many honours both from China and from other countries, including Japan, France, Italy, Denmark, Belgium, and Norway. On 2 July 1927 he married Anna Moore ('b'. 1883/4), daughter of Murray Pringle Ritchie, a shipping agent, of Santiago, Chile. Aglen died at Meigle Hospital, Meigle, Perthshire, on 26 May 1932. He was survived by his second wife. 
H. F. Oxbury', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37098


Ainslie, John (1745-1828), cartographer and land surveyor, was born on 22 April 1745 in Jedburgh, the younger son and younger child of John Ainslie, druggist in Jedburgh, writer to the signet, and burgess of the burgh. He may have been educated at Jedburgh grammar school and was later apprenticed to Thomas Jefferys, for whom he continued to work thereafter. He was employed by him to survey Bedfordshire with Thomas Donald, Buckinghamshire in 1766 to 1768, and Yorkshire from 1767 to 1770. 
After Jefferys's death on 20 November 1771 Ainslie returned home and shortly thereafter made a map of Jedburgh and its environs. This plan was dogged by misfortune, and the loss of the plates on a trip to London was never rectified. Lean times followed, and three years later he was using the backs of sheets of his Jedburgh map to draw a privately commissioned plan. On 27 October 1776 he married Christian, daughter and heiress of Thomas Caverhill of Jedburgh, merchant. Ainslie's mind was still fixed on making large-scale county maps: he proposed to survey Selkirkshire, Fife, and Kinross-shire, Stirlingshire and Clackmannanshire, Perthshire, the Lothians, Wigtownshire, Angus, Renfrewshire, Kirkcudbrightshire, and Berwickshire. The surveys of Stirlingshire and of Perthshire were never embarked upon, for want of subscribers, and Berwickshire was surveyed by John Blackadder, Ainslie being responsible only for the engraving; but the other counties were surveyed and a first edition of the resultant maps was published in 1797. A new edition was brought out in 1801. 
Ainslie settled in Edinburgh and had premises at St Andrew Street, Parliament Square, Rose Street, South Hanover Street, and latterly at Nicolson Street. From Parliament Square he published on 1 March 1778 a map of eastern Scotland from Moffat to Arbroath. He then published four charts covering the south-west coast from Saltcoats to Whitehaven in Cumberland, before turning to the east coast of Scotland, producing a general chart in 1785 and in May 1786 three separate charts of the same coast. Henceforth, the sheer variety of his cartographic output was impressive. In 1785 alone, not only did he survey and engrave the series of charts mentioned above, but he also made a series of estate plans for Patrick Kerr of Abbotrule (which Kerr failed to pay for), surveyed a line for a canal from the Forth to the Clyde for Robert Whitworth, and engraved several plans for the court of session in Edinburgh. 
During 1787 and 1788 Ainslie devoted most of his time to preparing his great map of Scotland. On 1 January 1788 the first of nine sheets was complete. This map was a landmark in the improvement of the outline of Scotland, which was not superseded for twenty years. For the first time the Great Glen is shown as a straight line, and Skye, Mull, and Islay are shown with some degree of accuracy. In 1789-90 he made a book of plans of the earl of Eglinton's estates in Ayrshire (now in the National Archives of Scotland). He then worked again with Whitworth, surveying lines for the Edinburgh to Glasgow canal. With Charles Rennie, the civil engineer, he surveyed the new harbour for Saltcoats and the line for the Glasgow to Ardrossan canal. With the turn of the century Ainslie turned to agricultural improvement, publishing 'The Gentleman and Farmer's Pocket Book, Companion and Assistant' in 1802 and a 'Comprehensive Treatise on Land Surveying' in 1812. At the time of his death he had amassed $8976 7's'. 6died He died on 29 February 1828 at his house in Nicolson Street, Edinburgh; he had lived since 1804 at various addresses on that street. He was buried in the south transept of Jedburgh Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 37099


Aislabie, Benjamin (1774-1842), wine merchant and cricket administrator, was born on 14 January 1774 in Newington Green, Middlesex, the third son, and sixth and last child, of Rawson Aislabie, soap and wine merchant of Newington Green, and his wife, Frances Rayson, of Dunham, Nottinghamshire. He was a descendant of John Aislabie, a Yorkshire MP and chancellor of the exchequer at the time of the South Sea Bubble. 
Educated at Eton College, Aislabie was a wealthy West India merchant with a well-established wine business in the Minories in London. Little is known about his professional life and he is remembered for his lifelong interest in cricket. 
On 13 March 1798 Aislabie married Anne, eldest child of William Hodgson, merchant, of the City of London. They had twelve children, of whom only six daughters and one son survived infancy. In 1802 Aislabie joined the Marylebone Cricket Club at its Dorset Square venue. Thenceforth he played many games, not only for the MCC, but for a variety of sides. He was a notoriously bad player. Throughout his career of some forty years he barely averaged four runs an innings and took a total of eight wickets. A big, heavy man (probably 17 stone), he had a substitute, not only to run for him when batting, but also to field for him. None the less, such was his amiable nature that all welcomed him as a playing companion. 
Aislabie's great contribution was as a cricket administrator. Cricket was somewhat unco-ordinated before the early nineteenth century; many fixtures were impromptu and piecemeal, despite the use of rather grandiose labels. In 1822, eight years after Thomas Lord had moved his famous turf to its last resting place at St John's Wood, Aislabie became the first secretary of the MCC, the first sign of any real formality of organization. The following year he was also made president. With the game tainted by gambling and violent disputes, Aislabie's popularity was instrumental in attracting and retaining members, and by the time of his death the membership of fewer than 200 had almost doubled. He organized matches, collected subscriptions, and became central to the MCC's task of developing a legislative and administrative framework for the game. He presided over the club, as cricket was transformed into a well-regulated, even quasi-religious, pastime and a symbol of 'muscular Christianity'; it was Aislabie who, in 1841, took the MCC team to Rugby for the match celebrated in 'Tom Brown's School Days' by Thomas Hughes. 
Aislabie lived for most of his life at Lee Place, Eltham, Kent, and at East Park Place, Regent's Park, London, where he died from a throat abscess on 2 June 1842. 


@@@@@


doc= 37100


Aitken, John (1839-1919), meteorologist and experimental scientist, was born on 18 September 1839 at Falkirk, Stirlingshire, the fourth son of Henry Aitken of Darroch, the head of a well-known legal firm, and his wife, Margaret Russell. He was educated at Falkirk grammar school and the University of Glasgow, where he studied natural philosophy under William Thomson as well as engineering. Intending to pursue a career in engineering, he served two years' apprenticeship in Dundee, followed by a further three years with Napier & Sons, a Glasgow shipbuilding firm. After completing his apprenticeship, however, he suffered a breakdown in health, causing him to abandon his chosen profession. He had inherited sufficient wealth to live a life of leisure but elected to pursue his earlier interest in natural philosophy. His training as an engineer proved invaluable for his purpose, for he was able not only to devise the experiments he wanted to make, but also to construct the apparatus needed to perform them. He never married, and he converted much of his Falkirk home into a scientific laboratory and workshop. 
Aitken's interests extended across a wide spectrum of physical science although his first contribution to the scientific literature was an article on an engineering subject -- that of safety valves -- published in 'Engineering' (3 May 1867). His later work covered a broad range. His outstanding experimental skills were first exhibited in a paper on colour sensation that he presented to the Royal Scottish Society of Arts in 1872. He tried to co-ordinate his results into a modified form of Young's three-colour theory, introducing considerations of a physiological rather than a physical character and emphasizing the influence of the surrounding background, and also fatigue, in affecting the apparent colour perceived. 
Aitken's early work on colour theory was followed by investigations into oceanic circulation, glacier motion, and changes of state, and the latter led him to a study of condensation in the earth's atmosphere. It was here that Aitken was to make the greatest impact. He designed an ingenious instrument, the Aitken dust counter, with which he showed that it was possible to count the number of dust particles (by which he meant condensation nuclei) in a closed sample of saturated air. Aitken expanded the air slightly using an air pump, thereby causing cooling and consequent condensation onto the dust particles, and so forming water droplets. The droplets then fell onto a silvered surface which had been ruled into squares, and the number of the droplets could easily be counted. He developed the instrument into a final portable form that was capable of considerable precision in the hands of a skilful operator. 
Using his dust counter Aitken showed that condensation does not take place under normal atmospheric conditions, even at high supersaturations, without the presence of dust particles to act as nuclei, and he also performed an exemplary series of control experiments to counter any possible objections to his theory. He then took his experiments a stage further by showing that a more sudden expansion can result in condensation occurring in air from which dust has been removed by filtration. C. T. R. Wilson later demonstrated that under these circumstances the condensation takes place on ions in the free air, but this effect can only be achieved in the laboratory using a greater and more rapid degree of expansion, and hence cooling, than occurs naturally in the atmosphere. It is also worth noting that J. J. Thomson, in his classical experiments on mass and charge of an electron, made use of Aitken's condensation method in obtaining some of the measurements on which the determination of these small quantities depended. 
Subsequent work by Aitken was largely within the field of meteorology, although he did maintain other interests. He made significant contributions to the study of dew formation, showing that the vapour which condenses as dew on cold surfaces comes from the ground below as well as from the air above, and that the 'dewdrop' on leaves of plants is actually exuded sap. He also disagreed with Sir Napier Shaw regarding the probable causes of cyclonic development (1917), although he acknowledged that he was himself handicapped by a lack of 'mathematical equipment' for this sort of investigation, and at his death he left behind a paper pointing to inadequacies in the standard Stevenson thermometer screen which, he considered, gave readings in calm and sunny conditions that were too high. 
Following publication of his paper on dust, fog, and clouds ('Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh', 30, 1883, 337-68), Aitken was recognized as one of the great experimenters of the day. He was on intimate terms with Lord Kelvin and corresponded with Rayleigh and William Ramsay. Bearded and dignified, he was an original thinker who remained outside the mainstream of scientific activity. This had some disadvantages, but it helped him take an individual approach to problems; he remained in touch with other workers, and his findings were always made available. Although he lived a quiet country life, with country pursuits his main recreation, and never lived away from Falkirk, he was not a recluse and travelled widely within Europe. 
Honours awarded to Aitken included fellowship of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1875 and its Keith (1883) and Gunning (1895) prizes; fellowship of the Royal Society in 1889 and its royal medal in 1917; and LLD from the University of Glasgow in 1899. He died at his home, Ardenlea, Arnothill, Falkirk, on 13 November 1919. 


@@@@@


doc= 37101


Alanson, Edward (1747-1823), surgeon, was born on 23 October 1747 in Newton-le-Willows, Lancashire, the son of John and Margaret Alanson. He was apprenticed to William Pickering, a surgeon to the Liverpool Infirmary, in 1763. In 1768 he went to London and became a house pupil of the surgeon and natural scientist, John Hunter. In 1770 he became a surgeon to the Liverpool Infirmary. Four years later he left the house of William Pickering and moved to Cable Street, Liverpool. In 1777 he became a partner of Henry Park, who was also a surgeon to the infirmary, and in the same year he moved to Basnett Street. Alanson became one of the first three surgeons appointed to the Liverpool Dispensary in 1778. In 1779 he published 'Practical Observations on Amputation and the After-Treatment'. At about the same time he helped to found the Liverpool Medical Library and the Liverpool Blind Asylum. In 1790 he moved to Wavertree, near Liverpool. He resigned his post at the infirmary on the grounds of poor health four years later and moved to Aughton, near Ormskirk, where he continued to practise surgery. In 1808 he returned to Wavertree. 
Alanson is best-known for his improvements in the technique of amputation, and his important suggestions for hospital reform were a vital adjunct to his new surgical methods. In the early part of the eighteenth century amputations were generally performed by a circular incision perpendicular to the limb. A large open wound remained which was dressed by dry lint and the arteries were tied off by passing a ligature around the entire mass of vessels. Alanson urged that operations be carefully planned in advance. He championed the flap technique, which had recently been revived by a few English surgeons. In this procedure the surgeon cut obliquely inwards towards the bone. The muscles were divided so that the cut end of the bone was covered and a flap of skin was left that could be used to cover the wound. Alanson suggested that the wound be cleansed with warm water and bandaged so that the edges formed a straight line across the stump: no dressings were to be used. He also urged that the arteries be drawn out and tied individually. Although it had been common for surgeons to expect suppuration of the wound as an inevitable concomitant of amputation, Alanson demonstrated that by these methods it was possible for these wounds to heal 'by the first intention', that is, without significant infection. Wounds healed with little fever or discharge and patients seldom needed opium to control post-operative pain. Moreover, the cushion of muscle provided a more useful and less vulnerable stump. 
Alanson reported that, of forty-six traditional amputations that he had witnessed, ten patients died and the survivors suffered prolonged complications. Following his adoption of the new methods, there were no deaths and only a few minor complications in thirty-five patients treated without selection at the Liverpool Infirmary. This was the best record until the development of antisepsis by Joseph Lister. 
Alanson and his colleagues obtained these results by making hospital reform an important part of their work. It is reported that he never performed an operation without washing his hands. He also urged that hospital wards be vacated and thoroughly cleansed every four months, that iron beds be used, that patients be washed on admission and dressed in clean clothes and that their own clothing be cleaned before discharge, that infectious patients be denied admission, that patients with offensive sores and surgical patients be placed in separate rooms, that hospitals remain uncrowded, that the windows of each ward be opened daily, and that infirmaries remove patients to country houses for recovery. 
Alanson's innovations evolved in close consultation with his gifted colleagues at the Liverpool Infirmary -- the surgeons Henry Park and John Lyon, and the physicians Matthew Dobson, Henry Richmond, and Thomas Houlston -- as well as with several other innovative surgeons and local reformers. He himself did not claim to have originated many of his improvements, but his work is notable for the way in which many details of care and technique were combined to produce a dramatically improved outcome, and for the rigour with which he analysed his work. Together, these amounted to a significant advance in the practice of surgery. 
In June 1775 Alanson married the daughter of Nehemiah Holland, a Liverpool merchant. Alanson died on 12 December 1823 in Wavertree. His wife died a year later; they were survived by five of their twelve children. 
Margaret DeLacy', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37102


Albright, Arthur (1811-1900), chemist and phosphorus manufacturer, was born on 3 March 1811 in Charlbury, Oxfordshire, into a Quaker family, the second son and sixth of ten children of William Albright, grocer and mercer of Charlbury, and his wife, Rachel Tanner of Woodborough, Somerset. He was educated at schools in Rochester and privately at home, and then at the age of sixteen became apprenticed to his uncle, a chemist and druggist in Bristol. He did not settle to this life and had a number of activities, including travel to France and Belgium, studying other industries such as beet growing. For a while he worked for a Bristol printer and publisher. 
In 1842 Albright joined the firm of John and Edward Sturge, manufacturing chemists in Birmingham, a town congenial to enterprising dissenters because it did not tolerate the limitations on the holding of municipal office imposed on them in the older charter cities. The firm expanded its scope in 1844 to make white phosphorus (from bone-ash), the main outlet for which was the making of matches. The match, as a simple, reliable source of fire, was one of the great technical innovations of the nineteenth century, a fact which explains the importance of Albright's industrial activity. However, the white phosphorus matches were dangerous and their manufacture a serious danger to health. In the course of travels to find sources of bone-ash Albright met Anton Schrotter (1802-1875), who had published in 1850 a good method of making the red, or amorphous, form of phosphorus, which was much less reactive than the white form. Albright purchased the patents, and then took out his own on improvements to Schrotter's method. He was thus able to make, economically, this form of phosphorus which was a main factor in bringing about the widespread use of safety matches. 
In September 1848 Albright married Rachel (died 1899), daughter of George Stacey of Tottenham. They had four sons and four daughters. They lived mainly in fine houses not far from his factories. In 1851, in an area already much industrialized (Oldbury in Worcestershire), the Sturge brothers opened a new phosphorus plant, which Albright took over at the end of 1854. In 1856 he went into partnership with J. W. Wilson (1834-1907), who married his wife's sister, Catherine Stacey, in 1857. The firm Albright and Wilson survived until the middle of the twentieth century. Albright travelled all through his working life, in eastern Europe in the early 1850s and in western Europe thereafter, promoting the use of red phosphorus, for example by showing specimens at exhibitions, first in the 1851 Great Exhibition, then in the Paris 'expositions' from 1855 onwards. In his widespread business dealings for an expanding export business he developed a good command of several European languages, for which he had shown a facility in childhood. Seeking sources of raw materials and expanding his export trade he visited Europe more than a hundred times, Egypt once, and the USA several times. 
Albright was a dedicated and effective philanthropist, his early interest in phosphorus having grown out of a concern for the health of match workers. He concerned himself with alleviating the slave-like conditions of black people in the West Indies, and when war broke out in the United States in 1861 he worked at getting financial and material support for emancipated slaves. He was also active in alleviating distress in France following the devastation of the Franco-Prussian War. In later life he expanded this social interest, even attempting to enter parliament; he stood as a candidate for East Worcestershire in 1874, but his platform, based on proposals to deal with the health problems of prostitution near garrisons and naval establishments, attracted little support. He was an active member of the Arbitration Society, believing that the kind of process which proved successful in settling some international disputes, such as the Alabama arbitration of 1871, should become general. He supported Gladstone in opposing the jingoistic agitation of 1877-8 when a Russo-Turkish war was feared, but parted from him on some of his domestic policies. Albright died in Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, London, while on a visit to his daughter Dora (Lady Scott-Moncrieff), on 3 July 1900. He was buried at Witton, Birmingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 37103


Stainsby, Alexander of (d. 1238), bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, was in all likelihood a native of Stainsby within Ashby Puerorum, Lincolnshire, where his brothers Gilbert and Master William of Stainsby held land. His parentage and schooling are obscure, though he may well have been a pupil of Stephen Langton, later archbishop of Canterbury (died 1228), himself a native of a village less than 10 miles from Stainsby. Master Alexander makes his first recorded appearance as witness to a settlement presided over by Archbishop Langton in 1216, in the company of several members of the archbishop's household. A tradition passed down by early historians of the Dominican order would make Stainsby already a teacher of theology at Toulouse in 1215, when his lectures were attended by the order's founder, the future St Dominic. In due course he moved, like Dominic, to Bologna, from whose schools he was promoted chamber clerk to Pope Honorius III ('r'. 1216-27) before 1224. Stripped of later accretions, the tradition is entirely plausible. A Master Alexander the theologian was indeed associated with the Dominicans of Bologna between 1221 and 1223, while in due course Bishop Alexander of Stainsby is credited with the foundation of Dominican houses at Chester and Derby, and with assisting the establishment of the Dominicans in Oxford. Several members of his episcopal household joined the friars, including his brother Master Richard of Stainsby, author of a revised alphabetical concordance to the 'Bible', and the great scholar Alexander of Hales (died 1245), who was afterwards to be the first Franciscan doctor of theology in Paris. 
Despite Alexander of Stainsby's own scholarly reputation, his only writings to survive are two short tracts, on the seven deadly sins and on confession, circulated together with his diocesan legislation. Both his statutes, which are remarkable for the number of scriptural quotations they contain, and the tracts show a keen awareness of the reformist approach to preaching, instruction, and penance common both to Dominican spirituality and to the tradition of Stephen Langton and the schools of Paris. Their content and tone alike make it probable that they are the works of Stainsby himself, rather than of some member of his entourage, even though a number of distinguished scholars joined his household. 
Stainsby was resident at the papal curia at the time of his election to Coventry in 1224. It was Honorius III who conferred the see upon him, acting as mediator in an election disputed between the secular canons of Lichfield and the monks of Coventry. The monks' election of their own prior as bishop had recently been quashed by Archbishop Langton, who almost certainly approved, though he may not have engineered, the election of Alexander. Stainsby's episcopate was to witness the elevation of Lichfield to equal status with Coventry, and from 'c'.1226 the bishop himself adopted the joint style of bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, in preference to Coventry alone. Following further argument in Rome it was decided that episcopal elections were to fall to the convents of Coventry and Lichfield by turn. 
Stainsby also did much to augment the common fund for resident canons at Lichfield, reserving pensions to it from several churches appropriated to monastic houses, securing the endowment of Lichfield's sacristy and of chaplains celebrating masses to the Virgin, and continuing the rebuilding of Lichfield Cathedral begun by his predecessors. He added new prebends to the cathedral's endowment, several of them being bursaries financed from the proceeds of the antiquated papal tax known as 'Peter's pence'. In addition he purchased estates to augment the temporal endowment of his see. In 1236, following a long legal battle, Stainsby secured visitation rights over the monks of Coventry. Assiduous in the correction of monastic abuses, he established resident vicars in many churches appropriated to the religious. 
Outside the diocese Stainsby's cosmopolitan early career ensured that he was much in demand as a diplomat. He was sent by Henry III to Rome in 1226, 1227, 1228, and 1234; to Antwerp for negotiations with envoys of the emperor Frederick II ('r'. 1220-50) in 1227; and on several occasions to France or Wales to renew truces. His trip to Rome in 1228 was intended to secure the succession to Archbishop Langton (whom he also served as executor). Politically, Stainsby's interventions were made in company with Langton's other proteges among the English bishops. In 1224 he acted as envoy to the disgraced courtier Falkes de Breaute (died 1226), during the siege of Bedford Castle. 
A decade later Stainsby was one of several bishops to oppose the controversial regime of Peter des Roches, bishop of Winchester (died 1237). Accused before the council in January 1234 of favouring the rebellious Richard Marshal, sixth earl of Pembroke (died 1234), he denied the charge, at the same time excommunicating those whom he dubbed the king's true enemies, a group taken to include Peter des Roches and his alien associates. Besides being one of Henry III's most frequent ambassadors to Rome, Stainsby served many times as papal judge-delegate. He died on 26 December 1238 in Andover, where he had gone to assist the cause of a papal clerk. By a deathbed grant he ensured the foundation at Denhall in the Wirral of a hospital to care for the poor and for those shipwrecked on the passage to Ireland. His body was brought back to Lichfield Cathedral, where he was commemorated in a chantry at the altar of St Ceadda (Chad). 
Nicholas Vincent', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37104


Newport, Alexander of (fl. c.1235-1257), master mason, was the son of Odo of Newport in Lincoln. First recorded in the mid-1230s, by 1240 he had become master mason of the fabric of Lincoln Cathedral, and it was probably in that capacity that between 1245 and 1248 the dean and chapter granted him a messuage in Pottersgate on a repairing lease. Although large claims have sometimes been made for the influence and importance of Alexander's work, these cannot be substantiated; indeed, it is probable that the most innovative work on the cathedral was done before he took up office. But the lower stages of the existing crossing tower, rebuilt after a collapse in either 1237 or 1239, would have been his work, and this had an effect on subsequent towers at Newark and Stamford. Alexander may also have been responsible for the remodelling of Lincoln's west front, for the galilee, and for the beginnings of work on the Angel Choir; the latter was undertaken 'c'.1256, the year before he is last documented as master mason. He had died by 1270. With his wife, Thecia, he had two daughters: Maud, who became a nun at Stamford; and Thecia, who married Lawrence of Ingilby. 


@@@@@


doc= 37105


Alexis Master (fl. c.1120-c.1140), manuscript artist, was active at St Albans Abbey, and probably at Bury St Edmunds Abbey, in the 1120s and 1130s. The name 'Alexis Master', first coined in German by the art historian Adolph Goldschmidt, derives from the illustrations of the life of St Alexis which this artist contributed to the great St Albans psalter now in Hildesheim Cathedral. Otto Pacht suggested that the Alexis Master should be identified as Anketil, a monk-goldsmith of St Albans Abbey, who completed a new shrine for the relics of St Alban in 1129 and spent part of his career at the Danish court as royal moneyer; this identification, however, has not met with general acceptance. C. R. Dodwell proposed that the Alexis Master was a secular artist hired by Geoffrey of Gorham, abbot of St Albans between 1119 and 1146. 
The surviving corpus of the Alexis Master's work comprises historiated initials, full-page paintings, and tinted drawings. It is believed to span six manuscripts, being concentrated in two: the St Albans psalter, and the life and miracles of St Edmund in the Pierpont Morgan Library, New York. His chief monument is his work in the St Albans psalter: forty full-page prefatory paintings illustrating the life of Christ and other subjects; tinted drawings of the life of St Alexis and of Christ at Emmaus; the historiated initial at the beginning of 'Psalm 1'; and under-drawings for other historiated initials. Made in the 1120s, the manuscript was originally intended for the St Albans monastic community. During production, or soon afterwards, the Alexis Master adapted it for the use of the recluse Christina of Markyate by adding the Alexis and Emmaus drawings, intended to echo incidents in Christina's own life. 
The master probably travelled to Bury St Edmunds Abbey at some time between 1130 and 1135 to provide the cycle of thirty-two full-page pictures which prefaces the New York manuscript. These pictures illustrate the life, passion, and posthumous miracles of the Anglo-Saxon martyr-king Edmund. The sacrifice of formal organization to dramatic tension in the pictures has raised doubts about their attribution to the Alexis Master, but this characteristic can probably be ascribed to the natural evolution of his style. 
The Alexis Master's full-page narrative pictures show stylistic and iconographic links with Anglo-Saxon and Ottonian art and the monumental art of Italy, which he may have visited. His pictures represent a new departure in post-conquest English manuscript art, which until his time had been largely confined to decorative initials. Through his stimulus, the art of pictorial narrative experienced a major revival in twelfth-century England. His style was inherited and perpetuated at St Albans, Bury St Edmunds, Canterbury, and Winchester. Apart perhaps from Master Hugo of Bury St Edmunds, he was the most influential English artist of his generation. 
Timothy Graham', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37106


Alford, Edward (1565/6-1631/2), politician, was born in London the only surviving son of Roger Alford (died 1580) and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1598), daughter and heir of Thomas Ramsey, esquire, of London and Hitcham, Buckinghamshire, and widow of Nicholas Clerke of North Weston, Oxfordshire. The Alfords were Sussex gentry who traced their origins back to Richard, lord of Aldford, Cheshire, who held Newton manor in Sussex in 1200; another ancestor fought at Agincourt. Edward's direct line came into the county in the fifteenth century. His grandfather, Robert Alford (died 1546), married Anne Brydges, a member of the prominent Gloucestershire and Somerset family, while his father made the transition from the local to the national stage as secretary to Sir William Cecil and as MP (for Bletchingley, Surrey, in 1558 and for Preston, Sussex, in 1559). Roger's brother, Sir Francis Alford, was also an MP in Elizabeth's parliaments. 
In his will Roger Alford left instructions for Edward to pursue his studies at Oxford and Lincoln's Inn, and to seek service in Cecil's entourage thereafter. Alford duly matriculated at Trinity College, Oxford, in 1581, aged fifteen, and subsequently entered Lincoln's Inn in 1583. He did not enter government service, but the durability of the Cecil connection was suggested in 1610 when the earl of Salisbury, the son of his father's patron, included him among a 'select number' of MPs with whom he had a private meeting about the levying of impositions, customs duties imposed under the royal prerogative (Foster, 'Proceedings', 2.274n.). 
On 11 April 1589 Alford married Judith Downing of Suffolk, with whom he had six sons and a daughter. He sat for Beverley, Yorkshire, in the parliament of 1593, and though no record of his activity in it has survived, he harked back to his service under Elizabeth in later years. He served in no other Elizabethan parliament, however, and his effective career began in 1604 with his election for Colchester, Essex, which he represented in the four succeeding parliaments of 1614, 1621, 1624, and 1625 as well. Alford faithfully reflected the interests of the town corporation which controlled the parliamentary franchise, advancing bills for it in 1621 and 1624, but by the session of 1606-7 he was also the acknowledged leader of the delegation from Sussex where his seat at Offington, near Worthing, lay. 
Alford soon adopted a third constituency, parliament itself. Throughout his long career, few MPs were as consistent in their defence of the privileges and autonomy of the House of Commons, and none stouter. In 1610 it was Alford's initiative which secured the ruling that all matters concerning the privileges of the Commons should be perused by the committee for privileges before being entered in the journal of the house. In 1607 he brandished a precedent for expelling a privy councillor who had revealed matters before the house to the king, and in 1621 he rebuked James I for interfering in another pending issue, complaining that there were 'Eyes over him to observe' (Tyrwhitt, 1.32). That same year he claimed for the house the right to adjourn itself on its own authority, and in 1628 he protested against the forced Easter sitting of parliament as an infringement of its liberty. In 1624 he objected strenuously when the Lords debated supply and in 1628 he opposed their admitting the testimony of judges. Royal councillors in the House of Commons had traditionally set the legislative agenda, but in 1625 Alford opposed having the solicitor-general, Sir Robert Heath, chair a committee 'because he was sworn to the King and of his fee' (Jansson and Bidwell, 234). Similarly he objected to the speaker's attending the presentation of the petition on billeting to Charles I in 1628; he had been sharply critical of what he regarded as a previous speaker's obsequious deportment at a conference with the Lords in 1621. At the end of the first session in 1621 he urged that a committee be set up to maintain parliamentary privileges during the summer recess, and when sittings resumed in the autumn he protested the detention of his fellow MP, Sir Edwin Sandys. In 1624 he moved a bill for the preservation of parliament's liberties, and tried to attach a rider to the subsidy bill providing that parliament should meet after adjournment 'at a specified time'. 
Alford was equally vigilant against other extensions of royal prerogative, including impositions, monopolies, proclamations, and purveyances, both as abuses in themselves and as encroachments on local commerce and governance. After joining the general parliamentary attack on increased customs rates in 1610 and 1614, he blamed them for the trade depression in 1621 and sought to have them added as grievances to the petition of right. Proclamations were another source of evil. Alford attacked the Lenten proclamation against killing meat in 1621 as a prime example of government meddling that raised the price of victuals for the poor in a time of dearth, and he continued to complain of Star Chamber prosecutions for violations of similar decrees in 1624 and 1628. That proclamations were typically enforced in prerogative courts such as Star Chamber suggested to him a sinister pattern in which conciliar decrees bypassed both statutes and the subject's redress at the common law. Particularly obnoxious among proclamations were those for patents of monopoly, which Alford saw as conspiracies to enrich London-based trading companies such as the Merchant Adventurers at the expense of the outports of the southern coast, and particularly abusive among courts was that of chancery, a perennial target of common lawyers. In 1621 Alford introduced a seventeen-point bill to halve the number of masters of chancery, curb their powers, and appoint two common-law 'judges assistant' to oversee them. In addition he proposed to erect a new court of appeal empowered to reverse chancery decrees by writ of error. In 1624 he spoke to no fewer than eight bills concerning chancery, enjoining the house to consider them 'with as much expedition as may be'. 
Alford stubbornly resisted the drift to war in the parliaments of 1624 and 1625, and characteristically opposed grants of subsidy. Along with other dissidents he was pricked for sheriff to disable him from sitting in parliament in 1626, but, although removed from the bench, he retained the position of deputy lieutenant for Sussex, probably through the influence of the earls of Arundel and Dorset, and remained a receiver of admiralty droits. His return to parliament in 1628 was marred by a disputed election, and despite the support of the Colchester corporation he was forced to accept a seat at Steyning, Sussex. Alford's service in this, his last parliament, was perhaps his most significant. Rejecting a mere confirmation of 'Magna Carta' in the dispute with Charles over the forced loan and billeting, he proposed to proceed by petition of right on 6 May and to incorporate the king's response as a preamble to the subsidy bill, thus firmly tying redress of grievances to supply. Alert to the symbolic significance of the moment, he proposed that Charles receive the petition in parliament rather than at Whitehall. The house did not immediately pick up his suggestion, but as reformulated by Sir Edward Coke it became the basis of the most important affirmation of personal liberty yet made by an English parliament. 
Alford, who had so often clashed with councillors from Sir Francis Bacon to Sir Robert Heath, sounded a rare and perhaps valedictory note of conciliation at the end of the session: 'I hope we may recede and find a better world at our next meeting' (Johnson and others, 4.320). Such a hope proved forlorn, and after the dissolution of parliament in March 1629 he retired to his estate at Offington. His last recorded parliamentary address was another protest against the imprisonment of a fellow MP. Alford died, probably at Offington, late in 1631 or early the following year (his will was proved on 26 January 1632). He was buried in the chancel of Hamsey church near Lewes, where he owned a manor. Two of his sons, Sir Edward (1592-1653), knighted 1632, and John (1590-1649), sat in parliament; the former was heavily fined for his service in the king's cause during the civil war. Alford's other sons were Henry, Lancelot, Robert, and William; the last-named became vicar of Purton, Wiltshire. Alford's daughter Elizabeth was an executor of his will. 
Alford was the quintessential county back-bencher of his era. His core views were conservative and insular, and his resistance to the extension of prerogative government, from the 'Act of Union' to the forced loan, was principled and unremitting. He believed in a balanced polity, and although he had no wish to magnify parliament's powers as such, he came to see them as the last bulwark of a system whose co-ordinate institutions had become increasingly impotent in the face of royal pressure. It was parliament, then, that by curbing prerogative courts and conciliar lawmaking, by asserting its privileges to defend the subject's liberties, by reining in government spending and rejecting all non-parliamentary taxation, and by functioning generally as the watchdog of the realm, would preserve the constitution. Such a view was to animate the Long Parliament in its first great spate of reform. No one articulated it more clearly, consistently, and fearlessly in the decades before 1640 than Edward Alford. 


@@@@@


doc= 37107


Alford, Francis (c.1530-1592), civil lawyer and member of parliament, was the second son of Robert Alford (died 1546) and his wife, Anne Brydges. He gained a BA degree at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1549 and was admitted to Christ Church, Oxford, in 1550. Until 1555 he was clerk of the market in Oxford and a proctor in the vice-chancellor's court. The civil law was apparently his chosen career, and during 1557-9 he studied in Italy. He wrote some short works, for instance on legal reform and trading corporations, but later hopes to be allowed to write an account of Elizabeth I's reign, with access to the papers of Lord Burghley, were never fulfilled. By 1562 he had married Agnes, widow of Augustine de Augustinis, physician to Thomas Wolsey; they appear to have had one son. 
With Thomas Sackville, Lord Buckhurst, as a cousin and constant support, perhaps even financially, Alford was ostensibly well placed for advancement, and he was able to secure election to borough seats in Lancashire, Cornwall, Berkshire, and Sussex so that he sat in nine of the thirteen parliamentary sessions of Elizabeth's reign. Beyond this, the minor offices of rector in Croxton, Cambridgeshire, and chanter at Lincoln Cathedral were the only posts to come his way. Alford obviously aroused distrust. He may have gone to Italy in order to escape the regime of Queen Mary, and his support of the protestant settlement of 1559 was clear, but his credit suffered because his Catholic wife practised her faith within his household. A visit to France, the details of which remain unclear, also led to the accusation that he had associated with the supporters of Mary, queen of Scots, there: this may account for the apparent loss of royal favour by the mid-1570s. 
Alford was probably not popular in parliament. He was unsympathetic to frequent and widely supported calls for reform of the church. In the parliament of 1584-5 he opposed a bill for improving the quality of the clergy, arguing that the Commons should not take it upon themselves to interfere in church matters, but also pointing out that many benefices were too poor to support well-qualified men. In the next parliament too (1586-7) he made his hostility to parliamentary involvement clear and argued that the problem of clerical inadequacy be left to the church itself. 
For some time Alford was in a minority on the question of what to do about Mary Stuart. While most members were unreservedly against Mary by 1572, Alford insisted that her being privy to the plots against Elizabeth was a necessary condition of her guilt. He was also uncertain of the propriety of trying her, a foreign sovereign, in England. This was anathema to the predominant mentality of the time, and a stark contrast to the later argument of Job Throckmorton that parliament had full competence in the matter. The hostile reception of Alford's views led him to reflect that he was being denied the parliamentary right of free speech. Though he shared this caution about the Scottish queen with Elizabeth herself, by 1586-7 he had come to support the general clamour for Mary's execution. He was also in favour of the view that Elizabeth should accept the sovereignty of the Netherlands. 
These were major issues of continuing importance. Yet Alford, in common with many of his fellow members of parliament, made a more broadly based contribution to the business of the House of Commons. He claimed later in life that he had 'done my country some good, whereunto we are called' (HoP, 'Commons, 1558-1603', 1.335). He appears to have sat on Commons committees which dealt with a wide range of bills, and a particular concern with vagabonds and the poor was sustained in the 1570s and 1580s. Though (typically) unsympathetic to vagabonds, he was also anxious in the 1584-5 parliament to preserve what he called the liberties of the common subjects. He thought that a bill that proposed to limit the keeping of hawks, ferrets, and so on to substantial landholders would threaten these. The measure, he feared, would cause discontent because it would deny 'our poor neighbours' their traditional pastimes. Alford was buried at St Dunstan-in-the-West, London, on 3 September 1592. 


@@@@@


doc= 37108


Allen, Elias (c.1588-1653), maker of mathematical instruments, was born near Tonbridge, Kent, probably in Ashurst, of unknown parentage. Apprenticed in 1602 to London instrument maker Charles Whitwell in the Grocers' Company, he served his master for nine years. Following Whitwell's death in 1611, Allen, then resident in Black Horse Alley, took his freedom on 7 July 1612, at the same time binding his first apprentice. His reputation was already sufficiently high for him to be recommended in Hopton's 'Speculum topographicum' of 1611. 
Allen soon moved to a workshop beside St Clement Danes Church, the Strand, probably the premises of his former master. He consolidated his position as foremost among the London makers of mathematical instruments, working mainly in brass but occasionally in silver. He won the patronage of various members of the aristocracy and made instruments for James I and Charles I. He also benefited from close association with leading contemporary mathematicians, in particular Edmund Gunter and William Oughtred. These two provided the instrument maker with many of his most popular designs -- the Gunter quadrant and sector, and Oughtred's circles of proportion (a logarithmic calculating device), double horizontal instrument (an astronomical instrument), and universal equinoctial ring dial. Surviving examples bear witness to Allen's skill in dividing scales and his artistry as an engraver. 
Allen became an associate of the Clockmakers' Company soon after its foundation in 1631, and was appointed as an assistant on 3 October 1633. On 18 January 1636 he assumed the responsibilities of renter warden (treasurer); he was master of the company from 19 January 1637 until 29 July 1638. 
This was the peak of Allen's career. Through hard work combined with notable ability he had created a thriving business, becoming the first English instrument maker not to be forced to supplement his income by engraving maps or practising as a surveyor. He was highly respected within London's mathematical community, his workshop being both a centre for discussions and a post office for various correspondences. His skill was esteemed by the most able mathematicians of his day, who were even prepared to alter instrument designs to accommodate his suggestions. He was also courted by his peers in the City: the master of the Vintners' Company commissioned Allen to produce a new gauging instrument. Meanwhile he profited from the increased amateur interest in mathematics which enabled him to develop a market for his wares among the gentry. His skill further showed itself in his ability to train his apprentices to the same high standards. Several of them proceeded to eminent positions in the trade; Ralph Greatorex is perhaps the best-known, by virtue of his association with Pepys. Through Robert Davenport (who settled in Edinburgh) and John Prujean (in Oxford), Allen's craft succession was spread across the country. However, it was the task of another pupil, John Allen, to train Walter Hayes, the instrument maker who inherited Allen's mantle in the latter half of the century. 
Elias Allen's achievement is celebrated most clearly in the wealth of instruments he left, but is also commemorated by his portrait -- an extremely unusual accolade for a seventeenth-century artisan. The painting (known only through a later engraving by Wenceslaus Hollar) was the work of the Dutch artist Hendrik van der Borcht, and dated from about 1640. Allen's trade suffered during the civil war, forcing him to petition the Clockmakers for funds in January 1649. However, he continued to work until his death in late March 1653. He left one surviving daughter, Elizabeth; his wife, also Elizabeth, whom he married about 1606, died in 1642. He was buried on 1 April 1653 in St Clement Danes, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 37109


Allen, Francis (c.1583-1658), politician and regicide, was probably born in London, though nothing is as yet known of his early life or parentage. He first appears in the mid-1630s as a liveryman of the Goldsmiths' Company living on Fleet Street. He was one of those goldsmiths living in 'remote' places who opposed attempts to force them back into the City by crown and company and to settle them in Goldsmiths' Row in Cheapside. Allen, a successful banker and financier with business interests in the Atlantic trade (he was an active member of the Bermuda Company), no doubt had good material reasons to resist. Suspended from the livery, when he refused the offer to rejoin in 1638 he explained that he was 'ready to doe the company' service but 'desired to be excused if it were so that he must leave his dwellinge which he could no wayes consent unto without his undoing' (Griffiths, 189). However, his objection was also ideological. His original withdrawal, he maintained in 1644 (by when the company was more than happy to welcome back a man upon whom 'Parliament hath cast an eye of favour'), had been because he conceived the order to return to the City 'to be altogether illegal and againste the right and liberty of the subject' (Griffiths, 190). 
Allen was elected 'recruiter' MP to the Long Parliament for Cockermouth in April 1642, and certified as such in April 1646. He became a commissioner of customs for parliament from 1643 to 1645 and was appointed one of the treasurers-at-war in March 1645, when the civil war was at a critical point, taking an active part in the financial administration of the war and in liaison with the Scottish army. In politics he was a radical figure, best labelled as a political Independent by the late 1640s. During the wardmote elections of 1642 he was active in the attempt to broaden the franchise in his ward of Farringdon Without upon which officers were elected. In January 1644 he was part of a hostile demonstration against the earl of Essex. In February 1646 he fell victim to the increasing tensions between parliament and the City when he was attacked for reporting to the Commons the details of a meeting between the Scottish commissioners and the presbyterian-dominated London common council (of which he was a member). The Scots had in barely coded terms denounced (and received a sympathetic hearing from their City allies) political and religious Independents for seeking to disturb the unity between the two kingdoms. At the end of the year, when the presbyterians triumphed in the wardmote elections, Allen lost his seat as councillor. He was from 1646 a presbyterian elder of St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street, the church of the prominent Independent William Strong. It has been suggested that in these years Allen is best thought of as a 'parochial Independent', one happy to maintain the parochial structure of the church, but Erastian in outlook and tolerant of gathered congregations (Lindley, 278). In the later stages of his life he could well be described as an Independent. 
Allen was nominated as one of the 135 commissioners (MPs and others) to form the high court of justice to conduct the trial of Charles I. The meetings of the court started on 8 January 1649 but Allen did not attend at the painted chamber in Whitehall until 17 January. Thereafter, however, he was in regular attendance, being recorded as present at nine out of twelve private meetings in the painted chamber and at all four sessions of the actual trial in Westminster Hall, including the final session on Saturday 27 January, in which the sentence of death was passed by all present (though he did not sign the death warrant). On 30 January (the day of the king's execution) he was appointed a member of the committee of the high court to arrange payments for the court and prepare its accounts ['see also 'Regicides]. 
Allen became one of the most active members of the Rump Parliament, often in alliance with his fellow London merchant, Richard Salwey. With Salwey he sat on the committee for establishing the Commonwealth's council of trade. He was by this time a very rich financier; he was elected alderman in 1649 and sheriff in 1651 and 1652. Throughout most of the history of the Rump he was a close political supporter of Oliver Cromwell, but in 1653 he fell out with him in the complicated debates about the dissolution of the house. When the parliament was dissolved by military force, Allen was one of the opponents bitterly attacked by Cromwell, and he was arrested by the army for a short time. Thereafter he dropped out of active politics. He died on 6 September 1658: an unnamed wife but no children are mentioned in his will. In the 'Act of Indemnity' passed in August 1660 after the Restoration the name of Francis Allen appears with those of other deceased regicides exempted from indemnity in respect of 'all rights and properties'. 
A. W. McIntosh', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37110


Allhusen, Christian Augustus Henry (1806-1890), chemical manufacturer, was born on 2 December 1806 in Kiel, Germany, the fourth son in the family of five sons and two daughters of Carl Christian Allhusen, merchant of Kiel, and his wife, Anna Margaretha Schroder. The French occupation of Schleswig-Holstein caused the family to break up. 
Allhusen's education is obscure; he worked in the grain trade, first at Rostock, then from 1825 at Newcastle upon Tyne with two older brothers. In 1827 his brothers left Newcastle and he invited Henry Bolckow, a Rostock friend, to join him in the grain trade; he was also involved in ship and insurance broking. 
Allhusen married Anne, daughter of John Shield of Broomhaugh, in 1835; they had four sons and two daughters. His daughter Annie married twice, her second husband being Lord D'Arcy Godolphin Osborne, brother of the duke of Leeds. 
Allhusen entered the Tyneside chemical industry at Gateshead in 1840 when he purchased the soap works of Charles Attwood & Co. He was not a chemist but adopted innovatory methods and used commercial skill to promote his products. In 1862 he began drilling for salt on Teesside for manufacturing alkali by the Leblanc process on Tyneside. However, this benefited the rival Solvay process, then expanding on the Tees, and so in practice hastened the decline of the Tyneside industry. 
Allhusen was a member of Gateshead town council from 1849 to 1853, an early president of the Newcastle chamber of commerce, and a Tyne commissioner from 1852 to 1855. An Anglican and liberal (later Liberal Unionist), he amassed a large fortune and his influence in the north-east was considerable. As an advocate of free trade, he supported Richard Cobden in his scheme for a commercial treaty with France in 1860, and represented local chemical manufacturers at the Paris conferences. To celebrate the treaty he invited W. E. Gladstone, chancellor of the exchequer, to visit Newcastle in 1862. Allhusen's business interests were varied; he was a director of the Marine Insurance Company, the Northfleet Coal and Ballast Company, the Brazil Great Southern Railway, the British Land and Mortgage Company of America, the International Bank of London, the New Oriental Bank Corporation, the Metropole Hotel Company, and the Newcastle and Gateshead Water Company. A major shareholder in the Northumberland and Durham District Bank, which failed in 1857, he managed to avert the closure of the Derwent Ironworks Company, which owed the bank $1 million. In 1864 it was registered as the Consett Iron Company. 
From 1842 Allhusen lived at Elswick Hall, Newcastle, but moved to Stoke Court, Stoke Poges, Buckinghamshire, in 1873 and died there on 13 January 1890, not long after his wife. Soon after Allhusen's death his Tyneside factory was amalgamated in the United Alkali Company. 
N. G. Coley', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37111


Alured, John (bap. 1607, d. 1651), army officer and regicide, was baptized in the parish of All Saints, Sculcoates, Hull, Yorkshire, on 4 April 1607, the eldest son of Henry Alured ('c'.1581-1628), gentleman landowner, and his wife, Frances (died 1626), daughter of Francis Vaughan of Sutton upon Derwent, Yorkshire. The Alureds moved to Yorkshire from East Anglia during Henry VIII's reign, establishing their seat at the Hull Charterhouse, just north of the town. Alured belonged to the fourth, and last, generation of the family to sit in parliament; his great-grandfather and grandfather represented Hull in three of the Elizabethan parliaments, and his uncle, Thomas Alured, sat for the nearby borough of Hedon in 1628-9. (Alured's father never served as an MP, as some authorities have claimed.) Alured's pedigree as a parliament-man was matched by his godly ancestry. The Alureds had supported further reformation in religion since the 1580s, and John's uncle, Thomas, was part of a high-powered puritan clique that opposed the crown over the Spanish match. 
On 11 August 1628, a few months after inheriting the family estate (worth $400-$500 a year), Alured was admitted to Gray's Inn. Despite his godly background, he was described about 1630 as 'a most profane young gentleman' ('God's Plot', 53). It was his marriage on 17 November 1631 to his second cousin Mary, daughter of the godly North Riding knight Sir Richard Darley of Buttercrambe (father of the future parliamentarians Henry and Richard Darley), and the influence of the Darleys' chaplain -- the puritan divine, Thomas Shepard -- that worked a 'great reformation' (ibid.) in his conduct. The marriage also had material benefits -- Sir Richard settled a 'considerable sum[m]e of money' (TNA: PRO, C10/14/3) on his daughter as her marriage portion. The union produced two sons before Mary's death some time in or before 1635. Alured married again about June that year; his second wife was Mary, daughter of John Arnold, a London feltmaker, whom he later deserted along with their son and two daughters. 
Alured consolidated his family's puritan connections, becoming an investor in the Providence Island Company, of which Viscount Saye and Sele and Henry Darley were leading members. In July 1638, as the kingdom began to mobilize for war against the Scottish covenanters, he was reported to the privy council for having declared that the Scots were 'brave boyes' and would 'reforme this land by a parlim[en]t... for the kinge would be forsed to lay downe his taxes by theire comminge in to England' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/395/29, fol. 56). In the elections to the Short Parliament in 1640, he was returned for Hedon -- probably on the interest of his kinsman Henry, first Viscount Dunbar, from whom the Alureds leased the manor of Burstwick, near Hedon. Alured signed at least two of the three Yorkshire petitions of July, August, and September 1640, complaining about illegal billeting and requesting that the king summon parliament. Re-elected for Hedon in the autumn, he was a member of the committee that the Long Parliament sent to Hull in May 1642 to assist Sir John Hotham -- who would later accuse Alured of plotting his downfall. 
Alured and his younger brother Matthew Alured (bap. 1615, d. 1694) were commissioned as captain and lieutenant of horse respectively under the earl of Essex in July 1642, but John spent most of the war as a colonel in Ferdinando, Lord Fairfax's northern parliamentarian army. He fought at several engagements, including Adwalton Moor (and probably Marston Moor), and was part of the entourage that Sir Thomas Fairfax took to London in February 1645 to take up his command of the New Model Army. Alured may well have been a patron of Philip Nye's Independent congregation at Hull -- of which his own parish minister, Robert Luddington, was a member -- and had certainly fallen out of sympathy with the Scots by 1645, signing numerous letters to parliament from the Yorkshire parliamentary committees in the summer and autumn of that year complaining about the 'oppressions' of the Scottish army in the north. 
Never very active at Westminster, Alured virtually abandoned his seat altogether after May 1645. Despite his political inactivity, he was evidently thought well-affected by the army and its allies, for on 6 January 1649 he was appointed one of the commissioners for the king's trial. He attended numerous meetings of the trial commission, was present on 27 January when sentence was pronounced, and signed the death warrant ['see also 'Regicides]. According to a Restoration pamphleteer, Alured was a man of 'turbulent spirit, and apt to take fire like gunpowder', although he could also be 'a cruel and close pursuer of whatsoever he intended to put in execution' ('Cromwell the Late Great Tirant', 1660, 5). It was perhaps this last trait that steeled him for regicide. In the summer of 1649 he petitioned parliament for compensation for his losses -- which he put at $5275 -- and arrears of pay amounting to $5494. In August 1649 the house ordered that he be paid $2000, but he probably saw none of this sum before his death in the autumn of 1651. His place of burial is not known. According to his widow, he died in possession of an estate of 'great yearly... value' (TNA: PRO, C10/465/3). 


@@@@@


doc= 37112


Amery, John (1912-1945), traitor, was born on 14 March 1912 at 9 Embankment Gardens, Chelsea, London, the elder son (there were no daughters) of Leopold Charles Maurice Stennett Amery (1873-1955), politician, and his wife, Florence Louise Adeliza 
(Bryddie; 1885-1975)
, daughter of John Hamar Greenwood of Whitby, Ontario, and sister of (Thomas) Hamar (first Viscount) Greenwood. At sixteen he ran away from Harrow School, and set up as a film director, work which took him to central Europe and east Africa, but proved financially unrewarding. It combined ill with his taste for fast cars and high life; in 1936 he was declared bankrupt, and settled with his family that he had better live abroad. Two years earlier, experiences in Vienna on the verge of civil war had awakened in him vehement, if premature, anti-communism. Accordingly, he went to Spain when civil war broke out there in July 1936 to take an active part on the insurgent General Franco's side, smuggling arms across the Pyrenees and receiving the Italian medal for valour in action. In 1939 bad health drove him to a sanatorium in French Savoy. 
Amery's first marriage (in Athens), which his parents disapproved, to Una Wing had rapidly broken down. He contracted a second, to Jeannine Barde, a Frenchwoman who had plenty of friends at Vichy. She died in April 1944; the following October he married another Frenchwoman, Michelle Thomas. There were no children. 
During his gun-running activities Amery had met Jacques Doriot, a renegade French communist who had turned ardent fascist. Doriot summoned him to Paris in the autumn of 1942, convinced him that Germany was going to lose the war unless Great Britain joined against the USSR, and enlisted Amery's aid. For the next eighteen months Amery toured prisoner-of-war camps, seeking to recruit a Legion of St George -- unromantically renamed by the Germans the British Free Corps -- to fight alongside the Germans against the Russians and save Europe from Bolshevism. From thousands of prisoners, thirty men elected to join him; they never went into action. He also broadcast to his fellow countrymen in England, seeking to persuade them to change sides, and gave anti-communist lectures, notably in Oslo and Belgrade. 
In April 1945 Amery and his wife were in northern Italy, making for Switzerland, when they were captured by communist partisans. He was handed over to the British army and sent back to England. His brother, (Harold) Julian Amery (later Lord Amery of Lustleigh), attempted to establish Spanish nationality for him, but failed. He was arraigned on eight counts of treason before Sir Travers Humphreys at the Old Bailey on 28 November 1945. He pleaded guilty, knowing this would mean execution, and was hanged at Wandsworth prison on 19 December 1945 by the famous executioner Albert Pierrepoint. 
M. R. D. Foot', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37113


Anderson, Dame Adelaide Mary (1863-1936), civil servant, was born on 8 April 1863 in Melbourne, Australia, the eldest child in the large family of Alexander Gavin Anderson, a Scottish shipbroker, and his wife, Blanche Emily Campbell. Her grandfather was Dr Alexander Anderson, principal of the Gymnasium of Old Aberdeen. The family later returned to Britain and settled in London. She was educated at home by governesses and later attended schools in France and Germany as well as Queen's College, Harley Street, London. She went to Girton College, Cambridge, where she was awarded the Gamble gold medal and took second-class honours in the moral sciences tripos (1887). She then lectured on philosophy and economics for the Women's Co-operative Guild. This introduction to the harshness of working women's lives was formative and determined her choice of career. 
In 1894, having gained valuable experience as a clerk on the staff of the royal commission on labour (1892-4), Anderson followed several colleagues from the royal commission into the newly created post of lady factory inspector in the factory department of the Home Office. In 1897 she was appointed principal lady inspector of factories and was given the task of heading the newly constituted women's branch. Women inspectors were responsible for enforcing protective legislation as it applied to women and children working in factories and workshops (whose interests, it was felt, had been neglected by men inspectors), and they paid particular attention to excessive hours, poor sanitation, dangerous conditions, illegal stoppages from wages, payment in kind, and exploitation of child labour. The work of women inspectors was hived off from the men's, and tensions arising from the delineation of boundaries and the working out of chains of command meant that relations were not always harmonious between the women's and men's branches of the inspectorate. 
As principal lady inspector Anderson sought to create a rational framework for inspection while preserving the independence and enlarging the sphere of activity of the women's branch. Anderson met the demands of an expanding workload, chronic understaffing, and excessive travelling on her inspectors by moving the women's branch towards an approximation of the organization of the men's branch -- though always under her own control. Initially women inspectors worked directly from London and were peripatetic, assigned to investigations in various parts of the country on an 'ad hoc' basis. Following the creation of two experimental special districts (west London and Potteries) in 1899 and 1903 respectively, in 1908 women inspectors were assigned to residential divisions along lines similar to but independent of the men's divisions. The notable successes of the women's branch under Anderson's leadership, particularly women inspectors' substitution for men inspectors during the First World War, paradoxically led to the demise of the women's branch in 1921, when women and men inspectors were fused into an integrated inspectorate. Anderson's heart was not in these changes, and she retired the same year. She later published an account of the work of the women's branch in 'Women in the Factory: an Administrative Adventure, 1893-1921' (1922). 
In retirement Anderson travelled extensively and continued her work for women and children in an international context. She was a member of the municipal council of the international settlement of Shanghai's commission on child labour (1923-4) and published an account of her experiences in 'Humanity and Labour in China: an Industrial Visit and its Sequel, 1923-1926' (1928). She was appointed to the Foreign Office's advisory committee on the Boxer indemnity fund in 1925, and made two further visits to China (1926 and 1930-31), the latter as a member of the International Labour Organization's advisory mission to assist with the creation of a factory inspectorate. Sandwiched between these trips to China she investigated child labour in Egypt in 1930 under the auspices of the International Association for Social Progress and the International Labour Organization. 
Anderson, who was always accompanied by an umbrella and a bag bulging with papers and letters, gave an impression of philosophical detachment. She was, however, a wholehearted feminist who found her metier among blue books and red tape. She was indomitable in her determination and tireless in her efforts to serve the women and children who were her special charge. She was appointed CBE in 1918 and DBE in 1921. She never married. She died on 28 August 1936 at a nursing home at 39 Royal Avenue, Chelsea, London. 
Meta Zimmeck', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37114


Anderson, Sir Robert Rowand (1834-1921), architect, was born on 5 April 1834 in Edinburgh, the younger son and third of the four children of James Anderson, a solicitor, and his wife, Margaret Rowand of Glasgow. Anderson studied at George Watson's Hospital, Edinburgh, from 1841 to 1848, before leaving to take up a legal apprenticeship for four years. This he abandoned in 1852, when he joined the office of Edinburgh architect John Lessels, and enrolled as a part-time student at the Trustees' School of Design, Edinburgh, that same year, under Alexander Christie. Here Anderson won a number of prizes for measured drawings of historic Scottish architecture. About 1854 he joined the Edinburgh office of the Royal Engineers, and in 1858-9 he undertook a year-long tour of France and Italy. He returned to Edinburgh in 1859, resuming his architectural post at the Royal Engineers' office, where he rebuilt Broughty Castle, Broughty Ferry, Forfarshire (1860-61). 
On 23 July 1863 Anderson married Mary (died 1921), daughter of Henry Ross, farmer, of Kinnahaird, Ross-shire. They had one daughter, who died of typhoid in 1872 at the age of eight. In 1868 he left the Royal Engineers, published a book of drawings, dedicated to George Gilbert Scott, from his continental tour, and began independent practice. In the meantime he had designed a number of small Episcopal churches. His restoration of St Vigean's Church, Arbroath, Forfarshire (1871-2), established his reputation as a restorer of taste, scholarliness, and principle. Later, there followed competition wins for the Catholic Apostolic Church, Edinburgh (1871-3), Edinburgh school board schools (1874-7), and Edinburgh University medical schools (1874-86). In 1878 he was commissioned by John Stuart, third marquess of Bute, to rebuild Mount Stuart, near Rothesay, confirmation of his pre-eminent position in Scotland. Other large commissions followed, including the Central Hotel, Glasgow (1878-84), the National Portrait Gallery and Museum of Antiquities, Edinburgh (1884-9), and the McEwan Hall at Edinburgh University (1884-9). 
These buildings, in a mixture of styles, bear all the hallmarks of Anderson's architectural approach: sound building, straightforward planning, and delicate, scholarly detailing. Believing that architectural beauty derived largely from functional and structural efficiency, Anderson constantly attacked the exponents of the Scottish Baronial style, and thus ushered in a new era of refinement in Scottish architecture. His restorations at Iona Abbey (1874-6), Dunblane Cathedral (1889-93), Paisley Abbey (1898-1907), and Sweetheart Abbey, Dumfries (1911-14), set standards of scholarliness and restraint for generations to come. 
In 1893 Anderson founded the school of applied art in Edinburgh, to train architects and craftsmen. In 1895 he instituted the national art survey to record all pre-eighteenth-century buildings. This, together with some of Anderson's own buildings, inspired a widespread revival of the Scottish Renaissance style. One of the most notable exponents of this style was Sir Robert Stodart Lorimer, who had trained in Anderson's office from 1885 to 1889. 
Unlike several of his famous pupils, such as J. J. Joass or Lorimer, Anderson deliberately restricted his practice to Scotland, and this has had a limiting effect on his reputation. He was, however, invited to submit designs, which were unsuccessful but widely admired, for the Imperial Institute, London (1887), the Queen Victoria memorial in the Mall (1901), and the British Museum extension (1904). He was awarded an LLD of Edinburgh University in 1884, was made an honorary member of the Royal Scottish Academy in 1897, was knighted in 1902, and was awarded the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) gold medal (he was a fellow of the RIBA) in 1916. His final achievement was the creation of a central professional body, the Institute of Scottish Architects, in 1916. He became its first president. Anderson was typically Scottish in character: serious, practical, energetic, and remarkably forceful. Occasionally, in his latter years, his pride could be wounded. He died at his home, Allermuir House, Colinton, Edinburgh, on 1 June 1921 and was buried five days later at Warriston cemetery, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 37115


Anderson, Tempest (1846-1913), ophthalmic surgeon and vulcanologist, was born on 7 December 1846 at 17 Stonegate, York, the elder son and eldest of the three children of William Charles Anderson, surgeon of York, and his wife, Sarah Ellen Hall. Educated at St Peter's School, York, and at University College, London, he gained his MD degree in 1873, and was subsequently elected a fellow of the college. In 1904 he became honorary DSc of the University of Leeds. 
Anderson specialized in eye diseases, becoming consulting ophthalmic surgeon at York County Hospital. He successfully combined his career with worldwide travel and scientific study, often applying the resulting experience to benefit his native city, where he was held in high regard. He took an active interest in the city's waterworks, town planning, and housing problems, and in the preservation of the city's green spaces and ancient monuments. A JP, he was appointed sheriff of York in 1894. 
Anderson took a great interest in the dissemination of science to the public. A leading member and benefactor of the Yorkshire Philosophical Society, he was also its secretary and president. He presented the society with a lecture theatre, named the Tempest Anderson Hall, which opened in June 1912. Nationally, Anderson served on the councils of the Royal Geographical Society, the Geological Society of London, the Linnean Society, and the British Association (he was vice-president in 1906). In 1910 he was elected president of the Museums Association. 
Anderson's main amateur interests were geology (particularly vulcanology), photography, and mountaineering, pursuits which he combined successfully. He was a distinguished and active member of the Alpine Club, having been elected in 1893. He made his own cameras and lenses, including a panoramic camera, and promoted the use of photography in geology. He served on a British Association committee which arranged the collection and documentation of several thousand geological photographs. The Royal Institution appointed him Tyndall lecturer on volcanoes, and he won awards for photographic studies of mountains and glaciers. Much of Anderson's collection of glass negatives and lantern slides was preserved in the Yorkshire Museum. 
From 1883 Anderson spent much time abroad, especially in areas of active volcanoes. He kept two bags always packed, one for hot climes and one for cold, so that immediately he heard of an eruption he could board the next available ship. In spite of the limitations of travel, he visited most major volcanic areas of the world. In 1902, with John Flett of the Geological Survey, he was commissioned by the Royal Society to investigate the catastrophic eruptions on the islands of Martinique and St Vincent ('Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society', 1903 and 1908). Detailed observations, at considerable personal risk, and comparisons with his studies of alpine avalanches, led to a better understanding of pyroclastic flows -- fast-moving, destructive avalanches of hot gas and rock particles. This was Anderson's most important contribution to vulcanology. His photographs and descriptions convey concern for the human suffering resulting from natural disasters. He appreciated the importance of careful, systematic observation, referring to this as a 'clinical or bedside study'. He excelled in conveying information in a palatable, humorous, and exciting form to a general audience. Good examples are found in his book of photographs, 'Volcanic Studies in many Lands' (1903; a second, posthumous volume was published in 1917). A bachelor, he had a reputation as an honest, likeable, and generous man, with a gift for forming lasting friendships. 
Anderson's last expedition was to the volcanoes of Indonesia and the Philippines. On the return voyage he became ill with heat apoplexy or enteric fever, and he died on 26 August 1913 while the ship he was on was crossing the Red Sea. He was buried at Suez. 
R. J. Suthren', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37116


St Victor, Andrew of (c.1110-1175), biblical scholar and abbot of Wigmore, was born in England, but as a young man studied in Paris, where he became a canon of the Augustinian house of St Victor. There he explored the historical and literal sense of the 'Old Testament', in contrast to the allegorical exegesis of many of his contemporaries. He wrote commentaries, on the 'Heptateuch', 'Judges' to '2 Chronicles', the wisdom literature, and the prophets. Several of these have now been published, in critical editions, in the 'Corpus Christianorum' series. Among the Parisian masters Andrew was a pioneer in the serious study of the Hebrew text, available in bilingual form with a Latin interlinear translation. Although his linguistic command of Hebrew, spoken or written, was not extensive, he could communicate with contemporary Jewish scholars in French, learning much 'viva voce'. Thus, in his own commentary, he was able to make apposite reference to Hebrew etymology and exegesis, and to Jewish tradition. In focusing so sharply on the literal meaning Andrew largely avoided the central issue for a Christian analyst of the 'Old Testament': in what ways was its interpretation affected by the life of Christ and the establishment of the Christian church? He was no theologian, neither a traditionalist maintaining the views of the fathers nor a scholastic systematizing a body of doctrine. Andrew remained a specialist within his own field. 
In or after 1147 Andrew returned to England for a few troubled years as the first abbot of Wigmore, a daughter house of St Victor in Herefordshire. Although the Wigmore chronicle refers to him as prior of St Victor, he seems to have had no experience of monastic government, and showed no talent when the need arose. In 1154-5 he returned to his scholarly work in Paris. A few years later, however, he was recalled to Wigmore (1161-3), where he remained as abbot until his death on 19 October 1175 and where he was buried. 
Andrew of St Victor was not a man of many pupils. Those whom he taught within St Victor provoked the criticism of a younger fellow canon, Richard, that they were 'judaizing' -- that is, understanding the 'Old Testament' primarily as Jews rather than as Christians. Andrew's own orthodoxy was never impugned. His greatest immediate influence was on another Anglo-Norman, Master Herbert of Bosham, a scholar of much greater linguistic competence but less of a historian. Andrew's commentaries remained available in Paris. They were used by the small group of masters who established the teaching credentials of the University of Paris, notably Stephen Langton. But it was the learned friars of the thirteenth century who discovered Andrew's work and used it extensively both in France and England. Andrew was a familiar author to Roger Bacon and to the circle of Robert Grosseteste. 
Margaret Gibson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37117


Andrewes, Sir Thomas (d. 1659), financier and regicide, was the son of Robert Andrewes of Feltham, Middlesex, a Plymouth adventurer and subscriber to the Massachusetts Bay Company, and his wife, Margaret. He was a member of the Leathersellers' Company (and its master in 1638-9), and from 1631 ran a wholesale linen drapery business at the White Lion, Fish Street Hill, prospering sufficiently to become an undersharer in the farming of the customs. His marriage to Eleanor, daughter of Henry Bonwick of Horsley in Surrey brought them four surviving sons and one surviving daughter, as well as a number of children who died in infancy. 
Andrewes came to prominence as a leading financier for the parliamentary side in the Civil War. As the conflict with the king developed, he became more and more involved with the opposition. When he was nominated for alderman for Tower ward in January 1642, there was some trouble about his unwillingness to take the oath of supremacy and allegiance, but he was eventually sworn in, and moved to represent Aldgate ward in 1649. As the war developed he took on many treasurerships for the army and parliament, becoming one of the treasurers for war in 1645 as well as a commissioner for the customs in 1643. He advanced large sums to parliament and later invested heavily on his own account in the purchase of bishops' lands. With Maurice Thompson and Samuel Moyer he was involved in trading ventures with west Africa, which brought him into competition with the East India Company, but he went on to become the company's deputy governor in 1657 and its governor in 1659. 
Andrewes was nominated in January 1649 to the high court of justice for the trial of Charles I; he did not attend the early stages of the court, but in the trial week he attended busily, and was in the group of commissioners who stood up to pass the sentence of death on Saturday 27 January ['see also 'Regicides]. Although he did not sign the king's death warrant, he was present at his execution. Shortly afterwards, he served on a high court of justice for the trial and condemnation of James, first duke of Hamilton, and others. He remained a leader of the City. He stepped in at mid-term to become the first lord mayor under the Commonwealth in April 1649 and served a full year in 1650-51; he was a firm supporter of Oliver Cromwell and republicanism in the moderate City government in the fifties. He and his son Nathaniel both acquired sequestered properties; in Thomas Andrewes's case, that of Mucking Hall in Essex, of which he was the tenant. He was knighted by Cromwell in 1657. The date and place of his death are not known though it is recorded that he was buried on 20 August 1659. A year later, the 'Act of Oblivion' exempted Andrewes from pardon in respect of his lands, goods, and all rights of properties. 
A. W. McIntosh', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37118


Andrews, John Miller (1871-1956), prime minister of Northern Ireland, was born on 17 July 1871 at Ardara, Comber, co. Down, the eldest child in the family of four sons and one daughter of Thomas Andrews DL, flax spinner, also of Ardara, and his wife, Eliza, daughter of James Alexander Pirrie, of Belfast, and sister of William James, Viscount Pirrie. His younger brother Sir James Andrews became lord chief justice of Northern Ireland. He was educated at the Royal Academical Institution, Belfast. He married in 1902 Jessie (died 1950), eldest daughter of Joseph Ormrod, stockbroker, of Bolton. They had one son and two daughters. His younger brother James married Jessie's sister. 
Following his father in business and politics, Andrews developed interests in a large number of commercial enterprises, not least in flax spinning and the Belfast and Down Railway. A Liberal Unionist, he was at one time president of the Ulster Liberal Unionist Association and a member of the committee of the Ulster Reform Club. He threw himself wholeheartedly into Ulster Unionist opposition to home rule in the early twentieth century, and was an active member of the Ulster Unionist Council and first president of the Ulster Unionist Labour Association. As one of the architects of Northern Ireland, he sat in its parliament for County Down (1921-9) and then for Mid-Down and County Down from 1930, and held high office for over twenty years, as successively minister of labour (1921-37), minister of finance (1937-40), and prime minister (1940-43). He remained in parliament until 1953. 
Although firm on the link with Britain and steadfastly opposed to a united Ireland, and although not immune to the pressures of extreme protestant organizations, Andrews was never a strident Unionist. Only in 1941 did he first hold significant office in the Orange order, and in 1949 he reached the highest rank on his election as imperial grand master of the grand Orange council of the world. His ministerial career was characterized by tolerance, humanity, and dedication. Unlike some of his colleagues, he did not allow his recreations, such as hunting, yachting, and golf, to interfere with his ministerial duties. As minister of labour, he was concerned that the government should not become totally identified with the Unionist Party and was determined that people in Northern Ireland should have the same standards of living as those in the rest of the United Kingdom. He particularly championed the 'step by step' policy which ensured the automatic adoption in Northern Ireland of the main British cash social services. As minister of finance, however, he readily adopted a narrower approach to service delivery and his main concern was to keep a balanced budget and to maintain good relations with the British Treasury. 
As a cabinet minister, Andrews was keenly aware of the increasing weakness of the government, as James Craig, first Viscount Craigavon, prime minister since 1921, lost control of affairs in the 1930s. Nevertheless, on becoming prime minister after Craigavon's death in 1940, Andrews was also at sea, since his loyalty to old colleagues prevented him from bringing in new men. His ageing government showed insufficient energy in pursuing the effort of the Second World War and its prestige and confidence were undermined by the German air raids in April-May 1941, indecision over conscription, the corruption of Belfast corporation, what was seen as the weak and complacent handling of industrial relations, and confused planning for the post-war world. Dissidents forced Andrews out of office and looked for leadership to Basil Brooke (later Viscount Brookeborough), the minister of commerce and war production, who had been completely identified with the war effort. Although Andrews was convinced that his minister had conspired against him, Brooke seems to have played a passive role in the 1943 crisis, refusing to lead a party revolt, and becoming prime minister almost by default. Excluded from Brooke's new cabinet in 1943, and missing departmental responsibilities, Andrews took little solace in becoming CH (1943). He died on 5 August 1956, at his home, Maxwell Court, Comber. 
Patrick Buckland', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37119


Anthony, (Henry) Mark (1817-1886), landscape painter, was born on 4 August 1817 at Rusholme Lane, Manchester, of Welsh ancestry, the second son of John Anthony, merchant, and his wife, Phoebe. His elder brother, John Anthony (1813-1895), was a physician in Birmingham, traveller, and distinguished microscopist. They moved to Cowbridge, Glamorgan, about 1823, and there Anthony was apprenticed to a doctor and amateur artist called Harrison. Subsequently he is reported to have been a pupil of his cousin George Wilfred Anthony, a drawing-master in Manchester, later a landscape painter and art critic (as Gabriel Tinto) for the 'Manchester Guardian'. He moved to London about 1833. Patronage, and a legacy some time in the 1830s, enabled him to travel; he studied at The Hague, in Paris at the Academie des Beaux-Arts with Paul Delaroche, Ary Scheffer, and Horace Vernet, and in Fontainebleau in 1837, where he was influenced by the Barbizon school, J. B. C. Corot, and Jules Dupre. 
Anthony was among the first to introduce the French style of 'plein-air' landscape painting of the 1830s to London. He exhibited regularly at the Royal Academy between 1837 and 1884, showing a total of thirty-six pictures. He also exhibited seven paintings at the British Institution (1841-60) and eighty-four (1841-69) at the Society of British Artists, of which he was elected a member in 1845, resigning in 1852 in the hope that this would assist his election to associateship of the Royal Academy. He exhibited once at the Grosvenor Gallery and the Liverpool Academy, winning the 1854 prize of $50 for 'Nature's Mirror'. He travelled in England, Wales, France, the Netherlands, Ireland, and Spain. 
Working directly from nature, Anthony was admired by the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood (attending their 'house-warming' at Newman Street, London, on 12 January 1850); he was a great friend of Ford Madox Brown, mentioned frequently in Brown's diaries; and D. G. Rossetti secured him the patronage of the important Newcastle collector James Leathart in the 1860s. New developments in British art after 1860, and his failure to be elected to the Royal Academy, led to a solitary later career. His works fetched high prices at auction during his lifetime, and were particularly admired for their detail, atmospheric effects, and melancholic mood, often enhanced by the light of dawn or early evening over an old church or castle. 
Anthony married at Surbiton on 18 April 1846 Eleanor Sophia Marshall (1808/9-1891) and had three daughters, born between 1849 and 1853. His wife left him in 1855, and in December 1859 her petition for a judicial separation was heard, revealing details of their domestic disputes. She lived in lodgings, while he settled at The Lawn, Hampstead, London, where he died on 1 December 1886. 
Ronald Parkinson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37120


Applegarth, Robert (1834-1924), trade unionist, was born in Kingston upon Hull in the East Riding of Yorkshire on 26 January 1834, the son of Robert Applegarth, who was engaged in the whaling trade. Robert had no formal education and began work at the age of ten. After a number of juvenile jobs he began work in a local joiner's shop and acquired the skills of a carpenter although he was never officially apprenticed. In 1852 he moved with his mother to Sheffield, where she died after a few months. Three years later, on 20 August 1855, Robert married Mary, the daughter of Stephen Longmoore, a farmer, but within a few months he left for America in order to improve his position. His wife, for health reasons, stayed in England. 
America had a powerful impact upon Applegarth. He appreciated the openness of American society compared with that of Britain and he also became a strong abolitionist. He might have stayed there (he was in Galesburg, Knox County, Illinois) but for his wife's health. When he returned he joined the local carpenters' union, and in 1861 he persuaded his Sheffield union to become part of the newly established Amalgamated Society of Carpenters and Joiners (ASCJ). A year later he became the general secretary, a position he was to hold until 1871. These were years of growth in power and status for the skilled unions of mid-Victorian Britain, and Applegarth established himself among the leading union personalities of his day. His own union grew from 1000 when he first took office to 10,000 within a decade. 
A radically minded Liberal, Applegarth was at the centre of all the political and industrial issues of the 1860s: the vigorous support for the north in the American Civil War; the agitation for the repeal of the master and servant acts; the political aims of the Reform League; and after union affairs his main concerns were the co-operative movement and a national system of education for working people. 
Applegarth joined the International Working Men's Association (the First International) in January 1865, a few months after its foundation, and at the third congress in Brussels in June 1868 he was elected chairman of the general council. In this high-profile role he was the subject of some interesting comments in letters from Karl Marx to Friedrich Engels. Applegarth's main activity at the end of the 1860s, however, was concerned with the legal status of trade unions. The royal commission which was established to review the whole situation included two sympathetic members -- Frederic Harrison and Thomas Hughes -- and Applegarth worked closely with them as a counter to the evidence of individual employers and their association. He himself was the first, and most important, trade unionist to present evidence to the commission, and he made a powerful impression upon its members. The final report was as satisfactory as could be expected. 
In 1870 Applegarth was war correspondent in the Franco-Prussian war for the 'Sheffield Independent', 'Scotsman', and 'New York World'. In the early 1870s his career as a trade union leader came to an end. He had accepted membership of the royal commission on contagious diseases -- the first working man ever to be appointed in this capacity -- but this led to fierce opposition from within the union's executive, and Applegarth resigned in April 1871. The opposition against him was straight prejudice, and a commentary upon the social conservatism of mid-Victorian trade unionists. 
The interesting thing is that while Applegarth did not return to his trade, or to the union movement, he retained his political radicalism to the end of his days: for another fifty years. He became a successful businessman, on a small scale, with a continuing faith in the co-operative movement, and above all a consistent advocate of compulsory, free, and unsectarian education. 
Applegarth was small in stature, only 5 feet 2 inches tall. His first wife died in 1870. Two sons aged fifteen and four, and a daughter of one year old, were mentioned in the 1871 census, but according to another source, he had five children to support (Humphrey). In summer 1871 he married Sophia Anne Huitson (1843-1915), of Lambeth, Surrey, with whom he had a daughter, Grace Edith ('bap'. 1875, died 1965). The couple appear to have separated, though they did not divorce, as Sophia and Grace were recorded in census returns from 1881 no longer living with Applegarth; in the 1911 census he was recorded as a 'widower'. Applegarth died at his home, 23 Parchmore Road, Thornton Heath, Surrey, on 13 July 1924. Trade union leaders, among them Ben Tillett, gave the funeral addresses at a secular service. In 1917 he had rejected the invitation to become a Companion of Honour, preferring, as he wrote to Lloyd George, to remain 'plain Robert Applegarth'. A newspaper obituary mentioned four children living at the time of his death. 
John Saville', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37121


Applegath, Augustus (1788-1871), printer, was born on 17 June 1788 in Stepney, the second child of Augustus Joseph Applegath, an East India Company sea captain, and his wife, Ann, formerly Parker, 'nee' Lepard. He was educated at Dr Wanostrocht's Alfred House Academy at Peckham Road, London, before being apprenticed to Benjamin Lepard, a wholesale stationer, at Covent Garden. Applegath and his younger brother, Joseph, continued in the stationery business in Covent Garden until 1813, when, on the death of William Cornish, Augustus joined Cornish's partners, Henry Mitton and Edward Cowper, in the printing firm of Cornish & Co. at Nelson Square, Southwark. In September 1813 he married Sophia, daughter of Captain John Drew of Bristol. Of their numerous children, seven survived him. 
In November 1817 the partners put forward a proposal to the Bank of England for a method of printing banknotes which could not be copied by forgers. Mitton left the partnership in December. Applegath and Cowper were required to deposit a sum with the bank equal to their estimated cost of development of the method, recoverable only if it was adopted; however, the bank did contribute to the cost of materials and labour. The two men developed a machine capable of printing six colours in perfect register and some millions of $1 notes were printed. But these were never issued because the bank reverted to cash payments in 1821. Applegath and Cowper received only $4000 in recompense for their three and a half years of labour. 
The partners also made a name for themselves in constructing and improving printing machinery, especially for 'The Times' from 1818. By 1826 no fewer than ten newspapers were printed on Applegath and Cowper presses. In 1827 an Applegath and Cowper four-feeder machine was installed for 'The Times', in 1846 an eight-feeder, and in 1847 a nine-feeder. These considerable feats of engineering enabled the newspaper to raise its circulation far in advance of its rivals. 
Despite these achievements, Applegath was declared bankrupt in 1826 and his Blackfriars workshops and goods were sold to another printer, William Clowes, who became a dominant figure in Victorian printing. By 1828 Applegath was working as a silk and calico printer, specializing in silk handkerchiefs, with a factory at Crayford, Kent, and a London office. In 1842 he was again declared bankrupt. The Crayford business was sold to David Evans and Applegath moved into a works in Dartford which had been established by his brother John, where he manufactured printing machinery. He remained at Dartford until his death, at his home in Spital Street, on 9 February 1871. 


@@@@@


doc= 37122


Arbuthnot, Harriett (1793-1834), diarist, was born on 10 September 1793, the third and youngest daughter and third youngest of the ten children of Henry Fane (1739-1802) MP of Fulbeck Hall, Lincolnshire (second son of Thomas Fane, eighth earl of Westmorland), and his wife, Anne (died 1838), daughter of Edward Buckley Batson, banker. She was baptized at Fulbeck on 2 November 1793. On 31 January 1814 she married (as his second wife) Charles Arbuthnot (1767-1850), MP and joint secretary to the treasury with responsibility for patronage. There were no children. Despite the age gap -- she was twenty-six years his junior -- they had twenty years of extremely happy marriage. 
Her obsession with politics partly explains her choice of the middle-aged widower as a husband, since he was the recipient of political secrets, which she shared. He was 'more largely mixed up with the principal people and events of his time than any other man' ('The Greville Memoirs, 1814-1860', ed. G. L. Strachey and R. Fulford, 8 vols., 1938). While Arbuthnot was tactful and exceedingly good-natured, his wife was equally discreet but with a sharper mind. She was soon well known in her own right as the friend of statesmen. Her valuable political diary, however, was secreted in her room until her death, then kept at Apsley House; it was not published until 1950, when it appeared in two volumes as 'The Journal of Mrs Arbuthnot'. 
An extreme tory, Mrs Arbuthnot passed her adult life mainly under tory governments. This gave her the entree into many whispering galleries of politics and the drawing-rooms if not the corridors of power. When the whigs returned to power she lost interest and in 1832 dropped the journal abruptly in mid-sentence. She had decided on the fourth day of George IV's reign, 1 February 1820, to overcome her natural 'laziness' and keep a diary. Eight days later the duke of Wellington was calling on her with reports of a coming clash over the king's desired divorce from Queen Caroline. Mingling genuine news with 'street talk', she produced a lively compilation. Among the important events she dealt with were the Cato Street conspiracy, Queen Caroline's trial, Catholic emancipation, and parliamentary reform. 
The two heroes of the journal are Lord Castlereagh and Wellington. Mrs Arbuthnot's admiration for Castlereagh was entirely uncritical: his 'dignity and nobleness' were 'never seen in any other man'. The modified toryism of George Canning and Sir Robert Peel filled her with contempt. Canning, she wrote, was 'always having some dirty underplot'. Towards Wellington she could be both critical and devoted, and her portrait of him is the most useful. 
The Arbuthnots and Wellingtons had met in Paris in 1814. Their friendship has been called a unique political 'menage a trois'. If things had been otherwise, Mrs Arbuthnot would have made an ideal wife for the duke. He liked a clever woman -- 'she sees what you mean' -- which his wife, Kitty, did not. Nor was his wife 'sensible' like Harriett, who found Kitty 'silly'. This was not sexual jealousy, though Charles Greville sent Harriett an anonymous letter accusing her of being in love with Wellington. Their relations are best described as 'amitie amoureuse'. Both Wellington and Harriett lacked imagination but relied instead on keen observation. Unlike Wellington, Harriett was a political animal through and through, whose ambition was that her men should succeed. Harriett, said Arbuthnot, had been his 'guardian angel', looking after everything, including his finances. After she died the heart-broken husband gave Woodford Lodge, Northamptonshire, where Harriett had spent her married life, to his son by his first wife, and went to live with Wellington. It was a no less remarkable 'menage a deux'. The memory of her graceful figure, wide-apart eyes, heart-shaped face, and alert expression remained their joint possession until Arbuthnot's death in 1850. Renowned in life for her guarded silences, Harriett Arbuthnot speaks out now through the pages of the 'Journal'. She died of cholera on 2 August 1834 at her home, Woodford Lodge. 


@@@@@


doc= 37123


Archer, John (d. 1639), separatist minister and writer, was the son of Francis Archer (1561-1636), whose family had been settled for centuries at Epping, Essex, and of his wife (died 1643), whose name is unknown. He is probably the John Archer who graduated MA from Magdalene College, Cambridge, in 1626. In September 1627 he was licensed to preach anywhere in London, and became a lecturer at St Antholin's and at All Hallows, Lombard Street. Samuel Hartlib, seeking relief in England for distressed protestants abroad, named him in 1630 as a leading well-wisher. Archer was soon in trouble over his puritan scruples. In December 1630 he was silenced by Bishop William Laud of London for not catechizing according to the form laid down in the prayer book, and for refusing to bow at the name of Jesus. The sentence was lifted after he submitted in January 1631, but by March Laud had found further evidence against him. The feoffees for impropriations came to his rescue by offering him the vicarage of All Saints', Hertford (where the millenarian Christopher Feake was later to serve). He was instituted there on 3 May 1631 and served for several years. 
Archer suffered from very poor health in this period. According to his fellow minister Thomas Edwards, a friend despite their differences, he was consumptive and often close to death, and rarely able to preach. He was also deeply unhappy with the religious climate of Laudian England, and in 1637 decided to settle abroad. He moved to the Netherlands with his wife (whom he had married at an unknown date, and who survived him) and mother, landing on 27 July, and became pastor to a group of about a hundred mostly prosperous English religious refugees at 'Viana' (probably Vianen, in Utrecht). In 1638 they moved to Arnhem, where the Archers' only child (a son) was born, and the magistrates allowed the group to hold regular services in the choir of the Broeren Kirk, sharing it with a congregation of French Huguenot refugees. Enjoying a comfortable life and better health than in England, Archer was able to preach regularly until his premature death at Arnhem in 1639. Thomas Goodwin and Philip Nye, who also served the congregation for a time, considered him and a fellow exile 'as precious men as this earth beares any' (Goodwin and others, 22). 
Archer's treatise 'The Personall Reigne of Christ upon Earth' was published in London late in 1641 or early in 1642, and predicted that the millennium was close at hand. It prophesied the calling of the Jews in 1650 or 1656, the fall of Rome in 1666, and the coming of Christ about 1700. Having set up his kingdom Christ would withdraw to heaven, returning at the end of the thousand years. The book appeared at a time of great political and religious excitement and caused a considerable stir. It went quickly through several impressions, and did much to foster the spread of millenarian ideas in England. Archer urged readers to leave matters in God's hands, but he also predicted the imminent overthrow of earthly kings; the revolutionary implications were obvious to many contemporaries, including a few years later the Fifth Monarchists. In 1645 the bookseller Benjamin Allen published some of Archer's other writings. 'Comfort for Beleevers', a pastoral treatise never intended for the press, provoked a storm by declaring that God was in part the author of the sins of the godly. Archer had intended this to reassure church members troubled by their human frailties, but the Westminster assembly was outraged by its antinomian implications and sent deputations to parliament in July 1645 to denounce it as heretical and blasphemous. The Lords and Commons both ordered the book to be burned by the public hangman and all remaining copies to be seized; Robert Baillie, one of the Scottish delegates in London, published a fierce condemnation of Archer's 'blasphemies'. 'Instructions about Right Beleeving', a collection of sermons, was uncontroversial. 


@@@@@


doc= 37124


Arendrup, Edith (1846-1934), artist and Roman Catholic religious sister, was born on 1 September 1846 at Bocking, Braintree, Essex, the younger child and only daughter of John Minton Courtauld (died 1877), junior partner in Samuel Courtauld & Co., silk and crepe manufacturers, and his wife, Sarah Bromley (died 1855). Educated at home, her first ambition was to become an artist. In 1866, after a term at the National Art Training School in South Kensington, she was invited to use a small studio in St John's Wood, owned by her uncle, George Hering (1805-1879), a landscape artist. There she met John Rogers Herbert, a leading Royal Academician, who gave her valuable advice. In the years following 1868 she had several landscapes and religious pictures exhibited at the Royal Academy. Her 'Memories of the First Palm Sunday' was bought by the National Art Gallery, Melbourne, Australia. 
In 1872, on a visit to Egypt, Edith Courtauld met Lieutenant Soren Adolph Arendrup (1834-1875), a 38-year-old widower and Danish officer, who was serving as artillery adviser to the Egyptian army. They married on 27 August 1873 and settled in Cairo. There two children were born, a daughter, Agnes, who soon died, and a son, Axel. In 1875, however, Edith Arendrup's marriage came to a tragic end. She had already lost her mother, killed in a riding accident, and her only brother, Julien, who had died suddenly in 1870. Now her husband was killed, leading a small Egyptian army into Ethiopia. Left a widow at the age of twenty-nine, she returned to England in 1876 and settled with her son and two stepdaughters in the developing suburb of Wimbledon. There she learned of the sudden death of her father in Switzerland. 
Arendrup survived these distressing events thanks to her deep religious faith. She had been brought up a Unitarian, but about the time of her brother's death she decided to become a Roman Catholic. Her conversion changed her life, and, with the fervour of a convert, she determined to spread her new faith in strongly protestant Wimbledon. In 1877 she opened a small chapel in her house in Cottenham Park. Then, as the congregation grew, she bought land off Edge Hill and had a fine new church built in 1887. She finally persuaded the Jesuits to accept its charge on the understanding that they could also open a day school in Wimbledon. As a result the number of Catholics increased so rapidly that the district was soon being talked of as 'a hot-bed of Jesuit Popery'. 
In 1896 Edith Arendrup's son died of typhoid. With no further family responsibilities, she sold her house and joined a religious order, the Daughters of Mary. For the next thirty years she worked among the poor in Wapping, Rotherhithe, and Dublin, retiring in 1925, at the age of seventy-nine, to her old home in Bocking, Braintree, now a convent run by Franciscan nuns as an old people's home. Early in 1934 she suffered a stroke and died there on 10 January in her sleep. She was buried in the grounds of the convent. Shortly after her death, a friend wrote of her: 'She was notable in many ways. She had great artistic talents; she was a skilled horsewoman. But most notable of all were her qualities of disposition and character. With absolute unselfishness, she devoted her life and resources to the building of the church on Edge Hill and later to rescue work in the East End. Her deep and tender sympathy for all who were suffering and afflicted expressed itself in a manner of impressive graciousness and dignity. ('Wimbledon Borough News', 26 Jan 1934)' 



@@@@@


doc= 37125


Armitage, Ella Sophia (1841-1931), historian and archaeologist, was born in Mason Street, West Derby, Liverpool, on 3 March 1841, the second daughter in the family of four sons and ten daughters of Samuel Marshall Bulley JP (1811-1880), a cotton broker of Liverpool, and his wife, Mary Rachel (1817-1887), only daughter of the Revd Thomas Raffles, first cousin to Sir Thomas Stamford Raffles (1781-1826). Her siblings included Amy Bulley and Arthur Kilpin Bulley. Educated at home, she in turn taught her younger brothers and sisters, which greatly irked her as it prevented her from pursuing her own studies. As her elder sister, Mary, married young, Ella took on the role of eldest daughter and mother's right hand. However, she vowed to overcome 'the accursed thraldom of womanhood' and to cultivate her mind and abilities to the utmost, a promise recorded in code in her 1856 diary, the only one to survive her death. Her commitment to self-education was reflected in her later proficiency in French, German, Italian, and Latin; she could also read Spanish, Norwegian, Danish, Welsh, and Early English. In October 1871 she became one of the first five students at Newnham College, Cambridge, founded by Henry Sidgwick with Anne Clough, a Bulley family friend, in charge. Ella was their first research student. On 30 July 1874 she married the Revd Elkanah Armitage (1844-1929), a Congregationalist minister and one of the fourteen children of William Armitage JP, of the manufacturing firm of Armitage and Rigby. They had one son and one daughter. 
In 1877-9 Ella Armitage taught history at the embryo women's department at Owens College, Manchester (later Manchester University). In 1887 she became the first and only woman on the school board at Rotherham, and in 1890 she was elected to the school board at Bradford and the West Riding education committee. In 1894 she was appointed assistant commissioner to the royal commission on secondary education under James Bryce to investigate girls' education in Devon. She worked hard to improve the status of further and higher education for girls, and in her special report to the royal commission on secondary education she did not mince her words in describing the deplorable state of girls' education in Devon's private schools. But she was not involved in the women's suffrage and other similar movements, and preferred to expend her energies within the arena offered by her church. A gifted pianist and musician, she wrote several hymns, and spoke frequently for the London Missionary Society throughout the country. She instituted a women's conference in the Yorkshire Congregationalist Union (1891), formed a women's guild of Christian service, and both spoke and preached in Congregationalist forums; she even wrote one of her husband's sermons. 
But Ella Armitage's abiding passions were medieval history and archaeology, which she continued to study all her life. When, in 1884, G. T. Clark (1809-1898) published his 'Mediaeval Military Architecture in England', she realized that it contained false assumptions about the origins of the various mounds or mottes scattered over the British Isles. Clark held that many were of Anglo-Saxon origin. Together with J. H. Round, George Neilson in Scotland, and Goddard Orpen in Ireland, Armitage was to prove in a stream of articles and books that motte and bailey castles did not appear in Britain until after the Norman conquest. An important paper was read for her in 1900 to the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland by her cousin Gerard Baldwin Brown, and thereafter controversial articles in learned journals culminated in 1912 in the publication by John Murray of 'The Early Norman Castles of the British Isles', which is still considered a seminal work on the subject. She also contributed the section on earthworks in the 'Victoria History of the County of York' in 1912. In 1919 she received an honorary MA from Manchester University for her work in archaeology. 
Described in her student days as tall and stately with magnificent hair worn in a plaited coronet, Ella Armitage was serious and slightly forbidding to some, but to family and friends was full of fun, with a deep chuckle when amused. She was sharp and witty in her writings and observations. She died on 20 March 1931 at her daughter's home, Parkhurst, Park Road South, Middlesbrough, just after her ninetieth birthday, with her mental faculties unimpaired to the last. In spite of the lack of recognition given to her for her work in education, her place as the pioneer of castle studies is still firm. As a result of archaeological progress, some of her conclusions have been found to be faulty but Allen Brown's recognition of 'her original and seminal work... a brilliant survey of all the evidence' (Brown, 234) still stands. 


@@@@@


doc= 37126


Armstrong, Edward Allworthy (1900-1978), ornithologist and Church of England clergyman, was born at Corlea, Lowwood, Belfast, on 8 October 1900, the younger child and only son of Hamilton Armstrong, manufacturer's agent, and his wife, Mary Elizabeth Susan, daughter of Dr Samuel W. Allworthy. He was educated at the Royal Belfast Academical Institution and then at Queen's University, Belfast, studying science in his first year then switching to philosophy. He graduated BA (honours) in 1921. 
Called to a religious vocation, Armstrong attended Ridley Hall Theological College, Cambridge, in 1921-3, being ordained deacon in 1923 and priest in 1924. Spells as a curate in Doncaster and Ipswich were followed by three years as chaplain at St Andrew's in Kowloon, 1929-31, during which he studied Chinese at Hong Kong University. He then spent eleven years in Leeds, first as curate at St Peter's (1932-8), during which he obtained an MA in the history and philosophy of religion and in Chinese studies at Leeds University, then as vicar of St Matthew's, Holbeck. In 1940 he married Eunice Joan, the daughter of Frank Uttley, a Methodist minister. They had two sons. In 1943 he returned to Cambridge as vicar of St Mark's, Newnham, in which post he remained until his retirement in 1966. 
Armstrong's career in the Anglican church was unexceptional and it was in other fields that this remarkable man achieved international distinction, most notably as a writer and an original student (as observer and interpreter) of bird behaviour -- in which field he produced a huge output of highly influential articles, books, and scientific papers. He had an extraordinary, polymathic mind, the breadth of his interests embracing folklore, anthropology, theology, philosophy, psychology, foreign languages, and Shakespearian criticism, as well as ornithology. His Christian delight in nature gave him 'a sense of wonder in creation', an important theme in his theology, his religious faith and a great love of the beauty of nature being basic to his character. Proud of being a member of a long line of parson naturalists stretching back to John Ray and Gilbert White, he saw his contributions to science as an extension of his work as a priest. 
Armstrong's interest in and love of birds began during his childhood in Northern Ireland and found their first mature expression in his prizewinning book 'Birds of the Grey Wind' (1940), as much a contribution to literature as to natural history. What has been called his 'exact and scientific attitude to bird-life' then gave rise to a series of important books on birds -- 'Bird Display' (1942) and its sequel 'Bird Display and Behaviour' (1947), 'The Wren' (1955), 'The Folklore of Birds' (1958), 'A Study of Bird Song' (1963), and 'The Life and Lore of Birds' (1975) -- as well as a number of shorter or more popular works. Two other books -- 'Shakespeare's Imagination' (1946) and 'St. Francis: Nature Mystic' (1973) -- also drew upon his ornithological knowledge, making each the definitive contribution in its field. In recognition of his work he was made an honorary MA of Cambridge in 1952 and received a special union gold medal of the British Ornithologists' Union in 1959 and the Stamford Raffles award of the Zoological Society of London in 1966. 
Armstrong's last years were marred by debilitating illness but, a compulsive worker, he went on writing until the end, dying at his home, 23 Leys Road, Cambridge, on 19 December 1978. 
K. E. L. Simmons', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37127


Arnulf (1105x9-1184), bishop of Lisieux, was born near Sees in Normandy, the second son of Hardouin de Neuville and an unnamed mother; a younger brother and at least one sister completed the family. Following the example of their maternal grandfather, Norman, dean of the chapter at Sees, and their maternal uncle, Jean, bishop of Lisieux, both Arnulf and his elder brother, John (d. 1142), who became bishop of Sees in 1124 ['see under 'John (d. 1137)], were trained for careers in the church. Arnulf began his formal education at the cathedral school of Sees and for a short time held the position of treasurer of Bayeux. After he was named an archdeacon of Sees, he became a pupil of Geoffroi, bishop of Chartres, and travelled to Bologna to study law. 
Arnulf made his first public mark in 1133 with the dissemination of a particularly vitriolic pamphlet directed against the antipope Anacletus II. This 'Invectiva in Girardum Engolismensem episcopum' has been excoriated by modern readers as calumnious and antisemitic, but at the time it was promulgated by such church dignitaries as Abbot Bernard of Clairvaux, Peter the Venerable, and Haimeric, papal chancellor under Honorius II. Arnulf completed his education in 1136 and travelled to England to serve the court of King Stephen. His most important assignment during that period was an appearance at the Lateran Council of 1139, where he defended Stephen's claim to the throne of England by attacking Matilda's legitimacy. His arguments were fallacious, and in any case Pope Innocent II declined to give a definitive judgement. 
Arnulf was elected bishop of Lisieux in 1141. He brought to his office a conviction that a bishop had a dual responsibility to serve both church and monarchy. During the 1140s he wavered in his political allegiance, hoping to find a king who was both worthy of his support and in need of episcopal guidance. For a time he offered his services to Louis VII of France, and accompanied him on the second crusade as papal legate in charge of the Anglo-Norman contingent. Upon his return Abbot Suger of St Denis employed him as an ambassador to the court of Matilda and her son, Henry. 
In Henry, Arnulf finally found the potential monarch for whom he had been searching. From 1150 to 1154 Arnulf was an active member of the entourage of the young duke of Normandy, travelling with him as he consolidated his hold over Normandy and pressed his claim to the English throne. In 1154 he accompanied Henry to England for his coronation, after which he was rewarded by the gift of the valuable chapelry of Bosham in Sussex and the title of chief justiciar for Normandy. Extant charters show that Arnulf served as a testator to Henry's acts at least 121 times between 1154 and 1179. He always considered himself a member of the court, although his services were somewhat sporadic and sometimes unappreciated by the king and his other advisers. In 1156 he persuaded Henry to delay indefinitely his plans to invade Ireland by pointing out to him, quite correctly, that the papal permission obtained by John of Salisbury acknowledged the pope's overlordship of all islands -- a matter of no small consequence to the ruler of an island kingdom. Henry reluctantly agreed not to act on the papal permission, but John of Salisbury never forgave Arnulf for placing royal interest ahead of papal prerogatives. 
During the papal schism of 1159 Arnulf was charged with the task of keeping Henry loyal to Alexander III. Henry, however, refused to commit himself, leaving the decision to his assembled bishops. Arnulf wrote a letter to the English bishops shortly before their meeting, telling them that the French king, the French bishops, and Henry himself were all agreed to support Alexander, and that they were only postponing their announcement until the English bishops could vote to join them. The facts were quite different; Henry and Louis had discussed the problem but had reached no settlement. The archbishop of Canterbury was convinced, however, and the English bishops acquiesced, leaving Henry no choice but to support them as he had promised. Arnulf achieved his goal, thereby opening himself to charges of duplicity. 
The controversy over Thomas Becket once again involved Arnulf in a test of the feasibility of a bishop serving both his church and his king. At the beginning of the crisis, in 1163-4, Arnulf seemed to support the king. It was he who advised Henry to try to break the unanimity of the English bishops; he also made six trips to the papal court at Sens to persuade Alexander to confirm the constitutions of Clarendon. When those efforts failed, Arnulf turned to Becket, trying to persuade him to moderate his views for the sake of ecclesiastical unity. Throughout the negotiations Arnulf was on hand, advising all sides of possible compromises, sometimes deploring Henry's intransigence and sometimes losing patience with the obdurate Becket. He was with Henry when the news of Becket's death arrived, and wrote a sycophantic letter to the pope in Henry's defence. And at Avranches, in May 1172, it was Arnulf who persuaded Henry to accept the final settlement. Throughout the crisis, no one was quite sure which cause Arnulf espoused; no one trusted him completely. 
Arnulf's last years displayed a steady decline of influence. He alienated the king one last time by seeming to offer support to Henry, the Young King, during the rebellion of 1173. The canons of his cathedral turned against him, and Henry began an organized campaign to drive the cantankerous old bishop from his office. In 1181 Arnulf formally resigned his bishopric and retired to the monastery of St Victor in Paris. He left behind him two monuments, one inscribed on parchment, the other carved in stone. The collection of his personal correspondence revealed much about the affairs of the twelfth century; the semi-Romanesque, semi-Gothic design of his new cathedral reflected his own dual goals. Although he had influenced popes and kings, he ended his life a disappointed man, mourning the passage of a simpler world in which a bishop could serve both church and monarchy. He died on 31 August 1184 at St Victor. 
C. P. Schriber', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37128


Artis, Edmund Tyrell (bap. 1789, d. 1847), geologist and archaeologist, was baptized on 11 September 1789 in Saxmundham, Suffolk, the eldest in the family of three sons and three daughters of James Artis, carpenter, and his wife, Mary Tyrell Watling. Little is known of his childhood, though it is said he developed a talent for drawing at an early age. At sixteen he went to work for his uncle, a London wine merchant, but by 1810 was established as a confectioner in Marylebone. In that year he married a Bristol woman and their only child, named Elizabeth after her mother, was born in 1811. During 1812 he attracted the attention of William, second Earl Fitzwilliam, who employed him at Milton, his Northamptonshire home; he became house steward in November 1816. Visits to Fitzwilliam's other residence at Wentworth Woodhouse led to an interest in geology, particularly the Carboniferous plant fossils found in coalmines in Yorkshire and Derbyshire. His studies, based on a collection of some 1500 specimens (later sold to the British Museum), resulted in the publication in 1825 of 'Antediluvian Phytology', a pioneering work in palaeobotany, illustrated by numerous plates taken from his own drawings. He became a fellow of the Geological Society in 1824. 
Simultaneously Artis pursued an interest in archaeology. Searching for fossils on Fitzwilliam's estates at Castor, near Peterborough, in 1821, he discovered a large tessellated Roman pavement; this encouraged him to conduct a series of excavations, unusually systematic for their time, which continued until 1827. From 1823 he produced a series of plates illustrating his discoveries, largely engraved from his own drawings, entitled 'The Durobrivae of Antoninus'. These appeared in a single volume in 1828, though the text to accompany them was never published. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1825. During this period he became friendly with the poet John Clare, a frequent visitor at Milton from 1820. Artis and Clare shared an interest in natural history and the latter often refers to Artis's opinions on local flora and fauna and to specimens which he saw in his collection of stuffed birds. Artis even made a plaster bust of Clare, who once described his friend as 'a clever man & everything but a poet'. 
In August 1826 Artis left Milton to go into business on his own again. After long negotiations he purchased the Doncaster race clubhouse, opening in time to provide food and accommodation for racegoers attending the St Leger meeting of 1828. Although the venture was initially successful, race week alone could not sustain the business for the rest of the year; the property was leased and the clubhouse opened only in September. In 1830 Artis returned to Castor and for the next few years divided his time between his business interests in Doncaster and small-scale excavations at Castor. In 1844 he became a regional committee member of the newly formed British Archaeological Association and began to conduct larger excavations, communicating his discoveries through the association's journal. He dug chiefly on the duke of Bedford's land at Sibson, encouraged by finds made during construction of the Northampton to Peterborough railway. Work continued until shortly before his death in Doncaster on 24 December 1847. He was buried in the churchyard at Castor. 
Steven Tomlinson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37129


Aspdin, Joseph (bap. 1778, d. 1855), cement maker, was baptized on 25 December 1778 in Hunslet, Leeds, the eldest in the family of five sons and one daughter of Thomas Aspdin, bricklayer of Hunslet, and his wife, Mary. Aspdin followed his father's trade of bricklayer and builder at Briggate, Leeds. On 21 May 1811 he married Mary Fotherby at Hunslet. They had two sons and five daughters, two of whom died in infancy. 
Aspdin's experiments with cement making led him to apply for a patent, which was granted in June 1824, for 'An improvement in the modes of producing an artificial stone' -- the first patent to be granted which used the term 'portland cement'. 
Cement is the term in common use for a powder which hardens when mixed with water and is used to bind together aggregates of gravel and stone to produce concrete. In the second half of the nineteenth century portland became the most popular type of cement and it has been used in vast quantities for building and construction in all parts of the world. In Aspdin's day cement manufacture was undergoing relatively rapid development and many experimenters were working in the field. Aspdin took the name for his patent material from portland stone, which had a high reputation and provided a standard with which artificial products would naturally be compared. To produce the high strengths associated with modern portland cement it was necessary to burn at high temperatures finely pulverized lime with clay in certain proportions, and grind the product. It is uncertain when Aspdin made this breakthrough. He may have used a glasshouse kiln, which would be more likely to reach the high temperatures required for successful burning of portland cement than the lime-burning kiln used by his competitors. There was a glassworks at Hunslet at this time and a glassworks and foundries at Wakefield. 
Aspdin set up a partnership in 1824 with a neighbour, William Beverley, as 'patent portland cement manufacturers', operating from Leeds and Wakefield, to where Aspdin moved, and later expanded to an agency at Liverpool. The partnership ended in 1837, and Aspdin recommenced manufacture with his two sons, James and William, at a nearby site in Kirkgate, Wakefield, and took James into partnership three years later. When Aspdin retired in 1844, James continued the business. 
William Aspdin moved to London in 1841, forming a succession of partnerships to make portland cement at Rotherhithe, Northfleet, and Gateshead upon Tyne in England, and Hamburg in Germany. It appears that his father deliberately excluded him from the family business, but despite this William was an enthusiastic advocate, often with exaggeration, of the superior qualities of portland cement. 
Aspdin died at his home in Hansons Terrace, Wakefield, on 20 March 1855 and was buried in St John's churchyard, Wakefield. A tablet to his memory was unveiled in Leeds town hall in 1924. 


@@@@@


doc= 37130


Aspinall, Sir John Audley Frederick (1851-1937), mechanical engineer, was born in Liverpool on 25 August 1851, the second of three sons (there was also a daughter) of John Bridge Aspinall QC (1818-1886), who was latterly the recorder of the city of Liverpool, and his wife, Bertha Wyatt, daughter of John Audley Jee, merchant of Mount Vernon, Liverpool, and descendant of the inventor John Wyatt. He was educated at Beaumont College, Berkshire, and in 1868 became a pupil of John Ramsbottom and later F. W. Webb in the locomotive works of the London and North Western Railway at Crewe. At the end of his pupillage in 1872 he was sent to the United States to study developments in railways and steel making. On his return he became assistant manager of the steelworks at Crewe. In 1875 he moved to the Great Southern and Western Railway of Ireland as the works manager and assistant locomotive superintendent at Inchicore, near Dublin, where he was responsible for making improvements to the automatic vacuum brake. 
In 1886 Aspinall was invited to become the chief mechanical engineer of the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway, for whom he completed, equipped, and organized the engineering workshops in Horwich, widely regarded as a model of their kind, eventually employing over 10,000 men. In 1899 the company took the unusual step of appointing him general manager, a tribute to his administrative as well as engineering abilities. He succeeded in reversing the downward trend of the railway's fortunes, countering the advance of electric trams by introducing electric traction on suburban railway lines such as Liverpool to Southport, one of the earliest main-line electrification schemes in the country, completed in 1904. He also built up the railway's fleet of passenger and cargo ships sailing to Ireland and the continent from Goole, Fleetwood, and Liverpool; by 1914 it was the largest of any of the British railway companies. 
For his work at Horwich in the First World War Aspinall was knighted in 1917. He retired from his position as general manager in 1919 and was appointed a director of the company, but resigned later in the same year on his appointment as consulting mechanical engineer to the newly formed Ministry of Transport, a position he held until 1927. 
Throughout this time he took a keen personal interest in the education of young engineers, especially in the Horwich Mechanics' Institute, which he founded in 1888. In 1902 he was appointed associate professor of railway engineering at the University of Liverpool, and from 1908 to 1915 he acted as chairman of the faculty of engineering. 
Among many professional distinctions were Aspinall's presidencies of the institutions of Mechanical Engineers (1909) and Civil Engineers, and the (Smeatonian) Society of Civil Engineers (1931). In 1936 he was awarded the James Watt medal of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers for his outstanding contributions to the advance of mechanical engineering. 
On 2 September 1874 Aspinall married Gertrude Helen (1852/3-1921), daughter of Francis B. Schrader of Liverpool. They had one son and three daughters; their son, John Bridge Aspinall, became a QC like his grandfather. Aspinall died at his home, Deerstead House, St John's Hill Road, Woking, on 19 January 1937. 
Ronald M. Birse', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37131


Astor, William Waldorf, first Viscount Astor (1848-1919), property owner and newspaper proprietor, was born on 31 March 1848 in New York, the only child of John Jacob Astor (1822-1890), manager of the family estate, and his wife, Charlotte Augusta Gibbes (1825-1887). He was educated privately and at Columbia law school, and worked as a lawyer and in the family estates before entering the New York state assembly as a Republican in 1877. He built the Waldorf section of what later became the Waldorf Astoria Hotel. In 1879 he was elected to the state senate, and in 1880 ran unsuccessfully for Congress. In 1882 he was appointed minister to Italy. There he wrote 'Valentino: an Historical Romance of the Sixteenth Century', published in 1885, the year when he ceased to hold his diplomatic office. 
Astor married Mary (Mamie) Dahlgren (died 1894), daughter of James William Paul of Philadelphia, in 1878. They had two surviving sons -- Waldorf Astor, later second Viscount Astor (1879-1952), and John Jacob Astor, later Baron Astor of Hever (1886-1971) -- and a daughter. 
In 1890 Astor's father died, leaving him a legacy estimated at $100 million. In September 1890 he took his family to London. In 1893 he bought Cliveden House, near Marlow, Buckinghamshire, to which he added the entire balustrade of the Villa Borghese. He was naturalized as a British subject in 1899. In 1906 he made over Cliveden to his newly married elder son, and bought Hever Castle in Kent, which he reconstructed and where he housed his collection of pictures and artefacts. 
In 1892 he bought the 'Pall Mall Gazette', a Liberal evening daily newspaper which he turned into a Conservative organ. In 1893 he launched the 'Pall Mall Magazine', a monthly journal. In 1911 he bought 'The Observer', in order to get the services of its editor, J. L. Garvin, as editor of the 'Pall Mall Gazette'. The 'Gazette' was sold in August 1915, the 'Pall Mall Magazine' having already been sold in 1912. Astor retained 'The Observer', which was subsequently passed down to his son Waldorf. 
Astor was a substantial contributor to charities and to the Conservative Party. He was created Baron Astor in 1916, and promoted viscount in 1917. Astor was a shy, austere and, by all accounts, unlovable man. He despised his native country and said so in print. In return, he was lampooned by the New York press. He added two further novels of historical romance to his published output before 1900. He was important not so much for any positive achievement as for the unintended consequences of his purchases. By buying 'The Observer' he preserved the independence of Garvin. By taking a peerage he ruined the political career of his elder son -- who had become Unionist MP for Plymouth in 1910 and was elevated to the Lords in succession to his father in 1919 -- but also created the opportunity for his daughter-in-law, Nancy Astor (later Viscountess Astor) to win her husband's seat at a by-election, and thus become the first woman to sit in the House of Commons. Astor died on 18 October 1919 at 155 King's Road, Brighton. 
John Turner', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37132


Atkins, Anna (1799-1871), botanist and photographic artist, was born on 16 March 1799 in Tonbridge, Kent, the only child of John George Children (1777-1852), scientist, and his wife, Hester Anne Holwell (died 1800). Some aspects of her early life are suggested in her pseudo-anonymous biography of her father, but otherwise little is known. Anna's mother died shortly after childbirth (the same fate that had befallen her father's mother) and the father and daughter developed a close and mutually productive lifelong relationship. It was from him that she gained a love of science and a facility at working with her hands. It is also likely that her father's influential position in the British Museum and the Royal Society encouraged her participation and acceptance in these traditionally male circles. 
Anna Children proved to be a highly skilled illustrator and contributed more than two hundred drawings to her father's 1823 translation of Jean Lamarck's 'Genera of Shells'. In 1825 she married John Pelly Atkins, a promoter of pneumatic railways and later sheriff of Kent, the son of John Atkins, alderman and lord mayor of London, and MP for Arundel in 1830-31. The couple had no children. 
A member of the Botanical Society of London, Anna Atkins was a pioneer in the application of photography to science and to publication. Her father had chaired the Royal Society meeting in February 1839 when William Henry Fox Talbot first publicly revealed the details of photogenic drawing. Within a short time father and daughter were experimenting with photography. Anna Atkins's major contribution, however, was entirely of her own making. Among scientists, botanists especially had grasped the potential of the new art for recording complex scientific specimens, and as an illustrator and lithographer, Anna Atkins extended this potential to the field of publication. She undertook the first serious application of photography to science by making photograms of her extensive collection of algae. 
Anna Atkins had become a close friend of Sir John Herschel, another photographic pioneer, and his daughters. She turned to his 1842 invention of the cyanotype process for her photographic work. It was a clever choice. The cyanotype was inexpensive and relatively easy to work; its only disadvantage, a blue image tone, proved to be a virtue rather than a drawback for her chosen subjects. Most importantly, cyanotypes were far more permanent than other early photographs and much of her output survived in good condition a century and a half later. Anna Atkins employed these cyanotype plates to publish the first book illustrated with photographs, pre-dating her colleague Talbot's better known 'The Pencil of Nature' (1844-6). Her privately published 'Photographs of British Algae: Cyanotype Impressions' was issued regularly in parts between October 1843 and September 1853, eventually incorporating more than four hundred photographic plates, and was distributed to scientific friends and institutions. The text was photographic copies of her own handwriting and the thousands of plates required were laboriously produced on hand-coated paper. Anna Atkins was a sensitive photographer who continued after this to create cyanotypes of other natural objects, largely for their aesthetic value, and sometimes in conjunction with Anne Dixon ('nee' Austen) (1800-1864), a close childhood friend, the wife of a vicar in Sussex. 
Following his retirement from the British Museum in 1840 Children had gone to live with his daughter at Sevenoaks, strengthening their collaboration in science. It was in Sevenoaks, after a lingering illness, that Anna Atkins herself died, at her home, Halstead Place, on 9 June 1871. She was buried in Halstead churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 37133


Atkinson, Edward Leicester (1881-1929), naval medical officer and explorer in Antarctica, was born on 23 November 1881 at Sion Hill, St Vincent, Windward Islands, West Indies, the third of eight children and the second and sole surviving son of Edward Leycester Atkinson, then an accountant at the Colonial Bank, Kingstown, St Vincent, and his wife, Jane Anne Hazell. His paternal grandfather was the Revd John Christopher Atkinson of Danby-in-Cleveland, Yorkshire. Entering Forest School, Walthamstow, Essex, in October 1895, in the following five years he received prizes for mathematics, chemistry, and form work. In 1900 he went to St Thomas's Hospital to study medicine, qualifying in 1906 as MRCS and LRCP, and he then went for a short time to Brompton Hospital and Convalescent Centre. 
Atkinson entered the Royal Navy in 1908 and was recommended by the medical director-general to join as surgeon and helminthologist the 1910 expedition to Antarctica led by Captain Robert Falcon Scott. In 1912 the leadership of the expedition's remnant at Cape Evans devolved upon Atkinson, the sole remaining officer. He initiated and led the search party which found and buried the bodies of Scott, Edward A. Wilson, and H. R. Bowers, retrieving the diaries, drawings, and letters that revealed the epic story of their fate. This scene is depicted in bas-relief on the plinth of the Scott memorial, Plymouth. Atkinson also wrote the epitaph to Captain Oates: 'Hereabouts died a very gallant gentleman...'. 
On 12 August 1915 at Rochford, Essex, Atkinson married Jessie Hamilton Fowler (died July 1928), daughter of Peter Ferguson, salesman. They had no children. During the First World War, Atkinson served with the Royal Naval division at Gallipoli in 1915, and the Royal Marine howitzer brigade in France, 1916-18. Mentioned in dispatches and twice wounded, he was appointed to the DSO in 1918. In September 1918 his ship, HMS 'Glatton', blew up in Dover harbour. Although severely wounded, Atkinson rescued five seamen and was awarded the Albert medal. He was staff surgeon (1913) and surgeon-commander (1918). In 1919 he saw active service in north Russia. Awarded the Chadwick gold medal in 1920, he retired from the navy in 1928, the year he became surgeon-captain. The 'Journal' of the Royal Naval Medical Service published nineteen articles written by Atkinson. 
Physically short and slightly built, Atkinson possessed remarkable attributes. He had a clear scientific mind but was self-effacing, modest, and a man of few words. As a serviceman he was reliable, displaying grit, fearlessness, and devotion to duty, as well as being cheerful and optimistic. During the 1910 Antarctic expedition Scott mentioned Atkinson, Bowers, and L. E. G. Oates as those on whom he particularly relied, describing them as 'treasures'. 
Atkinson married second, in Glasgow on 15 November 1928, Mary Flint (died 1954), daughter of John Hunter, of Glasgow. When he retired from the navy Atkinson joined SS 'City of Sparta' as ship's surgeon and sailed to India. During the return voyage he died in the Mediterranean on 20 February 1929 and was buried at sea. 
Adrienne Reynolds', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37134


Audley, Hugh, earl of Gloucester (c.1291-1347), magnate, was the second son of Sir Hugh Audley ('c'.1267- 'c'.1326) of Stratton Audley, Oxfordshire, by his marriage to Isolt (died in or after 1336), widow of Sir Walter de Balun and daughter of Edmund (I) de Mortimer (died 1304) of Wigmore, Herefordshire. Audley senior was a minor baron, with lands in Gloucestershire as well as Oxfordshire and a long record of service to the crown. This was the route by which his son rose into the higher nobility. Probably introduced to the court by his father, Audley junior first appears as a newly created knight of Edward II's household in November 1311 and thereafter rapidly became a central figure in Edward's circle. In March 1312 he was among the senior household men whom Edward sent to a magnate assembly to give the king's views on matters relating to the ordinances; in November 1313 he received a life grant of escheated lands; and in 1315 he was active on household business, serving, for example, as Edward's envoy to Thomas, earl of Lancaster. Loyalty and ability are likely to have been the qualities that most commended him to his master, who in 1317 rewarded him with one of the greatest prizes at his disposal: marriage on 28 April to Margaret de Clare (1291/2?-1342), widow of the former royal favourite Piers Gaveston, earl of Cornwall, and coheir to the estates of her brother, Gilbert de Clare, eighth earl of Gloucester, who had died at Bannockburn. 
From 1316 to 1319 Audley was one of a small group of courtiers, including Roger Damory and Hugh Despenser the younger, husbands of the other two Gloucester coheiresses, who kept a tight grip on Edward II's patronage and favour, though he was perhaps the least prominent of the three. During this period he contracted to serve Edward for life and from 1317 he was summoned to parliament. The violent opposition to the king's friends of Thomas of Lancaster forced Audley to leave the court in 1318, but he returned to serve in the royal army at the siege of Berwick in September 1319. By this time the acquisitiveness of the younger Despenser was beginning to fracture the unity of the court, and Audley was one of Despenser's first victims. His holdings in south Wales -- the gains of his marriage -- made him vulnerable to Despenser's territorial ambitions in that area, and by May 1320 he had lost control of Gwynllwg and Newport. These and similar provocations led Audley to join other marchers and former courtiers in rebellion, under the leadership of Lancaster, their one-time enemy. Audley's lands were confiscated in April 1321 and in March 1322 he was captured at Boroughbridge, in Yorkshire, where Lancaster's forces were conclusively defeated. 
Between 1322 and 1326 Audley was in prison, escaping execution only through the influence of his wife, Edward's niece and the younger Despenser's sister-in-law. After Edward II's overthrow in 1326 he was restored and he received back a substantial portion of his estates. This did not prevent his joining the revolt of Henry, third earl of Lancaster, against the corrupt government of Queen Isabella and Roger (V) Mortimer, first earl of March, in 1328. In January 1329 he surrendered and was fined $10,000, a sum eventually remitted. 
After the coup that established Edward III on the throne in 1330 he once again became an active royal agent, serving as envoy to France in 1331 and fighting in the Scottish campaigns of the mid-1330s. In March 1337 he was created earl of Gloucester -- a title he owed to his wife's inheritance, to his own services to the crown, and to his popularity with the baronage. For the remainder of his career he continued to serve Edward III, fighting in Scotland, at the siege of Dunbar, in 1337-8, joining Edward in Flanders in 1339, and taking part in the battle of Sluys in 1340 and in Edward's Brittany campaign of 1342. He died on 10 November 1347, leaving only a daughter, Margaret, who married Ralph Stafford, later first earl of Stafford. He was buried among his wife's Clare ancestors at Tonbridge Priory in Kent. In surviving the conspicuous favour of Edward II in order to go on to win that of Edward III he had followed a course unusual enough to suggest both his high abilities and his political dexterity. 


@@@@@


doc= 37135


Auldjo, John (1805-1886), geologist and alpinist, was born on 26 July 1805 in Montreal, the eldest in the family of two sons and one daughter of Alexander Auldjo (died 1821), born in Aberdeen but then a partner in Maitland, Gardner, and Auldjo, merchants, of Montreal, and his wife, Eweretta Jane, daughter of Thomas Richardson of Portsoy, near Banff. She and his infant sister died in 1808. His father retired in 1813 to London, and Auldjo was educated at Atwood's School in Hammersmith, and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he matriculated as a pensioner in 1823 but did not take a degree. He was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1827. His father's death in 1821 left him financially independent. 
In 1827 Auldjo visited Switzerland and, with the assistance of eight local men, climbed to the summit of Mont Blanc. This was only the fourteenth successful ascent, and his account, 'Narrative of an ascent to the summit of Mont Blanc, on the 8th and 9th August, 1827' (1828, 1830, 1856), was a classic of alpine literature, a vivid narrative of the pleasures and perils of mountaineering illustrated by Auldjo's own sketches. Later he lived in Naples, where he was acquainted with the archaeologist and literary socialite Sir William Gell. He made his first visit to Vesuvius in 1831, and published 'Sketches of Vesuvius, with short accounts of its principal eruptions' the following year. The published diary of his visit in 1833 to Greece and Turkey, 'Journal of a visit to Constantinople, and some of the Greek islands, in the spring and summer of 1833' (1835), was dedicated to Gell. 
In the 1840s and 1850s Auldjo lived at Noel House, Kensington, and participated in the scientific, literary, and artistic life of London. He was elected a fellow of the Geological Society (1828) and the Royal Society (1840); he joined the Royal Geographical Society on its foundation in 1830. Financial problems forced him abroad in the late 1850s and he settled at first in Florence, then in Geneva. He was acting British consul in Geneva in 1870-71, and unpaid consul from 1872 until his death. His surviving letters to Edward Bulwer Lytton, first Baron Lytton, his friend for half a century, reveal a warm and enthusiastic personality. 
In 1860, in Paris, Auldjo married Caroline Hayden, daughter of Joseph Pope Hammet. Two daughters were born but one died in infancy. Auldjo died on 6 May 1886 at his home in the rue des Alpes, Geneva, and was buried at the Chatelaine cemetery, Geneva, three days later. 
S. J. Flower', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37136


Ayrton, (Phoebe) Sarah (1854-1923), electrical engineer and suffragist, was born Phoebe Sarah Marks on 28 April 1854 at 6 Queen Street, Portsea, Portsmouth, third child of Alice Theresa (died 1898), seamstress, daughter of Joseph Moss, glass merchant of Portsea, and Levi Marks (died 1861), watchmaker and jeweller of Petworth, Sussex. Levi Marks, whose father was a Polish innkeeper, came to England to escape pogroms; he died as his impoverished family, with six boys, was expecting another child. When Sarah was nine her aunts Marion Hartog and Belle Leo, who ran a school in north-west London with Alphonse Hartog, invited her to live with them to be educated with her cousins. Her mother generously agreed. Sarah learned languages and music in this talented family; her cousin Marcus introduced her to science, and Numa (the first Jewish senior wrangler) to mathematics. Sarah and her family mostly became agnostic, though proud of their Jewish heritage. At sixteen she began teaching in London to support her mother. With Ottilie Blind, who called her Hertha after Swinburne (and the earth goddess Erda), she took the Cambridge University (local) examination for women. She was encouraged by her friends and patrons Barbara Bodichon, artist, women's activist, and co-founder of the new Girton College for women, and George Eliot. Marquis (Marky), as they called Sarah, with her curly black hair and grey-green eyes, was an exemplar for Mirah, heroine of 'Daniel Deronda', as Barbara Bodichon was for 'Romola'. 
Hertha read mathematics at Cambridge from 1877 to 1881, coached by Richard Glazebrook. While at Girton she constructed a sphygmomanometer (pulse recorder), led the choral society, founded the fire brigade, and with Charlotte Scott, Girton's first wrangler, formed a mathematical club. She published problems and solutions in 'Mathematical Questions from the Educational Times' for almost two decades. After her return to London she earned money by teaching and embroidery. She ran a club for working girls and cared for her invalid sister. She invented a line divider, which was sold under her patent. In 1884 she went to Will Ayrton's evening classes in electricity at Finsbury Technical College. 
Hertha and William Edward Ayrton (1847-1908) were married in 1885 and their daughter, Barbara, was born in 1886. Will Ayrton was an electrical engineer and co-founder of the City and Guilds Institute. His first wife, his cousin Matilda Chaplin (1846-1883), was a pioneer woman doctor, with his encouragement; their daughter Edith, who married Israel Zangwill, wrote novels as Edith Ayrton Zangwill; the Zangwills' son, Oliver, was professor of experimental psychology at Cambridge. 
Hertha Ayrton lectured to women on electricity and its domestic potentialities. She took over Ayrton's experiments on the electric arc at South Kensington while he was at the Chicago Electrical Congress in 1893. She traced the hissing, sputtering, and instability to oxidation of the positive carbon. Excluding air, she obtained a steady arc, and demonstrated a linear relationship between arc length, pressure, and potential difference, the Ayrton equation. Observing the image on a screen, she showed that cratering, as the carbon evaporates, determines the potential for a given current and arc length, and improved efficiency by reshaping the electrodes. 
Her analysis and technical advances, described in twelve papers in 'The Electrician' (1895-6), established her reputation, unique for a woman. She demonstrated her experiments at the Royal Society's Conversazione in 1899, and spoke on 'The hissing of the electric arc' at the Institution of Electrical Engineers. The institution elected her a member, the only woman member until 1958. Her lecture 'L'intensite lumineuse de l'arc a courants continus' at the International Electrical Congress in Paris in 1900 helped Marcus Hartog persuade the British Association to allow women on to their committees. John Perry gave her paper on 'The mechanism of the electric arc' at the Royal Society in 1901. Her book 'The Electric Arc' (1902), which became a standard work, included the history from Davy's discovery in 1800 (and a dedication to Barbara Bodichon). She later patented anti-aircraft searchlights, developed for the Admiralty, and arc lamp technology. 
From 1901, when Will Ayrton was convalescing at the seaside in Margate, Kent, she studied the formation of sand ripples and sand bars by wave motions of the water, conducting experiments in the landlady's zinc bath, with soap dishes and baking tins. Back home, in her attic, she produced stationary waves of different wavelengths by rocking glass vessels 4 to 44 inches wide, using permanganate, paint, or metal powder to show eddies and vortices. She reported her work to the Royal Society in 1904 (in person), in 1908, and 1911, and to the British Association and the Physical Society. The mathematical description gave difficulty: it is now known to involve complicated viscous effects and (chaotic) turbulence. After Will Ayrton died in 1908 she moved her laboratory down to the drawing room, as shown in the photograph 'Mrs Ayrton in her Laboratory' (Appleyard, 167-8). Her interest in vortices in water and air inspired the Ayrton fan, or flapper, used in the trenches in the First World War to dispel poison gas. She fought for its acceptance and organized its production, over 100,000 being used on the western front. 
In 1902 John Perry, with distinguished co-signatories, proposed her candidature for the Royal Society, but lawyers pronounced that a married woman, having no standing in law, was ineligible. Such arguments were quashed by the 'Sex Disqualification Removal Act' (1919), but no woman was proposed again until 1944. In 1906, however, she was awarded the society's Hughes medal for her work on the electric arc and on sand ripples. In 1998 she remained the only female recipient of this medal, awarded annually for original discovery in the physical sciences. Armstrong's obituary in 'Nature' exemplifies the opposition to such work by a woman, and elicited a rebuttal. 
Hertha Ayrton, despite recurrent ill health, supported by her extended family, was a stalwart of the women's movement. She chaired the physical science section of the International Congress of Women in London in 1899, and encouraged women in applied science. She supported the militant suffragists, as did her friend Marie Curie, who brought her daughters for summer holidays with her in 1912 and 1913. Hertha marched in all the suffrage processions: in 1911, with 800 women graduates in academic dress (which Cambridge women could not wear until 1948), she was in the science section. In 1912-13 Mrs Pankhurst and others recovering from hunger strike were nursed in Hertha's home, returning to prison when they recovered, under the ''Cat and Mouse Act'' -- the 'Prisoners (Temporary Discharge for Ill-Health) Act' of 1913. Hertha was 'very proud' when her daughter Barbara Bodichon Ayrton Gould (1886-1950) went to prison in 1912. Barbara became Labour member of parliament for Hendon North in 1945; her husband, Gerald Gould (died 1936), was a poet and journalist; their son was the artist Michael Ayrton (1921-1975). 
Hertha Ayrton helped found the International Federation of University Women in 1919 and the National Union of Scientific Workers in 1920. She died of blood poisoning (resulting from an insect bite) on 26 August 1923 at New Cottage, North Lancing, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 37137


Bach, Johann Christian (1735-1782), composer, was born on 5 September 1735 in Leipzig, Saxony, the sixth and youngest son and the eleventh of the thirteen children of Johann Sebastian Bach (1685-1750), composer, and his second wife, Anna Magdalena (1701-1760), daughter of Johann Caspar Wilcke, court trumpeter. He was probably educated at the Thomasschule, Leipzig, where his father was responsible for his musical studies as 'Kantor' at St Thomas's Church and civic director of music. After J. S. Bach's death in 1750, Johann Christian moved to Berlin, where his half-brother Carl Philipp Emanuel assumed responsibility for his welfare and education. His first surviving large-scale compositions, including at least five keyboard concertos, date from his years in Berlin, where he also gained renown as a harpsichordist. 
In 1755 Bach made a decisive break with the inward-looking Lutheran traditions of his forebears by travelling to Italy, possibly in the company of an Italian lady singer, where he took counterpoint lessons with Padre Martini in Bologna, composed several Roman Catholic church works (he was received into the Roman Catholic church about 1760), and secured a Milanese patron, Count Agostino Litta, in whose house he lived from before 1757 and through whose efforts he became 'second organist' at Milan Cathedral in 1760. But it was in the opera house, not the organ loft, that he found his true metier. The success of his three operas for Italy, 'Artaserse' (1760), 'Catone in Utica' (1761), and 'Alessandro nell' Indie' (1762), prompted an invitation to compose two works for the King's Theatre, London, and in 1762 Bach travelled to London, where he spent the remaining twenty years of his life as the dominant musical figure in the city, thereby earning the sobriquet 'the London Bach'. 
By February 1764 Bach was music master to Queen Charlotte. His duties entailed accompanying the amateur music-making of the king and queen, teaching the harpsichord to the royal family, and organizing the queen's chamber music concerts. For the King's Theatre he composed five Italian operas, of which the first, 'Orione' (1763), and the last, 'La clemenza di Scipione' (1778), were perhaps the most successful, and an oratorio 'Gioas, re di Giuda' (1770). Bach gave his first concert with his compatriot Carl Friedrich Abel in 1764 and in 1765 inaugurated the series of subscription concerts that eventually bore their names. Between 1765 and 1767 these were held at Carlisle House, Soho Square, and were organized by the impresario Teresa Cornelys. From January 1768 Bach and Abel managed the concerts themselves at Almack's assembly rooms in King Street, St James's. The Bach-Abel concerts moved in 1775 to the lavish Hanover Square rooms, specially built for the purpose with the financial assistance of Giovanni Gallini. At these concerts many of Bach's symphonies, concertos, cantatas, chamber works, and keyboard sonatas were given their first performances. 
As a composer and a soloist Bach did much to champion the pianoforte, an instrument then being developed in London by German immigrant craftsmen: the sonatas op. 5 are apparently the first works published in England to specify the piano on the title-page, and Bach is credited with performing the first solo on the instrument in public in London in 1768. The composer visited France, Germany, and Italy on a number of occasions, writing operas to be performed in Mannheim and Paris. He was acquainted with many great men of his age, including Sir Joshua Reynolds, John Zoffany, Thomas Gainsborough (who painted his portrait), Charles Burney, Denis Diderot, and Leopold and Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. On the Mozarts' visit to London in 1764-5 Bach is reputed to have performed duets with the eight-year-old composer. This friendship with young Mozart, who was much influenced by Bach's music, was renewed at another meeting in Paris in 1778. 
In the mid-1770s (the exact date is unknown) Bach married Cecilia Grassi, an Italian singer then past her prime. They had no children. Bach's last years were clouded by financial worries caused by declining receipts and heavy expenditure on the Hanover Square concerts. He died, leaving $4000 of debts, on 1 January 1782, presumably at the house in Paddington to which he had moved in November 1781, and was buried on 6 January 1782 in St Pancras's churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 37138


Bachiler, John (d. 1674), clergyman and ejected minister, of parents who are unknown, was admitted to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1632 as coming from Oxfordshire. He graduated BA in 1636 and proceeded MA in 1639. In 1642 he was appointed by the House of Commons to give a weekly lecture at Lewisham, Kent, but was obstructed by the vicar and some of the local inhabitants. Other parishioners successfully petitioned the House of Lords in 1643 to confirm his appointment. Thomas Edwards later claimed that Bachiler was 'no Minister' (Edwards, 1.139). 
Under the 1643 ordinance to control printing Bachiler was appointed one of the twelve divines empowered to license books of divinity. His licence appears at the beginning of a number of works. He did not restrict himself merely to giving his assent to publication, but added his comments, as, for example, on 'Two Treatises... Concerning Infant Baptism' (1645) by John Tombes, where he acknowledged that the author was a godly man 'and of the Presbyterian judgement, though I am not of opinion with him' and he agreed to the publication of these treatises to encourage further contributions to the debate on infant baptism. Licensing 'The Smoke in the Temple' (1645) by John Saltmarsh, a work advocating religious toleration, he described the book as 'this way of Peace and Reconciliation'. It was this which incensed presbyterians and led to complaints about him in the Westminster assembly. To Thomas Edwards, Bachiler was: 'Licenser-Generall of the Sectaries Books... who hath been a Man-midwife to bring forth more monsters begotten by the Divell, and borne of the Sectaries within this three last years then ever were brought into the light in England by all the former Licensers... for four score years. (Edwards, 3.102)' Bachiler was 'such a desperate Licenser' that: 'if the Devill himselfe should make a book, and give it the Title, A plea for liberty of conscience... he would license it, and... set before it the commendations of 'A usefull Treatise', of 'A Sweet and Excellent Booke', making for love and peace between brethren; or some such discourse. (Edwards, 3.104-5)' Several works licensed by Bachiler were attacks on Edwards himself, including two by William Walwyn and Thomas Webbe's 'Mr Edwards Pen No Slander' (1646). The latter was one of the texts which, according to Edwards, Bachiler, 'an Independent', had tampered with to strengthen sectarian and Independent positions against the arguments of the presbyterians (Edwards, 2.138). Bachiler seems to have remained a licenser until 1647, when a new printing ordinance came into force. The following year he published a work of his own, 'Golden Sands', extolling the riches of free grace for the saints. 
Between 1643 and 1645 Bachiler served in the parliamentarian army as chaplain to Colonel Valentine Walton, governor of King's Lynn. He then moved to Windsor as chaplain to Colonel Whichcote, governor of Windsor Castle. Here he encountered Charles I's young daughter Elizabeth, to whom he seems to have been some kind of chaplain and with whose virtues he was much taken. He stayed on as a civilian minister, preaching to both prisoners and garrison at Windsor, having in September 1647 become a fellow of Eton College. On 21 November 1648 he married Abigail Perwich ('bap'. 1631, died 1674) at St John's, Hackney, Middlesex. In 1657 he was nominated an assistant to the Berkshire commission of ejectors. In 1658 he was appointed vicar of Datchet, Buckinghamshire, where the parishioners complained that he was an absentee, but he was exonerated by the trustees for the maintenance of preaching ministers. He lost all his positions in 1660. 
After the Restoration, Bachiler took pains to dissociate himself from the religious radicals, subscribing both to a declaration against the Fifth Monarchist Thomas Venner in 1661, and in 1666 taking the Oxford oath, abhorring armed resistance to the king. At some point he moved to Hackney and became involved with the school kept by Mrs Perwich in the house of his father-in-law, Robert Perwich. He wrote a defence of the school and several volumes of religious queries, simple guides to religion, partly aimed against the Quakers, in the form of question and answer. He was buried in Hackney on 23 September 1674. By his will, made on 24 August and proved by his widow on 28 September, he left his estate to her, to be divided after her death (which occurred before the end of the year) between his nephews and nieces. 
Anne Laurence', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37139


Baddam, Benjamin (c.1693-1740?), printer and compiler of the Memoirs of the Royal Society, was the eldest of three children of Benjamin Baddam (1670-1700/01), free of the Glaziers' Company in 1692, who married Elizabeth Palmer (1672-1701x16), daughter of John Palmer, a dyer, at St Nicholas Cole Abbey in July 1692. Apprenticed (as Benjamin Maddam) on 1 May 1710 to Benjamin Harris, a well-known London printer and bookseller, he obtained his freedom as a citizen and Stationer of London on 4 August 1718, inheriting considerable London property from his grandfather John Baddam (died 1717), a dyer, in Spitalfields and St Dunstan and All Saints, Stepney. By 1720 he was living in Blue Anchor Alley, Wellclose Square, where he insured his goods and merchandise against fire for $500. From this address Baddam printed two publications in 1720 (partnered in the first by Moses Carter): 'Crambo's Elopement, or, The Austere Poetaster's Ramble', in imitation of John Wilmot, second earl of Rochester; and 'The Protestant Account of the Burning of London', as an 'antidote' to a tract absolving papists from complicity in the great fire of London. In July 1723 Baddam purchased printed letters from the estate of John Matthews, and Samuel Negus listed him that year as a high-flying Fleet Street printer (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 1.304). However, in November the Stationers' Company filed a bill in chancery against Benjamin Baddam, of Ratcliff Highway, near Shadwell (and Wellclose Square, Stepney), for printing, publishing, or selling 'severall Thousands of Primmers and severall Thousands of the 'Psalms' of David in English metre' (TNA: PRO, C11/2538/56), thereby flouting its royal monopoly. Despite an injunction against him, as the master reported to a meeting of the court of assistants at Stationers' Hall on 3 November 1723, Baddam intended to 'Controvert the Validity of the Companys Letters Patent' (court book of the Stationers' Company, 162). In February 1724 Baddam agreed to accept the company's terms, but refused to pay its legal costs; instead, and in return for an annual life allowance of $50, he proposed revealing 'a Method which if followed would put it out of the power of any person to clandestinely print any of the Companys copys for the future' (ibid., 166). Baddam's wife attended a court meeting on his behalf in October 1724. The outcome of the case is not clear. 
During 1732 Baddam printed in Fleet Street a subscribed folio edition of Le Stourgeon's 'Compleat Universal History of the Several Empire... throughout the Known World', illustrated with maps by Henry Wilson and reprinted, with a new title-page, in 1738. Describing himself as a former pupil of J. T. Desaguliers, he publicized in the 'Daily Advertiser' three courses of public lectures covering the full range of experimental philosophy which he gave at the London Coffee House in Ludgate Hill between 11 October and 30 December 1732, alternating with Abraham Chovet, a pioneering Huguenot anatomy lecturer who was appointed demonstrator to the Company of Barber-Surgeons in 1734. It was from Fleet Street, possibly in January 1733, that Baddam printed a trade advertisement for 'Curiosities of all sorts, in pneumatics, hydrostatics, mechanics, &c., viz. air-pumps or pneumatical engines', recently improved by Desaguliers and other natural philosophers, as well as barometers and thermometers recommended by the Royal Society, which were made and sold by Rees Williams in the Strand. From January to February 1733 he also worked briefly as a journeyman compositor in the famous Bowyer printing house. 
Baddam's experience qualified him admirably for his most ambitious known project -- an abridgement of the Royal Society's 'Philosophical Transactions'. On 12 October 1738, as B. B. Philo Physiologiae, he issued proposals in the 'Daily Advertiser' for subscriptions to this work, with details available from four well-established scientific instrument makers. It was then printed for him by Godfrey Smith in ten volumes, with 131 folding plates drawn by G. Smith and engraved by James Hulett, between 1738 and 1744, under the title 'Memoirs of the Royal Society, being a new abridgment of the Philosophical Transactions for the years 1665 to 1735'. A second edition, extending to 1740, was published in 1745 for John Nourse (vols. 4-10 are reprinted from the original edition, with cancel title-pages). Previous abridgements of the 'Philosophical Transactions' had been carried out on a piecemeal basis, whereas Baddam's version provided continuity and uniformity for the first time (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 1.482-3). The title of the 'Memoirs' emphasized their 'general Use to the Publick, and worthy the Perusal of all Mathematicians, Artificers, Tradesmen, &c. for their Improvement, in various Branches of Business'. A supplementary volume of mathematical tracts, requested by the majority of the subscribers and announced at the end of the fourth volume, was never implemented. Baddam's preface, which explains his own approach, provides an informative 'short and succinct Narrative of the Royal Society and their 'Transactions''. A somewhat crudely drawn frontispiece depicts several scientific instruments, such as Boyle's air-pump and a Marshall-type microscope, as used by Robert Hooke, together with other objects from the Royal Society's collections. As Baddam indicates, the French were translating the 'Philosophical Transactions' simultaneously (Francois de Bremond, and then Pierre Demours, for the period from 1731 to 1740). His own competent and useful abridgement served its purpose well for nearly seventy years. 
Baddam's death -- and his wife's -- is obscure, but a Benjamin Baddam from Fetter Lane was buried at St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street, on 23 November 1740. 


@@@@@


doc= 37140


Badlesmere, Sir Bartholomew (c.1275-1322), soldier and administrator, was the son and heir of Guncelin of Badlesmere (died 1301), of Badlesmere, Kent, and an unknown mother. Like his father, who was a royal banneret and justice of Chester from 1274 to 1281, Badlesmere made his way in the world through service to the crown. First summoned to serve in Gascony in 1294, he accompanied Edward I to Flanders in 1297, fought at Falkirk in 1298, and by 1299 was one of the king's household knights. His representing Kent in the Carlisle parliament of 1307 was a mark of corresponding importance in his own 'pays'. Edward II's accession later that year accelerated his rise. He was made constable of Bristol Castle in August 1307, and began to receive numerous royal grants. Only in 1310-12, during the prolonged crisis caused by the opposition of the reforming ordainers to the king's favourite, Piers Gaveston, did his loyalties waver. He was among those barons who petitioned Edward for reform in March 1310, and in 1312 he was ordered to surrender Bristol Castle, probably the sign of a more open opposition. But after Gaveston's execution in June 1312 he returned to a more comfortable position at the king's side. 
By this time Badlesmere had a firm place in baronial society. His early connections had been with Henry de Lacy, fifth earl of Lincoln (died 1311), whose retainer he was by October 1300, and with the northern magnate Robert Clifford, lord of Westmorland (died 1314), with whom he served in Edward I's later Scottish campaigns. He had a closer association with Gilbert de Clare, eighth earl of Gloucester (died 1314), perhaps resulting from his marriage, before 30 June 1308, to Gloucester's cousin, Margaret de Umfraville, 'nee' de Clare, the widow of the eldest son of the earl of Angus. As Gloucester's knight he earned an ignominious name at Bannockburn in 1314 when he left his lord to be killed in the melee. 
Badlesmere was by now one of the king's chief councillors and lieutenants. Together with Aymer de Valence, earl of Pembroke (died 1324), often his partner in these years, he led an expedition to the north in 1315; in 1316 he took a major role in the suppression of the Welsh rising of Llewelyn Bren (Llywelyn ap Rhys), and also of the disturbances that broke out in that year at Bristol, which constituted a revolt by the townsmen against Badlesmere himself. In the same year he was among the committee of bishops and magnates appointed to reform the royal household. In September 1316 Edward retained him for a very large fee in return for the promise of his service with a commensurately large retinue; and shortly afterwards he and Pembroke set off for the papal curia on a mission that had the repeal of the ordinances as one of its objectives. 
All these activities point to Badlesmere's standing at Edward's court. He was, however, on the court's moderate wing. In 1317 he and Pembroke combined to restrain the most avaricious of the courtiers, Roger Damory (died 1322), in order to placate the court's leading opponent, Thomas, earl of Lancaster (died 1322); and he went on to play a part in the negotiations with Lancaster that culminated in the treaty of Leake in 1318. But his appointment as steward of the royal household in November 1318 was both a snub to Lancaster, who claimed the right of appointment, and a mark of his growing association with Hugh Despenser the younger (died 1326), the chamberlain of the household and the rising star at court. He remained very close to Edward, particularly as the king's negotiator with the Scots, until June 1321, when, at Sherburn in Yorkshire, he deserted to the baronial party which was forming against the two Despensers. Resentment at the younger Despenser's dominance at court, and his own links with the marchers who formed the core of the opposition -- his daughter Elizabeth married the son and heir of Roger (IV) Mortimer, lord of Wigmore (died 1326), in 1316 -- may account for this dramatic change of sides. But although Badlesmere even engaged in forgery in his efforts to discredit the younger Despenser, the fabrication was detected and he achieved nothing. Lancaster, the opposition's leader, refused to receive him and Badlesmere returned to Kent. There his wife's exclusion of Queen Isabella from Leeds Castle in October 1321 inaugurated the short and violent civil war that ended with Lancaster's defeat at Boroughbridge on 16-17 March 1322. Badlesmere fought with the rebels at Boroughbridge, but escaped, only to be captured and subsequently hanged and decapitated in Canterbury on 14 April 1322. 
Badlesmere left one son, Giles (1314-1338), and four daughters. Through the favour of the king and of the earl of Gloucester he had built up a large estate in Kent and elsewhere: a royal grant of 1315 enumerates lands in forty-six places spread through eight counties. To judge by his employment, he was an able man, who owed his promotion to both his diplomatic and military skills and his energetic acquisitiveness. That such a natural loyalist should have met a traitor's end reflects all Edward II's failings as a political manager. 
J. R. Maddicott', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37141


Bailey, Sir Donald Coleman (1901-1985), civil engineer, was born in Rotherham, Yorkshire, on 15 September 1901, the only child of Joseph Henry Bailey, commercial cashier, and his wife, Caroline Coleman. After attending Rotherham grammar school and the Leys School, Cambridge, Bailey went to Sheffield University, where he obtained a BEng in 1923. He was employed by Rowntree & Co. of York, the civil engineer's department at the London, Midland, and Scottish Railway, and the city engineer's department in Sheffield before joining the War Office in 1928 as civil engineering designer at the Military Engineering Experimental Establishment in Christchurch. 
Among the unit's tasks was the development of improved transportable bridges for the increasingly mechanized army. In 1936 Bailey conceived the idea of a simple bridge structure based on standard rectangular trussed welded units (10 ft x 5 ft) bolted together in combinations to suit the job in hand. Each unit could be lifted by six men and fitted a standard 3 ton lorry. The panels were built up from small components, enabling work to be subcontracted to a large number of small engineering firms without disrupting heavy engineering production. The War Office displayed no interest, but Bailey persevered with detailed design in his own time. It was not until February 1941, after the tubular-girder design of Charles Inglis had failed under test (as predicted by Bailey), that he was ordered to design a new, all-purpose bridge. Bailey's private design work enabled the first prototype to be ready by 5 May, with production bridges reaching the army in December 1941. Lieutenant-General Sir Giffard Le Q. Martel declared that the Bailey bridge doubled the value of allied armoured and mechanized units. Over two thousand of the bridges were erected in north-west Europe between June 1944 and May 1945 and the design was also used extensively in Italy and the Far East. After the war both second-hand and new bridge panels found a ready civilian market and many Bailey bridges remained in use around the world. 
Bailey was appointed OBE in 1944 and knighted in 1946. In 1946 he was promoted to senior principal scientific officer and became assistant director of the Military Engineering Experimental Establishment, subsequently becoming director. The Royal Commission on Awards to Inventors awarded him $12,000 in 1948 for his work on the bridge. He became deputy chief scientific officer, Ministry of Supply, in 1952. Bailey served on a number of technical committees, giving his name to the Bailey committee on house interiors (1952-3). He was appointed dean of the Royal Military College of Science at Shrivenham in 1962, and exerted a 'benign influence on the modern scientist-soldier' until his retirement in 1966. He was an honorary DEng (Sheffield, 1946), a commander of the order of Orange Nassau, a fellow of the Institution of Structural Engineers, a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers, and an honorary member of the Institution of Royal Engineers. 
Bailey's quiet, unassuming exterior hid great determination and considerable inventive ability, which he applied not only to bridges but to a wide range of other technical equipment. It was a source of satisfaction to him that his bridges found as ready a use in the civilian market as they had in the military. In 1933 Bailey married Phyllis Amy (died 1971), daughter of Charles Frederick Andrew, a retired farmer, of Wick, Bournemouth. They had one son, Richard Henry. In 1979 Bailey married Mildred Stacey ('b'. 1919/20), his housekeeper, a widow, the daughter of Herbert William Crees, licensed victualler. Bailey, whose home was at 9 Stour Way, Christchurch, died on 5 May 1985 at St Leonards Hospital near Bournemouth, survived by his second wife. 
A. P. Munford', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37142


Baker, Robert (1803-1880), surgeon and factory inspector, was born on 15 August 1803 in York, the second son of John Baker, druggist, of High Ousegate, York, and his wife, Hannah. His career shows many parallels with that of the better-known Charles Turner Thackrah, but evidence of association is lacking. In March 1818 Baker was apprenticed to William Pearson for five years, Pearson being surgeon to the Hull General (later Royal) Infirmary. Baker's medical education was continued at Guy's Hospital, London. He passed the Society of Apothecaries' qualifying examination in 1823, apparently while under age, and then gained membership of the Royal College of Surgeons. He appears on the college registers only from 1828 to 1843. 
Baker's first appointment was in Leeds, as a poor-law surgeon, which he later described as 'an ordeal all the medical men of the town go through as the high road to better practice'. The direction of Baker's career was determined by the cholera epidemic of 1831-2. Baker's sanitary reports on the cholera in Tyneside, and on housing and environmental conditions in Leeds, included a use of maps which brought him to wider notice. On his own account he abandoned medical practice for factory work as a result of contracting cholera in the course of his poor-law duties. In the early 1830s he was employed as factory surgeon to the mill of Hindes and Derham and later claimed credit for the half-time education system for child factory workers whose health appeared precarious. 
On 22 October 1834 Baker was appointed a 'superintendent' (equivalent to sub-inspector) according to the 'Factory Act' of 1833. By 1837 he had ceased acting as a certifying surgeon, which involved some conflict of interest. He was still the only factory inspector with medical qualifications at the time of the famous sanitary report of 1842 by Edwin Chadwick, to which Baker was a contributor. In spite of local support he was not promoted until 15 June 1858. In 1861 he became, with his younger colleague Alexander Redgrave, one of two inspectors covering the British Isles following the retirement of John Kincaid. Baker supervised the north-west, the midlands, the west country, Wales, and northern Ireland. In this capacity he submitted biannual reports and advised on legislation, which was elaborated and then codified by the 'Factories Act' of 1878. He retired in the same year and was appointed CB. 
Baker's publications were occasional. He was most consistent in his concern for working children and in his advocacy of some form of comprehensive medical supervision of all factories. In his later career he was hard-working and respected, especially by those in whose interests he was acting, but not innovative, as he had been during the heroic period of sanitary reform. The medical qualifications which at first gave him distinction tended later to restrict his outlook on what might be achieved in the field of occupational health. 
Baker had a wife, Maria, who died in 1903. They had a numerous family, of whom four sons and four daughters were living in 1878. Baker died at home at Milverton Hill near Leamington Spa on 6 February 1880. 
Margaret Pelling', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37143


Bald, William (1789/90-1857), surveyor and civil engineer, was born in Burntisland, Fife, and educated at Burntisland and in Edinburgh before becoming apprenticed to the eminent Scottish land surveyor, John Ainslie. From 1803 onwards he was employed on very extensive estate surveys throughout Scotland, and his maps were used by Aaron Arrowsmith for his own map of Scotland. While still in his teens, and with an audacity that marked his whole career, he made himself known to the officers conducting the Ordnance Survey of Great Britain, who recommended him to an MP for co. Mayo, Ireland, as capable of providing the Mayo grand jury with an accurate county map. (Grand juries were the principal road-making authorities and were empowered to commission such county surveys.) Bald started work in 1809 and soon secured other appointments in Mayo, first as one of the engineers employed by the government to survey and map the bogs of Ireland, and later as a road engineer. His survey of the county, completed in 1817 and published in 1830, was the most ambitious of all the Irish grand jury maps, paying special attention to trigonometrical accuracy and to the correct representation of relief and altitude. Bald planned to follow it with other county surveys of similar quality, but this ambition was frustrated when the Ordnance Survey was directed to produce its own map of Ireland in 1824, and henceforth he devoted his energies to civil engineering, a profession for which he further equipped himself by a period of renewed study and visits to places of scientific interest abroad. 
After 1832 Bald's career becomes a catalogue of the roads, harbours, river navigations, canals, and railways designed by himself or with his advice. His first and most spectacular project in this period was the new Antrim coast road of 1832-7, which involved much blasting and tunnelling in the cliffs between Larne and Ballycastle. Another road design of the same period, which included Ireland's first suspension bridge, was from Kenmare to Bantry, in the south-west. In less difficult country, such as the Irish midlands, he was an advocate of railways, and later reproached the government's commission on this subject with the inadequacy of the network it proposed for Ireland. His interest in tidal rivers began with work on the River Boyne and culminated in 1839 with re-employment in his native country as engineer to the Clyde River Trust, a post from which he was dismissed six years later after criticizing the trustees in a Glasgow newspaper. This experience does not seem to have damaged his career, and his last recorded assignment was in the same area, reporting in 1854 on the navigational implications of the 'Glasgow Waterworks Bill'. 
Bald was a prolific and articulate writer and speaker on scientific topics, the way in which science might promote economic development, and the training of civil engineers. Although he was never honoured by the government, he was elected to several learned societies, including the Royal Geological Society, the Royal Irish Academy, the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and the Societe de Geographie de Paris, to the last of which he had exhibited his Mayo map while living in Paris in the late 1820s. He was thrice married (his third wife's name was Margaret) and had nine children, one of whom, Charles ('b'. 1812/13), worked as a surveyor on his father's projects, as did William Bald, junior, probably also a son. He died on 26 March 1857 at 14 Werrington Street, Oakley Square, St Pancras, London, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 37144


Baldwin, Thomas (c.1750-1820), architect and property developer, of unknown parentage, was mainly active in Bath, although not born there. He married Elizabeth, daughter of John Chapman, alderman of the city, on 15 September 1779, at St James's Church. They had at least one daughter and one son. He began his career as clerk to the Palladian local architect Thomas Warr Atwood, who brought him into the firm as someone familiar with London fashion, able to handle Robert Adam's refined but shallow surface detail. In 1775 Atwood was awarded the contract to build the city's new guildhall, but his sudden death in November that year did not interrupt his clerk's assimilation into the Bath building scene. Over the next eleven months Baldwin's designs, first for the east front, then for the west or entrance front, and finally for a suite of banquet room and council chamber in a style indistinguishable from that of the Adam brothers, were accepted by the council. In the same year, 1776, Baldwin was appointed city architect and surveyor. From this base he mounted a successful practice, executing public works and speculative building on the grandest scale, only halted by his dismissal from his official positions for false accounting and his subsequent bankruptcy in 1796. 
Baldwin was master of two related styles. His public buildings were conceived in a robust stylar Palladian, but display the refined ornaments of neo-classicism and command the city centre with both authority and elegance. In 1786 he built the Cross Bath with a north facade of subtle serpentine curves and refined neo-classical forms. This confirmed his connection with the city's hot springs: he was made inspector of the baths in 1787 and in 1790 he was ordered to begin the west front of the Great Pump Room with its exquisitely ornamented twin colonnades. 
For his speculative housing Baldwin devised shallow elevations which gave an impression of expensive surface detail but were relatively cheap to construct: Northumberland Buildings ('c'.1788) was his first experiment in this style. After 1788 Baldwin took over the development of the Bathwick estate, a project conceived on the most ambitious scale: Great Pulteney Street alone is 1100 feet long and 100 feet wide, although the thin pilasters and applied pediments of Bathwick's terraces prevent them from ranking alongside the Royal Crescent and the King's Circus as works of European significance. Bath Street, which he was building in the old centre after 1791, is probably his finest work, with sweeping quadrant arms and a covered promenade of Ionic columns. Unfortunately, its creation opened up an unsatisfactory vista to the almost blank east wall of Baldwin's earlier Cross Bath. At the same time suspicions were growing over his handling of council funds. Before his disgrace and dismissal, he had prepared designs for the north front of the Pump Room, overlooking the abbey churchyard. This was to have had a projecting Corinthian portico, but John Palmer who succeeded him, completed the north front with an engaged portico. Palmer also rebuilt the Cross Bath, re-siting the serpentine north facade to face east down the new Bath Street. 
Baldwin continued to work after his bankruptcy, rebuilding Hafod in Cardiganshire for Thomas Johnes in 1807 and designing the town hall in Devizes, Wiltshire (1806-8). He died at 3 Harington Place, Bath, on 7 March 1820, and was buried in St Michael's Church there. 


@@@@@


doc= 37145


Balleny, John (b. c.1770, d. in or after 1842), merchant navy officer and Antarctic discoverer, was born 'c'.1770 but nothing is known about his early life and education. He may have been a Londoner, brought up in the Newcastle coal trade. From 1798, when he was living in the parish of St George-in-the-East, London, he is occasionally recorded in the coasting, home, and foreign trades as master of various vessels. 
In 1838 Messrs C., H., and G. Enderby, of London, managing owners for a joint venture, sent the schooner 'Eliza Scott' and the cutter 'Sabrina' on a commercial voyage of discovery, hoping to find new lands and sealing grounds. At the last moment Balleny was brought out of retirement and appointed master of the 'Eliza Scott', which was not a good sea boat. Some scientific instruments were lent by the hydrographer John Washington for the making of barometrical observations. Balleny sailed from the Thames on 14 July 1838, sighted Amsterdam Island, and reached Chalky Bay, New Zealand, on 3 December. At Campbell Island on 7 January 1839 he met John Biscoe, who was on a similar search for land in the Antarctic. 
At 11.30 a.m. on 9 February 1839, north of the Ross Sea, Balleny sighted land in lat. 66-7 degree S, long. 162-3 degree E. This was a group of five islands, which he called the Balleny Islands. Captain Freeman of the 'Sabrina' landed briefly, but there was no suitable place for a party to land and explore further. The striking point was Balleny's accuracy in navigation, for after days of dead reckoning, his latitude and longitude were in error by no more than 5 miles, despite difficulties of navigation in those waters: this suggests that he was an experienced sailor. 
Sailing westwards, on 2 March 1839, in lat. 64 degree 58' S, long. 121 degree 08'-122 degree 44 E, Balleny charted 'Sabrina Land', which does not in fact exist. He may have seen the continental ice cap, raised by mirage. The 'Sabrina' was lost on 24 or 25 March 1839 but Balleny returned to Britain on 18 September, just as Captain James Clark Ross was leaving for Antarctic exploration. Balleny gave Ross a copy of his chart and extracts from his logbook. When Ross reached that area, he charted the islands as a separate group, the Russell Islands. Balleny's barometrical observations had had to be abandoned after difficulties with instruments. Neither was the voyage a commercial success. Profits from the sealskins he brought back covered no more than a fraction of the expedition's cost, although it seems likely that Charles Enderby, a keen geographer and the main organizer of the venture, never envisaged that it would bring commercial gain. However, its geographical results were notable. A report of Balleny's voyage was made to the Royal Geographical Society by Charles Enderby in 1839 and published in the society's journal in the same year. 
In 1840-41 Balleny was master of the new barque 'Taglioni' on its voyage to Calcutta, and in 1842 to Australia. He seems to have died about this date, for there is no further record of him. 


@@@@@


doc= 37146


Ballinger, Sir John (1860-1933), librarian, was born in Pontnewynydd, Monmouthshire, on 12 May 1860, the younger son and second of four children of Henry Ballinger of Whitchurch, Herefordshire, a metallurgical engineer, and his wife, Jane Williams (1827-1896) of Llanrumney. His father died in 1866. He was educated at Canton School, Cardiff, and privately until 1875, when he was apprenticed at Cardiff Free Library. In 1880 Ballinger was appointed librarian at Doncaster. Before returning to Cardiff as chief librarian in 1884 he developed journalistic skills, contributing a series 'About books' to the 'Doncaster Chronicle' between 1880 and 1884. In 1888 he married Amy, daughter of Captain David Boughton, master mariner, of Cardiff. They had two sons and a daughter. 
Cardiff's policy of providing school libraries, inaugurated in 1899, and children's reading-halls in branch libraries, evidenced the practice of principles advocated by Ballinger in a stream of papers and pamphlets urging their educational function. Children's literature became an abiding interest. 'Books for Village Libraries' (with Frank Burgoyne, 1895) and articles on library planning and administration, foreshadowing 'The Rate Limit and the Future of Public Libraries' (1902) and 'Library Politics: a Sequel' (1905), reinforced Ballinger's many dynamic contributions to the public libraries movement. 
Although Ballinger knew little Welsh, he made a name as a bibliographer by publishing the monumental 'Catalogue of Printed Literature in the Welsh Department of Cardiff Free Library' (1898), articles on Vicar Prichard of Llandovery (1899) and on the Trefeca printing press (1905), and 'The Bible in Wales' (1906), all with the assistance of James Ifano Jones. Bibliography and acquisitions of valuable collections of Welsh books and manuscripts for Cardiff led to his appointment in 1908 as first librarian of the National Library of Wales at Aberystwyth, which was opened in 1909. 
There Ballinger's reputation as an administrator and expository bibliographer increased with the publication of reports and papers on the library and its educational role, and with his contributions to the south Wales press, the journal of the Welsh Bibliographical Society, which he served as treasurer (1910-24), and 'Y Cymmrodor'. He pioneered the historiographic use of ephemera in 'Gleanings from a Printer's File' (1928). Assisted by William Llewellyn Davies and other Welsh scholars, he prepared new editions of 'The History of the Gwydir Family' (1927), and 'Basilikon Doron' (1604), and four seventeenth-century Welsh religious books for the University of Wales press board, on which he served from 1922 until 1930. He co-directed, then directed, the Library Association's summer schools at Aberystwyth from 1917 until 1929. 
Ballinger was awarded an honorary MA by the University of Wales in 1909 and he was appointed CBE in 1920. He served as president of the Library Association (1922-3), was elected an honorary fellow of the association in 1929, and, just before he retired, was knighted in 1930. In 1932 the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion awarded him its medal for services to Wales in the field of Celtic bibliography. In private an autocrat, Ballinger was popular with the public and its political representatives, whom he impressed with his authority, journalism, and the exhibitions he organized; but, sadly, his lack of humour and austere sense of mission alienated many of his associates and he intimidated his subordinates. 
Until he died at Hawarden, Flintshire, where he lived, on 8 January 1933 Ballinger helped organize the St Deiniol's Library of Henry, Baron Gladstone of Hawarden. He was buried at St Deiniol's, Hawarden, and was survived by his wife. 
M. A. Bloomfield', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37148


Barber, John (bap. 1675, d. 1741), printer and local politician, was born at Gray's Inn Lane, London, in the parish of St Andrew's, Holborn. He was baptized at St Andrew's on 11 April 1675. His father, Morgan Barber, had been a journeyman barber-surgeon to Benjamin Tomlinson, whose widow, Mary, he subsequently married; John was the only surviving child of the marriage. With the help of his godfather Elkanah Settle, the 'City Poet', John was sent to a school in Hampstead. On 6 May 1689 Settle apprenticed him to George Larkin, a printer in Bishopsgate. Barber served most of his time, however, with Mrs Hannah Clarke, a widow who continued her husband's printing business at Thames Street. Barber was freed of the Stationers' Company on 6 June 1696. 
Barber became a manager for Mrs Clarke before setting up his own business in 1700. His business prospered, and in 1705 he became a liveryman of the Stationers' Company, but his rise to prominence in printing circles was attributable to his contacts with the tory party. The printer of 'The Examiner', he became a friend of Jonathan Swift and Henry St John, later first Viscount Bolingbroke, and the lover of Mrs Delarivier Manley, with whom he lived from 1714 onwards. When the tories achieved power in 1710 Barber landed some lucrative contracts. In 1711 he became the official printer of the 'London Gazette' and the South Sea Company. Two years later he obtained a reversion to the office of the queen's printer. 
Although Barber found himself in the political wilderness with the tories' fall from power after the death of Queen Anne in 1714, he remained loyal to his friends and true to his tory principles. In 1715 he was called 'Tyrant' by the duke of Ormond in a letter to Swift, a nickname that proved enduring (Rivington, 71). In 1720 he speculated successfully in South Sea stock, making an apparent profit of $30,000, and this enabled him to purchase a coat of arms, an estate in East Sheen, and a town house at Queen Square, London, and to consider retiring from business. In the same year a former servant of Mrs Manley's, Sarah Dovekin or Duffkin ('bap'. 1699, died 1758) replaced Manley in Barber's affections. 
Barber's independent fortune also enabled him to focus his energies on civic politics. Already a common councilman for Queenhithe (since 1711) and a well-known opponent of the great whig financiers who dominated the City's upper court, he became alderman for the tory ward of Castle Baynard in 1722 and a leading City critic of Sir Robert Walpole. In 1722 he was implicated in the Atterbury plot (an attempt to restore James Stuart to the throne) following Barber's departure in April for Rome bearing $50,000 in bills of exchange. Never formally accused or punished for this, he was nevertheless unable to return to England until August 1724. Once back in London, he opposed the 'City Elections Act' of 1725 and as sheriff (1729-30) facilitated the acquittal of Richard Franklin, the printer of 'The Craftsman', who had been prosecuted by the government for seditious libel. As lord mayor (1732-3) he co-ordinated the City's opposition to Walpole's 'Excise Bill' in 1733, and vigorously defended the raucous jubilation that accompanied its withdrawal from the Commons. 
Barber's defence of the City's political liberties and trading interests made him very popular in London circles. Even so, he was narrowly defeated in the City parliamentary election of 1734 and failed to make the opposition slate in 1740-41. On both occasions his tory-Jacobite past counted against him. 
Barber's interest in City politics waned a little after 1738, but he was active in the controversial mayoral elections of 1740 when the whig-dominated court of aldermen sought to exclude Sir Robert Godschall from the chair. Barber died on 2 January 1741 at his home in Queen Square, London. The bulk of his estate went to his common-law wife, Dovekin. He had no children. 
Nicholas Rogers', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37149


Barclay, David (1682-1769), merchant, was born in Ury, Scotland, on 17 September 1682, the second son and second child in the family of three sons and four daughters of the Quaker apologist Robert Barclay (1648-1690), of Ury, and his wife, Christian ('c'.1651-1724), daughter of Gilbert Molleson of Aberdeen. Barclay's father gave him 9000 Scottish merks ($500) to start on a mercantile career. He was apprenticed on 1 March 1698 to John Perry of London (died 1718), a member of the Drapers' Company since 1686, as the eighth of Perry's sequence of eighteen apprentices. On completion of his articles on 3 April 1706, Barclay was admitted a freeman of the Drapers' Company; in 1720 he became a liveryman of that company. In 1746 he was elected to its court of assistants, serving until 1768. He was nominated renter-warden (the third of the four wardens of the company) in 1746, and in 1756 master, but on both occasions he paid a fine, as was customary for refusers, to avoid election. 
Barclay began to deal in linens while still a freeman, being described in the company's records as 'linen-draper of Cheapside at the White Bear'. His cousin John Falconar was already an established Cheapside merchant. Barclay sold Scottish linens on commission, and dealt in Irish linens with his brother, John Barclay of Dublin. He gradually extended the range of his business by exporting German linens to Philadelphia on joint account with local merchants. Already by 1728 one of them was able to describe him as 'better Acquainted with our Trade than any Draper in London' (Price, 'The great Quaker business families', 391). By the time of his retirement in 1767, Barclay's firm was 'the first house in their business' (ibid.), owning ships, and trading to New York, Pennsylvania, the Chesapeake, and the West Indies. At his death, two years later, Barclay was reputedly worth over $100,000. He was an active member of the monthly, quarterly, and yearly meetings of the Society of Friends, of its meeting for sufferings, and of the latter's subcommittee for American affairs. 
Barclay married, first, on 12 April 1707, Anne (died 1720), daughter of James Taylor, citizen and glover of London; second, on 8 June 1723, Priscilla, daughter of John Freame (1665-1745) of Lombard Street, a leading Quaker banker. Freame, who was the son of Robert Freame, clothier of Cirencester, was in a banking partnership from the 1690s with his brother-in-law Thomas Gould (died 1728), son of Thomas Gould, a Quaker of Enfield. Freame married Thomas Gould's sister Priscilla, and Thomas Gould married Freame's sister Hannah, both events occurring in 1697. The banking partnership ended with Thomas Gould's death, Freame continuing alone, then in partnership with his son Joseph (died 1766), at what later became 56 Lombard Street. In 1733 James Barclay, David Barclay's son by his first marriage, married Sally Freame, Priscilla Barclay's sister (thus his step-aunt) and joined the partnership, which became Freame and Barclay, until his death in 1766. Joseph Freame's own son John (died 1770) was also a partner from 1759 (Freame, Barclay, and Freame). On Joseph Freame's death, the Barclay interest in the bank continued through the two sons of his sister Priscilla and David Barclay, David and John, who progressively withdrew from their father's linens trade because of the American war, which they strongly opposed. From 1776 the bank was Barclay, Bevan, and Bening, stabilizing as Barclay, Tritton, and Bevan from 1797. It can be seen from this that, although David Barclay senior was not the founder of Barclays Bank, as he has sometimes been named, his sons James, David, and John were important early partners in the bank, and the mercantile fortune he had built up was an important source of capital for it from the 1770s. 
Barclay's house at the sign of the White Bear in Cheapside, opposite St Mary-le-Bow Church, was earlier used by Charles II in 1671, William and Mary in 1689, and Anne in 1702, to view the lord mayor's procession. This custom continued under David Barclay, who entertained there George I in 1714, George II in 1727, and the young George III and his new bride in 1761, the last occasion attracting widespread interest in the metropolitan press. 
Barclay had two sons and four daughters from his first marriage, and two sons and six daughters from his second. Alexander, a child of his first marriage, was a collector of customs in Philadelphia; David Barclay (1729-1809), banker and brewer, from his second marriage, was prominent in the Quaker anti-slavery movement. Barclay died on 18 March 1769 at Bush Hill, Winchmore Hill, Middlesex, a house inherited from his father-in-law John Freame. 
P. G. M. Dickson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37150


Barclay, David (1729-1809), banker and brewer, was the younger son of David Barclay (1682-1769), Quaker merchant, and his second wife, Priscilla, daughter of John Freame, banker, of Lombard Street. David and his brother John became partners in their father's linen and merchant house in Cheapside. 
Even before the death of his father in 1769, David Barclay had begun a strategic redirection of the family's efforts and resources. Perceiving more clearly than most the dangers inherent in the darkening American situation, the Barclay brothers first gave up their commission merchant business, and then gradually reduced their export trade to North America. By 1783 they had decided to wind up their old linen business. Through his mother, Barclay was to inherit a share in the Freame bank, the oldest surviving Quaker bank in London. In 1776 he became an active partner in this firm, now styled Barclay, Bevan, and Bening, which developed as the Lombard Street node of a network of Quaker country bankers, financing bridges and canals as well as trading enterprises. (After many changes of partners, with the Barclays, Bevans, and Trittons predominating, this firm became the nucleus of the corporate merger of 1896 which became Barclays Bank.) In 1781 Barclay and his nephews, Robert Barclay and Silvanus Bevan, bought the Anchor Brewery in Southwark from Mrs Hester Thrale. This became Barclay, Perkins & Co., one of the three great London breweries of the nineteenth century. The later partnership records of the bank suggest that he became a sleeping partner at some time in the 1780s. 
Like his father, David Barclay was a conscientious and active Quaker, and a pacifist. He was a good friend of Benjamin Franklin and tried unsuccessfully in 1774-5 to mediate between Franklin and the government of Lord North to avoid the impending break with the American colonies. His philanthropies were many, and he used his influence to move English Quakers into a stronger stand against slavery -- a difficult position for a retired West India merchant, whose bank financed slavers and slave owners, and had the non-Quaker Bevans, with less severe views on such matters, as partners. On a Jamaican cattle ranch acquired in settlement of some debts, he freed the slaves and transported them at his own expense to Philadelphia for resettlement, incurring a $3000 loss. 
On 6 May 1749 Barclay married his first wife, Martha, daughter of John Hudson, of Thames Street, London, hop merchant. They had an only child, Agatha, who married (3 August 1773) Richard Gurney, a Quaker banker of Norwich. She was the mother of Hudson Gurney, David Barclay's principal heir. In 1767 Barclay married his second wife, Rachel, daughter of Sampson Lloyd (1699-1779), banker. In his will Barclay remembered numerous nephews and cousins, some of whose descendants were active in his bank and brewery until well into the twentieth century. He died at Walthamstow, Essex, on 30 May 1809. 


@@@@@


doc= 37151


Barclay, James (fl. 1763-1774), Church of England clergyman and lexicographer, was for many years a curate at All Saints' Church, Edmonton, Middlesex, and a teacher at schools in Goodman's Fields and Tottenham. In 1763 he published 'What is Meant by Coming to Christ', the text of a sermon he had delivered in one of the London churches. His fame, however, rests on his 'Complete and Universal English Dictionary', first published in 1774; it was to pass through at least twenty-four reprints and editions by 1851. (The editions of 1813, 1841, and 1848 were revised by William Shorton, Henry W. Dewhurst, and Bernard Bolingbroke Woodward, respectively.) 
Despite its title the work took account of only a selection of English vocabulary, including 'Difficult Words and Technical Terms in all Faculties and Professions'. The stress-point in words was marked, and words were noted which were apparently synonyms: Barclay was the first English lexicographer to attempt the latter. In addition, the reader was provided with information more usually to be found in an encyclopaedia than in a dictionary. Thus, there were articles on politics and society, both past and present (for example, a listing of important historical events, descriptions of major towns and cities in the world, and details of Britain's trading relationships with the rest of the world), and on religion (the denominations of the church) and literature (a listing of Greek, Roman, and English classics). Illustrations accompanied some of the entries. Barclay's interest in linguistic matters 'per se' is evidenced by the inclusion of an article on the origin of language by the Frenchman Abbe Antoine Anselme (1652-1737), and by a series of articles on the history, grammar, pronunciation, and orthography of English, very probably by Barclay himself. The dictionary won immediate acceptance from the public, especially the lower classes, for whom it acted, until well into the Victorian age, as an important means of self-education. 
Barclay's son James, who died on 13 June 1771 at the age of twenty-four, was the youthful author of 'An Examination of Mr Kenrick's Review of Mr Johnson's Edition of Shakespeare' (1766). 


@@@@@


doc= 37152


Baring, John, second Baron Revelstoke (1863-1929), merchant banker, was born on 7 September 1863 in Kingston upon Thames, the eldest child of the five surviving sons and three daughters of Edward Charles Baring, later first Baron Revelstoke (1828-1897), and his wife, Louisa Emily Charlotte (died 1892), daughter of John Crocker Bulteel of Lyneham, Devon. He was educated at Eton College and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he excelled as an oarsman and horseman but did not take a degree. 
Baring's father had from 1883 been senior partner in the merchant bank of Baring Brothers & Co., and John Baring joined the firm on leaving Cambridge. He served his apprenticeship as a clerk and from 1885 until 1887 he toured the world, during which he spent some time with the firm of Kidder Peabody in the United States. Power of procuration at Barings was given him in January 1889, and his admission as a full partner followed a year later. He was fluent in French and Spanish, having lived in Spain for six months, and he had a good grounding in Italian and German. 
In 1890 Barings experienced a liquidity crisis and had to be rescued from collapse by a Bank of England loan which was guaranteed by the banking community. The City of London narrowly avoided catastrophe. Barings' chief embarrassment was a commitment, taken up in 1888 but unsupportable by late 1890, to raise $10 million for the Buenos Aires Water Supply and Drainage Company Ltd. In 1889 Barings' senior management had dispatched John Baring to Buenos Aires to investigate this company's difficulties; his discoveries shocked him and gave long notice of problems ahead. 
In the face of what seemed to be inevitable liquidation, the junior partners, led by John and his older cousin Francis and buttressed by the assets of a retired partner, T. C. Baring, resolved to 'buckle to and make a fight of it' (Barings archives, DEP84). Bypassing their superiors they established a limited company, Baring Brothers & Co. Ltd, financed by shares to the value of $1 million taken up by relatives and City friends, and transferred to it the good business, leaving the bad debts with the old firm. 
For the next fifteen years Baring, the firm's natural leader and chief workhorse, almost single-handedly rebuilt the business. He fully recovered its prestige, returned it to the private ownership of his family, and masterminded the orderly liquidation of the old bank whose debts were paid off and whose partners recovered some of their wealth. The achievement for a man not yet twenty-eight when the crisis broke was extraordinary, but the experience of ruin haunted him for the rest of his life, instilling in him a sense of excessive caution and a dread of being in debt. As a partner in the old business, the 1890 crisis had left him penniless and living off the generosity of relatives. His father died in 1897, and Baring was known thereafter, having inherited the barony, as Lord Revelstoke. 
Following Francis Baring's retirement in 1901, Revelstoke became senior partner and remained Barings' autocratic head until his death. He gathered around him a partnership comprised mostly of relatives, so the business remained truly a family affair. However, he insisted on a deputy of outstanding ability. Gaspard Farrer (1860-1946), who worked 'cheek by jowl' (Barings archives, DEP193.74.14) with him from 1902, undoubtedly limited some of Revelstoke's autocratic excesses, and interpreted his actions to the junior staff. In 1925 Farrer was succeeded in this role by Edward Peacock. 
Barings became extremely profitable, with declared profits increasing from $125,000 in 1891 to almost $600,000 in 1909, and to a $750,000 peak for the 1920s in 1924. From 1896 Barings was owned and controlled by a new partnership and Revelstoke gradually increased his interest in its profits until his death. Thus although his income was modest in the 1890s, he eventually accumulated enormous wealth, receiving over $100,000 for the first time in 1909, over $200,000 in 1915, and well over $100,000 in most years from then until his death. His endeavours to receive a greater share of the profits met with the outright opposition of his partners, led by Farrer who recognized the injustice to the junior employees. 
Revelstoke was especially concerned with major transactions, such as bond issues during what was the heyday of London's capital market. But the environment was one of unprecedented competition from British and overseas banks, not least those in Paris, Berlin, and New York. He fought these competitors as ruthlessly as the next and withdrew only when profit was wanting or available at unacceptable risk. He moved with ease from one financial centre to the next, forming international syndicates of banks to underwrite bond issues and then taking a leading role in subsequent negotiations with the issuer. His clients were largely sovereign entities or giant corporations and his world was filled with presidents and finance ministers, ambassadors, and governors of national banks; the authority that he came to exercise meant that before 1914 many of them beat a path to his door. He moved around Europe by train, his secretaries furiously at work and his telegrams being sent and received at stations 'en route'. His devoted assistant, Mr Hollings, organizer of this entourage, smoothed its progress through the largess to be found in a bag of gold sovereigns. But Revelstoke himself eschewed flamboyance; he kept far from the public eye. 
After 1902 Revelstoke resumed Barings' historical connection with Argentina, rehabilitating its credit in London through leadership of numerous bond issues, mostly for the government; likewise after 1900 he returned Barings to the financing of the imperial Russian government. However, issuing for the government and railways of Canada, so important before 1890, was lost permanently afterwards, whereas financing of American business was stronger than ever. Barings again focused on railway finance, via bond issues for transcontinental and regional lines; and here Revelstoke with Farrer pitted his wits against the likes of E. H. Harriman, J. J. Stillman, and J. P. Morgan. 
Revelstoke had no great liking for Americans but he recognized fully the emerging strategic importance of their country to his firm's issuing and trade finance businesses. When younger he had visited the USA annually, and from 1891 until 1908 his brothers Cecil and Hugo led a sister house in New York. To strengthen his American business further, in 1904 and 1905 he negotiated with Pierpont Morgan for the merger of their respective businesses in New York and London. By far the most powerful transatlantic banking alliance would have been created, but each party's overriding desire to maintain undisputed dominance in their home city scuttled the plan. 
Under Revelstoke's leadership Barings steered clear of close involvement in British industry until the 1920s. In 1911 Revelstoke admitted to having a 'horror of all industrial companies' (Barings archives, DPP2.2.14), but probably he had in mind equity issues for manufacturing business. He was happier issuing debentures for infrastructure projects, and here his clients included the Mersey Docks and Harbour Board and London United Tramways. Those industrial debentures he issued -- largely for the armaments manufacturers Vickers, Sons and Maxim Ltd and William Beardmore & Co. Ltd -- were handled under the name of a commercial bank, which was acting as little more than a receiving agent, as shown on the prospectus, in place of Barings. In turn the bank's own portfolio excluded securities in British industry. 
The increasing prominence of the Baring name, and Revelstoke's desire to draw attention to the rehabilitation of his house, resulted shortly after 1900, however, in a succession of business appointments. These included his trusteeship for the debenture holders of the Cunard Steamship Company Ltd; his membership in 1900 (and chairmanship a year later) of a royal commission to examine the workings of the port of London which recommended the formation of the Port of London Authority; and his mediation in 1904 and 1905 in a furious dispute between Cunard and International Maritime Marine over north Atlantic conference rates. Sometimes, when Revelstoke saw certain profit, his commitment to industry was significant; in 1907 he joined a small syndicate of London bankers to finance and guarantee the important Caucasus Copper Company Ltd. 
The historical depth of Barings' links with the British government, coupled with the influence of relatives, meant that few London houses were closer to the political establishment. Revelstoke courted such connections assiduously and was closest to A. J. Balfour and Lord Lansdowne, both his clients, and to H. H. Asquith for whom, in 1906, he threw a dinner party to introduce the new chancellor of the exchequer to City leaders. After 1900 Barings, while never a tool of government, worked for the promotion of British influence overseas, especially in the eastern Mediterranean. Revelstoke was closely associated with the abortive Trans-Persia Railway, formed to link the railway systems of Europe and India. Along with Sir Ernest Cassel and Sir Alexander Henderson, he took a one-third interest in the unsuccessful National Bank of Turkey. He was especially close to Cassel, whom he treated with unaccustomed deference. In 1911 he advised the committee of imperial defence on the implications for the City of war with Germany. 
A number of Revelstoke's other transactions had enormous political implications. In 1902 he managed one of the first external bond issues for the Japanese government, which paved the way in 1904 and 1905 to arranging huge sterling bond issues in London and New York, undertaken to finance Japan's war against Russia. In doing this, Barings' long-standing and continuing relationship with the Russian government seems to have caused Revelstoke few qualms. In 1912, with Foreign Office enthusiasm, Barings was recruited to strengthen that group of British banks co-operating with, yet also competing against, other national groups for a share in Chinese government external finance. 
During the First World War Revelstoke's chief preoccupation was the finance of allied governments in Europe; connections existed with those of Italy and Belgium but the needs of these administrations were dwarfed by those of Russia. Barings was London financial agent for the imperial government and Revelstoke now advised it on borrowing vast sums from the British government via the issue of Treasury bills, discounted at the Bank of England. His role was critical. As middleman he sat alongside Russian diplomatists at difficult Treasury meetings with Lloyd George, Reginald McKenna, and civil servants such as J. M. Keynes, arguing his client's cause and smoothing out difficulties. Sometimes he went to these meetings alone. He oversaw currency operations in support of the rouble and, from a distance, watched over the vast number of banking transactions required for Russia's munitions purchases. The business was immensely profitable. 
Notwithstanding a potential conflict of interest, Revelstoke accompanied Lord Milner as minister-plenipotentiary and deputy head of the British mission to the allied conference at Petrograd in 1917. After the war he argued with the British government, steadfastly yet successfully, for the retention of frozen Russian government balances in Barings' books. Somewhat reluctantly he also arranged finance for the Omsk government resistance during the civil war that followed the Russian Revolution, via a syndicated advance secured on gold and provided by friends in London and New York. 
After the war Revelstoke was less at ease in the City, where the international role of sterling was much reduced. Sovereign issues remained a staple activity of his business, but now they were invariably led jointly with old adversaries such as Rothschilds and Schroders, while seemingly everywhere the Americans had the upper hand. In 1929, as an elder statesman of British international capitalism, he joined Sir Josiah Stamp at Versailles as joint head of the British mission to the committee of experts -- the so-called Young committee -- reviewing the Dawes plan for German reparations. He was outraged by the tyranny of the Americans whose 'insolent wealth' arising out of Britain's 'loss of blood and treasure' made them 'the greatest profiteers that the World has ever seen' (Barings archives, 200011). He was highly important at these negotiations, petitioning forcibly for the establishment of the Bank for International Settlements, but he died before the committee's work was concluded. 
While Revelstoke remained the undisputed head of his house in the 1920s, Edward Peacock, a Canadian recruited in 1924 as the future senior partner, steadily gained the initiative. Peacock differed culturally and temperamentally from Revelstoke and his appointment was as imaginative and courageous as it was brilliantly successful. Peacock gave the business vital new direction in the financing of British industry -- an area where Revelstoke was distinctly out of place -- which kept Barings at the forefront of London merchant banking. His appointment reflected Revelstoke's determination, strongly influenced by the 1890 crisis, to leave his house in capable hands. 
Outside Barings, Revelstoke's business activities were largely restricted to his directorship of the Bank of England. He joined the court in 1898 and its influential committee of Treasury in 1915, and sat on both until his death. Because he 'could never forget the Baring Crisis' (Sayers, 643), he ruled himself out as governor or deputy governor. In 1917 and 1918 he headed the so-called Revelstoke committee, formed to investigate the management of the bank in the difficult circumstances of an open quarrel between the governor and several directors. Like so many others he fell under the spell of Montagu Norman and was unusually influenced by him. 
The increasing complexity of investment decisions and of taxation meant that Revelstoke's expert advice was sought by family and friends on the management of their capital. From 1908 until his death he was an innovative receiver-general of the duchy of Cornwall, and from this base he became the trusted financial adviser and close friend of George V and Queen Mary. He was associated with several charitable institutions, in particular King Edward's Hospital Fund, of which he was treasurer from 1914 to 1929, and Guy's Hospital, where he chaired the finance committee. He was sworn of the privy council in 1902, appointed GCVO in 1911, and in 1926 was created by George V his lord lieutenant for Middlesex. He also received honours from France, Japan, and imperial Russia. 
Revelstoke never married but enjoyed close friendships with a number of lady friends, the most enduring being with Lady Desborough (Ethel Grenfell). His brief affair with Nancy Astor, before her marriage, was abruptly terminated by his questioning of her capacity to cope with the social requirements of being his wife. She labelled him a snob and she was right; when he sold his motor car to his sister he changed its upholstery lest it should be recognized as formerly his. He had natural hauteur and remoteness. His London home from 1903 was 3 Carlton House Terrace, where he entertained on a lavish scale, but always with great propriety. His nieces were sent dresses to wear for their visits while women, apparently, were discouraged from excesses lest their faces became flushed. His country home was Firbank, near Market Harborough, where he hunted with the Pytchley and the Fernie hunts. Each year he spent lengthy holidays at Aix les Bains. 
Worn down by the Young committee negotiations, Revelstoke died of a heart attack at his Paris flat, 27 rue du Faubourg St Honore, on 19 April 1929. He left unsettled net estate of over $2.5 million, of which almost $200,000 was bequeathed for the benefit of London's hospitals and a year's salary to each member of Barings' staff. His pictures were left to the National Gallery and the National Portrait Gallery. The barony passed to his brother Cecil. 


@@@@@


doc= 37153


Barker, Jane (bap. 1652, d. 1732), poet and novelist, was baptized on 17 May 1652 in Blatherwycke, Northamptonshire, the second of three surviving children of Thomas Barker (died 1681) and Anne, 'nee' Connock (died 1685?). Thomas, whose family origins are uncertain, may have had a court position during the reign of Charles I as a member of the staff of the keeper of the great seal, for the notice of Jane's death in the St Germain parish register indicates he had been 'Secretaire du grand sceau d'Angleterre' ('Galesia Trilogy', ed. Wilson, xviii). From 1662 he leased the manor at Wilsthorp, Lincolnshire (near Stamford), from the earl of Exeter, bequeathing the leasehold to Jane. On her mother's side the Connocks (or Connochs) were an old Cornish gentry family that produced a number of army officers, including Jane's 'cosen' Colonel William Connock, named by the Old Pretender to the Jacobite baronetage in 1732. William Connock was a cousin of Richard Lower, the physiologist. Anne appears to have come from an unlanded and possibly Roman Catholic branch of the family. 
Jane grew up in Wilsthorp and was largely self-educated, studying Latin and medicine under the tutelage of her brother Edward (1650-1675), an MA of Christ Church, Oxford, and exchanging verse with other amateur poets, including a group of scholars at St John's College, Cambridge. She moved to London some time after her father's death in 1681 and converted to Catholicism probably during the reign of James II. In a verse autobiography which survives in two manuscripts, she characterizes herself as Fidelia, and the political and theological reasons for her conversion are given in a powerful Drydenesque polemic ('DNB'). By June 1689 she had followed the Stuart court into exile at St Germain-en-Laye. In 1704 she returned to England to take up management of the Wilsthorp estate; by the 1710s she had the care of two young grandnieces and in 1717 was involved in a legal dispute over their custody with her niece Mary Staton ('nee' Barker). She returned to France in 1727, taking up residence at the Chancellerie in St Germain. She died there in 1732, a spinster, and was buried on 29 March. 
Unheralded in her own time, Barker is one of the most significant figures to emerge in the feminist recovery of early modern women writers. Over a writing career spanning nearly half a century she wrote friendship epistles, odes, satires on affairs of state, religious dialogues from a Catholic perspective, poetry on medical themes, a Jacobite heroic romance entitled 'Exilius, or, The Banished Roman' (1715), and 'The Christian Pilgrimage' (1718), a translation of a Lenten devotional manual by Fenelon. Her most important printed work is a trilogy of partly autobiographical prose fictions -- 'The amours of Bosvil and Galesia' (1713), 'A Patch-Work Screen for the Ladies' (1723), and 'The Lining of the Patch Work Screen' (1726) -- which tell the story of a woman who slips free of the moorings of ordinary female destiny to 'espouse' instead 'a Book' ('Galesia Trilogy', ed. Wilson, 15). The trilogy is remarkable for its psychological subtlety, acute analysis of the difficult position of a learned woman, and sympathetic rendering of the female single life. An unauthorized printing of some of her early coterie verse appeared as part 1 of 'Poetical Recreations' (1688). A corrected version of this verse appears in the three-part Magdalen manuscript, which includes occasional verse written at St Germain as well as a sequence of pro-Stuart verses presented to the future Pretender in 1701, 'Poems Refering to the Times' (Magdalen College, Oxford, MS 343), another copy of which is in the British Library (Add. MS 21621). Barker remained committed to the Stuart cause all her life. A 1718 letter in the British Library shows her supplying information about a proposed invasion to the exiled Jacobite leader, the duke of Ormond (MS Stowe 232, fol. 93). Among the Stuart papers in the Royal Archives at Windsor Castle is a contribution to the Jacobite effort to canonize James II, a letter of 1730 (?) testifying to the healing powers of the blood of 'our holy king' (SP 208/129). 
Although Barker is now recognized as one of the most innovative of the early novelists, her significance resides as much in the shape of her career as in the merits of her fictions. As a coterie and then court poet turned market place novelist, she exemplifies the emergence of female literary professionalism, her long and diverse writing life illustrating the shift from an amateur, court-centred manuscript-based literary system to the market-driven culture of print. She is an important Jacobite imaginative writer as well. Her verse-history 'Poems Refering to the Times' is a key Jacobite poetic text of the 1690s, while the later novels offer a sustained Catholic-Jacobite response to the declining fortunes of the Stuarts during the early Hanoverian period. 


@@@@@


doc= 37154


Barnard, Sir Frederick Augusta (1743-1830), librarian, was the son of John Barnard (died 1773), page of the backstairs to Frederick, prince of Wales, and to the prince's wife, Augusta (after whom Frederick was named), who may have been his godparents. The erroneous belief, which originated with the obituary of Barnard in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', that he was the illegitimate son of Frederick, prince of Wales, almost certainly arose from a confusion with Fitz Frederick (who died in infancy), son of the prince of Wales and Anne Vane, daughter of Lord Barnard. Barnard started in royal service as page of the backstairs to George III in 1760; by 1765 he was a member of the staff of the royal library, then newly housed in the octagon at the Queen's House. 
The old royal library had been given to the British Museum by George II in 1757. George III employed Barnard as chief agent in his lifelong endeavour to build up a new collection, which later came to be known as the King's Library. Though still very young, Barnard rapidly established himself as a man of account and was responsible for introducing Samuel Johnson to the king in 1768. Shortly afterwards, in a lengthy and famous letter, subsequently printed in the King's Library catalogue, but denied by Barnard to Boswell, Johnson proffered invaluable advice to Barnard on book purchase. Barnard's association with the Johnson circle may have dated from this time. Between 1768 and 1771 Barnard, on a salary of $200 p.a. and with a purchasing allowance of $2000 p.a., travelled in Europe, buying books, visiting many of the principal cities -- Paris, Vienna, Rome, Strasbourg, Dresden, Berlin, Amsterdam, Brussels -- and taking advantage of the recent dispersal of many Jesuit libraries. 
In 1774 Barnard succeeded Richard Dalton as royal librarian, a position he was to hold for half a century. He followed the king's wishes in building up a genuinely working library, albeit one well stocked with rarities, and including a magnificent topographical and cartographical collection, manuscripts, coins and medals, and drawings. It was a library collected (in Barnard's own words included in the printed catalogue): 'upon such a comprehensive and liberal design of embracing every species of Knowledge, that the Possessor of it can call to his aid upon any subject, all the Learning and Wisdom which the mind of man has hitherto communicated to the world. ('Bibliothecae Regiae catalogus', 1820-29, 1.viii-ix)' By 1823, when George IV presented his father's library to the nation for deposit at the British Museum, the collection comprised over 65,000 volumes, 19,000 pamphlets, and the king's topographical collection of some 50,000 maps and charts. Barnard had doubts about the transfer of the military plans, charts, topography, and geography collections, and succeeded in reserving the king's maritime collection, the larger part of which was given to the museum only in 1844. In 1973 the King's Library passed into the care of the newly established British Library and was transferred in 1998 to the new British Library building at St Pancras. His portrait by John Knight, presented to the British Museum in 1926, hangs adjacent to the glass tower housing the King's Library. 
Barnard became FSA in 1789 and FRS in 1790 when his proposers included a number of notable members of the Johnson circle such as R. P. Joddrell and John Paradise. He was largely responsible for compiling the catalogue of the King's Library, based on the twelve-volume manuscript catalogue, which was published in five volumes between 1820 and 1829 as 'Bibliothecae Regiae catalogus'. He also checked and revised the catalogue of medals in 1814. 
In October 1796 Barnard married Catherine (died 1837), daughter of John Byde; they had one son, George (died 1817), and at least one daughter, who died young. Barnard retired from the royal library in 1828, having overseen the transfer of it and its staff to the British Museum. In the same year he was made a knight commander of the Royal Guelphic Order. He died on 27 January 1830 at his house in St James's Palace. He was buried in St Martin-in-the-Fields and in 1852 reinterred in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 37155


Barnard, John (1709-1784), collector of prints and drawings, was born in London and was baptized on 25 August 1709 at St Laurence Pountney, the eldest of the three children and only son of Sir John Barnard of Greenwood ('c'.1685-1764), MP for the City of London, and Jane (died 1738), daughter of John Godschall, a London merchant trading with Turkey. 
Barnard, who inherited a large fortune from his father, for fifty years devoted himself to the formation of a collection of prints, drawings, and paintings, becoming one of the foremost connoisseurs of his day. The earliest printed account of his collection dates from 1761: it lists sixty-five pictures and records that he also had a collection of 'about twelve thousand prints, engraved and etched by the most celebrated masters of the three last centuries... They are contained in about 50 large volumes, besides above 60 volumes in sculpture and architecture' (Dodsley and Dodsley, 292). His collection of prints included works of Italian, French, Flemish, German, and Dutch artists, and was distinguished by a nearly complete representation of the work of Marcantonio Raimondi, Wenceslaus Hollar, Rembrandt, Van Dyck, and Rubens. 
Barnard's collection of drawings was also very fine and sheets with a provenance from his collection are usually of the highest calibre, both in quality and in the state of preservation. Several of his Rembrandt drawings were said to have a provenance from the Six collection in Amsterdam, and other purchases were made from distinguished contemporary sales such as those of the earl of Arundel, Sir Peter Lely, Lord Somers, Richard Mead, and Sir Uvedale Price. The sculptor Joseph Nollekens was reputed to have been removed from Barnard's will for not sufficiently admiring Barnard's Italian drawings. 
Barnard established himself in Berkeley Square, London, with many prominent contemporaries as neighbours. His sister Sarah had married Alderman Sir Thomas Hankey; his younger sister, Jane, was the mother of the second Viscount Palmerston, a patron of Joseph Nollekens. His wife was previously the mistress of John Wilkes. Her infidelity continued after her marriage, which produced one daughter who died young. Barnard had originally bequeathed his prints, drawings, and books to John Wilkes. This bequest was revoked because of a cooling in the friendship, brought about by the continuing closeness between his wife and Wilkes. 
Barnard died at Berkeley Square in 1784. His drawings were sold first by Greenwood, auctioneer of Leicester Square, on 16 February 1787 and seven days following. His prints were sold next by Harry Phillips, auctioneer of New Bond Street, on 16 April 1798 and twenty-five days following. He left his pictures to his nephew, Thomas Hankey of Bedford Square; these were sold at Christies on 7-8 June 1799. His pictures are distinguished by having his monogram in black letters with an inventory number at the back. 
Charles Sebag-Montefiore', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37156


Barnard, Joseph Edwin (1868-1949), hatter and microscopist, was born on 7 December 1868 at 321 Vauxhall Bridge Road, Pimlico, London, the son of Walter Barnard, hatter, and his wife, Elizabeth Phillips Jacob. He was educated at the City of London School, leaving at the age of sixteen as head boy. He entered his father's firm, with premises at 97 Jermyn Street, London, later becoming its proprietor. This business gave him the time and money to pursue his hobby of microscopy to a highly professional level. 
In his own private laboratory Barnard worked with ultraviolet radiation at the ultimate resolution of the optical microscope. From 1899 he undertook photomicrographic work at the Jenner (later Lister) Institute of Preventive Medicine. He became honorary lecturer in microscopy at King's College, London, in 1909, a position he held for sixteen years. His book 'Practical Photo-Micrography' (1911) remained the standard English textbook on the subject for over thirty years. In 1916 he was co-opted on to the trench fever committee of the War Office, and attempted to discover the causal organism of the fever. In 1920 he became honorary director of the department of applied optics, National Institute for Medical Research; he retired during the Second World War. 
Barnard was elected a fellow of the Royal Microscopical Society in 1895, and served three times as its president (1918-19, 1928-9, and 1938-45). He was awarded an honorary fellowship in 1948. In 1911 he was a founder member of the Photomicrographic Society, whose Barnard medal he endowed. He was elected a fellow of the Institute of Physics in 1923, and of the Royal Society in 1924. On 23 March 1894 he married Amelia Muir Cunningham Burge (1867/8-1923), daughter of William Mark Burge, hatter; they had no children. On 18 August 1924 he married Daisy ('b'. 1892/3), daughter of Frederick William Russell Fisher, sheet metal worker. They had one son and one daughter. 
Barnard's achievement was to develop the ultraviolet microscope (invented in Germany in 1903) for the study of viruses. In the course of twenty-five years of persistent pioneering work, he was responsible for novel design features, such as the duplex condenser (1924), objective changer (1926), and cone condenser (1930), the last allowing for the first time ultraviolet, dark-ground photographs of viruses. He collaborated with his friend Conrad Beck, the optical manufacturer, in applying these improvements to a production model, and the Beck-Barnard instrument, the first really efficient ultraviolet microscope, was placed on the market in 1929. As a result of his work, a number of viruses causing disease in plants, animals (he worked on foot-and-mouth disease), and humans were first observed. In 1925 he received national press publicity for discoveries concerning malignant growths. 
In addition to his business, and his devotion to microscopy, Barnard found time for other interests. He was musical, and had an organ in his house; he enjoyed travel, motoring over much of the continent; and he was a keen photographer. He died at 19 Grimwade Avenue, Addiscombe, Surrey, on 25 October 1949. 
G. L'E. Turner', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37157


Barne, Sir George (c.1500-1558), merchant and local politician, was the son of George Barne, grocer, of London, though the family seems also to have had connections in Wells, Somerset. His sister may have been the mother of Nicholas Culverwell (d. 1569) ['see under 'Culverwell family (per. c.1545-c.1640)], who later served as his apprentice. He was a member of the Haberdashers' Company, and prospered from various sectors of English commerce, both traditional and novel. He exported cloth and imported wine from Spain, and he was a leading figure in new enterprises. With William Garrard he was a 'principal doer' in promoting the first voyage to Muscovy of 1553, a founder and active member of the Russia Company, and a promoter of voyages to west Africa in 1553 and 1554. 
Barne also took a full part in City politics. He was alderman from 1542 and lord mayor in 1552-3, when the crown passed precariously from Edward VI to Mary. He was knighted on 11 April 1553 and was one of the City fathers signing the letters patent of Edward which made Lady Jane Grey queen. Though consequently treated with some suspicion by the Marian regime, there is no evidence that he had strong protestant convictions: his loyalties were to the City and those who, like himself, were members of its elite. 
Barne married Alice Brooke (died 1559) of Shropshire, with whom he had at least three sons and two daughters, all of them involved directly or by marriage in London commerce. His heir, George, married William Garrard's daughter, Anne, and was subsequently governor of the Russia Company, mayor in 1586-7, and MP. Of his daughters, Anne married, first, Alexander Carleill, another Muscovy merchant, and, second, Sir Francis Walsingham; and Elizabeth married John Rivers, lord mayor in 1573-4. Barne died on 18 February 1558. He and his wife were both buried at St Bartholomew by the Exchange, London. At the time of his death he had property in London, Southwark, and Hertfordshire. 
Paul Slack', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37158


Barron, (Arthur) Oswald (1868-1939), genealogist and heraldist, was born in West Ham, Essex, on 3 January 1868, the second of three sons (there were two daughters) of Henry Stracey Barron (1838-1918), consulting mechanical engineer and one-time chief engineer of the Imperial Ottoman Arsenal in Constantinople, and his wife, Harriet Marshall (1838-1918). He was of the sixth generation in descent from James Barron, gentleman, of late seventeenth-century London. His great-great-grandfather Francis was ironmonger to the king; his grandfather Francis William was master of the Ironmongers' Company in 1864; and his uncle Edward Jackson Barron, a distinguished antiquary. He was educated in London at the Merchant Taylors' School -- the 'Blue Coat School' (1877-1883), but circumstances prevented him from going up to Oxford University. 
After a few temporary appointments in private service, Barron took employment with the 'Evening News' of London, and for some thirty years contributed a daily article to that newspaper under the byline 'The Londoner', and it is said that many bought the paper simply to read him. In his early twenties he became romantically involved with E. (Elizabeth) Nesbit (1858-1924), the famous author of children's stories, and collaborated with her in several fields. Their joint book 'The Butler in Bohemia' (1894) was dedicated to their mutual friend Rudyard Kipling. Barron's deep attachment to Nesbit ceased in 1899 when he married Hilda Leonora Florence Sanders, a member of an old Northamptonshire family, but his influence outlasted his departure and he is widely credited with having provided the plot for 'The Railway Children', which finally appeared in 1906. 
His early interest in fiction aside, Barron's abiding passions were heraldry and genealogy. In time he was to be acknowledged as the chief living authority on these subjects. His first contribution of significance had, in fact, appeared in 1895 when his annotated edition of the parliamentary roll of 'c'.1312 was published in 'The Genealogist'. This was followed in 1898 by 'Benolt's Visitation of Berkshire in 1532', and in 1901 by 'The St George's Kalendar', several copies of which were ordered by the king. 
However, it was with his editorship of and contributions to 'The Ancestor' (1902-5) that Barron set his stamp upon his chosen subjects. Each issue of this quarterly review ran to some 300 pages, and in every one Barron's articles stripped away the pretensions of earlier writers -- their 'well-springs of engaging nonsense' -- and gradually put the study of heraldry and, indeed, genealogy, onto proper historical bases, shorn of myth, legend, snobbery, and mere whimsy. The last issue of 'The Ancestor' appeared in January 1905, to enable Barron to concentrate on the demanding task (in addition to his daily 'Evening News' column) of editing the genealogical and armorial sections of the 'Victoria county history'; his own magisterial quartos, dealing with Northamptonshire county families, were published in 1906. His article on heraldry in the 1911 edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' remains one of the best and most erudite introductions to the subject. From 1916 to 1919 he served in the Inns of Court reserve regiment with the rank of lieutenant, and in 1920 he was awarded the Medaille du Roi Albert for his services to Belgians in distress. 
After the war Barron continued his heraldic studies in addition to writing for the 'Evening News', but he never produced the great comprehensive book on armory which might have been expected of him. In spite of his sometimes prickly relationship with the heraldic establishment -- his earlier views that men could assume arms at will rather than having them properly granted had caused much controversy -- his knowledge and deep sincerity won him respect and he was increasingly welcomed in official circles, particularly in the College of Arms. He had already been a gold staff officer (usher) at the coronation of King George V in 1911, but his final reward was to be appointed Maltravers herald-extraordinary in time for the coronation of King George VI in 1937 and thus to play a time-honoured role in the ceremony. 
Barron's marriage to Hilda Sanders, which produced a daughter, Yolanda Wilmot Philipse Barron, lasted until his death at 22 Gay Street, Bath, on 24 September 1939. He and his wife had been staying with relations in that city and his passing was sudden and unexpected. He was cremated at Arnos Vale crematorium in Bristol on 27 September, and his ashes taken to Hammersmith, London, where the couple lived. His papers were subsequently deposited with the Society of Antiquaries of London, of which he had been a fellow since 1901. He was a man held in affectionate respect by his peers, and his scholarship had brought new realism into the whole fields of heraldry and genealogy. 


@@@@@


doc= 37159


Barron, William (1805-1891), landscape gardener, was born on 7 September 1805 in Eccles, Berwickshire, the son of John Barron, gardener, and his wife, Betty Johnston. (The year of his birth is usually cited as 1800, as a result of a mistake in his obituary in the 'Gardeners' Chronicle'.) He served a three-year gardening apprenticeship at Blackadder, Berwickshire, before entering the Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh, where he was soon placed in charge of the glasshouses. From there he went to Syon House, Middlesex, where he helped to plant the new conservatory. On 1 March 1830 he was appointed gardener to Charles Stanhope, fourth earl of Harrington, at Elvaston Castle in Derbyshire, where he took up his post on 2 August, with instructions to create a new garden. 
Early in 1831 Barron began transplanting mature trees; he became expert in their removal and he described his techniques in 'The British Winter Garden' (1852). The gardens he created were seldom visited before 1851, when a series of articles in the 'Gardeners' Chronicle' created a sensation by describing the transplanting operations, the grafted conifers, the avenues of multiple rows of different species, the architectural topiary, and the series of formal gardens enclosed by hedges. The revelation of Elvaston led to a topiary revival in the 1850s. 
The fourth earl died in 1851 and his successor retrenched on expenditure, opened the gardens to the public, and instructed Barron to develop a commercial nursery at the garden. In 1862, on the death of Leicester Stanhope, fifth earl of Harrington, Barron bought 40 acres for a nursery site in nearby Borrowash, to which he moved from Elvaston in 1865. In addition to plant sales, Barron offered transplanting and landscape gardening. During Barron's life, among his firm's commissions were those undertaken at Stancliffe Hall, Matlock; Impney Hall, Droitwich; Locke Park, Barnsley; People's Park, Grimsby; and, his most famous work after Elvaston itself, Abbey Park, Leicester (between 1877 and 1882). In 1880 he successfully moved the Buckland yew, with a documented age of 800 years. One of his transplanting machines was preserved at Kew. 
Barron retired in 1881 but came out of retirement for a commission for the ninth earl of Dysart, at Welbeck Abbey, in 1886. In 1887 he was the first witness called before the select commission on forestry. He was noted for his prodigious memory, he was deeply religious, and he was a staunch advocate of temperance. 
Barron married Elizabeth Ashby, and their only child, John (born on 8 June 1844), having trained abroad in landscape gardening, became his father's partner by 1867. Barron died in Borrowash, Derbyshire, on 8 April 1891. The family continued the firm into the inter-war years. Among the firm's later commissions were those at Queen's Park, Chesterfield (1893); the Bedford Embankment (1894); and Whitaker Park, Rawtenstall (1900). 
Brent Elliott', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37160


Barton, John (1789-1852), political economist and botanist, was born on 11 June 1789 in Southwark, London, the son of John Barton (1755-1789) and his second wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Horne (1760-1833). He was the half-brother of Maria Hack, children's writer, and Bernard Barton, poet. The elder John Barton, a manufacturer, was a member of the first committee formed for the abolition of the slave trade in 1787. Towards the end of his life he was engaged in the malting business in Hertford. After his death in 1789, the children were brought up by Mrs Barton and her family in Tottenham, Middlesex. A man of independent means, Barton travelled widely, visiting France and Italy and possibly venturing as far afield as Poland and Russia, and pursued interests in economics and botany. In 1827 he left the Society of Friends and joined the Church of England. Throughout his life he was a staunch supporter of mechanics' institutes and schools, and he helped to establish the Chichester savings bank. His 'A Lecture on the Geography of Plants' (1827) shows Barton to have been well read in German scientific literature, notably in A. Humboldt's work on the geographical distribution of plants. 
Although he never published the systematic economic treatise which might have established his reputation, Barton's closely argued pamphlets were influential. His 'Observations on the Circumstances which Influence the Condition of the Labouring Classes' (1817) questioned the linkage by Thomas Malthus of population growth to increasing wage rates, arguing that the likely age of first marriage and thus birth rates were influenced, not by wage rates or poor-relief practices, but by perceived employment prospects which, paradoxically, were best when wages were low. A rise in wage levels, Barton argued, encouraged employers to invest in labour-saving technology. In opposition to David Ricardo, he maintained that only when circulating capital increased did employment rise: any increase in fixed capital was unlikely to stimulate, and might significantly diminish, the demand for labour. 
Barton's pamphlets influenced both Ricardo and Malthus. In the third edition of his 'The Principles of Political Economy' (1821) Ricardo added a chapter on machinery, conceding that Barton 'had taken a correct view of some of the effects of an increasing amount of fixed capital on the condition of the labouring classes', but maintaining that there was a, perhaps imperfect, positive relationship between increases in capital and the demand for labour. Malthus accepted Barton's contention that any increase in poor relief should be measured, not in nominal terms, but in real monetary terms. 
Later Barton became increasingly preoccupied with the effects of overpopulation. In his 'An inquiry into the causes of the progressive depreciation of agricultural labour in modern times' (1820) and 'A Statement of the Consequences Likely to Ensue from our Growing Excess of Population' (1830) Barton argued that only where land was cheap and plentiful would economic growth be maximized and accordingly favoured emigration schemes and colonization of Canada and other territories. He dismissed claims that free trade and cheap food could transform the economy, perceiving instead a tendency to overstock the labour market in industrial areas. The expansion of capital and population beyond a certain point was 'a national evil', creating social problems which could be offset by greater prosperity. Accordingly Barton favoured the maintenance of agricultural protection. By 1846 he was deeply worried by the likely effects of free trade on monetary policy, and in two letters to 'The Standard' he argued that, by increasing the demand for imports, free trade would precipitate an outflow of gold and thereby provoke a monetary crisis. His last pamphlet, 'The Monetary Crisis of 1847' (1847), offered a brief vindication of this analysis. 
In 1811 Barton married Ann Woodrouffe Smith (died 1822). With his second wife, Frances (Fanny) Rickman (died 1842), daughter of James Rickman, he had six surviving children, one of whom, John Barton (1836-1908), became a missionary in India. Barton died in Chichester on 10 March 1852. His 'Economic Writings' were edited by G. Sotiroff (2 vols., 1962). 
David Eastwood', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37161


Bastian, (Henry) Charlton (1837-1915), physician and neurologist, was born on 26 April 1837 in Truro, Cornwall, the third son in a family of four sons and one daughter of James Bastian, merchant, and his wife, Charlotte Eliza Bullmore. After attending school in Falmouth he entered University College, London, in 1856, and graduated BA (1859), MA (1861), MB (1863), and MD (1866). He became MRCS (1860), MRCP (1865), and FRCP (1870). In 1866 he married Julia Augusta, third daughter of Charles Orme, brewer, of 81 Avenue Road, Regent's Park, London; they were to have three sons and one daughter. 
Charlton Bastian first worked in London at St Mary's Hospital, Paddington, as assistant physician and lecturer in pathology. He returned to University College as professor of pathological anatomy in 1867, and became a physician to University College Hospital in 1878. He also held another senior post, as physician in nervous diseases at the National Hospital, Queen Square, from 1868 to 1902. He held the chair of medicine at University College Hospital from 1887 to 1898. Bastian served as a censor of the Royal College of Physicians of London (1897-8) and later received an honorary fellowship of the Royal College of Physicians of Ireland and an honorary MD degree from the Royal University of Ireland. 
As a child Bastian was fascinated by natural history, and among his early publications was a complete flora of Falmouth and a collection of the ferns of Great Britain. He was an authority on free nematode worms and named 100 new species in his monograph 'The Anguillulidae' in 1864. He was elected FRS for this work in 1868, at the age of thirty-one, but had to abandon this interest when he developed an allergy to the worms. He was a strong supporter of the theory of evolution and numbered Herbert Spencer among his lifelong friends. His reputation in medicine was made in the late 1860s by his neurological studies of aphasias and other speech disorders. His standing in medicine was not harmed when he became the British champion of 'spontaneous generation of life' and a leading opponent of the germ theory of disease. However, as support for spontaneous generation faded and germ theory gained more supporters in the medical profession, Bastian's star waned. He found himself confronting many of the leading scientists and clinicians of the day, including Thomas Huxley, John Tyndall, Joseph Lister, and Louis Pasteur. One of the great paradoxes of Bastian's work is that in neurology his views were highly conventional, while in biology, and what became bacteriology, they became unorthodox and eventually eccentric. However, Bastian would maintain that he followed the evidence as he saw it and avoided metaphysics. 
Bastian's first major publication in neurology was about the identification of a degenerated tract in the spinal cord, which was later named after Sir William Gowers (whose investigation was more definitive). In 1869 he published a seminal paper on various forms of speech loss and their relation to cerebral disease. Wernicke's sensory aphasia -- a form of word deafness which was again later identified with another doctor -- was initially described by Bastian. His approach to the understanding of aphasias was based on the idea that independent centres in the brain controlled speech and vision. His views on localization in mental functioning were set out in 'The Brain as an Organ of Mind' (1880), 'On Paralyses: Cerebral, Bulbar and Spinal' (1886), and 'On Various Forms of Hysterical or Functional Paralysis' (1893). His classic 'Treatise on Aphasia and other Speech Disorders' (1898) was based on his Lumleian lectures and was translated into Italian and German. 
Bastian regarded his true life's work and achievement as the studies he made on the origins of life, despite the opprobrium this brought him. His views on this subject first came to light in the late 1860s when he defended the doctrine of spontaneous generation by both logic and experiment. Mainstream biological opinion assumed that life always came from life -- 'omne vivum ex ovo' -- and that the actual origins of life, if not the creation of life, occurred at some distant time. Darwin, despite choosing the title 'On the Origin of Species' for his main work on evolution, avoided consideration of the first origin of life and only sought to explain how existing species transmute into other species. None the less, both Darwin and Wallace found Bastian's ideas interesting, for if scientists accepted that life had originated once from non-living matter, then it was illogical to deny that this process might still be occurring. All the more so, when no one knew in what conditions life had first appeared. However, Huxley and other leading Darwinians regarded Bastian's views as unnecessarily contentious and he was ostracized for damaging the cause of evolution. 
In the 1870s the British debate about spontaneous generation was fought in public over the experimental demonstrations of the phenomenon and the standing of the germ theory of disease. Bastian's main opponent was John Tyndall, who gathered increasing support across the scientific community and in the late 1870s enlisted none other than Pasteur in the cause. Bastian mostly fought alone, though he enjoyed the tacit support of many doctors who thought that germs were the result rather than the cause of infectious and septic diseases. With hindsight, it is clear that Bastian's challenges to what became a consensus on the continuity of life and the bacterial causes of disease helped to shape the new orthodoxy. His work led others to the recognition that certain bacteria could survive boiling and to improved sterilization procedures in bacteriological research. Bastian regularly defended his unfashionable views at scientific and medical meetings, and he published extensively. He completed three books on the subject in the 1870s: 'The Modes of Origin of Lowest Organisms' (1871), 'The Beginnings of Life' (1872), and 'Evolution and the Origin of Life' (1874). Quite suddenly, in 1878, Bastian gave up his fight. The main reason was the pressure of his clinical work, though few would have enjoyed the lonely pursuit of what had quickly become unfashionable views. 
Bastian had not, however, altered his convictions, and on his retirement in 1900 he returned to the question of the origin of life with undiminished energy. He published four further monographs: 'Studies in Heterogenesis' (1901-4), 'The Nature and Origin of Living Matter' (1905), 'The Evolution of Life' (1907), and 'The Origin of Life' (1911). By this time his views were quite heterodox and he found it difficult to publish his work in mainstream journals. Bastian died at his home, Fairfield, Chesham Bois, Buckinghamshire, on 17 November 1915. He was survived by his wife. He was cremated at Golders Green crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 37162


Bate, Robert Brettell (1782-1847), maker of scientific instruments, was born in Old Swinford, Worcestershire, on 27 February 1782, the third of four sons of Overs Bate, mercer and banker of Old Swinford, and his wife, Susannah Brettell. Both his parents came from prosperous merchant and landowning families. No record of his schooling or any apprenticeship has been found, but by 1804 he was in London, living with his uncle, a haberdasher. On 11 February 1804 he married his cousin Anna Maria, daughter of Benjamin Sikes, a collector of excise living in Clerkenwell. They had five children: Mary, Bartholomew (apprenticed to his father in 1822), Anna Maria, John, and Ann, who in 1843 married Richard Thomas Staples-Brown. Shortly before Sikes's death in 1803 his improved hydrometer had been adopted by the government excise department for revenue purposes. The right to supply this instrument passed to his family, and thus Bate, as nephew and son-in-law, was appointed mathematical instrument maker to HM excise, a privilege later extended to his widow. 
In 1813 the Clockmakers' Company, having observed that Bate had opened a shop where he was selling sundials and other mathematical instruments, summoned him to take up his freedom within that company. Bate's response was to enrol in the Spectaclemakers' Company, an action which became the subject of the test case in the notorious dispute between these two companies, as to which should control the makers and the retailers of mathematical instruments. When judgment was finally delivered in November 1817, Bate was described as a maker of spectacles, but a retailer of other mathematical instruments. He continued this profitable line of business and examples of virtually all types of optical, mathematical, and philosophical instruments bearing his signature are known. 
Bate was admitted to the Spectaclemakers' livery in 1822, moving up through the ranks to become master in 1828-30, thereafter sitting in the court of assistants. He was appointed optician in ordinary to King George IV, this post being renewed on the accessions of William IV and Queen Victoria. Helped by eminent scientists, Bate worked continually to improve the hydrometers and his skills were acknowledged when he was asked to make the models for the new standard weights and measures of capacity enacted by parliament in 1825 to replace existing ancient local measures. Bate and Henry Kater worked on these models in 1825-6, and subsequently Bate supplied hundreds of sets of standards to government and municipal offices throughout the United Kingdom and overseas. He also made bullion balances for the Bank of England, the East India Company, and other establishments. John Bate stood in for his father during his frequent absences -- he suffered from chronic bronchitis -- giving evidence to several parliamentary commissions on weights and measures before his own early death from consumption in 1840. 
Appointed sole Admiralty chart agent in 1830, Bate was co-publisher of the 'Nautical Magazine' during its early years, and he wrote and/or published navigation books and some dozen handbooks concerning apparatus which he sold. He retailed mathematical, scientific, and optical instruments, collaborating with David Brewster on the kaleidoscope (1816), and took out patents for hydrometers and spectacle frames. The firm traded from 17 Poultry, in the City of London, from 1807, moving to larger premises at 20-21 in 1820 where a workforce of some twenty people was employed. In later years Bate also rented a house in Hampstead, where he died on 27 December 1847. His widow ran the firm until 1850, closing it down shortly before her own death in 1851. Bate and his wife were buried at St John, Clerkenwell, as were several members of their families. 
Bate and his family had various properties and business interests in the west midlands. He was a partner in his brother John Henzey Bate's unsuccessful Eagle Furnace Company of Dudley, and he maintained an interest in the family bank, which traded as Hill, Hill, Bate and Robins, later as Bate and Robins. It was purchased by Midland Bank in 1851. 


@@@@@


doc= 37163


Bothumley, Jacob (1613-1692), Ranter, was born in 1613 in Leicester, the son of William Bauthumley (1586-1635), a shoemaker, and was baptized on 23 May. He was apprenticed to his father in 1627. Both father and son were members of a semi-separatist group in All Saints parish in the city, and both attracted the attention of the ecclesiastical authorities for repeating sermons in William's house. William had been excommunicated in 1619 and Jacob was excommunicated on 28 June 1634, although he had already refused to kneel at communion in 1627 and 1633. Their identities have been confused: William was probably 'Bottomley the shoemaker' who prayed aloud in the company of the nonconformist ministers Francis Higginson and Jeremiah Burroughs in the later 1620s. Both Bothumleys then were closely involved in the emergence of nonconformity in Leicester, a process which was hastened by the action of the forces attempting to achieve its eradication. The consequence of excommunication for Jacob was economic isolation: he was forced to give up his trade and was given redress for this when he petitioned the Long Parliament in 1640. 
Bothumley fought for parliament and rose to be quartermaster in Colonel Cox's regiment. He seems to have had no direct connection with the other publishing Ranters (although Joseph Salmon refers to him), but on 14 March 1650 Bothumley was bored through the tongue with a hot iron for blasphemy, had his sword broken over his head, and was cashiered from the army. He was punished for publishing 'The Light and Dark Sides of God' (1650), copies of which were ordered to be burnt, although George Thomason was still able to acquire a copy in November of the same year. By this time Bothumley had probably returned to Leicester, where the tract had already been sent to London as 'very dangerous... a very wide door to atheism and profaneness'. 
Bothumley's earlier habit of repeating in private sermons already delivered helps to explain his acquisition of a literacy exceptional for a shoemaker: 'The Light and Dark Sides of God' has been regarded as 'a neglected masterpiece of seventeenth-century devotional prose'. It is a work of deep inwardness, where the presence of God in all creatures makes external worship and scriptural authority superfluous: 'God is in all Creatures, Man and Beast, Fish and Fowle, and every green thing, from the highest Cedar to the Ivey on the wall; and that God is the life and being of them all' (Smith, 'Collection', 232). In no place does Bothumley recommend the practical antinomianism of which the other Ranters were accused. The devil and sin exist for him as states of mind in which the true location of the godhead is not recognized, even though such unenlightened awareness still functions as a praise of God. Sinful acts are not Bothumley's concern as such, but it is not difficult to see why 'The Light and Dark Sides of God' was regarded as a dangerous work when it appeared to undermine Christian certainties: 'I have made God mutable as my self' (ibid., 233). 
When the leading Quaker George Fox met Bothumley at Swannington in January 1655, he referred to him unfavourably as a Ranter, although 'The Light and Dark Sides of God' circulated among Quakers. Later on, Bothumley became a minor corporation official at Leicester, in 1658 as serjeant-at-mace, and in 1667 as library keeper. Despite these offices, he was presented for not receiving the holy communion at his parish church, All Saints, Leicester, on 11 September 1667, together with two women. In 1676 he published an abridgement of Foxe's book of martyrs, entitled 'A Brief Historical Relation'; it was reissued in 1686. Between 1676 and 1685 Bothumley was keeper of the house of correction, administering relief to the poor in Leicester on behalf of the corporation. He was buried on 30 July 1692. 


@@@@@


doc= 37164


Baxendale, Joseph (1785-1872), transport entrepreneur, was born at Lancaster on 28 September 1785, the eldest child in a family of two sons and two daughters of Josiah Baxendale (1761-1835) of Castle Hill, Lancaster, surgeon, and his wife, Mabella (1756-1829), daughter of Thomas Salisbury of Marshfield House, Settle. His father carried on a prosperous practice in Lancaster for some forty years and was a leading citizen. His mother was descended from a family of minor gentry from Newton in Bowland on the Lancashire-Yorkshire border. 
Baxendale was educated at Lancaster but left in 1804 for Preston, and afterwards London, where in 1806 he was with Samuel Croughton, wholesale linen draper, of 33 St Paul's Churchyard, the agent for Bannister, Hall & Co., calico-printers of Preston. In 1809 Baxendale returned to Lancashire and became a one-fifth partner in Bannister Hall with Charles Swainson, his cousin through the Salisbury family. The $4000 needed to purchase this share in the partnership Baxendale borrowed from his father and uncle. During these years he travelled much between London and Preston and resided at Darwen Cottage, Walton-le-Dale, near Preston. In 1816 he married Mary (1789-1862), the youngest daughter of Richard Birley (1743-1812) of Blackburn, a wealthy cotton mill owner and co-founder of the firm of Birley, Cardwell & Co., cotton spinners of Blackburn. They had four sons and three daughters. 
Retiring from Bannister Hall in December 1816 with some $6000 in net profit, Baxendale purchased in April 1817 a one-sixth share in the old established but ailing business of T. and M. Pickford & Co., carriers of Manchester. The $8000 Baxendale needed for this purpose was mostly borrowed from the trustees of his wife's marriage settlement. Two other new partners contributed similar capital at the same time, but the poor condition of the firm's affairs (culminating in the bankruptcy of Thomas and Matthew Pickford in 1820) increased Baxendale's active role in the business. By 1824 he was appointed the salaried managing partner. 
During the next twenty years Baxendale's energetic and far-sighted management turned the firm's fortunes from bankruptcy to great prosperity and expanded it to become the largest carrying business in the United Kingdom, giving a comprehensive service to all major towns and cities in England and Scotland, and a household name in nineteenth-century Britain. Baxendale's leadership and personality became a legend with his employees, whose welfare was his constant concern. 
In the 1820s and 1830s the firm relied on canals and roads for the transport of goods, but Baxendale early appreciated the advantages of railways and that Pickford & Co. should go with them rather than against them. His dealings with the Liverpool and Manchester Railway commenced in 1829, even before that line was opened. In 1838 he accepted appointment as general superintendent of the new London and Birmingham Railway, and in 1837 became a director of the South Eastern Railway. From 1841 to 1845 he was chairman of that company and as such instrumental in the construction of the line to Paris via Folkestone and Boulogne. Initially unable to persuade his co-directors of the desirability of using Folkestone harbour, he purchased and developed the site personally in association with his friend Sir William Cubitt, but afterwards sold it to his company at no profit. He was, in the 1840s, a director of the Compagnie du Chemin de Fer du Nord and of the Amiens and Boulogne Railway, and was received by King Louis Philippe. In 1852 he suggested driving a tunnel under the channel to provide a direct rail route. In the late 1830s Baxendale acted as consultant for the construction of the Belgian state railway system. He was also a director of the Regent's Canal Company from 1836, and of the East India Railway Company in the 1840s. 
Having, in 1823, moved the headquarters of Pickfords from Manchester to London, Baxendale moved his own residence from Eccles to Woodside, a spacious Georgian villa at Whetstone, near Finchley, on the Great North Road. From there he travelled continuously in his specially constructed fly carriage to check on the activities of his drivers, as he likewise did in his canal boat, the 'Joseph', on his firm's canal traffic. By degrees he bought out the remaining interests of the Pickford family and of his two other partners, Langton and Inman, so that by 1847 ownership of the business was entirely in the hands of Baxendale and his three elder sons, Joseph Hornby, Lloyd, and Richard Birley, who had become partners in 1843. Baxendale resigned active management of the firm to his sons in 1847 following a period of illness spent abroad. He also resigned his railway directorships. 
The last twenty-five years of his life were spent in retirement at Woodside attending to his locally celebrated garden, his increasing investments, and his charitable interests, while keeping a watchful eye on the fortunes of the firm. He was a JP and deputy lieutenant for Middlesex and Hertfordshire and a magistrate for the liberty of St Albans, as well as visitor of the Jesus Hospital Charity, Barnet (which named Baxendale Street on its Bethnal Green estate after him). He was made associate member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1837. 
A tory in politics and a staunch member of the established church, Baxendale built St John's Church, Whetstone, on part of his estate there in 1832, and during fifty years' residence at Woodside purchased considerable property in the area as well as two agricultural estates at Henham in Essex and Little Dartmouth in Devon. Another investment was a block of houses in Park Village West, Regent's Park, sub-leased from his friend the architect John Nash. Baxendale occupied no. 16 as his London residence from 1838. 
Baxendale died at Woodside on 24 March 1872, aged eighty-six, and was buried on 30 March with others of his family in the vault beneath St John's Church. His personal estate at death amounted to $700,000 in investments, in addition to his freehold estates and the business of Pickford & Co., by then entirely made over to his sons. A lifetime's endeavours brought rich rewards and gained him the admiration of Samuel Smiles, who named him 'the Franklin of Business' (Smiles, 172) and praised him for his enlightened treatment of his employees. 
By the time of Baxendale's death the firm of Pickford & Co., with its headquarters at 57 Gresham Street in the City of London, employed some 1800 horses and a huge staff of clerks, messengers, and porters. Its fortunes were directed by Baxendale's three elder sons, and in turn by three of his grandsons. Prosperity remained with the firm and its partners until 1901, in which year it became a private limited company and embarked on long-drawn-out litigation with the London and North Western Railway, for whom the firm had acted as cartage agents since 1847. Unsuccessful in the courts and badly affected by the loss of the agency, the partners quarrelled and Joseph's grandson Joseph William Baxendale left the firm in 1908. Thereafter undercapitalized, Pickfords was forced into amalgamation with its rival Carter Paterson in 1912, was bought up by Hay's Wharf Cartage Company in 1920 and finally lost all independence when, with Hay's Wharf Cartage and Carter Paterson, it was acquired by the four railway companies jointly (that is, the London, Midland and Scottish Railway, the London and North-Eastern Railway, the Great Western Railway, and the Southern Railway) in 1934. 


@@@@@


doc= 37165


Baxter, George (1804-1867), colour printer, was born at 37 High Street, Lewes, Sussex, on 31 July 1804, the second son and second child in the family of three sons and three daughters of John Baxter (1781-1858), printer and bookseller, and his wife, Charlotte, 'nee' Warner. He spent his childhood in Lewes, attending the Cliffe House Academy and then the town's grammar school. After school he was apprenticed to a wood-engraver. In 1825 he moved to London and in 1827 settled in Islington. On 23 August 1827 he married his cousin Mary, daughter of Robert Harrild, manufacturer of printing machinery. They had one son and two daughters. 
Over the next eight years Baxter applied himself to developing and perfecting the colour printing process which brought him international fame. In 1829 he produced his first coloured print, 'Butterflies', and achieved popular acclaim in 1834 with the coloured plates for 'Feathered Tribes of the British Islands' by Robert Mudie. Baxter enjoyed a fruitful collaboration with Mudie and had illustrated thirteen of his books by 1844. 
In 1836 Baxter received a royal patent for his printing process. His technique was innovatory, combining an engraved metal plate with as many as twenty engraved wooden blocks, each printed in a separate colour. The prints combined quality and cheapness and were produced in vast numbers. For the next twenty-five years Baxter dominated colour printing, branching out into a variety of publishing areas, including decorated music sheets, notepaper, pocket-books, and his famous needle cases. He claimed to have produced 20 million prints by the end of his career. Baxter's subjects were remarkably varied and included sentimental treatments of religious and romantic themes, prints of typical London figures, and newsworthy events. His piety led him to produce some of his most powerful work for the immensely influential and prosperous missionary societies. In collaboration with John Snow, Baxter worked for the London Missionary Society from 1837 to 1843, and in 1844-5 with the Baptist and Wesleyan missionary societies. His most celebrated missionary print was 'The Massacre of the Lamented Missionary, the Rev. J. Williams and Mr. Harris at Erromanga' (1841). 
Had he restricted his output to such enterprises, Baxter would undoubtedly have become very wealthy; yet he suffered commercially throughout his career because of his perfectionism and over-ambition. It is ironic that his greatest financial disasters were projects which resulted from the interest which both Queen Victoria and Prince Albert showed in his work. The large prints which he brought out by royal command to commemorate the coronation and opening of the House of Commons in 1838 and the prints he produced, after Lord Brougham had arranged an interview with Albert, to commemorate the Great Exhibition of 1851, were hopelessly delayed and proved very expensive failures. Nevertheless, Baxter's work and his royal connections made him famous during the years directly following the Great Exhibition, and he gained public recognition for his achievements: he was awarded the great gold medal of Austria (1852), and medals for his exhibits at the Great Exhibitions in New York (1853) and Paris (1855), was elected a member of the Royal Society of Arts (1855), and received the grand gold medal of Sweden (1857). The years 1850-55 were also those of his greatest commercial success. A single print, 'The Madonna', sold in excess of 700,000 copies. 
By 1856, however, Baxter was in financial difficulties as a result of competition from rival companies, and because of photography's growing appeal. His markets were poached, and his temperament appeared to decline with his financial fortunes. He became increasingly embittered, alienating both his family and personal friends. In 1859 he produced his last print, 'Dogs of St. Bernard', and in 1865 he was declared bankrupt. After unsuccessful attempts to sell his enormous stock of prints through public auctions, he retired to his wife's house, suitably named The Retreat, at Peak Hill, Sydenham, London. In 1866 Baxter suffered a blow to the head in an omnibus accident; he never properly recovered, and he died at home on 11 January 1867. He was buried at Christ Church, Forest Hill, Sydenham, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 37166


Bayes, Thomas (1701?-1761), mathematician and Presbyterian minister, was probably born in Hertfordshire, the eldest in the family of four sons and three daughters of the Revd Joshua Bayes and his wife, Ann Carpenter. He entered Edinburgh University in 1719 and studied for three years, though without taking a degree. He was licensed to preach while in Edinburgh, ordained by 1727, and began his ministry as an assistant to his father, at the time minister of the Presbyterian meeting-house at Leather Lane, Hatton Garden, London. In 1731 he was appointed to minister in Tunbridge Wells at the meeting-house in Little Mount Sion, and in that year a tract attributed to him -- 'Divine benevolence, or, An attempt to prove that the principal end of the divine providence and government is the happiness of his creatures' -- was published by John Noon. 
In 1736 Noon published another anonymous tract which has always been attributed to Bayes -- 'An introduction to the doctrine of fluxions, and a defence of the mathematicians against the objections of the author of The analyst'. The author of 'The Analyst, or, A Discourse Addressed to an Infidel Mathematician' (1734), George Berkeley (1685-1753), had attacked the practitioners of the Newtonian calculus, and impugned their piety; among the replies in defence of the mathematicians, that of Bayes was considered the most acute. Perhaps on this account he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1742. 
Bayes's fame rests on his posthumous paper, 'An essay towards solving a problem in the doctrine of chances', which was published in 1764 in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' for the year 1763, having been 'found among [his] papers' by his friend the Revd Richard Price, who wrote an introduction for it. It contains a solution to the problem (in Bayes's words): ''Given' the number of times in which an unknown event has happened and failed: 'Required' the chance that the probability of its happening in a single trial lies somewhere between any two degrees of probability that can be named' ('Philosophical Transactions', 53, 1764, 370-418). 
The problem is fundamental to statistical inference. It owes its origin to the 'Ars conjectandi' of James Bernoulli (1713), and was extensively treated by Abraham de Moivre. Possibly Bayes learned of it directly from de Moivre, although he may equally well have encountered it first in his writings, or in 'Observations on Man, his Frame, his Duty, and his Expectations' (1749) by David Hartley. 
Bayes's tentative solution to the problem involves assuming that the lack of knowledge of the probability about which an inference is to be made may be represented by a uniform probability distribution, for which he gives an ingenious argument which has often been overlooked. The resulting type of statistical methodology is referred to as Bayesian and involves assigning a probability distribution to every unknown. Commonly rejected for much of the twentieth century, the use of such arguments has become more popular recently, though they remain controversial. Bayes's paper also includes a result which is a special case of a more general theorem in conditional probability which, anachronistically, has therefore become known as Bayes's theorem. In addition it contains some interesting contributions to the evaluation of the beta probability integral. Bayes's only other known published work is a short letter to John Canton on Stirling's approximation which was also printed in the 'Philosophical Transactions' for 1763. 
In 1752 Bayes retired from his ministry, but continued to live in Tunbridge Wells until his death. He died on 7 April 1761, and was buried in the Bayes and Cotton family vault in Bunhill Fields, the nonconformist burial-ground at Moorgate, London. He was unmarried. His will, executed on 12 December 1760, shows him to have been a man of substance. Richard Price described Bayes as the most ingenious man he ever knew, and William Whiston wrote that he was a very good mathematician. He is also said to have been a good Greek scholar and a poor preacher, and it is clear that he was retiring and modest. 


@@@@@


doc= 37167


Sir Edward Baynton (c.1495-1544), inherited all his father's estates. Probably knighted in 1522 he was an astute courtier who served in the royal household (he was vice-chamberlain to all save the first of Henry VIII's wives) and on military expeditions to the Scottish borders and France, as well as in local affairs. He sat in the parliaments of 1529 and 1539 as a knight of the shire for Wiltshire, and in that of 1542 as a burgess for Wilton. Probably during his association with Thomas Cromwell he began the family tradition of strong protestantism, and at the dissolution he gained much former monastic land in and near Wiltshire, especially the site of Stanley Abbey and sixteen of its manors. He built an imposing manor house at Bromham, which was said to be almost as large as the king's new court at Whitehall, and which remained the family's chief residence until demolished during the civil war. Edward married, first, Elizabeth Sulyard, and they had four daughters and three sons, Andrew, Edward, and Henry. The second and third sons had the same mother, a fact emphasized in the wills made both by Sir Edward before his death on 27 November 1544 and by his son Edward in 1592. There has been confusion over this, as Sir Edward's second marriage to Isabel Leigh, whom he had married by 1531, produced two sons, one named Henry. 
Sir Edward's heir, 


@@@@@


doc= 37168


Beaumont, Agnes (bap. 1652, d. 1720), religious autobiographer, was born in Edworth, Bedfordshire, where she was baptized Ann on 1 September 1652, the youngest of seven children (of whom three died in infancy) of John Beaumont, yeoman farmer of Edworth, and his wife, Mary Pakes of Pirton, Hertfordshire. Agnes was the author of a brief but vividly written autobiographical account describing events leading up to and following the death in 1674 of her father, whom she was accused of having poisoned with the help of the separatist minister John Bunyan, a crime for which, had she been convicted, she could have been burnt at the stake. 
Her family was strongly nonconformist, and in 1672, having come under the spell of Bunyan's preaching, Agnes joined a congregation of his at Gamlingay. Her father had turned against Bunyan, however, and when he heard that she had ridden behind him to a meeting, he locked her out of the house for two days. When she promised not to attend any more meetings without his permission, they were reconciled, but he died the same night, probably of a heart attack, with only Agnes in the house. A former suitor, Mr Feery, the family lawyer, maliciously suggested that she had murdered him, and her brother had to summon from a neighbouring village a coroner and jury, which cleared her of any guilt. Rumours that she was carrying on an illicit relationship with Bunyan persisted for some time, and in the following year Feery also accused her of having set fire to a house in Edworth. Again these allegations were dismissed, but Bunyan was deeply disturbed by the continuing rumours of sexual misconduct, and added a section to a later edition of his own autobiography, 'Grace Abounding to the Chief of Sinners' (1666), vehemently denying them. 
In her middle life Beaumont was married twice: first, in 1702, to Thomas Warren of Cheshunt, a landowning gentleman who died in 1707 leaving her half his estate; then, in 1708, to Samuel Storey, a prosperous London fishmonger, who survived her. She died on 28 November 1720 and was buried at her own request near the minister John Wilson, in the yard of the Tilehouse Street Baptist meeting in Hitchin. She had contributed towards the cost of erecting the church building in 1692, and may have been a member before her marriage. Her autobiography remained in manuscript but copies began to circulate, and in 1760 it was published in a frequently reprinted collection of nonconformist conversion narratives. It is a rare example of the genre at this social level in the seventeenth century, and illustrates the power of radical religious belief to inspire resistance to patriarchal authority. 


@@@@@


doc= 37169


Beaumont, Sir Henry de (c.1280-1340), baron, was the younger son of Louis de Brienne, in right of his wife vicomte of Beaumont in Maine, and Agnes, daughter of Raoul, vicomte de Beaumont. Through his great-grandfather, Alfonso IX, king of Leon, he was distantly related to Edward I's first wife, Eleanor of Castile: a connection that may have promoted both the marriage of Beaumont's sister, Isabella, to Edward's supporter, John de Vescy (d. 1289), in 1279 or 1280, and Beaumont's own entree into English affairs in 1297, when he was made a knight of the royal household. He quickly came to be on close terms both with Edward himself, in whose Scottish wars he regularly served, and with his heir. 
After the young Edward's accession in 1307 Beaumont rose rapidly. Joint warden of Scotland in 1308, he was summoned to parliament in 1309, and went on to receive extensive lands in Lincolnshire (augmented by his sister's lands in that county after her death in 1334) and the more contentious grant of the Isle of Man. The king's favour made him the special target of the reforming lords ordainer, who in 1311 called for the exclusion from court of both Beaumont and Isabella, the resumption of his grants from the king, and the transference of the custody of Man to 'a good Englishman' (a phrase that reveals one reason for his unpopularity). These demands, however, were never implemented and Beaumont remained prominent at Edward's court until 1323. Regularly employed on missions abroad, he was also closely involved with the king's attempt to secure the bishopric of Durham for Henry's brother Louis de Beaumont, which led to the capture and ransoming of both the Beaumonts by Thomas, earl of Lancaster, the court's leading opponent, in 1317. He had his revenge in March 1322, when he was among the royalist army that defeated Lancaster at Boroughbridge. It may have been shortly after this that he served (so John Capgrave (died 1464) says) in the Italian crusades launched against the enemies of Pope John XXII. 
About 1310 Beaumont married Alice or Alicia Comyn (died 1349), niece of John Comyn, seventh earl of Buchan, and heir to the Comyn earldom. This claim to a Scottish title and lands did as much as royal favour to determine the course of his career. The status that it gave him as a disinherited lord led him to oppose the Anglo-Scottish truce of 1323 and helped to persuade him to change his allegiance shortly afterwards. Although he was still sufficiently trusted to be appointed one of the young Edward's guardians when the prince was sent abroad to do homage for his father's French lands in September 1325, a year later he had become one of the leading supporters of Queen Isabella in her invasion of England. 
After Edward II's deposition Beaumont was well rewarded for his altered loyalties by a large grant of lands in Leicestershire, but the Anglo-Scottish treaty of Northampton of 1328 led him once more into opposition. The treaty had promised the restoration of their Scottish inheritances to Beaumont and the other disinherited; but these promises were not kept. Beaumont became implicated first in the rebellion of Henry, earl of Lancaster, against the regime of Roger (V) Mortimer and Isabella in 1328-9, fleeing to France after its collapse, and then in the inept conspiracy of Edmund of Woodstock, earl of Kent. 
The coup of 1330, which finally overthrew the regime and established Edward III as king, opened a second successful phase in Beaumont's career. He returned to England and became the leading supporter of Edward Balliol in Balliol's attempt to secure the Scottish throne for himself and the restoration of their lands for the disinherited. In 1332 he shared Balliol's triumph at the battle of Dupplin Moor and in 1333 he was in the victorious army that defeated the Scots at Halidon Hill and restored Balliol to his throne after a brief Scottish rebellion. In the aftermath of the battle Beaumont was apparently made both earl of Moray and constable of Scotland by the new king. In 1334 he was captured and ransomed by the Scots, gaining his freedom in time to fight in Edward III's major Scottish campaign of 1335; but thereafter he shared in the general decline of English fortunes and interest in Scotland and never obtained recognition of his titles there. In July 1338 he went abroad to the Low Countries with Edward, and died there on 10 March 1340. According to Capgrave he was buried at Vaudey Abbey, a Cistercian house in Lincolnshire. He left a son and heir, John, aged twenty-two, a daughter, Katherine, who had married David Strathbogie, eleventh earl of Atholl, and his widow, who died in 1349. He was essentially an adventurer, who owed his rise to his service to three kings, his military vigour, his fortunate marriage, and his ability to press home the advantages that opportunity offered him. 


@@@@@


doc= 37170


Bedyngham, John (d. 1459/60), composer, is of unknown parentage and birth, though his name suggests a family of Norfolk origins. A hypothesis that he is identical with John Bodenham (1422-1458), scholar and fellow of New College, Oxford, has not won general acceptance. Bedyngham left a small but distinguished body of secular and sacred music. Apart from three mathematically intricate proportional puzzle motets, his works are known almost entirely from manuscripts compiled on the continent of Europe. This may suggest that he travelled, as does his composing a chanson mass, but the presence of texts in foreign languages among his songs is by no means conclusive evidence for this, since in many cases it can be shown that the words are not original; and the marked propensity of foreign copyists to ascribe his works to more famous masters suggests that he was not personally known to them. 
Bedyngham's music, especially his secular songs, survives in a surprising number of different manuscripts. He probably composed the famous setting of Giustinian's 'O rosa bella' commonly ascribed to John Dunstaple (Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, 'Chansonnier de Jean de Montchenu', MS Rothschild 2973 (I.5.13), fols. 8'v'-10'r', item 7). The song does not observe the niceties of the ballata form. The eight songs attributable to Bedyngham are between them supplied with no fewer than twenty different texts in four languages; three remain doubtful as to their form, but two are ballades and three rondeaux, types well known and widely practised in England at the time. 
Expertise in the medium of song may have led Bedyngham to become one of the first composers, along with Walter Frye and Guillaume Dufay, to experiment with the technique of building a mass cycle not on plainchant, but on a model taken from secular music. There is a remarkable cycle on Gilles Binchois's ballade 'Deuil angoisseux', in which material from all voices of the song informs other parts than the tenor alone (Trento, Castello del Buonconsiglio, Monumenti e Collezioni Provinciali, MS 1375, fols. 27'v'-31'r' and 17'v'-21'r'). Two other masses (one of doubtful attribution) are hardly less distinguished. In turn, Bedyngham's own songs served as models on which other composers based mass cycles, including three on 'O rosa bella'. 
Bedyngham appears to have spent the last seven years of his life in Westminster. By Michaelmas 1453 he was in the employ of the lady chapel of Westminster Abbey, while by May 1456 he had become verger to the collegiate church of St Stephen, Westminster, a post he still held in 1457-8, when he made over all his property to others by letters patent. The membership list of the Confraternity of St Nicholas, the London guild of parish clerks, of which he was already a member in 1449, reveals that Bedyngham died between 3 May 1459 and 22 May 1460. 


@@@@@


doc= 37171


Beecroft, John (1790-1854), west African explorer and consul, was born near Whitby. Little is known about his early years beyond the fact that in 1805, while serving aboard a coasting vessel, he was captured by a French privateer and held prisoner until the peace of 1814. He subsequently joined the merchant service, rising in due course to become commander of a transport vessel, in which capacity he accompanied one of the expeditions to Greenland led by Sir William Parry. 
The significant part of Beecroft's career began in 1829 with his appointment as superintendent of works at Fernando Po, an island in the Gulf of Guinea nominally under Spanish control but where Britain was establishing a base for combating the slave trade. Beecroft pressed ahead with building docks and shore installations. Very quickly, however, his superiors recognized his talent for understanding and winning the goodwill of Africans, as when he successfully resolved a dispute with the rulers of Old Calabar, upon which the settlement was largely dependent for provisions. In 1830, when the governor, Edward Nicholls, returned to England on sick leave, Beecroft took over as acting governor, a post conferred on him by the Spanish government with the rank of lieutenant in the Spanish navy, and which he held with distinction for the next two years. Finding that Spain was unwilling to part with Fernando Po, Britain gave up its settlement in 1833. Beecroft, however, stayed on as a partner in the firm of Dillon, Tennant & Co., which controlled the shore establishments from 1833 to 1837. Strictly speaking he was simply a private citizen, but effectively he continued to govern the island, maintaining a court of justice, and generally overseeing its affairs. In 1843 he was made governor of Fernando Po and two other Spanish islands. 
Beecroft's other principal concern was using steam power to open up the interior of Africa to trade. The great difficulty was that, although steamers could ascend the Niger and other rivers, the effectiveness of quinine as a prophylactic against malaria had not yet been fully grasped, with the result that the death-rate among Europeans was appallingly high. However, Beecroft's attempts, little noted at the time because they were mounted from Fernando Po, proved much more successful than the highly publicized expeditions that set out from England. Employing crews composed largely of Africans he systematically explored the rivers flowing into the Gulf of Guinea, ascending the Niger as far as Raba, 400 miles from the coast, on more than one occasion. As a result he became the most knowledgeable and influential European in that part of Africa and was continually being called on by traders, missionaries, and humanitarians for advice or to sort out local disputes. 
Beecroft was thus already something of an institution when, in 1849, the third Viscount Palmerston appointed him consul to the bights of Benin and Biafra. (This post was not incompatible with his governorship of Fernando Po which he continued to hold until his death.) Although Britain had long had trading connections with these areas, hitherto she had had no territorial ambitions there. Under Beecroft that changed. As the senior resident British official on the coast he was largely responsible for the British occupation of Lagos in 1851 and the deposition of King Pepple of Bonny in 1854. If the years 1829-49 show Beecroft's genius for winning the friendship and respect of Africans, the period 1849-54 reveals him as a forceful interventionist, determined to establish British paramountcy over what was eventually destined to become the colony of Nigeria. 
With the support of the British government and of the Royal Geographical Society, to which he had been elected on the recommendation of its president, Sir Roderick Murchison, Beecroft was appointed leader of the Niger expedition in 1854, but before it was fully under way he died, on 10 June 1854 at Fernando Po, where he was buried; his place as leader of the expedition was taken by William Baikie. 


@@@@@


doc= 37172


Beeton, Isabella Mary (1836-1865), writer on household management and journalist, was born on 14 March 1836 at Milk Street, off Cheapside in the City of London, the eldest in the family of three daughters and a son of Benjamin Mayson (1801-1840), linen factor of Milk Street, London, and his wife, Elizabeth Jerrom (1815-1871). Isabella's father died when she was four, and in 1843 her mother married Henry Dorling (1806-1873) of Epsom, who had two sons and two daughters from a previous marriage. To these eight, a further thirteen children were added over the next twenty years. They were housed for most of the year with their maternal grandmother, Mary Jerrom (1794-1874), in the Epsom grandstand, which was let to Henry Dorling in his capacity as clerk of the course. As the eldest girl among the twenty-one children, Isabella was her grandmother's chief assistant, and in this unusual establishment her informal education began. Her formal education, after a brief period in Islington, was in a school in Heidelberg which she probably entered in summer 1851. Here, as well as developing her musical talents, she acquired a facility in languages which was to be useful in her later career. She also took to pastry making, which she continued to practise at a local confectioners when she returned to Epsom in 1854, though her family thought this to be 'ultra modern and not quite nice'. 
On 10 July 1856, at St Martin's, Epsom, Isabella married Samuel Orchart Beeton (1831-1877), the son of Samuel Powell Beeton, an innkeeper at Milk Street, London. They had four sons, the first of whom died in infancy (1857) and the second aged three (1864). Samuel Beeton had already begun to make a name for himself as a publisher and editor. His early involvement in the English edition of Harriet Beecher Stowe's 'Uncle Tom's Cabin' had helped to finance a series of innovatory publications. The most important of these for Mrs Beeton was the 'English Woman's Domestic Magazine', a twopenny monthly launched in 1852, which pioneered the middle-class woman's magazine. 
For the eight and a half years of their marriage the Beetons developed a partnership in which the personal and professional were intertwined. Mrs Beeton entered almost immediately into her husband's publishing business, and within a year was writing on domestic matters for the 'English Woman's Domestic Magazine' and had begun the 'four years' incessant labour' which she claimed 'Beeton's Book of Household Management' cost her. Her role in the production of the various Beeton journals is not self-evident in their pages, since a public persona was not part of her style. However, she was 'editress' of the 'Domestic Magazine' and was involved in the upmarket weekly 'The Queen' which was launched in 1861. A visit to Paris in 1860 established a French connection for the firm, and a new series of the 'English Woman's Domestic Magazine' included monthly accounts of the latest Paris styles, a high-quality colour fashion-plate, and the offer of a pattern service for readers, a combination which was to become a staple of twentieth-century women's magazines. Whether she was visiting Paris, writing articles, dealing with layout, even demonstrating how to cut out a pattern for a perplexed reader, Mrs Beeton's energy and organizational skills were crucial to the management of the publishing house. It is not for this, however, that she is remembered, but for her writing on domestic matters and especially for 'Beeton's Book of Household Management' (1859-61), which in its various editions made 'Mrs Beeton' a household name in a double sense. 
Part of the extraordinary success of this book may be attributed to skilful marketing -- as a part-work between 1859 and 1861, the illustrated edition in 1861, and the cheap reissues begun by Samuel Beeton and continued by Ward, Lock, and Tyler, to whom he sold his titles after Isabella's death. Its success, however, also rested on its quality, especially the combination of clear structure and precise detail. Recipes, for example, were arranged alphabetically in sections, with ingredients, prices, weights, and cooking times all precisely stated. The book's style moved easily between detailed instructions and neat aphorisms. 
For Mrs Beeton, a people's 'way of taking their meals, as well as their way of treating women' were marks of civilization. Dining well 'implies both the will and the skill to reduce to order, and surround with idealisms and grace, the more material conditions of human existence'. That will and skill she showed in large measure. The popular image of Mrs Beeton as a middle-aged housewife given to the confection of extravagant recipes is doubly mistaken. First, her book is notable for its attempt to combine good living with economy. Second, she never lived to middle age; she died aged twenty-eight at her home, Mount Pleasant, Swanscombe, Kent, of peritonitis and puerperal fever on 6 February 1865, eight days after the birth of her son Mayson, who later had a distinguished career in journalism and government. She was buried on 11 February at Norwood cemetery. 
Margaret Beetham', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37173


Beldam, Asplan (1841-1912), marine engineer, was born in Bluntisham, Huntingdonshire, on 5 October 1841, the eldest son in the family of eleven children of William Beldam, farmer and victualler, and his wife, Mary Peat. After serving an apprenticeship with Kitson, Thompson, and Hewitson, locomotive engineers in Leeds, he turned to marine engineering and from 1864 to 1869 gained experience with several shipbuilding firms on the Thames. From 1870 to 1873 he was outside manager at G. Forrester & Co.'s Vauxhall foundry, Liverpool, where he had charge of repairs to vessels and the fitting out of new ships. 
By the time Beldam left Liverpool in 1873 he had been appointed consulting and superintending engineer to a number of shipping companies, including the Flower Line, the Castle Line, and the Eastern Telegraph Company. One particularly notable vessel which he designed was the 'Stirling Castle', famed for her speed, for example, when in 1882 she brought home a cargo of 6000 tons of China tea from Hangchow (Hangzhou) in twenty-eight days, beating the previous best time by more than a week. 
From 1873 to 1876 Beldam acted as marine superintendent with Hargrove, Fergusson, and Jackson, for whom he constructed both ships and machinery, striving always to achieve greater power, efficiency, and economy. During this time he developed and patented several new types of high-pressure steam boiler as well as making improvements to steam-tight glands, valves for pumps, and anti-clinkering fire bars. 
By 1876 the growing interest in his metallic asbestos packing encouraged Beldam to patent it and found the Beldam Packing and Rubber Company, which later became Beldam Crossley. At the same time he set up in practice as a consulting engineer and naval architect in London, where he remained until his death. Beldam took a leading part in the formation of the Institute of Marine Engineers and was elected the first president in 1889. He continued to take a very active interest in its affairs, and he was also a member of the institutions of Mechanical Engineers (1888) and Naval Architects and of the London chamber of commerce. His advice and opinion as an arbitrator were frequently sought, his fair and impartial judgement being held in high esteem. 
Beldam married, at Deptford on 9 February 1863, Elizabeth Hannah Knowles (1842/3-1921), daughter of George Wood Knowles. They had eleven children; their two sons both went to Cambridge University before entering the family business, of which they later became directors. He died suddenly at his residence, Torrens House, North Common Road, Ealing Common, London, on 16 December 1912. 
Ronald M. Birse', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37174


Bell, Henry (bap. 1647, d. 1711), architect and merchant, was baptized on 8 July 1647 in King's Lynn, Norfolk, the son of Henry Bell (died 1686), mercer. He was educated at the local grammar school and then Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he took his BA degree in 1665, before embarking on a grand tour. On 28 February 1678 he married Anne Brumble; they had five sons and one daughter. In 1686 he inherited his father's properties and continued his successful business as a producer of linseed and rape oil. His status in the merchant community is attested by his becoming an alderman in 1690 and, following his father, serving as mayor of King's Lynn in 1692 and 1703. 
An educated and cultivated gentleman, Bell's travels played an important part in the formation of his taste, both as a connoisseur of paintings and as an architect. His own collection, bequeathed to his youngest son, William, included works said to be by Hans Holbein, Rembrandt, Egbert van Heemskerk and his father, and Hendrick Goltzius. He practised architecture as a pastime rather than as a full-time profession. In the brief memoir of his life, which prefixes his posthumously published 'An Historical Essay on the Original of Painting' (1728), Bell's travels are said to have 'conduced very much to his Improvement' in architecture, the 'Mistress of... (his) Affections'. His style owed a great deal to Dutch architecture, as well as to the work of Sir Christopher Wren. He first came to notice for his role in planning the rebuilding of Northampton after the fire of 1675. He was certainly at least jointly responsible for the rebuilding (1677-80) of the town's All Saints' Church and was perhaps involved also in the designing of the sessions house (1676-88), as well as houses in the market place. 
Bell's most important surviving building is the custom house, King's Lynn, built in 1683 as an exchange, at the expense of the wine merchant and member of parliament Sir John Turner, and sold to the customs authorities in 1718. This square building, with an arcaded ground floor, steep roof, and lantern, is articulated by superimposed orders which carry Bell's characteristic garlanded, Ionic capitals. This motif occurs also at his church at North Runcton, Norfolk, rebuilt in 1703-13, which shares with All Saints' in Northampton the plan of a Greek cross within a rectangle, probably derived from Wren's St Mary-at-Hill. Of Bell's other documented works, all in King's Lynn, the domed, octagonal market cross (1707-10; dem. 1831) was the most notable. It is likely that he was responsible also for the surviving Duke's Head inn, in the town's Tuesday Market, built about 1684 for Sir John Turner to accommodate those visiting the exchange. On stylistic grounds we may also attribute to him the church of St Genevieve at Euston, Suffolk (1676), the courtyard of Kimbolton Castle, Huntingdonshire ('c'.1685), and Stanhoe Hall, Norfolk (1703), built for Thomas Archdale (MP for High Wycombe in 1698-9) and his wife, Jane, the daughter of Charles Turner, Sir John's younger brother. 
Bell has a small but significant place in English architectural history, not only for the strength of his designs but also as an occasional architect coming, unusually, from the mercantile community rather than from the court or the gentry. He signed his will in 1706 and died in King's Lynn on 11 April 1711, leaving substantial properties to his wife and family. He was buried in St Margaret's Church, King's Lynn, in which he had been baptized and married. 


@@@@@


doc= 37175


Bell, Joseph (1837-1911), surgeon, the son of Benjamin Bell, surgeon, and his wife, Cecilia Craigie, was born on 2 December 1837 at St Andrew Square, Edinburgh. He was educated at the Edinburgh Academy and entered the University of Edinburgh at the early age of sixteen; he graduated MD in 1859. He travelled to the continent but was not attracted to stay and study there. Bell returned to become house surgeon to Professor James Syme, and then house physician to William Gairdner. 
Bell became a demonstrator in anatomy, and at the early age of twenty-six he set up his own classes of systematic and operative surgery. He was special assistant to Syme for five years and was held in high esteem by his master and mentor. In 1865 he married Edith Katherine (died 1874), daughter of the Hon. James Erskine Murray of the Elibank family; they had a son and two daughters. In 1872 Bell became a senior surgeon to the Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh. During these years he also served with great distinction in the Edinburgh Eye Infirmary. Having completed the statutory fifteen years' service, he then 'retired' from the Royal Infirmary to become the first surgeon to the Royal Hospital for Sick Children. 
Bell's reputation as a brilliant, caring craftsman and surgeon has been extensively recorded, but he was also a dedicated mentor of nurses. He introduced the new Nightingale ward design to the Royal Infirmary and began the clinical teaching of nurses on Sunday morning rounds. He was the founder and vice-president of the Queen Victoria Jubilee Institute of Nurses. Bell was a strong churchman and after seeing two or three patients on a Sunday morning would go without fail to St George's United Free Church, where he was a senior elder. 
Bell was not a prolific writer, but his book 'Some Notes on Surgery for Nurses' (1887), dedicated to Florence Nightingale, ran to six editions. His other publications included 'A Manual of the Operations of Surgery', which ran to seven editions, and articles on scapulo-humeral dislocation and pulsating tumours of the orbit. He served Edinburgh University from 1895 as the assessor of the university court and was soon elected a curator of patronage, a post he held until he died. He was also committed to and involved in the admission of women to the medical school, which obviously involved much tact and understanding in order to break down prejudice. He was an examiner for the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh for more than forty-two years, treasurer for eleven, and president in 1887-9. He was a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh and deputy lieutenant of the county. 
Bell won notoriety as the inspiration for the creation of the character of Sherlock Holmes. Arthur Conan Doyle was a medical student in Edinburgh and had been impressed if not inspired by Bell's professional appearance -- 'a tall, stately, kindly man, keen eyes and aquiline features contributing to his air of intent investigation. He would study with close interest all the mannerisms, features, expressions and personal traits of a patient' (Liebow). Bell died on 4 October 1911 at his home, Mauricewood, Milton Bridge, Midlothian. He is buried in Dean cemetery, Edinburgh. 
R. B. Duthie', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37176


Bellingham, John (1770-1812), assassin, was born in St Neots in Huntingdonshire, the younger child and only son of a London land surveyor and miniature painter and his wife, Elizabeth Searbrow, of St Neots gentry stock. His father became mentally ill in 1779, and died a year later. At fourteen Bellingham was apprenticed to a Whitechapel jeweller but proved 'perverse and troublesome' and eventually ran away. In 1787 he sailed as a subaltern on a merchantman that was wrecked. 
In 1793 Bellingham established himself as a tradesman in Oxford Street but was gazetted bankrupt in 1794. Later he became a commercial agent, and in 1804 was arrested for debt in Archangel. He accused the local authorities of improper detention and made repeated appeals for help to the British consul and ambassador. They did not act, since the case was one for the Russian authorities alone. Finally released in October 1809, he returned to England, determined to gain redress. 
After Bellingham's return from Russia he married Mary-Anne, daughter of John Neville, a Dublin merchant. The pair settled in Liverpool; Bellingham practised as an insurance broker and his wife as a milliner. They had two children. Preoccupied with efforts to gain redress from the British government, however, Bellingham abandoned his family and moved to London. 
Persistent calls for justice were unavailing and, exasperated by his lack of success, Bellingham decided upon the extreme course of assassinating the prime minister, Spencer Perceval -- a crime carried out, with pistols, coolly and deliberately, in the lobby of the House of Commons on 11 May 1812. Tried on 15 May, he was found guilty of murder and executed three days later in London. Before, during, and after the trial Bellingham remained calm and collected, showing no signs of fear or remorse. He felt fully justified in acting as he did, asserting that true blame attached to those who had refused to listen to his grievances. 
Michael J. Turner', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37177


Benet, John (d. 1458), composer, has left about twenty compositions whose style proclaims him to have been a slightly younger contemporary of John Dunstaple, perhaps a close disciple. Nothing is known of his parentage or birth and very little of his life. He may have been a vicar-choral at Lincoln Minster from 1437 to 1441. It is likely that he was the John Benet of London, clerk, who in 1443 was appointed master of the six choristers of St Anthony's Hospital in London. A John Benet, very probably the same man, was listed in 1448-9 as an existing member of the Confraternity of St Nicholas, the London guild of parish clerks, to which several known composers and their wives belonged; his wife, Agnes, is also named. The indenture of 1443 suggests that Benet was by then approaching the end of his career, while a citizen's will of 1449 implies that the mastership of St Anthony's had by then become vacant. Benet apparently lived for several years more, however, for his will was proved on 4 December 1458. He does not seem to have been wealthy. He lived in the parish of St Benet Fink, London (the parish of St Anthony's Hospital), but probably died in Southwark and was buried in St Olave's, Southwark; his executors were his widow, Elena, who must have been his second wife, and John Weston. 
Benet's motet 'Lux fulget ex Anglia'/'O pater pietatis'/['Salve Thoma']'', a complex large-scale composition honouring St Thomas of Hereford, has plausibly been connected with Hereford Cathedral, which was dedicated to the saint and contained his tomb. The likely occasion for the motet would seem to be the centenary in 1420 of St Thomas's canonization. Dunstaple was a canon of Hereford, and there is certainly a close stylistic relationship between his music and that of Benet, who was one of the last practitioners of a form brought to its apogee by Dunstaple, the mathematically proportioned isorhythmic motet. Three examples survive from Benet's pen; the other two are in honour of St Mary Magdalen and St Alban respectively, which may suggest connections with Magdalen College in Oxford and St Albans Cathedral. 
The rest of Benet's works are all settings of items from the ordinary of the mass, and include an entire five-movement mass cycle and fragments of two more. The first is not based on chant, but relies on a repeated and varying motto in the tenor, with similar beginnings to each movement in the upper voices; its authorship is sometimes allotted to Lionel Power or Dunstaple. Of the incomplete cycles, one also employs motto openings and the other is based on a tenor plainsong. Both these methods of construction were taken up by continental masters, and Benet holds an important place as one of the early creators of the mass cycle, the leading musical form of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. He has also left a remarkable four-voice canonic 'Kyrie'. 
Brian Trowell', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37178


Bennet, Abraham (bap. 1749, d. 1799), Church of England clergyman and natural philosopher, was baptized in Taxal, Cheshire, on 20 December 1749, the son of Abraham Bennet, schoolmaster, of Whaley Lane, Cheshire, and his wife, Ann Fallowes of Cheadle. He appears to have been the eldest child, with at least one brother, William. On 5 April 1774 he married Jane Fallowes (presumably related to his mother's family); they had two sons and six daughters. In September 1775 he was ordained in London and appointed to Derbyshire curacies, first at Tideswell, and the next year at Wirksworth at a doubled annual stipend of $60, where he remained for the rest of his life; Bennet also taught at Wirksworth grammar school. He became domestic chaplain to the duke of Devonshire at nearby Chatsworth, and perpetual curate at Woburn and librarian there to the duke of Bedford. For the last three years of his life he also held the living of Fenny Bentley in Derbyshire. 
Bennet maintained links with local natural philosophers, including Josiah Wedgwood at Etruria, Joseph Priestley at Birmingham, and Erasmus Darwin at Derby, who encouraged him to begin a weather diary to record atmospheric electricity, a principal interest of Darwin and other electrical experimenters such as Priestley and Benjamin Franklin. In September 1786 Bennet sent Priestley an account of an electrometer (soon published in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society') that could detect such electricity using the repulsion of thin gold leaves in an earthed glass bottle, 5 inches high, with a flat brass cap. Atmospheric electricity could be gathered by putting a candle on the cap or connecting it to a kite during lightning storms. This robust device, used in Birmingham, Etruria, and London, proved popular. In December 1786 Bennet described using the electrometer with marble and metal plates to condense electricity in the manner set out in 1782 by Alessandro Volta. Such an instrument had been outlined by Darwin in 1778 before it received a fuller treatment in Volta's paper. 
In May 1787 Bennet published extracts from his electro-meteorological diary in the 'Transactions', along with a detailed account of his new device to make weak atmospheric electricity detectable by repeated doubling using brass plates as condensers. He gathered atmospheric electricity from a candle flame (or, if it was raining, from an umbrella handle) onto a Leyden jar, then brought the jar indoors to charge the electrometer cap. After earthing a varnished brass plate on the cap, Bennet would lift it off the electrometer with an insulating mahogany handle, making the leaves in the electrometer separate. Then he would bring the plate into contact with another varnished plate, earth the latter, and separate them, giving a charge to the second plate of the same sign and size as that initially given to the top of the electrometer. Touching this plate to the electrometer cap while the first plate also sat on it and was grounded doubled the initial charge on the cap. The agile Bennet could double the charge twenty times in about forty seconds. Darwin lauded Bennet's process to Franklin in May 1787, and in 1788 the natural philosopher William Nicholson of London mechanized the process, using a winch to turn a metal disc round a central metal ball. Bennet claimed he had been on the point of mechanizing his own apparatus when Nicholson announced his scheme to the Royal Society. 
In 1789 Bennet was elected a fellow of the society. With support from Darwin, Wedgwood, and Priestley, he published at Derby new accounts of what became known as Bennet's electrometer and doubler in 'New Experiments on Electricity' (1789). He endorsed the French theory that atmospheric electricity stemmed from the evaporation of water through solar heat. Following trials in the 1770s by the natural philosopher Georg Lichtenberg of Gottingen, Bennet worked on 'adhesive electricity', making dust figures on the surface of an electrified resin cake. The expert potter Wedgwood helped Bennet to fix these figures by covering the cake with powdered enamel, then baking it, thus potentially allowing the effects of atmospheric electricity on such figures to be recorded. In autumn 1789 Bennet worked with Darwin to test whether iron filings became more magnetic when mixed with dilute sulphuric acid, and whether inflammable air were magnetic. In both cases Bennet decided in the negative. For these experiments he suspended a magnetic needle within a glass jar from a spider's thread, a sensitive device that could also be used to detect wind currents. He published his results in the 'Transactions' in early 1792. In November 1795 Bennet sent an account of an earthquake to the Royal Society, and suggested an electrical cause of such phenomena. In December 1795 he signed a Derby petition against Jacobinism and in support of the war with France. He died in Wirksworth after a severe illness, and was buried on 9 May 1799. 


@@@@@


doc= 37179


Bennet, Henry Grey (1777-1836), politician, was born on 2 December 1777, the second of three sons and fourth of eight children of Charles Bennet, fourth earl of Tankerville (1743-1822), of Chillingham Castle, Northumberland, and his wife, Emma (1752-1836), daughter and coheir of the London banker Sir James Colebrooke, first baronet, of Gatton, Surrey. He was educated at Eton College (1788-92), served five years in the 1st foot guards, and entered Lincoln's Inn in 1798, and Peterhouse, Cambridge, in 1799 before graduating MA in 1801. Between interludes as assistant to William Drummond, envoy at Naples, and captain of militia volunteers, he was called to the bar in 1803, and afterwards practised on the western circuit. The political diarist Thomas Creevey described him in 1805 as 'most amiable, occasionally most 'boring', but at all times most upright and honourable' (Maxwell, 1.36). 
Bennet, whose father had retreated from public life after two spells as postmaster-general, shared the political ambitions of his brother Charles Augustus Bennet (1776-1854): both belonged to the whiggish Brooks's Club. Bennet's first election as MP for Shrewsbury in 1806 was invalidated, not before he had signalled hostility to George III's dismissal of the 'ministry of all the talents'. His advocacy of Catholic emancipation courted defeat in 1807. Before regaining his seat in 1811 he travelled to Spain to view the theatre of the Peninsular War. He faced no contest for his parliamentary seat after 1812. In the Commons he joined the opposition 'mountain' led by Samuel Whitbread, whom he revered, although his closest associates were his fellow lawyers Creevey and Henry Brougham. His maiden speech, ostensibly a conventional attack on placemen, was directed at the prince regent, who, provoked by Bennet's championship of his estranged wife, labelled him 'factious' (Aspinall, 134). Bennet shunned the 'constitutional' opposition leaders as deviants from Foxite principles, but his 'bete noire' was Robert Stewart, Viscount Castlereagh, leader of the house, with the home secretary Henry Addington, first Viscount Sidmouth, a close second. His quest for 'a cheap government under a reformed parliament' ('Hansard 2', 7, 1822, 1313) meant frequent tirades against army estimates, civil list extravagance, and taxes. He assailed other reactionary regimes sanctified by Napoleon's final defeat, before which he toured the continent. He condemned post-war curtailment of civil liberties, and support for parliamentary reform involved him in metropolitan politics, but he disappointed whigs and radicals alike. After the Peterloo massacre of August 1819 he sought an inquiry into the manufacturing districts' plight. His outspoken defence of Queen Caroline in 1820-21 led to his portrayal among her champions in an engraving by Francis Holl after Abraham Wivell. The radical 'Black Book' (1823) commended him: 'Always at his post. Supports Mr [Joseph] Hume nobly. Tells the Collective Wisdom home truths. Calls for useful papers and documents. Shames the rogues... Great... as the labours of Mr Hume have been, it may be doubted whether all his exertions can be put in competition with the single act of Mr Bennet in obtaining an accurate return of the salaries, offices and emoluments of the honourable Members. (J. Wade, 2.139)' Bennet's efforts 'to diminish the sum of human misery' ('Hansard 1', 39, 1819, 118), adorn the history of English criminal law. No retributory institution, prison, hulk, penal colony, or penitentiary adequately combined punishment with reformation: he and his select committees exposed them, but to little avail. The inquiry into metropolitan policing which he initiated, prompted by Sir Samuel Romilly, caused such a furore in 1816 that ten years elapsed before constructive legislation emerged, although Bennet, having previously piloted the abolition of gaol fees, overthrew statutory rewards for informers on felony in 1818. Other abuses that he confronted included flogging, callous capital punishments, confusion of political prisoners with felons, the despotism of colonial governors, the plight of lunatics and child chimney sweeps, and corrupt licensing. He was sometimes taken in by unscrupulous petitioners. 
On 15 May 1816 Bennet married Gertrude Frances (died 23 Jan 1841), daughter of Lord William Russell. They had one son and three daughters. The abrupt termination of his public career, ascribed to the death from consumption of his only son six months after that of one of his daughters, in 1824, was followed by a curative continental trip in the spring of 1825. His public reputation at home was ruined by the threat, albeit averted, of criminal prosecution for importuning a young male servant at Spa in August 1825. This accounts for his remaining in exile, and giving up his seat in parliament the following year. He and his wife resided in a villa near Lake Como in Italy until his death on 29 May 1836. Bennet's disgrace explains his subsequent pathetic submission to criticism of his parliamentary endeavours, themselves often misreported. The author of several pamphlets, and a fellow of the Royal Society, Bennet kept a political diary from 1806, now lost, though extracts were published in the nineteenth century and one volume (for 1821) has come to light. 


@@@@@


doc= 37180


Bennet, John (1715-1759), Methodist preacher and Independent minister, was born on 1 March 1715 in Whitehough, near Chinley, Derbyshire, the younger son of William Bennet ('c'.1677-1766), farmer, and his wife, Ann (died 1752). Raised as a presbyterian, he was educated at a school in Chapel-en-le-Frith, where he acquired proficiency in Latin and Greek, intending to become a dissenting minister or attorney. However, after a short period in 1732 at the dissenting academy in Findern, Derbyshire, he became a justices' clerk in Sheffield until 1737, and then commenced work as a carrier between Sheffield and Macclesfield. 
On 1 January 1742 Bennet experienced a religious conversion through the influence of David Taylor, an evangelical preacher formerly in the service of the family of Selina Hastings, countess of Huntingdon. From March 1743 he began to preach and built up a network of religious societies in Derbyshire, Cheshire, and south-east Lancashire, which soon became part of the Methodist organization led by John Wesley. As one of Wesley's leading preachers he attended the first Methodist conference in 1744, and in 1748 promoted the system of quarterly meetings to oversee the local Methodist circuits (groups of societies). 
Relations with Wesley, however, became strained as a result of Bennet's marriage on 3 October 1749 to Grace Murray (1715-1803), the widow of a Newcastle ship's captain and daughter of Robert Norman of Newcastle upon Tyne, since Wesley claimed that Grace was already contracted to marry himself. Bennet developed Calvinistic views and by the beginning of 1754 had broken with Wesley, followed by some of his societies, notably at Bolton. Bennet continued to be a travelling preacher, hoping at first to obtain aid from George Whitefield and his Calvinistic Methodist Connexion. Failing to achieve this, he was licensed as a dissenting preacher in January 1754, had a meeting-house built for him at Warburton in Cheshire, and on 9 November 1754 was ordained as an Independent minister. Although he also continued to preach elsewhere, ill health probably curtailed his activities. 
Bennet was among the better educated of the early Methodist preachers and more sober than some in his attitude to supernatural phenomena. He was of a somewhat anxious and dependent temperament, especially when faced with persecution. He died in Chinley on 24 May 1759 and was buried in the presbyterian graveyard there. He left five sons, one of whom, William, became an Independent minister in London. His wife returned to Methodism later in life and died in Chapel-en-le-Frith on 23 February 1803. 
Henry D. Rack', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37181


Bennett, Alfred Rosling (1850-1928), electrical engineer, was born on 14 May 1850 in Islington, London, the son of John Richard Bennett. He had at least one brother. He was educated at a private school, and later at the Bellevue Academy, Greenwich. His original leanings were towards railway engineering, and he maintained an interest in the subject all his life, but his first appointment in 1869 was to the Indian government telegraph department in Karachi, on whose behalf he visited Baluchistan, Mesopotamia, and Turkey, receiving special mention for his proficiency in the testing of land line and submarine cables. 
In 1873 he returned to England and became electrician to the Highton Battery Company, which worked the battery and other patents of the Revd Henry Highton. In 1877, only two years after Alexander Graham Bell had invented the telephone, Bennett set up the first experimental overhead telephone line in England, linking the Queen's Theatre in Long Acre and the Canterbury Music Hall, in London, for a demonstration of Varley's musical telephone. Soon afterwards, he engaged in research which resulted in his filing patents for the telephonic translator (1880), the caustic alkali and iron battery (1881), and a telephone transformer (1881). 
Bennett entered the service of the National Telephone Company in 1883, becoming general manager and chief engineer for Scotland and north-west England from 1886 to 1890. During this time he was responsible for the installation of the first incandescent lamps in Scotland, and the first electric lighting in a coal mine, near Hamilton. After short periods as general manager and chief engineer of the Mutual and the New Telephone companies he set up in practice in 1893 as a consulting telephone and telegraph engineer, in which capacity he acted as consulting engineer to the telephone departments of Guernsey (1896-1921) and Glasgow (1900-04), as well as Portsmouth, Hull, Brighton, and Swansea (1900-11). He was the originator of, and vice-chairman of the executive council for, the Edinburgh International Electrical and Engineering Exhibition of 1890. His last work was the reorganization of the telephone system in Malta. From 1891 on, Bennett published books and papers on both telephony and railways. He was a member of the Institution of Electrical Engineers and a vice-president of the Institution of Locomotive Engineers. 
Bennett was unmarried. He spent the winter of 1927-8 in Malta, and had only been back in England for a few days when he succumbed to bronchitis and died on 24 May 1928, at Smedley's Hydropathic Establishment, Matlock, Derbyshire. He was buried at Darley Dale cemetery, Matlock. His obituarist in 'Locomotive' noted that 'death brought to a close an interesting and useful life'. Bennett was known for his remarkable energy, great sincerity, and charm, and was always ready to acknowledge merit in others. H. W. D., obituarist, writing in the 'Transactions' of the Newcomen Society (Bennett had been a member since 1921), commented on his remarkable memory, and described him as 'a man of genial breezy temperament, a strong individualist, and one who made friends wherever he went.' 


@@@@@


doc= 37182


Benson, William Arthur Smith (1854-1924), metalwork designer, was born at 6 Sussex Square, Paddington, Middlesex, on 17 October 1854, the eldest in the family of four sons and two daughters of William Benson (1816-1887), barrister, and his wife, Elizabeth Soulsby, daughter of Thomas Smith of Colebrook Park, Tonbridge, Kent. Among his brothers were Francis Robert Benson, actor, and Godfrey Rathbone Benson, first Baron Charnwood. Educated first at Darch's Preparatory School, Brighton, Sussex, and afterwards at Winchester College, he entered New College, Oxford, in 1874. In 1876 he decided to be an architect, the following year becoming articled to Basil Champneys. By chance he became acquainted with Edward Burne-Jones and his circle, through whom he also met William Morris. 
Benson remained with Champneys until 1880, but it soon became clear that architecture would never be his chief preoccupation. Instead, with memories of boyhood visits to his uncle, William Arthur Smith, 'a great worker with his hands' (W. A. S. Benson, ix), who introduced the lad to lathes and elementary mechanics, Benson began to consider a career in handicrafts. 'The long and short of it is', he wrote to his mother, 'I must make something or be miserable' (ibid., xxii). With the encouragement of Burne-Jones and Morris, and a modest financial backing from his father, he established a business to manufacture domestic articles in metal to be designed by himself and made, in part, with specially constructed tools and machinery. 
Benson's first workshop opened in 1880 at North End Road, Fulham, where a few men operated foot-powered lathes for turning metal. This was eventually moved to a purpose-built factory, Eyot works, at St Peter's Square, Hammersmith. The enterprise proved so successful that Benson, now nicknamed 'Brass Benson', established a showroom in 1887 at 82 and 83 New Bond Street. He married on 26 October 1886 Venetia Margaret, daughter of the landscape painter, Alfred William Hunt. They had no children. The firm's range, much of it in combinations of copper and brass, gradually increased to include numerous patterns of gas and electric lamp fittings, furniture decorations, and tea-kettles. The business was converted into a limited liability company named W. A. S. Benson & Co. Ltd in 1901, and was sold upon Benson's retirement in 1920. 
Those who knew Benson only as 'a rather dreamy artist' were astonished upon visiting his factory (W. A. S. Benson, xxvi). This advocate of the 'intelligent education of the hand and eye' had after all shown himself to be a resourceful manufacturer. Success lay in the fact that his products were fashionably artistic as well as affordable. Nor did Benson let indifferent health interfere with many other projects and interests. In 1884 he became a founder member of the Art-Workers' Guild. The Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society, which held its inaugural exhibition in 1888, came into being through his initiative. After William Morris's death in 1896, Benson also became the first chairman of William Morris & Co. Decorators Ltd. 
Benson's books, 'Elements of Handicraft and Design', 'Rudiments of Handicraft', and 'Drawing: its History and Uses', were published respectively in 1893, 1919, and posthumously in 1925. He died after only three days' illness on 5 July 1924 at his cottage, Castle Cottage, in Manorbier, Pembrokeshire. 
John Culme', rev. ' 


