@@@@@


doc= 37183


Bentley, Walter Owen (1888-1971), designer and racer of motor cars, was born on 16 September 1888 at 78 Avenue Road, Hampstead, London, the youngest in the family of six sons and three daughters of Alfred Bentley, retired businessman of London, and his wife, Emily Waterhouse. After leaving Clifton College at sixteen and a premium apprenticeship (1905-10) with the Great Northern Railway at Doncaster, he raced motorcycles and cars, and worked as a driver and mechanic for the National Motor Cab Company. 
In 1912 Bentley acquired, with his brother Horace Milner Bentley, the London agency of three French cars, Buchet, La Licorne, and Doriot, Flandrin et Parant. At their premises off Upper Baker Street he then made a major contribution to the development of the internal combustion engine, originating the use of aluminium for pistons. Commissioned in 1914 and attached to the Royal Naval Air Service, he designed two rotary aero-engines, BR1 and BR2, which were successfully fitted to the Sopwith Camel and Snipe respectively. In 1919 he was appointed MBE. 
In that year, with F. T. Burgess and Harry Varley, Bentley designed, built, and marketed a 3 litre engine and car, aimed at the top of the market, with a high performance for fast, sporting touring. He subsequently designed 4, 6, and 8 litre engines. Speed and endurance record breaking and long-distance racing were the surest forms of testing and advertising. 'We were in racing, not for glory and heroics but strictly for business.' Paradoxically, his 'Bentley boys', among them Woolf Barnato, son of the South African diamond millionaire, provided the British motor industry with its most glamorous episode. The works-entered team won the twenty-four hours' race at Le Mans in the years 1927-30. 
Bentley's company was chronically underfunded and development costs always outran returns. Financial disaster was temporarily averted when Barnato put his money in and replaced Bentley as chairman in 1926, but the Wall Street crash in 1929 (the first year in which the company showed a profit) exposed the vulnerability of the luxury car market. In 1931 the company was bought, to Bentley's chagrin, by its rival, Rolls-Royce, Bentley's service contract being among the assets acquired. He had no part as a designer in the new subsidiary, Bentley Motors (1931). He felt 'a hostage -- a dangerous ex-enemy confined (with all the comforts) to my Elba'. His contract expired, he moved to Lagonda in 1935, dangerously returning to the precarious world of the fast car. There he improved the Le Mans 4 litre and introduced a new V 12 twelve-cylinder. 
During the Second World War Bentley worked with Lagonda on aircraft and tank components. After the war Lagonda announced a 2 litre car to be sold as Lagonda-Bentley. Rolls-Royce was swift to establish in the courts that its purchase of the trademark Bentley over-rode its contract with him, which had banned his own use of his name for ten years only. The car was then marketed as 'Lagonda, designed under the supervision of W. O. Bentley', but the volume of orders could not be met owing to the post-war shortage of steel. The firm was sold to David Brown and Bentley's engine was used in the Aston-Martin DB2 developed in its successors. 
Taciturn, precise, a perfectionist engineer, but with little skill in a boardroom, Bentley was, by his own account, unresponsive and over-sensitive to criticism, dependent always on the riches of others whom he could not control. Though not easily approachable, he inspired enthusiasm, lasting devotion, and, increasingly, historic reverence. 
Bentley married three times. On 1 January 1914 he married Leonie, daughter of (St George) Ralph Gore, ninth baronet. She died in the influenza epidemic of 1919. His unsuccessful second marriage, to which he never referred, was to Audrey Morten Chester Hutchinson. After a divorce he married on 31 January 1934 Margaret Roberts ('b'. 1892?), daughter of Thomas Roberts Murray, mechanical engineer, and divorced wife of Charles Alan Hutton. There were no children from these marriages. Bentley died at the Nuffield Nursing Home, Woking, on 13 August 1971. 
H. G. Pitt', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37184


Beresford, William Marcus Joseph (1797/8-1883), politician, was born in Ireland on 17 April 1797, or possibly in 1798 after the death of his father. He was the youngest in the family of two sons and two daughters of Marcus Beresford MP (grandson of Marcus Beresford, first earl of Tyrone and counsel to the Irish revenue commissioners), and his wife, Lady Frances Arabella, daughter of Joseph Leeson, first earl of Milltown. His father died on 16 November 1797. He was educated at Eton College and St Mary Hall, Oxford, where he took his BA in 1819. 
In 1822 he was commissioned as lieutenant in the 9th (Royal) Dragoons, transferring to the 12th lancers in 1826. He served in the Lisbon expedition of 1826 and retired on half pay in January 1831 with the rank of major. For some years he lived on his estate at Ballinastow in co. Wicklow, where he was high sheriff in 1835. After contesting Waterford City in 1837, he was elected MP for Harwich in 1841. He kept this seat until 1847, when he became MP for North Essex. In public life his guiding principles were protestantism and protectionism. He opposed the 'Maynooth Bill' of Sir Robert Peel in 1845 and was made chief whip of the protectionist party early in 1846. As such he was responsible both for the retirement of Lord George Bentinck from its leadership in 1847, after his vote for Jewish emancipation, and for the resumption of the title 'Conservative' for his party in 1848. While initially suspicious of Benjamin Disraeli, he recognized his talents and served loyally under him from 1849. In Lord Derby's ministry he became secretary for war (February-December 1852) and was party manager in the following general election. Subsequent parliamentary inquiries into improper electoral practices involved him in some censure, and this enabled Disraeli, who never liked him, to make fresh arrangements for the management of the party in opposition. In 1859 Beresford headed a protest against the Derby ministry's Reform Bill but did not press his opposition to a vote. Defeat in the general election of 1865 ended his parliamentary career. 
Under William IV and Victoria he held court appointments as groom of the privy chamber and from 1823 master of the tennis court. His several business interests included the chairmanship of the Northern Counties Union Railway and various directorships. A tall, rough, hot-tempered Irishman, given to profanity, Beresford was more popular with back-benchers than with his leaders. His encouragement to the tory press to take a strong protestant and anti-Peelite line contributed to the perpetuation of the 1846 disruption. He assisted nevertheless in keeping the protectionist party together in a difficult period, with few resources and little help from his leaders. 
In 1833 he married Catherine, youngest daughter of George Robert Heneage, of Hainton Hall, Lincolnshire; they had two sons and a daughter. Beresford died at his home, 40 Eccleston Square, London, on 6 October 1883. 
Norman Gash', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37185


Berkeley, Charles, earl of Falmouth (bap. 1630, d. 1665), courtier, was baptized on 11 January 1630 at Bruton Abbey, Somerset, the second son of Charles Berkeley, second Baron Berkeley of Rathdowne, second Viscount Fitzhardinge of Berehaven (1599-1668), politician, and his wife, Penelope (died 1689), daughter of Sir William Godolphin of Godolphin, Cornwall. William Berkeley (1639-1666) was his younger brother. He was tutored by Hugh Cressy, the former chaplain of Thomas Wentworth, earl of Strafford, and Lucius Cary, second Viscount Falkland. During the civil wars his family was strongly royalist, and afterwards he was sent to serve the exiled Stuart court. In 1652 his uncle, Sir John (later first Baron) Berkeley, used his influence as governor to James, duke of York, to secure the youth a commission as a cavalry officer under the command of that prince. He remained in York's employment until the Restoration -- first in the French and then in the Spanish armies, where he saw considerable action -- and became his groom of the stole and one of his closest friends. In 1660 he returned to England with his master, who ensured him several honours from the newly restored Charles II. These included a knighthood, the post of lieutenant-governor of Portsmouth, and the receipts from mooring fees levied on the Thames below London Bridge. The latter provided him with the income needed to purchase a house beside the bowling green at Whitehall, and York also secured his election as MP for New Romney, Kent, in 1661. Nevertheless, his most nefarious recorded act was to claim that he had enjoyed the favours of York's new wife, Anne Hyde, in an effort to dissolve the marriage, which many considered a disaster, and to defame her father, Edward, the king's new chief minister. This attempt to 'protect' his patron was, to say the least, both ill-considered and tactless, though seemingly had little effect on the favourite's relationship with either the king or his brother. The episode bears testimony to one who could be coarse in conversation, but Berkeley was to marry for love, as his own bride came from an impoverished royalist family. She was a famous beauty, Mary (1645-1679), daughter of Colonel Hervey Bagot of Pipe Hayes, Warwickshire, whom he married on 18 December 1664. 
At court Berkeley became associated with the faction led by George Digby, second earl of Bristol, and Sir Henry Bennet, and was friendly with the king's mistress, Barbara Villiers, countess of Castlemaine. In 1662 that faction became an important part of the government, and Berkeley received Bennet's post of keeper of the privy purse when the latter was promoted. But it was during the next year that observers noticed that King Charles himself had become so fond of Berkeley that he was now one of the principal royal favourites, and perhaps the greatest. In July 1663 he was raised to the Irish peerage as Baron Berkeley of Rathdowne and Viscount Fitzhardinge of Berehaven and would have received an English title had the king not been conscious of hostility to his courtiers in the English House of Commons. However, in March 1665 he was granted the English titles Baron Botetourt of Langport and earl of Falmouth, as part of the honours bestowed when war was declared against the Dutch. The newly created earl volunteered for service in the royal fleet, and was killed by a cannon shot in the first battle, off Lowestoft on 3 June. On 22 June he was given a hero's funeral in Westminster Abbey, where he was buried. As his marriage had produced a single daughter, the earldom and his English barony became extinct; however, his father inherited his Irish titles by special remainder. Falmouth's widow married Charles Sackville, later sixth earl of Dorset and fourth earl of Middlesex, in 1674, and lived until 1679. 
The king was more distressed by Falmouth's death than by that of any other person except his own sister, and it seems certain that the earl would have received further advancement had he lived. Even so, it may be doubted that he would have made a greater impact upon the course of history. No known portrait of him survives, and his character is almost as faintly recorded. He had no outstanding gifts, of intelligence, learning, or good looks, and was never employed for any important administrative, political, or diplomatic office. Instead he managed the privy purse, retained his post at Portsmouth, sat upon the committee for Tangier, and was sent upon polite diplomatic errands. He performed these minor tasks diligently, although he hated writing letters. He had no political aims and did not lead a faction, although he sought lesser posts for a few clients. If he had one trait of potential consequence it was his fondness for France, which led him to encourage efforts to ally with that country, but the international situation made these futile during his lifetime. His popularity with the royal brothers derived, indeed, from the fact that he was a devoted servant and affable companion who was content to further their wishes. His unpopularity with the more high principled of the English derived from the same qualities, for he indulged or encouraged what they considered to be the king's lechery and laziness. His prominence in his time and his lack of consequence for it both derive ultimately from his pleasant mediocrity. 
Ronald Hutton', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37186


Bernard, Oliver Percy (1881-1939), architect and designer, was born on 8 April 1881 at 2 Box Villas, Danby Street, Camberwell, London, the younger son (there were no daughters) of Charles Bernard 
(formerly Charles West; died 1894)
, theatrical manager of Scottish descent, and his wife, Annie Allen, actress, of Glasgow. There was also another son from a previous marriage. Bernard was married first on 23 October 1911 to Muriel Theresa Lightfoot ('b'. 1884/5), singer, daughter of Jabez Lightfoot, manager of the Bengal and North Western Railway. This marriage, of which there were no children, was dissolved in 1924 and in the same year he married (Edith) Dora Hodges (1896-1950), an opera singer with the stage name Fedora Roselli, daughter of Joseph Hodges, butcher, of Tooting; they had three sons and two daughters, one of whom died in infancy. Oliver Bernard, poet and translator, was his eldest son; Bruce Bonus Bernard (1928-2000), photographer, picture editor, and art critic, was his second; and Jeffrey Joseph Bernard (1932-1997), journalist, was the youngest. 
Bernard grew up at 8 Waterloo Road, London, a household kept by his father, containing, in Bernard's words, 'vague and violent people together, to whom parents had consigned a son who would have encumbered their travels' ('Cock Sparrow', 11-12). On the death of his father in 1894, Bernard went to Manchester and found work as a 'property boy and paint-room drudge', educating himself by reading, among others, John Locke and John Ruskin, and practising drawing ('Cock Sparrow', 35). He escaped from Manchester as cabin-boy in a tramp steamer, the 'Manchester Commerce', and, tiring of this, became a seaman in the Norwegian barque 'Naja', a terrifying experience recounted in his autobiography. He resumed scene painting in London, in the studio of Walter Hann, participating in the sporting scene as a boxer and billiards player. He travelled to New York in the autumn of 1905 and became principal scenic artist for Klaw and Erlanger, and later technical director for the Boston Opera Company. Here, and again in London, as resident scenic artist for the Grand Opera Syndicate at Covent Garden, he became frustrated by the conservatism of management with regard to production and scenery, and returned to America after the outbreak of the First World War, having been rejected for military service because of deafness. Determined to try again, he crossed back in the 'Lusitania', and survived its sinking on 7 May 1915. Early in 1916 he was commissioned as a camouflage officer in the Royal Engineers and served in France, Italy, and Belgium, reaching the rank of captain. He was awarded the MC and appointed OBE. 
In 1919 Bernard returned to the London theatre, designing Wagner's 'Ring' cycle for Sir Thomas Beecham in the 1921 Covent Garden season. Acting as consultant to the board of overseas trade, he worked on the British Empire Exhibition, Wembley, in 1924, as a designer of friezes, decorations, and displays. He designed a new system of lighting and stage planning for the Admiralty Theatre and staged the 'Raid on Zeebrugge' and 'Air Attack on London'. For the Paris 1925 exhibition, Bernard was technical director for the British government, but he achieved his greatest fame as consultant artistic director to the caterers J. Lyons & Co. For the Strand Palace Hotel, he designed in 1929 a spectacular entrance of reflective metal and concealed lighting, and other interiors for the Oxford Street, Coventry Street, and Strand Corner Houses, and in 1932 for the Cumberland Hotel, with many separate restaurants in each building, cleverly exploiting new materials and techniques in a popular decorative manner. 
Bernard's knowledge of continental modern design was considerable. He displayed it in journalism, arguing that the future of architecture lay with engineers. In 1931 he was appointed consultant designer to Practical Equipment Ltd, manufacturers of tubular steel furniture. His architectural works date from the late 1930s and were mostly industrial buildings, notably the Supermarine aviation works, Southampton (1937). 
Bernard was short in stature with a large head. His former secretary described him as 'amusing, utterly impossible, kind, and a bully'. Bernard died unexpectedly of peritonitis on 15 April 1939 at the St Thomas Home, Lambeth Palace Road, London. 
Alan Powers', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37187


Berthelet, Thomas (d. 1555), printer, was probably of French origin, and perhaps related to Jacques Berthelot (died 1541), bookseller at Caen from 1527 and at Rennes from 1539 to 1541. Thomas's name was spelt Berthelot by the College of Arms when granting him a coat of arms, which incorporated the fleur-de-lis. The 'Dictionary of National Biography''s identification of Berthelet with Thomas Bercula is likely to be mistaken. Clair identified the name as a Latin form of Barclay and takes it to refer to Thomas Barclay, servant to John Rastell. 
The first mention of 'Berthelett', resident in the parish of St Dunstan, Fleet Street, London, is when he applied on 23 August 1524 for a licence to marry Agnes Langwyth, widow, at St Bride's, also in Fleet Street. On 27 September that year his first book, a small tract by the monk Galfredus Petrus of Bayeux, 'Opus sane de deorum dearumque gentilium genealogia' (STC 19816.5) was printed 'at the sign of the Roman Lucrece', Berthelet's premises midway along Fleet Street. At this time printers were being warned against handling books labelled as heretical or seditious, and Berthelet was summoned before the vicar-general in March 1526 for printing 'A Devout Treatise upon the Pater noster' and other works, without first submitting them for licence. He later reissued them, having obtained the necessary privileges. In 1528 he printed Thomas Paynell's translation of 'Regimen sanitatis Salerni', one of the most popular medical books, which was widely translated. Between 1531 and 1545 he printed all fifteen of Sir Thomas Elyot's works. Among his later publications were a few yearbooks of Edward III (1527-32; STC 9562, 9565) and Sir Anthony Fitzherbert's 'La novel natura brevium' (1534; STC 10958), showing his familiarity with the legal world of Rastell and Pynson. 
Berthelet may not have immediately succeeded Richard Pynson (died 1530) as king's printer, for John Rastell printed the statutes of '21 Henry VIII' during the closing months of 1529, but he was already holding that office by 22 February 1530 when he was granted the annuity of $4 that went with it. He held the office until Henry's death, printing all statutes and proclamations with exemplary skill and efficiency, and on one occasion being ordered to produce a proclamation immediately, if necessary setting the type himself. His account submitted for payment covering the period 9 December 1541 to 12 June 1543 details not only quantities and costs of proclamations but also special purchases of books for the king, with the style and price of binding. Also king's business were several works fostering uniformity in religion such as the 'Bishops' Book' (1537; STC 5163) and the 'King's Book' (1543; STC 5168), of which multiple editions had to be printed. 
Following Henry's death in 1547 Berthelet did not seek to renew his patent as king's printer, which was taken up by the ardent protestant Richard Grafton under Edward VI. Berthelet was granted a coat of arms in 1549, and may have retired to live in his house in the adjacent parish of St Andrew, Holborn. He died in London on 26 September 1555, leaving a second wife, Margaret, and two sons: Edward, a lawyer of Lincoln's Inn, and Anthony, still a minor. His funeral, held at some point before 26 January 1556, was celebrated with great pomp, attended, as Machyn relates, by many priests, clerks, and mourners, and a concourse of his fellow craftsmen in the book trades, although it is not recorded where he was buried. His nephew Thomas Powell, who was free of the Stationers' Company in 1556, ran the business under Berthelet's name for several years. 
K. F. Pantzer', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37188


Best, Henry (c.1592-1645), landowner and farmer, was probably born in Hutton Cranswick, Yorkshire, the second of the five sons and one daughter of James Best (died 1617), yeoman of Hutton Cranswick (later gentleman of Elmswell, Yorkshire), and his wife, Dorothy (died 1605), whose background and maiden name are not known; James Best married for a second and third time, and had two daughters and a son with his second wife. Nothing is known of Henry Best's early years, though his collection of books and his literary ability indicate a good education. When his father died in April 1617 he was living in Braintree, Essex, probably working in the shop of John Lawrence, grocer and apothecary, and one of the leading townsmen, whose daughter Mary married Best at about this time. 
In the summer of 1617 Best travelled back to Yorkshire to manage the family estate at Elmswell, near Driffield, which had been bought by his father in 1598, and to supervise the upbringing of his young siblings and half-siblings. The estate, of nearly 1300 acres, had been left to his elder brother, Paul Best, a scholar at Cambridge, but it was bought by Henry in 1618. He spent the next twenty-seven years at Elmswell, overseeing his farms and estate; he built a new house in the 1630s, and only occasionally visited places out of the district. 
In the early 1640s Best compiled an account of his farming methods and other country matters, such as 'the fashions att our Country weddings', for the benefit of his son, John (1620-1669), who succeeded him as lord of the manor. Unfortunately, parts of the original manuscript, especially those dealing with tillage and the management of stock other than sheep, have been lost, but what remains of this farming book comprises the most detailed contemporary account of seventeenth-century farming practice. Throughout his control of the Elmswell estate Best also kept a memorandum book, in which he recorded in a haphazard fashion the things he wished to remember: the wages agreed with servants; debts owed and owing; the number of sheep in the shepherd's care. Although not an agricultural innovator, he was an astute farmer and businessman: he took great care in selecting seed and breeding stock; he knew the best markets in the region for a wide variety of products; and he endeavoured never to miss an opportunity for profit. He was always an active manager, out in the fields, exhorting his workers, ever watchful for the tricks of 'theevish and ill-disposed servants' or the lackadaisical habits of maids 'of a sluggish and sleepy disposition'. He was a man to whom fair dealing came naturally and he was a just, if firm, master. 
Best had five sons and two daughters. His wife died in 1639 and he was predeceased by a son and a daughter. He was buried in Little Driffield, Yorkshire, on 22 June 1645. 
Donald Woodward', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37189


Besterman, Theodore Deodatus Nathaniel (1904-1976), psychical researcher and bibliographer, was born on 22 November 1904 in Lodz, Poland, and named Nataniel. He was the second son (there were no daughters) of Benjamin J. N. Besterman, diamond merchant, and his wife, Golda Augusta Krengiel, and probably grew up in Britain. 
The single-minded energy which was Besterman's main characteristic brought him, early on and despite his lack of education, the chairmanship of the British Federation of Youth Movements (1925). Besterman claimed that he was largely self-educated at the British Museum Library and it is typical that his first separate publication should have been a bibliography (1924) of the well-known theosophist Annie Besant. He was investigating officer to the Society for Psychical Research, 1927-35, and published widely on associated matters. 
In the early 1930s Besterman turned his attention towards bibliography, becoming both special lecturer at the London School of Librarianship and joint editor of the important, if short-lived, series 'Oxford Books in Bibliography', as well as writing his classic 'The Beginnings of Systematic Bibliography' (1935). An indefatigable, largely single-handed, compiler and one who aimed essentially at making bibliographical and other information available, he published privately the first edition of his 'A World Bibliography of Bibliographies' in 1939; this work, constantly enlarged, was to make his a household name with librarians worldwide. He was also closely associated with the British union catalogues of both periodicals and music, as well as being the first editor of the 'Journal of Documentation'. 
In these years Besterman published on American history and established his own private press, the Guyon House Press, which, however, came to an end when destroyed in the air raids of December 1940. During the Second World War he served in the Royal Artillery and the Army Bureau of Current Affairs, the latter foreshadowing his immediately post-war position as head of the department for the exchange of information in UNESCO, where he worked towards universal bibliographical control. Besterman's advocacy of his causes was ardent rather than diplomatic, and around 1950 he turned to publishing the correspondence and works of Voltaire, a liberal spirit with whom he identified. Living, by agreement with the city of Geneva, in Voltaire's former house Les Delices, he founded the Institut et Musee Voltaire there (1952), while editing that writer's correspondence (107 vols., 1953-65) as well as the equally multi-volume series 'Studies on Voltaire and the Eighteenth Century'. He created the conferences which gave birth to the International Society for Eighteenth-Century Studies and was the leading figure in the post-war rise of those studies outside the Anglo-Saxon world. Despite his intensive activity on both bibliographical and scholarly fronts, he wrote numerous other works and started a series of facsimiles of the printed sources of Western art, for which he collected both books and watercolours. 
On 6 April 1925 Besterman married Henrietta Birley ('b'. 1893/4) of Hampstead, a secretary, but the marriage only lasted some ten years. Besterman subsequently married Evelyn, younger daughter of Arthur Mack, of New York. She had one son of her previous marriage. The marriage was dissolved in 1958 and Besterman married Marie-Louise van Muyden of Geneva. 
Following disagreements with the Genevan authorities he moved in the later 1960s, first to London and then to Banbury, where he died at the Horton General Hospital on 10 November 1976, having arranged with the University of Oxford for the bequest of his scholarly research interests (the Voltaire Foundation) to the Taylor Institution there. 
Giles Barber', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37190


Bevan, (Edward) John (1856-1921), analytical chemist, was born on 11 December 1856 at 8 Argyle Street, Birkenhead, Cheshire, the son of Edward Bevan, master watchmaker, and his wife, Margaret Matilda Prosser. After attending private schools he became a laboratory assistant at the Runcorn Soap and Alkali Company. He was advised to continue his education and went to Owens College, Manchester, between 1877 and 1879. He then worked for three years for Alexander Cowan & Co. at Musselburgh Paper Mills. At Owens College he had met Charles Frederick Cross and the two chemists joined forces at the Jodrell Laboratory, Kew Gardens, with the aim of exploring the chemistry of cellulose, the major constituent of wood, cotton, flax, and paper. They went into partnership as analytical chemists at Lincoln's Inn in 1885. Bevan was appointed public analyst for Middlesex county council in 1892. He was president of the Society of Public Analysts in 1905-6, and vice-president of the Institute of Chemistry in 1905-8 and 1914-17. 
The interest of Cross and Bevan in the chemistry of cellulose led them to the study of the viscose solutions produced by treating cellulose with a strong solution of caustic soda and then carbon disulphide vapour. An aqueous solution of this 'xanthogenate' regenerated cellulose on standing or when heated. They filed the key patent in May 1892, with their colleague Clayton Beadle (1868-1917). The three partners set up the Viscose Syndicate in 1893, with the aim of producing adhesives, films, coatings for natural fibres, and mouldings, and British Viscoid Ltd followed in 1896. The manufacture of fibres from viscose was pioneered by Charles Henry Stearn (1844-1919), who established the Viscose Spinning Syndicate with Cross in 1898. The British rights to viscose rayon fibre were acquired in July 1904 by Samuel Courtauld & Co., which began production at Coventry a year later. In May 1894 Cross and Bevan patented the manufacture of cellulose acetate, which was later developed and sold as a fibre by the British Celanese Company, in competition with viscose rayon. 
Bevan was described by Charles Cross as 'genial and generous' and was popular with his fellow chemists. He died, unmarried, at 18 Dorset Square, Marylebone, London, on 17 October 1921. 
Peter J. T. Morris', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37191


Bickford, William (bap. 1774, d. 1834), currier and inventor of the safety fuse, was baptized in Ashburton, Devon, on 23 January 1774, the son of William and Mary Beckford. He was in business as a currier, dressing and colouring tanned leather, first rather unsuccessfully in Truro and later in Tuckingmill near Camborne in Cornwall. He was not involved in any way with the mining that was carried on in the surrounding area, but he was greatly affected by the frequent serious, and often fatal, accidents suffered by the miners through premature blasting explosions. 
Gunpowder had been in widespread use in Europe in mining and quarrying since the early seventeenth century, but 200 years later the techniques available for detonating the charges were still very primitive. One method was simply to set fire to a 'train' of gunpowder leading to the charge itself, the length of the train corresponding roughly to the time delay before the charge exploded; a later method involved a kind of fuse of goose quills filled with gunpowder. Both methods were dangerously unreliable, even when (and it was not always the case) the greatest care was exercised by the shot-firers. 
Bickford was determined to make a safer type of fuse, and although he was no scientist he carried out a series of experiments with many different combinations of materials until, having nearly despaired of ever achieving his goal, he visited a friend in his rope-walk and suddenly hit on the idea of spinning a light rope or cord round a tightly packed central core of gunpowder. The idea was simple, but devising a machine for the manufacture of his 'safety fuse' was beyond Bickford himself, so he took into partnership Thomas Davey, a working miner with a talent for solving mechanical problems. The Bickford safety fuse, as patented on 6 September 1831 (no. 6159), consisted of two layers of flax yarn enclosing a central core of gunpowder, the whole being made watertight with varnish or tar. The resulting fuse was much more accurate and consistent in its timing, and had a much better resistance to water and the various kinds of treatment to which it was inevitably subjected in the mines. It raised the level of both safety and productivity and was therefore popular with both miners and management. 
Bickford himself fell seriously ill before his fuse could be manufactured in any quantity, and it was only after his death in 1834 that a factory was established at Tuckingmill which continued to make various types of fuse, seldom departing very far from the original specifications, for almost 130 years. Bickford's family, along with those of his partner, Davey, and Davey's son-in-law George Smith, were involved in the management of Bickford, Smith & Co. up to the time of its final closure in 1961. 
William Bickford married Susanna Burall in April 1802 at Illogan, Cornwall. They had two sons, baptized in Truro in 1808 and 1809, both called William (presumably the first died). Bickford died in Tuckingmill and was buried there on 7 October 1834. 
Ronald M. Birse', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37192


Billing, Noel Pemberton (1881-1948), aviator and self-publicist, was born on 31 January 1881 in Hampstead, the youngest child of Charles Eardley Billing, a Birmingham iron-founder, and his wife, Annie Emilia Claridge. He was educated at the high school, Hampstead; Cumming's College, outside Boulogne; Westcliff College, Ramsgate; and Craven College, Highgate. At the age of thirteen Billing stowed away on a ship bound for Delagoa Bay. In Durban he drifted into a succession of menial jobs before joining the Natal mounted police. From 1899 to 1901 he fought in the South African War. In 1903 he finally returned to England, and in the same year he married Lilian Maud (died 1923), daughter of Theodore Henry Schweitzer, of Bristol. There were no children. 
Billing was quick to see the military significance of air power, and this gave purpose to an otherwise chaotic life. He edited the new journal 'Aerocraft' (1908-10), and in 1908 designed and tested, on his own airstrip in Fambridge, Essex, three light monoplanes, two of which left the ground. Billing then threw himself into land speculation, writing, yacht broking, and ship-running. By 1913 he had amassed enough capital to found a yard on Southampton Water, where he pioneered the construction of flying boats (supermarines). With characteristic bravado he had meantime obtained a pilot's certificate after only four hours two minutes in the air. 
In 1914 Billing joined the Royal Naval Air Service. He organized the raid on the Zeppelin sheds in Friedrichshafen in November 1914. But in early 1916, then a squadron commander, he retired in frustration in order to publicize his complaints about the way the war in the air was being conducted. The tall, monocled, and debonair Billing drew large enthusiastic crowds to his meetings. Although defeated as an independent candidate at Mile End in January 1916, he succeeded two months later at another parliamentary by-election at East Hertfordshire. Revelling in his role of 'first air member', Billing campaigned for a unified air service, helped force the government to establish an air inquiry, and advocated reprisal raids against German cities. He also became adept at exploiting a variety of popular discontents. In spring 1918 his increasingly outrageous language led to his being prosecuted for criminal libel by the dancer Maud Allan. With his usual flair for publicity, Billing conducted his own defence, amusing and scandalizing the nation with his claim that the German government was in a position to blackmail 47,000 prominent British 'perverts', among them Herbert Asquith and his wife, whose names, he alleged, figured in a 'black book'. On being acquitted, Billing further annoyed the main parties by running his own 'purity' candidates at by-elections, under cover of an organization called the Vigilantes, of which he was president. 
Although Billing retained his seat at the general election of 1918, ill health forced his retirement in 1921. In 1928 he had a play, 'High Treason', performed at the Strand Theatre. But most of his time was now absorbed by his various inventions, which included a miniature camera, a two-sided stove, and a gramophone; he claimed to have taken out 500 patents. He married second, on 8 December 1937, Elsie Veronica Jones (1892-1978), the divorced wife of Owen Jones; she was the daughter of James Louis Farmer. 
At the start of the Second World War Billing produced a design for a pilotless flying bomb; the British authorities turned it down. In 1941 he stood as an independent candidate in four by-elections, but although he retained his deposit on each occasion, there was to be no political comeback for this highly cantankerous patriot. Billing died on 11 November 1948 on his motor yacht 'Commodore', The Quay, Burnham-on-Crouch, Essex. 
G. R. Searle', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37193


Birch, Eugenius (1818-1884), civil engineer, was born at Gloucester Terrace (later Pitfield Street), Shoreditch, on 20 June 1818, the son of John Birch, corn dealer, and his wife, Susanna. An elder brother, John Brannis Birch, was born in 1813. Birch showed considerable mechanical and artistic talent at an early age. Educated in Brighton, and then at Euston Square, London, he was enthralled by the works on the London-Birmingham railway. He was trained in a succession of London's engineering works -- Samuel Wright, J. and G. B. Blyth, and R. A. and O. Robinson -- as well as attending a mechanics' institute. In November 1835 the London and Birmingham and Great Western railways offered a prize for first-class carriage design. Although he was unsuccessful in the competition, his method of putting the wheels under the carriages was adopted by the London and Greenwich Railway. In 1837 he received a silver Isis medal from the Society of Arts for his drawing of a marine steam engine, and in 1838 the Institution of Civil Engineers' Telford medal for his drawings and description of Huddart's rope machinery. In 1839 Birch was elected a graduate of the Institution of Civil Engineers. At that time he and his brother were working for Rowland Macdonald Stephenson (1808-1895). On 10 February 1842 Birch married Margaret, daughter of Charles Gent, of Moss Side, Manchester, a manufacturer. There were no children. 
In 1843 Stephenson left for Calcutta in connection with the East India Railway which he had been promoting, and meanwhile Birch entered into partnership with his elder brother. They were engaged in various unsuccessful railway schemes in the years of the 'railway mania' including the Leek and Mansfield, Manchester and Rugby orient and Salisbury and Swindon railways. Birch designed the Kelham and Stockwith bridges in Nottinghamshire and many of the bridges on the East India Railway between Calcutta and Delhi. The Birch brothers had an office at 3 Cannon Row, Westminster, from 1841 to 1856, and at 43 Parliament Street from 1858 to 1864. From 1864, after the death of his brother, Birch occupied offices at 7 Westminster Chambers, Victoria Street, London SW1. 
Birch's fame rested mainly on the fourteen seaside piers he built around the coasts of England and Wales. The longest surviving were Aberystwyth (shortened), Birnbeck (Weston-super-Mare), Blackpool's North Pier, Bournemouth, Eastbourne, Hastings, and the West Pier, Brighton. Experts consider his finest achievement to be the West Pier, with its elegant cast-iron kiosks, railings, and windscreens. Birch's piers were noteworthy for their screw-pile method of construction, which he pioneered at Margate. This method, based on Alexander Mitchell's patent, involved screwing the cast-iron columns into the sea-bed, sometimes by means of a winch mounted on a barge. Birch was also a great believer in the corrosion-resistant qualities of cast-iron columns, and this confidence was fully vindicated by time. Apart from his piers, he carried out the Devon and Somerset Railway, Exmouth docks, Ilfracombe harbour, and Eastbourne, Margate, and west Surrey waterworks. 
Birch was also a talented artist. Apart from his early technical drawings, he painted over a hundred water-colours during a visit to Italy, Egypt, and Nubia in the winter of 1874-5. He died at his home, Laurieston Lodge, West End, Hampstead, on 8 January 1884. 


@@@@@


doc= 37194


Biscoe, John (bap. 1794, d. 1843), merchant navy officer and explorer, was baptized in Enfield on 28 June 1794, the third son and youngest child of Thomas Biscoe of Waltham Abbey and his wife, Ann Tibbs. Nothing is known of his early years, but on leaving school he became a clerk. On 11 March 1812 he volunteered for the 'San Domingo' (74 guns), probably to avoid being pressed into the navy, and he served off North America. On 4 January 1813, as volunteer first class, he entered the brig 'Colibri' (16 guns), which was lost off South Carolina in a hurricane. In 1813-15 he was midshipman, quartermaster, and acting master in the 'Moselle' (16 guns) in the West Indies and off the coast of the United States. Captain John Moberley of the 'Moselle' said of him, 'keeps a good reckoning, is attentive and promises to make a good officer' (TNA: PRO, ADM/6/177/2634). Biscoe was later to name a mountain after Moberley. 
Nothing is known about Biscoe's employment from 1815 to 1830, when Messrs C., H., and G. Enderby, oil merchants in the City, proposed an Antarctic sealing voyage, and appointed him master of the brig 'Tula' (150 tons) -- which was not a good sea boat -- with the cutter 'Lively' and twenty-nine men and boys in all. The two ships left the River Thames on 10 July 1830 and returned in January 1833. Biscoe called at the Falkland Islands for refreshment, searched in vain for the 'Aurora Islands', and between 17 and 31 December 1830 examined the South Sandwich Islands as best he could. On 24-25 February 1831, in lat. 65 degree 57' S, long. 47 degree 20' E, Biscoe discovered Enderby Land, which he named after his employers, sighting black mountain tops showing through the ice-cap. His landfall was probably the Tange peninsula. He charted Cape Ann (named after his mother) and mounts Charles, Henry, George, and Gordon (named after the Enderbys), and Mount Codrington. At a cost to the health of the crew and himself, he persisted off the coast for a month, trying to make a fuller chart. When he reached Hobart Town on 9 May 1831, all save four men were ill with scurvy. 
In a second season Biscoe visited New Zealand and the Chatham Islands, and then made for South Shetland. On 15-16 February 1832 he discovered Adelaide Island; then he sighted Alexander Land, charted the Pitt Islands and Anvers Island, and called at South Shetland. He returned home from the Falklands after most of his crew, who could stand no more of the Antarctic, had deserted and he had had to use his own funds to secure supplies. His voyage was outstanding for his persistence and seamanship, and his charts are of high quality, despite his poor equipment; in 1833 he was awarded the royal premium of the Royal Geographical Society and was honoured by the French Geographical Society. He was proposed as an 'ordinary member without payment of fees' of the RGS, a testimony to his geographical achievement and to his poverty. He applied in vain to the Admiralty for his master's warrant. 
In 1833 Biscoe was appointed by the Enderbys to the 'Hopefull' and the 'Rose' for a similar expedition, but resigned before sailing. In 1834-6 he was in the West Indies trade, and in 1837 sailed from London for Hobart Town, commanding the 'Superb' (345 tons). There he became master of the 'Emma', a brig of 122 tons. In 1839, at Campbell Island, he met John Balleny and on a sealing voyage (also in 1839) he penetrated what was later named the Ross Sea to lat. 75 degree S, probably on the Pennell Bank, before its 'discovery' by James Clark Ross. In 1839-41 Biscoe commanded the 'Marian Watson' and the 'Trugenina', trading out of Sydney. 
Biscoe's health was failing and there was a subscription, to which Sir John Franklin was a leading contributor, for his return to England. He embarked on the 'Janet Izatt', but the hardships of his exploring voyages had broken his health and he died at sea or in a port somewhere between Sydney and London at some time between February and June 1843. More precise information cannot be obtained since the ship's log was destroyed. He left his wife, Emma Crowe (the daughter of a Hackney bootmaker, whom he had married on 8 September 1836 in Whitechapel), a daughter, and three sons in extreme poverty. Among those who subscribed for their relief was Queen Adelaide, after whom Biscoe had named an island in the Antarctic. His eldest son, William John Dawson, was given a charity place at the Greenwich Hospital school and in 1901 his daughter, Emily, was given a civil-list pension of $30 for her father's services to geography. Biscoe was the first to chart portions of the Antarctic continent and, despite limited means and difficult conditions, contributed significantly to Antarctic exploration. 


@@@@@


doc= 37195


Bishop, George (d. 1668), government official and religious writer, was born in Bristol, probably the son of Thomas Bishop, brewer, who became a freeman of the city in 1612. A local and London administrator as well as a New Model Army captain during the civil wars, Bishop is significant because he possessed the organizational and literary skills that proved invaluable to the establishment of the Quaker movement in seventeenth-century Bristol. A man of evident education and a skilled publicist, Bishop wrote more than thirty Quaker tracts. Rich in apocalyptic imagery and Jeremianic in tone, his arguments are grounded in scripture, early church history, politics, and natural reason. His religious ideas are infused with republican sentiments that distrust power wielded by monarchs and clerics alike. 
In 1648 Bishop married Elizabeth (died 1658), daughter of William Canne, mayor of Bristol and a powerful local figure. His father-in-law's influence may have kept Bishop out of harm's way during his early years of organizing and publishing on the Quakers' behalf. The Bishops' only surviving child, Elizabeth (1655-1724), married the Quaker writer Richard Vickris in 1672 and raised eight or nine children at Firgrove, the Vickris estate in Chew Magna, Somerset. 
During the civil wars Bishop fought with the parliamentary army, and evidently was the politically radical Captain Bishop who in the army debates at Putney in 1647 advocated regicide, attributing the kingdom's difficulties to Charles I, 'that man of blood'. His appointment in 1650 as secretary to the committee for examinations of the republican council of state brought him to London, where he and Thomas Scott headed the intelligence operation and skilfully countered royalist conspiracy. Bishop's reports disclose an intense, perhaps overstated, concern for the fragile Commonwealth, which in his estimation had 'clouds darkening over it' ('Original letters and papers', 54). During the First Anglo-Dutch War Bishop gathered military intelligence, but in 1653 he was dismissed for 'intermeddling in foreign affairs' ('CSP dom.', '1653-1654', 14) and was questioned about expenses for which he sought reimbursement. Unsubstantiated allegations of Bishop misusing his political post in unseemly and dishonest ways must be understood in the context of interregnum politics, his association with the Quakers, and the atmosphere of factionalism and dysfunction that haunted the republic. Citing examples of his loyal service to the council of state, which had exacted financial and personal costs, Bishop resigned from his post in September 1653. He returned to Bristol, where he unsuccessfully stood for parliament in the 1654 elections and continued in a private capacity his efforts to secure a godly commonwealth and liberty of conscience. After the installation of the protectorate Bishop accused Cromwell of harbouring kingly ambitions, allying himself with John Wildman and other radical republicans who believed the lord protector had surpassed the late king in exercising arbitrary power. Under the protectorate the various intelligence positions, including Bishop's, were combined and administered by John Thurloe. 
Bishop's association with the Quakers followed the visit of itinerant preachers John Audland and John Camm to Bristol in 1654. His conversion sharpened his criticism of national and local politicians, who in turn questioned his integrity. Bishop soon abandoned the 'exalted' demeanour that troubled his brethren, and his organizational skills made him an invaluable member of the emerging movement. His early tracts, including 'The Cry of Blood' (1656) and 'The Throne of Truth' (1657), provide insight into the early Quakers' denunciation of the Presbyterian settlement, and their own vociferous performances of protest, which frequently resulted in violence and arrest. In 1656 his Bristol neighbour Captain Edward Pyot and other imprisoned Quakers forwarded Bishop accounts of their experiences, which he published in 'The West Answering to the North' (1656), a work formerly credited to George Fox. As a Quaker spokesman Bishop denounced the protectorate's ambiguous religious and social policy, which reflected a growing weariness with radical sectarianism. In 1659, when for a brief time it seemed that reforms would be legislated, Bishop petitioned the recalled Rump Parliament to support 'The Good Old Cause'. 
Dating Bishop's commitment to peace must be nuanced. From the outset of the Quaker movement, George Fox had advocated the principle of peace. Bishop, however, wore his sword until at least 1655, when he was with Fox at Reading. On 26 February 1655 he wrote to Thurloe, commenting he was now 'looking after a kingdom that cannot be shaken' and 'studying peace with truth' (Bodl. Oxf., Rawlinson MS A. 24, fols. 295-6). However, when the republic was faltering in 1659, Bishop's associates, including his co-authors of 'Cry of Blood', served as militia commissioners from Bristol, and after Major-General John Lambert dismissed the reassembled Rump Parliament on 13 October Bishop urged the army to take the lead in reform. Shortly after the restoration he employed Fifth Monarchist tones in his advice to the divided army that they be not 'shaken nor stumbled' but turn inward as 'man's day is done but the Lord's is come' (G. Bishop, 'The Warnings of the Lord', 1660, 42). 
When the newly restored king visited Bristol, Bishop conveyed a welcome from the Quakers. Underscoring their peaceful intentions, he played a leading role in advocating religious liberty and publicizing Quaker principles and beliefs. Although Charles II had initially promised toleration to nonconformists, Bishop anticipated the legal prescriptions of the Clarendon code and the 1662 'Quaker Act'. In 'To thee Charles Stuart King of England' (1660) he warned the king that, like King David, he must govern the faithful justly lest he repeat the disaster that had toppled 'the other chaff before thee' (p. 6). 
Bishop was subsequently arrested on several occasions for attending illegal religious meetings and refusing to give surety of good behaviour. As the Quakers grew quieter in their response to religious intolerance, he advocated passive resistance to state regulation of religious worship. His 'Illumination to Open the Eyes of Papists' (1661), reflective of the contemporary interest in scientific discourse, argues that moral restraints on conscience are ineffective since force 'can reach no further than to that which is of the same Nature with it. A thing cannot be extended beyond its Principle' (p. 10). Bishop's best-known work, 'New England Judged' (1661, 1667, 1703), compiled from firsthand reports conveyed to Bristol, is a standard account of the puritans' persecution of Quakers in colonial America. Bishop's widely read account may well be the Quaker text to which Hawthorne alluded in 'The Scarlet Letter'. 
Bishop died in Bristol in November 1668. A state official commented on the unusually large gathering of 'that sect' who attended the burial of their 'archbishop' near Redcliff parish; the turn-out fittingly symbolized George Bishop's contribution to the establishment of Quakerism in Bristol. 


@@@@@


doc= 37196


Black, Clementina Maria (1853-1922), political activist, suffragist, and writer, was born on 27 July 1853 in Brighton, the eldest girl in the family of five daughters and three sons of David Black, solicitor, town clerk, and coroner of Brighton, and his wife, Clara Maria (1825-1875), daughter of George Patten, portrait painter to the prince consort. Educated at home, mainly by her mother, she became fluent in French and German. 
When Clementina Black was twenty-two her mother died, leaving her to look after the family, including an invalid father. A teaching job added to her duties, but she began to write short stories. These were followed by her first novel, 'A Sussex Idyll' (1877), and a three-volume novel, 'Orlando' (1879). In the 1880s she and her sisters (one of whom was Constance Garnett) moved to Fitzroy Street, London. Here she divided her time between private studies (which included work on social problems) at the British Museum Library, literary work, and lecturing on eighteenth-century literature. She began associating with both Marxist and Fabian intellectual socialists and was a friend of the Marx family. 
Ill health forced Black abroad in 1885 and she returned to England to the Trafalgar Square riots of 1886. This event made her determined to become actively involved in social issues. She promoted the idea of a consumers' league, whose members would purchase only from firms paying decent wages, and advocated closer ties between trade union and co-operative societies. In 1886 she became secretary to the Women's Protective and Provident League (founded by Emma Paterson), and as a delegate to the 1888 Trades Union Congress initiated an equal pay resolution. She resigned in 1889 after becoming actively involved in the match girls' strike in London's East End. Convinced that a more radical, militant approach to women's trade unionism was needed, she became one of the founders of the Women's Trade Union Association (WTUA) in the East End in 1889, supported by John Burns and H. H. Champion, well-known socialists, and served as secretary until 1891. 
The failure of the WTUA in 1894 led to the formation of the Women's Industrial Council (WIC), a new kind of organization which sent out its mainly middle-class women investigators to see for themselves conditions of working women, after which they wrote reports in an attempt to influence public opinion and government policy. Clementina Black became editor of its journal, the 'Women's Industrial News', in 1895 and later president of the WIC. She became increasingly active as a speaker and writer on problems facing women workers. She saw low pay as the root of the problem, and from 1896 began to campaign for a legal minimum wage. She was concerned with the plight of women home workers (usually widows or wives of casual labourers), especially in the tailoring trade in east and south London. She was on the executive committee of the National Anti-Sweating League and one of the organizers of the 'Daily News' sweated industries exhibition of 1906. Her two books, 'Sweated Industry and the Minimum Wage' (1907) and 'Makers of our Clothes: a Case for Trade Boards' (which she wrote jointly with C. Meyer, 1909) were powerful works of propaganda. The 'Trade Boards Act' was passed in 1909, but her stand on the legal minimum wage caused a split within the WIC and she resigned, though later returned as its president. Her interest in improving conditions for working women remained, and she edited 'Married Women's Work' (1915), the findings of the WIC's inquiry into the effect of industrial employment on married women. In 1918 she wrote on ways of improving housing and housekeeping so that women could be freed for employment. 
A non-militant suffragist, Black inaugurated the suffrage declaration of 1906 which was signed by thousands. Representing the WIC, she was one of twenty-one distinguished women who met the prime minister (Asquith) in 1910 during the campaign for the 'Conciliation Bill' which, if passed, would have allowed limited women's suffrage. She realized that, without the vote, women had no power to legislate against poor working and social conditions. She became one of the vice-presidents of the London Society for Women's Suffrage in 1913 and was acting editor of the 'Common Cause'. She was a well-known author in her day, writing fiction, biographies, translations, and even plays for children. One novel, 'An Agitator' (1894), was described by Eleanor Marx as a realistic account of the British working-class movement, but her other fiction avoided social concerns. A non-revolutionary socialist, she believed in legislative action. A deceptively fragile and refined appearance belied her dedication and untiring industry in the cause of justice for women. Her cheerful disposition, sympathy, and tact made her popular. In recognition of her endeavours on behalf of women, she was granted a civil-list pension of $75 a year in 1913. 
Unmarried, Black took her niece Gertrude Speedwell, daughter of her brother Arthur, into her house when Arthur committed suicide after murdering his wife and son ('The Times', 21 Jan 1893), and brought her up herself. Clementina Black died at 22 Westmoreland Road, Barnes, Surrey, on 19 December 1922. 


@@@@@


doc= 37197


Blackwell, John (1624-1701), government official and colonial governor, was born in St Matthew's parish, London, on 8 March 1624, the eldest son and second of ten children of John Blackwell (1594/5-1658), a puritan-inclined London merchant who at one time supplied the royal household with groceries and who latterly settled in Mortlake in Surrey, and his first wife, Juliana (died 1640). Blackwell was an ensign in the City of London's horse militia as early as 1642 and a cornet in the parliamentary army by 1644; in 1645 he became a captain in Oliver Cromwell's own cavalry regiment, in which he served until June 1648. On 9 June 1647 Blackwell married Elizabeth Smithesby (died 1669), a relative of his father's second wife, Martha Smithesby. They had at least eight children. 
From 1645 Blackwell combined his military service with the important post of deputy treasurer-at-wars. As he was a political as well as a religious Independent, his appointment may have been intended to reassure the army, since the war treasurers themselves were London aldermen of Presbyterian persuasion. In 1649 the Rump Parliament rejected a motion to make Blackwell a full treasurer, but in 1652 he became co-treasurer with an obscure back-bench MP, and from 1653 with Richard Deane; they were also joint receivers-general of assessments, and thus responsible for the entire system of direct taxation and military expenditure. Blackwell and Deane received a basic salary plus poundage according to the level of military spending. Although Charles Fleetwood, the lord deputy, grumbled about his getting priority for his Irish land claims -- Blackwell and his father both having invested in Ireland as adventurers, and part of his own pay arrears being due in this way -- two years later John Thurloe, secretary of state, thought his conduct perfectly reasonable. In the 1656-8 parliament, as a member for Surrey Blackwell was active in committees but took little part in the debates. 
Although Blackwell might have seemed to be a committed Cromwellian, he like Deane supported the Wallingford House faction, led by Charles Fleetwood and John Lambert, who were responsible for the overthrow of Richard Cromwell as protector and for the return of the Rump in May 1659. If a little less politically active than his colleague Deane, Blackwell too continued to act under the military junta of October-December; and not surprisingly the restored Long Parliament replaced both of them as war treasurers early in 1660. After the Restoration he was one of those perpetually disabled from holding any office. He was able to satisfy royalist investigators that an out-payment which he had made in connection with the king's trial and execution had simply been a routine matter, in no way implicating him in the actual regicide. This was fortunate, since his father had served on the second high court of justice in February-March 1649, which had tried and condemned James Hamilton, first duke of Hamilton, Henry Rich, first earl of Holland, and other royalist leaders in the second civil war of 1648. The elder Blackwell's religious commitment was at least as strong as his son's; he seems to have died in some poverty in early 1658, having previously calculated the debts owing to himself at nearly $36,000. 
Blackwell's Irish lands had been confirmed by a special act in the second protectorate parliament of 1656-8. In the autumn of 1659, when he was appointed (very briefly as it turned out) to be a treasury commissioner, he was also elected an alderman of the City of London; early the next year he was excused from this dignity owing to lack of means. At the Restoration his former church and crown lands and those belonging to the Butler (Ormond) family in Ireland were all forfeit, but he managed to retain other Irish interests through the friendship and protection of the first Baron Kingston who, as Sir John King, had been a Cromwellian until 1659. In spite of this Blackwell was threatened with arrest at least once in the 1660s. He seems to have divided his time between Dublin and Chester. 
About 1672, having been a widower for some two years, Blackwell married Frances, daughter of the imprisoned republican general, John Lambert, which hardly argues any diminution in his commitment to the Good Old Cause. They had nine children, one of whom, Lambert Blackwell, became a household official and diplomatic envoy under William III, was knighted, and then made a baronet in 1718: a nice reminder of the continuities between the protectorate and the post-1689 monarchy. 
The next phase of Blackwell's career was in the colony of Massachusetts Bay, where he arrived in 1684. In spite of the charter having been called in and the old puritan ruling party apparently crushed, Blackwell rapidly attained considerable influence, as was sourly noted by the ardently imperialistic customs official Edward Randolph. Blackwell produced an ingenious if not wholly convincing scheme for a land bank, to provide credit and to help overcome the colony's chronic shortage of specie. It is not clear whether the plan foundered because of legal or constitutional doubts about the governor's interim council lacking authority to incorporate such a bank, or because of opposition from the mercantile, creditor interest. Blackwell had already been in touch with William Penn when the Quaker proprietor offered him the deputy governorship of the infant colony of Pennsylvania, in a desperate attempt to reassert his authority over the resident Quaker oligarchy based in Philadelphia. Blackwell's effective period as governor lasted only a year, from the end of 1688 to new year 1690, and is generally reckoned a failure. Given the balance of social and political forces and the lack of coercive power, Pennsylvania was in fact ungovernable except by, or with the tacit agreement of, the local elite. The governor expressed his disillusionment in letters to Penn and others: 'the hosts of Musqueetos are worse than armed men: yet the men without Armes worse than they'; he also attacked what he saw as Quaker hypocrisy: 'each praying with his neighbour on First Days, and then preying on him the other six' ('DNB'). 
Having declined Penn's offer of a lesser post as receiver-general of all proprietary revenues in the colony, Blackwell returned to Massachusetts in 1690 and then to England in 1693 or 1694. Thereafter he lived in Bethnal Green in east London; he died intestate, and was buried in Kensington on 6 July 1701. The baronetcy bestowed on his son became extinct in 1801. 


@@@@@


doc= 37198


Blaikie, Walter Biggar (1847-1928), civil engineer and publisher, was born in Edinburgh on 23 November 1847, the second son of the Revd William Garden Blaikie (1820-1899), minister at Pilrig, a Disruption father of the Free Church of Scotland, later professor of apologetics and pastoral theology at New College, Edinburgh, and his wife, Margaret Catherine (died 1915), daughter of Walter Biggar, a retired fish merchant resident in Edinburgh. Like his relative Robert Louis Stevenson, with whom he shared a childhood nurse, Blaikie was destined to be a civil engineer. He was educated at Edinburgh Academy and privately in Brussels before attending classes at Edinburgh University and training in the office of B. and E. Blyth, noted railway engineers. He went to India in 1870 to work first for the raja of Kathiawar, and then for the public works department of the government of India, in which he became executive engineer, military works. In 1873 he married Janet Marshall (only daughter of John Macfie of Edinburgh); they had five daughters. The Indian climate suited neither Blaikie's wife nor their first child, so he returned to Scotland on leave and resigned in 1879. 
Blaikie was about to emigrate to Australia when he happened to meet, at King's Cross Station, London, Thomas Constable, the queen's printer in Edinburgh, a fellow Edinburgh Academical, and an elder of Pilrig Free Church, who suggested that he try a spell in the printing trade. Six months later he became a partner in T. and A. Constable, Thistle Street, Edinburgh. He settled in Colinton and rose to be company chairman, an authority on the history of Scottish typography, and a printer of fine editions of, among others, the works of R. L. Stevenson. 
Passionately interested in non-telescopic astronomy, Blaikie published annually from 1898 until 1920 an elaborate set of star maps designed to help amateurs. His ingenious spherical planisphere calculating device was appreciated by the Greenwich and Edinburgh observatories. He wrote articles for the magazine of the Royal Scottish Geographical Society, of which he was a founder, and for long a member of council. A fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, he was prominent in the Scottish History Society, and a founder and president of the Old Edinburgh Club. He was also a member and office bearer of the Scottish Society of Arts. As generous-hearted as he was brusquely businesslike, he was chairman of the Edinburgh chamber of commerce in 1903-6, and from 1900 to 1920 a manager of the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary. 
Blaikie wrote and printed for the Scottish History Society his meticulous 'Itinerary of Prince Charles Edward Stuart' (1897) and the substantial volume, 'Origins of the Forty-Five' (1916). He put money into the 'Scots Observer', which in 1891 became the London-based 'National Observer'. He also helped found the 'Celtic Review' and was president of the Royal Celtic Society, 1921-6. 
Edinburgh University awarded Blaikie an honorary LLD in 1913. He was a JP and from 1918 a deputy lieutenant of Edinburgh. One daughter married Robert Kilpatrick, managing director of T. and A. Constable. Two others, Alice and Margaret Blaikie, presented his Jacobite pamphlets and manuscripts to the National Library of Scotland as a memorial after his death in an Edinburgh nursing home on 3 May 1928. 
B. P. Lenman', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37199


Blaugdone, Barbara (c.1609-1704), Quaker preacher, was 'a Woman of good Parts and Education' (Besse, 2.37) and well connected. Her husband, about whom nothing is known, probably died young, leaving her a widow with a small income which she supplemented by teaching. She was converted to Quakerism in 1654 by John Audland and John Camm. Of her earlier life it is known only that she 'feared the Lord' and 'sought' him 'earnestly' (Blaugdone, 5). She may have been one of the Bristol Seekers from whom many Quakers at this time were recruited. After conversion, to 'subdue her body', she abstained for a year 'from all Flesh, Wine and Beer', drinking only water (ibid., 9). 'She became plain both in speech and habit', alienating her employers and losing her pupils (Sewel, 1.252). 
For entering churches in Bristol 'to bear testimony against their formalities', Blaugdone was imprisoned for three months in 1654 ('DNB'). On leaving a meeting at a private house she was stabbed, narrowly escaping death. To gain the release from prison of two Quaker preachers, she went to Basingstoke. Denied access to them, she successfully pleaded their cause with the mayor. In 1656, when several Quakers were imprisoned in Ireland, she felt called to continue their mission and sailed for Cork. A storm forced her boat into Dublin, where she met the deputy, Henry Cromwell (second son of the lord protector), and cautioned him about his treatment of Quakers. She left him 'much troubled and... melancholy' (Besse, 2.459). In Cork her religious enthusiasm and the power of her preaching alarmed friends. She was accused of witchcraft and imprisoned. A letter to George Fox told of a call to Jerusalem, but she was dissuaded and on release went home. Shortly afterwards she was back in Dublin, exhorting judges in the court of justice to righteousness. Again imprisoned, 'she suffered much' (Sewel, 1.308). Only the intervention of powerful friends obtained her release. She went to Limerick, was imprisoned, and moved to Cork and Kinsale gaols before being released and banished. 
In 1657 in Marlborough, Blaugdone attempted to speak in the church following the service, was attacked, brought before a magistrate, and imprisoned for six weeks, during which she fasted six days. On release she went to the mayor and so powerful were her reproaches that he 'acknowledged the truth of her doctrine' and henceforth attempted to protect Quakers (Brailsford, 169). She visited Molton, Barnstaple, and Bideford in the west country 'in all which places a Prison was her Lot' (Sewel, 1.253). For bearing witness in Great Torrington she was sent to Exeter prison, long detained before trial, and finally 'whipt till the Blood ran down my back' (Brailsford, 172). After the Restoration she remained active. The year 1681 found her in prison in Bristol for attending a Quaker meeting. Two years later in Ilchester, Somerset, she was again imprisoned, and in the same year she was fined $280 for failing to attend the local Anglican church. In 1686 she wrote to James II about the continued imprisonment of many Quakers. Her memoirs, published in 1691 but almost certainly circulated privately long before, end in 1657. In 1689 two other writings intended for publication were censored. She died in London in 1704. 
Bridget Hill', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37200


Blom, Eric Walter (1888-1959), music critic and lexicographer, was born on 20 August 1888 in Bern, Switzerland, the only son and eldest child of Frederick Walter Blom, bookseller and amateur singer of Danish origin, and his wife, Anna Elise Rosalie Wenger. He was educated privately and was always very reticent about his early years: he seems to have been largely self-taught in music. Blom settled in England shortly before the First World War, and after working for two music publishers -- Breitkopf and Hartel in Bern and J. and W. Chester in London -- he began to make his name in 1919 as a writer of programme notes for the Queen's Hall Promenade Concerts, being first invited to do so by Rosa Newmarch. His flair and knowledge led to his becoming London music critic of the 'Manchester Guardian' in 1923; an appointment to the 'Birmingham Post' followed in 1931; and from 1949 onwards he worked as music critic of 'The Observer'. In all three tenures Blom showed a wide range of musical sympathies and balanced judgements, and he wrote with fine style and sensitivity. Of his dozen books 'Mozart' (1935) was by far the most successful. Written with insight and affection, for the 'Master Musicians' series (of which he was editor), it remained in print for over fifty years. In 1923 he married Marjory Spencer (died 1952), with whom he had a son and a daughter. 
Blom's fluent command of languages was invaluable in his work as a lexicographer. His Everyman's 'Dictionary of Music' (1946) revealed his gift for the systematic organization of a large quantity of material. Its success led at once to his appointment as editor of the fifth edition of 'Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians', a task that occupied him until 1954. The fourth edition of 'Grove' appeared in 1940, comprising a revision of the five volumes of the third edition of 1927, with a sixth, supplementary, volume. But clearly by the late 1940s an entirely new approach was required, and Blom was given a free hand to bring everything as up to date as possible. Of the 8 million or more words to which the nine-volume fifth edition ultimately amounted, over half were entirely new articles or replacements of old ones, and nearly all else was revised. Though some of the original contributions by Sir George Grove were still retained, Blom was able to take account of the huge expansion of musical scholarship and history that had occurred during the preceding quarter of a century. In addition to planning and editing, he read the entire dictionary in proof, a prodigious task for one man. The result was the crown of his life's work and his lasting monument. In 1950, because of pressure of work on 'Grove', Blom gave up the important editorship of 'Music and Letters', which he had held since 1937. He resumed it in 1954 and continued as editor until his death. In this capacity his wisdom and tolerance gave much encouragement to young writers. A supplementary volume to the fifth edition of 'Grove' was published in 1961, containing not only corrections but a number of important new articles. 
Blom was a man of sterling character -- modest, kindly, humorous, hospitable, and friendly: he hated pretentiousness in any form. Although preferring music by the classical masters, he was by no means hostile to contemporary music, the development of which he followed with interest. In 1955 he was appointed CBE and he was awarded a DLitt by the University of Birmingham. Blom died in the Princess Beatrice Hospital, London, on 11 April 1959. 


@@@@@


doc= 37201


Blumlein, Alan Dower (1903-1942), electronics engineer, was born on 29 June 1903 at 31 Netherhall Gardens, Hampstead, London, the only son and the second of two children of Semmy Joseph Blumlein (1863-1914), a German mining businessman and naturalized British subject, and his wife, Jessie Edward Dower, daughter of the Revd William Dower, a Scottish missionary, and his wife. 
Blumlein, possibly the greatest British electronics engineer of the twentieth century, was a remarkably versatile, prolific, and creative engineer. His 128 patents, which were produced in a working lifetime of just eighteen years, embrace the fields of telephony, electrical measurements, sound recording and sound reproduction (both monaural and stereophonic), high-definition television, radar, and electronics generally. 
Blumlein was educated at various schools, including Highgate School, Middlesex (1918-21), and at the City and Guilds College, London (1921-3). He graduated with a first-class honours degree in electrical engineering in 1923, and was then appointed an assistant demonstrator (1923-4). With Professor Mallett, Blumlein devised a new method of high-frequency resistance measurement. Their joint paper was awarded a premium by the Institution of Electrical Engineers in 1925. 
Blumlein joined the International Western Electric Company in September 1924. His endeavours, in the field of telephony, on loading coils, and the reduction of cross-talk and electrical interference, were appreciated by the company and led to Blumlein's being given a bonus of a year's salary. Later, during an investigation of capacity unbalance, he invented the widely used transformer ratio arm bridge. In 1929 he was appointed by the Columbia Graphophone Company to engage in work on monaural sound recording and reproduction, primarily to circumvent the Western Electric patents on electrical recording. He was eminently successful in his task and engineered a superior system. 
About 1930-31 Blumlein became interested in stereophonic recording and reproduction. His extensive investigations resulted in one of the classic patents of the electrical recording literature. Such was the profusion of his ideas that the patent contains no fewer than seventy claims. However, his work was twenty-five years in advance of the recording art, and its significance was recognized only in 1958, when a citation was awarded posthumously to him by the Audio Engineering Society of the USA. 
Following the formation in 1931 of EMI, Blumlein made sterling contributions to the realization of the world's first, public, all-electronic, high-definition television service. His patents on camera tubes, camera mosaics, wide-band amplifiers of all types, modulators, pulse circuits, power supplies, transmission lines, antennas, test equipment, and electronic circuits generally, constitute a set which illustrates the manifold ideas and the intellectual power of Blumlein's genius. With E. C. Cork he designed the wide-band cable which was utilized during the televising of the 1937 coronation. In 1938 he invented slot antennas, and, with H. Kallman and W. S. Percival, the transversal filter. 
The threat of war caused Blumlein and E. L. C. White to design and demonstrate in 1939 a 60 MHz radar. This was a private venture of EMI and was conceived when government radar work was a closely guarded secret. When the Second World War began Blumlein applied his binaural concepts to the problem of the sound location of enemy aircraft, and his transformer ratio arm principles to the design of a low-level altimeter for the RAF. 
Of great importance was Blumlein's work, with White, on air interception (AI) radar. Their solution to the minimum range problem and their development of a new modulator-transmitter (which became part of the AI Mark IV radar) contributed substantially to the defeat, from the beginning of 1941, of the German night bomber offensive over England. An improved version, AI Mark VI, was engineered by Blumlein and White for single-seater fighters. 
Blumlein's work on the navigation radar H2S and its adaptation, known as air surface vessel (ASV) radar, for locating enemy U-boats, was invaluable. These radars had a dramatic effect on the battle of the Atlantic and on the allies' long-range strategic bombing of Germany. His delay-line circuits, automatic strobe-following concepts, and diverse electronic circuits found application in other types of radar, including GL Mark III -- a gun-laying radar which played a significant role in the anti-aircraft gunnery defence of the United Kingdom. 
On 22 April 1933 Blumlein married Doreen Lane (1908-1989), daughter of W. H. Lane, auctioneer and estate agent of Penzance, and his wife, and settled in Ealing, London. Their sons, Simon and David, were born in 1936 and 1939 respectively. 
Blumlein was killed, aged thirty-eight, on 7 June 1942, while flight testing, over the Wye valley, a version of the H2S radar. He was cremated on 13 June at Golders Green crematorium. Of Blumlein's life's work, Isaac Shoenberg, director of research at EMI, said: 'There was not a single subject to which he turned his mind that he did not enrich extensively' (J. D. McGee, 'Contributions to television', 'British Kinematography, Sound and Television Journal', July 1968). 


@@@@@


doc= 37202


Boase, Frederic (1843-1916), lawyer and biographer, was born on 7 October 1843 in Larrigan, near Penzance, the youngest in the family of four sons and two daughters of John Josias Arthur Boase (1801-1896), banker, and his wife, Charlotte (1802-1873), daughter of Robert Sholl. He was educated at Penzance and Bromsgrove grammar schools from 1855 to 1859, and in 1861 was articled to Thomas Cornish, a solicitor in Penzance. He passed his law finals in London in 1867 and was admitted attorney and solicitor in that year. Until 1868 he worked as a solicitor in Exmouth after which he moved to London to a post as a conveyancing clerk, which he held until 1872. In 1877 he was appointed librarian of the Incorporated Law Society. He was an original member of the Library Association. 
In 1891 Boase published a 'Catalogue of Printed Books in the Library of the Incorporated Law Society', which was reprinted in 1906, and in 1892 he published the first volume of his 'Modern English Biography', which contains many thousands of concise memoirs of people who had died since the year 1850. This was printed privately in a limited edition of 250 copies, and in its preface the author expressed his gratitude to his father and to his eldest brother, Charles William Boase, 'for their great kindness in conjointly defraying the cost of printing this work which I claim to be an important contribution to the English biography of the nineteenth century'. Boase explained that for twenty years he had made a collection of notes relating to English persons deceased since 1850, and that in compiling his work he had kept in mind the dictum of James Anthony Froude, 'we want the biographies of common people', so that many hundreds of the thousands of entries included in his compilation related to persons who had not been eminent but had led interesting lives, accounts of which could not be found in any other book. 
The second and third volumes of 'Modern English Biography' were published (also in limited editions) in 1897 and 1901. In 1903 Boase retired from his post of librarian of the Law Society and devoted the rest of his life to his biographical work. Volume 4 was issued in 1908, volume 5 in 1912, and volume 6 in 1921 (by which time the author had been dead for five years). In 1965 all six volumes were republished with a new preface written by Anna Kate Rance. The full six volumes of Boase's 'magnum opus' contain 30,000 entries, a stupendous achievement to come from the pen of one author. The work remains an essential tool for historical research into the period covered. The indexes are of exceptional usefulness and Boase set new standards in the use of sources. He developed a curious relationship to the 'Dictionary of National Biography', which he both contributed to and plundered. 
From 1868 Boase lived in London with his brother, George Clement Boase, bibliographer, who, up to the time of his death in 1897, assisted his younger brother with his biographical studies. Charles William Boase, the Oxford historian, together with George Clement and Frederic, all collaborated in the preparation of 'An account of the families of Boase or Bowes, originally residing at Paul or Madron in Cornwall'. This was printed as a limited edition of seventy-five copies for private circulation in 1876, and a second edition limited to 100 copies appeared in 1893. 
Frederic Boase never married. He died in St Leonards on 23 December 1916. 


@@@@@


doc= 37203


Bodley, John Edward Courtenay (1853-1925), writer on France, was born on 6 June 1853 at King Street, Hanley, Staffordshire, the son of Edward Fisher Bodley, commercial traveller, and later a wealthy pottery owner, and his second wife, Mary Ridgway. Bodley was educated at Mill Hill School, London, and in 1873 matriculated at Balliol College, Oxford; his friends at Oxford included Oscar Wilde and Cecil Rhodes. He took a pass degree in 1877 (MA 1879). Called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1874, he practised as a barrister on the Oxford circuit, and then in June 1880 became political secretary to Sir Charles Dilke. His father was so disappointed at his abandoning law that he was disinherited in favour of a younger brother. In 1884 Dilke appointed Bodley as secretary of the royal commission on the housing of the working classes. Bodley wrote three reports on housing for England, Scotland, and Ireland, but his political hopes were dashed when Dilke was ruined by a divorce scandal in 1885. 
Bodley visited South Africa in 1887-8 and the United States and Canada in 1888-9, meeting senior officials, politicians, and churchmen, and in 1890 he settled in France. The following year he married Evelyn Frances Bell, the daughter of John Bell of Rushpool Hall, Yorkshire; they had two sons (one of whom became a soldier and the other a painter) and a daughter, Ava, ['see under 'Anderson, Ava Courtney] who married the diplomat Ralph Follett Wigram. Bodley's marriage ended in divorce in 1908. 
Bodley began his literary career in France with the publication of 'France' (1898), on French political institutions, which displayed an encyclopaedic knowledge of French local custom and tradition. It was followed by 'L'anglomanie et les traditions francaises' (1899) and the publication in 1906 of two lectures on the separation of church and state. 'The Romance of the Battle-Line in France' (1919) recounted the historic associations of the departments ravaged in the First World War. Bodley was a corresponding member of the Institut de France (Academie des Sciences Morales et Politiques), and contributed to the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' articles on the history of the Third Republic. He knew France so well that Charles Maurras once described him as almost a Frenchman. 
Cardinal H. E. Manning intended Bodley to be his biographer, but Bodley was absent in France when Manning died, and Edmund Sheridan Purcell guilefully secured the job for himself. Bodley drew Manning's portrait in 'Cardinal Manning and other Essays' (1912), and wrote by royal command the official record of Edward VII's coronation (published 1903). The king personally rewarded him with the Royal Victorian Order, fourth class, but broke off relations when the disgruntled recipient returned it the following day. 
In 1920 Bodley married Phyllis Helen Lomax, the daughter of the Revd Henry Joshua Lomax of Stoke Golding. He died at The Chestnuts, Haywards Heath, Sussex, on 28 May 1925; his wife survived him. 
Bodley's life was one of disappointments, over Dilke's disgrace, the Manning biography, the coronation record, and the lack of English official acknowledgement of his work for Anglo-French relations. He failed to make a wholly satisfactory career. 
Sheridan Gilley', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37204


Boghurst, William (1630/31-1685), apothecary, of St Giles-in-the-Fields, London, was the son of William Boghurst of Ditton, Kent, and served his apprenticeship with a London apothecary, Francis Drury. During the great plague of 1665 his medical practice expanded and he made his name. He stayed in the city throughout the epidemic, treating by his own account '40, 50 or 60 patients a day' ('Intelligencer', 7 Aug 1665) and advertising his medicines and services in 'The Intelligencer'. By the end of the year his reputation was sufficient to attract offers from the corporation of Norwich, which tried to employ him when the infection reached there. 
Boghurst described the symptoms of the disease, and remedies for it, in 'Loimographia, or, An experimentall relation of the plague' (1666, BL, Sloane MS 349). This manuscript, which was clearly intended for publication, reflects his personal observation as well as drawing on the published literature (in Latin as well as English) on the disease. Boghurst was critical of the established practice of quarantining infected households -- a policy 'oft enough tried and always found ineffectual' -- and was in general doubtful about the conclusions drawn from theories of contagion. He also criticized the standard treatments of bleeding and purging and the practice of fumigating houses, though he sensibly warned against using the linen and bedding of sick patients. He described the symptoms of the disease with great accuracy, and correctly predicted its gradual decline in 1666, since 'the plague hath a long tail,... going backwards and forwards in little increases and decreases till it be quite gone'. His work is both a testimony to the critical acumen of a seventeenth-century general practitioner and the most reliable eyewitness account of bubonic plague in 1665. 
Boghurst also wrote a poem in praise of London, 'Londinologia, sive, Londini encomium' (1666, BL, Sloane MS 904, fols. 53-68), estimating its population at one million (double the actual figure), celebrating the antiquity of St Paul's (on the eve of its destruction in the great fire), and welcoming the growth of the West End over the past forty years: '
so large, so beautiful, so fair and strait 

both streets and houses uniform and neat. 

' Little is known about Boghurst's family or personal circumstances. According to an epitaph, 'he was an honest, just man, skilful in his profession, and in the Greek and Latin tongue, delighting in the study of antiquity; and played exceeding well upon the lute, which he took naturally. He left a sorrowful widow and six children, to whom he afforded commendable breeding' (BL, Sloane MS 904, fol. 68'r'). In later life, however, his fortunes appear to have declined: he could not afford the livery of his company in 1682. He died in London on 2 September 1685 and was buried in Ditton. 


@@@@@


doc= 37205


Bolton, Arthur Thomas (1864-1945), architect and architectural historian, was born on 14 April 1864 at 37 Westbourne Park, Bayswater, London, the second son in a family of five sons and three daughters of Thomas Bolton (1819-1895), solicitor, and his wife, Emily Wildman (1831-1906), of Chilham Castle, Kent. He was educated at Dr Huntingford's Preparatory School, Wimbledon, and Haileybury College, before entering University College, London, in 1882. In 1884 he was articled for three years to the architect Robert Edis. He studied at the Architectural Association from 1885 to 1888 and from 1888 to 1889 acted as clerk of works to Ewan Christian before setting up his own architectural practice in 1890. He was elected an associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) in 1888 and a fellow in 1909. In 1893 Bolton won the Soane medallion for his 'Design for a railway terminus', and in 1895, having become increasingly interested in the history of architecture, he won the RIBA's silver medal for an essay, 'The influence of literature on architecture'. 
On 26 January 1897 Bolton married, in London, Harriet Barnes (1863-1944), daughter of Samuel Fall of Carolina. They had three sons and two daughters. In 1901 Bolton was appointed first headmaster of the new day school at the Architectural Association. His first major commission was a factory and offices in Limehouse for the Sanitas Company (1900). He built for himself a house, Larkscliff, on the cliffs at Birchington, Kent (1906). His most important commission was to complete the offices for the Hamburg-Amerika Linie in Cockspur Street, London (1906-8). Subsequently Bolton built a house in the country for a wealthy barrister (Hurtwood in Sussex) and another in the Usk valley (Colomendy), where he also displayed a talent for garden design (1912-14). However, most of the work he was doing at this time was of a minor nature. 
Having moved his family back to London in 1913, Bolton was in 1917 appointed curator of Sir John Soane's Museum in succession to Walter L. Spiers. He remained in this post until his death. He opened up the museum to scholars and architectural historians by writing many articles on Soane and his collections for the architectural press in the 1920s and also embarked on a series of publications about Soane: 'The Works of Sir John Soane' (1924), an edition of Soane's Royal Academy 'Lectures on Architecture' (1929), and 'The Portrait of Sir John Soane' (1927), as well as a number of pamphlets. During the 1920s he campaigned tirelessly to stop the destruction of Soane's Bank of England by Sir Herbert Baker. Besides his work on Soane, Bolton became a great authority on the Adam brothers and wrote a two-volume work, 'The Architecture of Robert and James Adam' (1922), still regarded as a major source of reference on the subject. This led to work at several Adam buildings and to an invitation from Sir Lawrence Weaver to design an Adam room for the British Empire Exhibition at Wembley in 1925. 
Bolton was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1914 and served on the council of the London Topographical Society (1918-27). From 1923 until his death he was joint editor with H. Duncan Hendry of the Wren Society volumes, which aimed to publish all the drawings, documents, and facts relating to Wren's life and works; the twentieth and final volume was published a few days before Bolton's death in January 1945. In the 1930s he carried out extensive research on the work of Sir Charles Barry and was working on a study of Barry's diaries at the time of his death. Bolton enjoyed only modest success as an architect, although he was greatly respected; but as a scholar he excelled. He died of a heart attack in London on 17 January 1945, having collapsed on the platform of Queensway tube station on his way to a meeting of the trustees of Sir John Soane's Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 37206


Bomberg, David Garshen (1890-1957), painter, was born at 18 Florence Street, Birmingham, on 5 December 1890, the fifth of the eleven children of Abraham Bomberg (1867/8-1938), a Polish immigrant leather-worker, and his wife, Rebecca, 'nee' Klan (1863/4-1912), whose family kept an inn and reared horses. In 1895 the family moved to Whitechapel, London, and Bomberg attended Old Castle Street School, off Aldgate High Street. About 1906 he was apprenticed to the German immigrant lithographer Paul Fischer in Islington. But far more important to his future development as a painter were the evening classes at the Westminster School given by Walter Sickert, which he attended from 1908 to 1910. Then, fortified by a visit to Roger Fry's 'Manet and the post-impressionists' exhibition at the Grafton Galleries, London (1910), where he saw Cezanne's work for the first time, Bomberg entered the Slade School of Fine Art in London with the help of a much-needed loan from the Jewish Education Aid Society. 
During his time at the Slade (1911-13), Bomberg proved himself a precocious and innovative student. One of an exceptional Slade generation, which included Mark Gertler, Paul Nash, William Roberts, Stanley Spencer, and Edward Wadsworth, he rapidly gained a reputation as a forceful member of the avant-garde. The artist and critic Percy Wyndham Lewis visited Bomberg at his Tenter Buildings studio in 1912, and in 1913 he travelled to Paris with the sculptor Jacob Epstein to select work for the Jewish section of an important exhibition 'Twentieth century art' at the Whitechapel Art Gallery (1914). After leaving the Slade, Bomberg had a short and stormy affiliation with the Omega workshops of Roger Fry before exhibiting six works in the 'cubist room' section of 'The Camden Town Group and others' exhibition (December 1913), a major survey of the British avant-garde held at Brighton City Art Galleries. 
But 1914 was the 'annus mirabilis' of Bomberg's early career. Having exhibited five works as a founder member of the London Group, including a frenetic and impressively organized canvas called 'In the Hold' (1913-14; Tate collection), he asserted his independence from Wyndham Lewis's newly formed vorticist group ['see 'Vorticists]. Bomberg's first one-man show at the Chenil Gallery, Chelsea (July 1914), established him as a remarkably powerful cubo-futurist. In a youthful masterpiece entitled 'The Mud Bath' (1914; Tate collection), he presented a vision of his local Whitechapel steam baths as a stark arena where harsh, clear-cut figures, an amalgam of human and machine forms, hurled themselves around and into the pool. 
Bomberg shared the vorticists' involvement with the machine-age dynamism of modern urban life. In 1915 he exhibited six works in the 'invited to show' non-members' section of the first vorticist exhibition, held at the Dore Galleries in London. By November, however, he had enlisted in the Royal Engineers, from which he later transferred to the 18th King's Royal Rifles. In March 1916 Bomberg married Alice ('b'. 1880), daughter of John Burton Mayes, a London wholesale stationer, and divorced wife of Jack Richardson. Shortly afterwards he was sent to the front line in France. 
Although the First World War prevented Bomberg from painting, he did receive an important commission in 1917 from the Canadian War Memorials Fund. The subject was 'Sappers at Work' and the first version (1918; Tate collection) was rejected. The second, more representational version (1919; National Gallery of Canada, Ottawa) was accepted. During the 1920s Bomberg underwent an irrevocable loss of faith in machine-age abstraction. He turned instead to a more traditional style rooted in his response to landscape. After journeying to Jerusalem in 1923 with funds provided by the Palestine Foundation Fund, he painted surprisingly naturalistic views of the city and countryside. Then, having returned to London in 1927 and left his wife, he held an exhibition of Palestine and Petra paintings at the Leicester Galleries (1928). 
In 1929 Bomberg made his first trip to Spain, where the city of Toledo inspired him to achieve a greater breadth and expressiveness in his landscapes. He returned to London early in 1930, but only displayed his Spanish paintings in a 1932 one-man show at the Bloomsbury Gallery. These were the years when Bomberg's reputation faltered, and during his brief affiliation with the Communist Party he visited Russia in 1933. Lack of success then drove him back to Spain, where his best work was painted at Ronda in Andalusia. By the time Bomberg applied for a war artist's commission in 1939 he was a sadly neglected figure. After several rejections the War Artists' Advisory Committee grudgingly asked him to paint an underground bomb store near Burton upon Trent in 1942. It inspired some of his finest work, but the committee only accepted three bomb-store drawings. In 1941 he married the painter Lilian Mendelson (1898-1983), divorced wife of Jacob Mendelson, an art dealer. She was the daughter of Oliver Oswald Holt, civil servant. They had one daughter, Diana, born in 1935. 
Bomberg suffered continual rejection during the Second World War. The last one-man show he ever held in London was staged at the Leger Gallery (1943), and the only art school to accept him as a teacher was the Borough Polytechnic, London, where he taught part-time from 1945 to 1953. Although the classes were small, he became a legendary teacher. Among his students were Frank Auerbach, Dennis Creffield, Leon Kossoff, and Gustav Metzger, and the Borough period coincided with his most fruitful post-war painting expeditions: Cornwall in August 1947, and Cyprus in the summer of the following year. The heat and light of the Mediterranean inspired him to paint his most exuberant and expressive landscapes, but they remained largely unseen. 
Bomberg returned to Ronda in 1954. There, after an abortive attempt to establish a school of painting at the Villa Paz, he executed his final landscapes and figure paintings. A new turbulence enters his freely handled work, and the 'Last Self-Portrait' (1956) reveals the extent of his despair. In 1957 Bomberg became seriously ill and was moved to hospital in Gibraltar, and later to England. He died at St Thomas's Hospital, London, on 19 August 1957. 
Richard Cork', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37207


Bonham, Francis Robert (1785-1863), political party agent, was born in London on 6 September 1785, he and an older sister Susan being the only surviving children (two sons and a daughter having died in infancy) of Francis Warren Bonham, landowner of Ballintaggart, co. Kildare, who settled in England, and his second wife, Dorothea Sophia Herbert, of Muckross, co. Kerry. After private tutoring Bonham went to Corpus Christi College, Oxford, where he took his BA in 1807. In 1808 he entered Lincoln's Inn; he was called to the bar in 1814 though he never practised. 
In 1830 Bonham was elected for the government borough of Rye and the following year was active as tory assistant whip. Though defeated at Rye in 1831 he took part in the management of the 1832 general election. From 1832 he replaced William Holmes, who was out of the House of Commons from 1832 to 1837, as the Conservative Party's chief electoral expert. When Sir Robert Peel formed his first ministry in 1834 he appointed Bonham storekeeper of the ordnance. Bonham sat in the 1835-7 parliament as member for Harwich and assistant whip, losing his seat at the next general election. Though making no attempt to stand for parliament in 1841, he was again appointed storekeeper of the ordnance in Peel's second ministry. He resigned this post in 1845 as a result of a parliamentary inquiry into alleged improper acquisition of railway shares. He continued nevertheless to act as unpaid organizer and adviser to the Peelites up to 1852. In 1853, through the good offices of W. E. Gladstone and other Peelites in Lord Aberdeen's government, he was rescued from penury by an appointment as commissioner of income tax; he retired through ill health some time before his death. 
Bonham was a founder-member of the Carlton Club, from where he carried out most of his work. His detailed and systematic accumulation of electoral information provided him with an unsurpassed knowledge of constituencies and candidates and greatly contributed to the efficient Conservative organization which triumphed in 1841. Modest, discreet, industrious, and loyal, Bonham enjoyed the friendship, affection, and trust not only of Peel but of many other leading members of the party. His career marks an important stage in the development of party management in the post-1832 era, when legal registration of voters constituted a new factor in electoral calculations. 
Bonham died unmarried on 26 April 1863 at 13 Albert Terrace, the Knightsbridge home he shared with his sister, and was buried on 2 May 1863 at Brompton cemetery. His voluminous political correspondence was purchased from her by Peel's literary executors, the fifth Earl Stanhope and Edward, Viscount Cardwell, and destroyed except for the two volumes incorporated in the Peel papers, now in the British Library, and letters of his own retained by Lord Stanhope. 
Norman Gash', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37208


Bosanquet, Helen (1860-1925), social theorist and social reformer, was born in Manchester on 10 February 1860. She was the youngest daughter and the fifth child in the family of five sons and four daughters of the Revd John Dendy, who had been a nonconformist minister, and then became a businessman in Manchester, and his wife, Sarah Beard, daughter of a Unitarian minister. Mary Dendy was an elder sister. Having been educated at home by a German governess, she spent the early part of her adult life keeping house for her brothers. In 1886, at the age of twenty-six, she went to Newnham College, Cambridge, where she and another were the first women to gain first-class honours in the Cambridge moral sciences tripos in 1889. She specialized in political economy. She appears to have had academic ambitions, but no permanent openings were offered in either Cambridge or Oxford. She then moved to London and joined the Charity Organisation Society (COS), a body committed to rationalizing London's vast mass of private charities and to defending orthodox economics. She became organizer and district secretary of the society's Shoreditch branch. She was also active in the London Ethical Society, where she met the philosopher Bernard Bosanquet (1848-1923), whom she married on 13 December 1895. Thereafter she took no paid employment for the rest of her life, but pursued an active public career as a theorist and publicist for the COS, as a translator of German philosophy and sociology, and as a collaborator with her husband. 
In 1902 Helen Bosanquet had a much publicized exchange of views with Benjamin Seebohm Rowntree in which she questioned both the extent and the causes of primary poverty as set out in Rowntree's survey of York in 1899. At the end of 1905 she was appointed a member of the royal commission on the poor laws, where she defended the role of organized private charity in public welfare, against the bureaucratic socialism of Beatrice Webb. Her health broke down in 1908, but she is nevertheless believed to have drafted many sections of the royal commission's majority report. In 1909 she became editor of the 'Charity Organisation Review', the official mouthpiece of the COS, and in 1914 she published a history of the previous half-century of charitable work in London, 'Social Work in London, 1869-1912'. She and her husband lived most of their married life at Oxshott in Surrey, in a rural-cum-suburban community very similar to that described in the writings of their neighbour and contemporary George Sturt (George Bourne). They had no children. 
Mrs Bosanquet's reputation was in eclipse for most of the twentieth century, partly because of the disparaging account of her in Beatrice Webb's diaries ('the little woman'), and partly because of her association with a subsequently discredited school of 'social economics'. She was, however, a major figure in the development of British social work; and her theoretical and sociological writings became of more interest in the late twentieth century than they had appeared to be during and shortly after her lifetime (when idealist and 'verstehen' modes of thought were being demolished by positivism). She was influential in defining the syllabus of the COS's school of sociology, founded in 1903, which was absorbed into the social science department of the London School of Economics in 1912. It was she who insisted that charitable visiting should be grounded in formal training for objective casework; and it was also she who suggested that social workers needed civic education in history, social structure, and economics, as well as professional skills. That two-tier emphasis on both general and professional learning remained a characteristic of British training for social work. 
Helen Bosanquet's major writings were: 'Rich and Poor' (1896), 'The Standard of Life and other Studies' (1898), 'The Strength of the People' (1902), and 'The Family' (1906). These books are rather discursive in style, and contain little of the exhaustive empirical detail characteristic of much Edwardian sociological writing. Nevertheless, they all exhibit a coherent underlying social theory. They attempt to fuse an organic, interdependent theory of society with a view of social behaviour that emphasized diversity and idiosyncrasy. The key to social progress lay in the rational will of individuals, and true philanthropy consisted in supporting and strengthening that rational will rather than in the mere mechanical relief of poverty. The way to social understanding lay not in counting heads or in measuring incomes (though accurate collection of such data was a useful secondary tool); it lay rather in cultural interpretation and participant observation. 'The Family' challenged the view of many late nineteenth-century sociologists that the family as a social unit would inevitably decline under the pressures of industrial capitalism; and it challenged also the claim of Edwardian anthropologists (echoed by many feminists) that the roots of the family lay in matriarchy. Mrs Bosanquet was herself a feminist and suffragist, though she dissented from most Edwardian feminists in believing that the true expression of women's rights lay not in the public and professional sphere, but in raising the status and functional efficiency of family life. Her views were spelt out in her criticism of the royal commission on divorce (1912), which had recommended the liberalization of the divorce laws. She is often portrayed by historians as upholding an archaic, gentrified, pre-industrial theory of society, and some of her opinions lend support to this view. But in many respects her writing suggests the exact opposite: that she was a proponent of modernity, rationality, and functional efficiency, often at the expense of traditional values and structures. 'The one fundamental cure for poverty is to make the poorer wage-earners more efficient in the widest sense of the term -- more efficient as producers, as consumers, and in all the relations of life'. 
As a person Mrs Bosanquet appears to have been quiet, ironic, and donnish. Her Newnham nicknames -- Tone-Raiser and Aunt Dendy -- suggest a certain old-fashioned high-mindedness of manner. Her method of cross-examination on the poor law commission was very low-key and mainly confined to precise verification of points of detail, in marked contrast to the dramatic style and absorption in first principles displayed by Beatrice Webb. In later life she suffered much from ill health and lived largely in retirement with her husband in Oxshott and subsequently in Golders Green. She wrote a short memoir of her husband which was published in 1924. Helen Bosanquet died at her home, 13 Heathgate, Golders Green, on 7 April 1925. 
Jose Harris', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37209


Boteler, William (fl. 1645-1670), parliamentarian army officer and major-general, was the son of Noel (or Neville) Boteler of Barnwell in Northamptonshire; the Anglican clergyman Edward Boteler was probably his brother. There is little information about his early life but he reputedly attended Oundle School, Northamptonshire. At some point before 1646 he married Elizabeth Brooke of Great Oakley, Northamptonshire. 
Boteler rose to the rank of captain of a troop of horse in a local regiment during the first civil war. Over the next few years he was active in, first, local and soon national military affairs: in the summer of 1648 he was a leader of the forces which suppressed a royalist rising in Northamptonshire and the following spring he was active both in maintaining order in the county and in the capture of the Leveller mutineer William Thompson. He acquired a residence in Oundle and land in Derbyshire. Clearly he was on the way up economically. 
Boteler's concern for religion was shown by service on the commissions for the propagation of the gospel in Wales (where he became a JP) and by his part in petitions for toleration, which no doubt reinforced contacts with Oliver Cromwell. He had spoken up for religious freedom at the Whitehall debates in January 1649: acutely aware 'that for the most parte truth and light go under the name of errour and heresy', he feared that the state-funded religious teachers proposed in the second 'Agreement of the People' would 'raile against us in every pulpitt; and make itt their worke nott to discover truth and preach sound doctrine, butt to raile against honest men' ('Clarke Papers', 2.173). In 1652, in similar vein, he presented a paper to his fellow-commissioners for the propagation of the gospel in Wales which asked whether it was not God's pleasure that the judgment and condemnation of false teachers and heretics be left to himself [God] alone and whether for civil powers to judge in matters of religion was not against the liberties granted by Christ to his people. An Independent congregation met at his house in Oundle. 
Between 1655 and 1657 Boteler was major-general for Northamptonshire, Bedfordshire, and Huntingdonshire. This was a remarkable appointment for one who had so far never commanded a regiment -- he was by now major in James Berry's regiment of horse -- though he had been engaged in local administration in his home county as JP and judge for the relief of poor prisoners over the preceding years and had recently earned praise for his success in quelling discontent and negotiating civil-military tensions in Bristol in the winter of 1654-5. Boteler was certainly among the most assiduous of the major-generals. He was particularly harsh on Catholics, on Quakers (to George Fox, Boteler was 'a cruel persecutor' and 'a shame to Christianity and religion'), and on vagrants and the disorderly: all of these groups he seems to have lumped together (Durston, 46). Boteler was noted, too, for vigorous, even violent, implementation of the decimation tax upon royalists. He showed little regard for their social sensibilities, gaoling James Compton, third earl of Northampton, when the latter refused to enter into a security bond with no time limitation, and releasing him only when directly ordered to do so by the council of state. According to one royalist account, Boteler had 'carried himself insolently to a royalist of quality, calling him 'Sirrah' and telling him he would make him proclayme Charles Steward... a traytor or eate his sworde' (ibid.). He purged Bedford corporation, justifying the legally dubious ends that he had employed by pointing to the consequent strengthening of the position of the godly party in the town; he later managed to restrict the borough franchise and got himself and four allies placed on the aldermanic bench. 
Elected for Northamptonshire to the second protectorate parliament (1656-8), Boteler was prominent in the debates over the alleged 'horrid blasphemy' of the Quaker James Nayler, revealing thereby, as in his actions against Friends as major-general, the limitations of his own toleration. His ears tingled and his heart trembled to hear the report of Nayler's entry in Bristol in imitation of Christ's entry into Jerusalem. Such blasphemers by the Mosaic law were to be stoned to death, and for his part he could freely consent to it. When the protector enquired about the grounds for the Commons proceeding to a trial, Boteler was satisfied they had 'a judicatory power' to do so. Not unexpectedly, his defence of the major-generals in the debates over the 'Decimation Bill' was 'hot'. He deplored the house's 'dilatoriness' in voting funds for the war with Spain. Although he was opposed to the offer of the crown to Cromwell in the spring of 1657, with that out of the way he came round in support of the revised draft of the humble petition and advice (June 1657). In the brief second session (January 1658) he argued strongly for transacting with the new 'other House' as a House of Lords, expounding the virtues of government by a single person and a bicameral parliament. In his interventions he displayed a familiarity with the scriptures and a grasp of parliamentary procedure. In the spring of 1658 Boteler was given the command of Oliver Cromwell's own regiment of horse: an appointment which Henry Cromwell put down to his father's belief that 'he may command those more absolutely, who have been most used to obey him' (Thurloe, 7.102). 
Boteler did not sit in Richard Cromwell's parliament (1659), where, however, he was assailed for gross abuses as major-general in Northamptonshire. Although he claimed merely to have followed the protector's orders, he was put out of the commission of the peace. When further penalties were proposed Secretary John Thurloe, for political (and perhaps personal) reasons, spoke up for him, pressing -- ironically in view of Boteler's attitude in the Nayler trial -- that he should be heard before sentence. The abrupt dissolution of the parliament in April rescued him. The restored Rump, however, took away Boteler's regimental command and spurned his nomination as quartermaster-general. Even so, he was given a garrison command at Rockingham. 
At the Restoration Boteler's exclusion from the 'Act of Oblivion' was rejected by a small majority. He retired to live quietly at Oatlands Park, Walton-on-Thames, Surrey, maintaining his religious nonconformity, establishing himself in legal practice and, if he was indeed the Mr William Buttler who paid tax on fourteen hearths in 1664, living in some prosperity. He was questioned from time to time about radical plots, and was even for a time held in the Tower of London. In June 1666, after ten months' imprisonment, he pleaded with the secretary of state, the earl of Arlington, for his release: his practice and estate were ruined and he feared that his wife and five children would starve for lack of maintenance (it is uncertain whether this wife was Elizabeth Brooke or another woman). His claim to be moved by conscience and not by political faction seems then to have been accepted. However, he is last visible in the records following his being picked up again at a large conventicle in May 1670, regarded by the authorities as a man 'dangerous, and likely to enflame' ('CSP dom.', '1670', 234). The date and place of his death are unknown. 
Boteler's was an unappealing personality. His principles were narrow and his realization of them oppressive: even he conceded to Thurloe in May 1656 that he was almost daily exceeding his legal powers. His career suggests that he was capable of combining a sense of duty with an urge to self-help. But within its strait limits his religion seems to have been genuine enough, and one small incident a few months before Boteler became major-general shows him in an informal moment of curiosity drawn to the utopian vision of Samuel Hartlib. In June 1655 he visited Hartlib to thank him for his recently published 'The Reformed Common-Wealth of Bees', which presented the hive as the model of a harmonious, ordered commonwealth; Boteler was 'especially taken with the Glass-hives' which Hartlib used to exhibit his argument (Hartlib papers, Sheffield University Library, HP 29/5/35b). 
Ivan Roots', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37210


Bourne, John (bap. 1620, d. 1667), naval officer, was baptized on 14 November 1620 at St John-at-Wapping, the younger son of Robert Bourne (died 1625), shipwright, who owned a dockyard at Wapping, and his wife, Mary (died 1630). His elder brother Nehemiah Bourne emigrated to New England in 1638, and John may have followed him there. During the 1640s he commanded ships on trading voyages to Massachusetts in association with his brother, who had returned home in 1643. 
Parliament drew Nehemiah into naval service in 1650, and John accompanied him. He served in the hired ship 'Merchant' in the North Sea squadron under his brother in the summer of 1650, and commanded the newly built 'Assistance' (thirty-six guns) from the autumn of that year. Bourne served throughout the first Anglo-Dutch War, and fought in the Kentish Knock in December 1652. He was rear-admiral in the squadron of William Penn at the battle off Portland in February 1653; the 'Assistance' was boarded by the enemy, and Bourne was wounded in the head with a poleaxe in the course of fierce hand-to-hand fighting. Though still suffering from his wounds, he was persuaded by General Richard Deane, his patron, to return quickly to sea as flag captain to him and George Monck in the 'Resolution'. He took part in the major actions off the Gabbard in June and the Texel in July. 
During the winter of 1653-4 Bourne served in the channel, and in July 1654 he was named to the 'Essex' as commander of a squadron to Newfoundland. The 'Essex' lost her mainmast in a storm on the outward voyage and was forced to return, and Bourne thereupon resumed his service in the channel. Early in 1656 he was appointed rear-admiral of the fleet being sent against Spain under generals Robert Blake and Edward Mountagu (later first earl of Sandwich), and took part in the long blockade of Cadiz. When news arrived early in 1657 that a Spanish plate fleet was on its way to the Canaries, Bourne (now vice-admiral) and Richard Stayner, the new rear-admiral, pressed Blake to intercept it. He took part in the ensuing operation at Santa Cruz in April, in which the entire plate fleet was destroyed. He returned to England with Blake later in the year, and was one of the witnesses to the dying admiral's will. 
Bourne served as rear-admiral in the 'Swiftsure' in 1658 in the channel, and again in 1659 in the 'Richard', commanding the Home Fleet with Mountagu and Lawson away in the sound. Though he was willing to serve under the protectorate, his loyalties were essentially republican, and he welcomed the restoration of the Rump Parliament early in 1659. As Mountagu was a known Cromwellian, the support of Bourne, commanding in the Downs, was of considerable political significance. The 'Richard' was paid off in October 1659, however, and was to prove Bourne's last naval command. When the army ousted the Rump in October 1659 he and a group of other naval officers then ashore wrote to Monck in Scotland, urging him to accept the coup, arguing that divisions would only play into the hands of the cavaliers. The Rump, probably resentful, did not employ him again when it was reinstalled in December, and Mountagu had no wish to recall him. Bourne therefore played no part in the Restoration, returning instead to his earlier career in maritime trade. He became an elder brother of Trinity House in March 1660. He was away at sea for much of the following year, but took the oaths of allegiance and supremacy on 8 June 1661, when he was back in London. There is no record of any further political involvement, and he was often away thereafter, on voyages to the Mediterranean and North America. 
As a puritan, Bourne had devoted himself to God's cause, as he saw it. When a storm disabled his ship in 1654 he was dismayed by the thought that God might have judged him unworthy to be an instrument. In 1655 he responded to news of the persecution of the Waldenses by arranging a day of fasting in the Channel Fleet and a collection for the victims. 
Bourne died in 1667, probably in July or August and probably in his home parish, St Mary Magdalene, Bermondsey; a successor was elected to his place at Trinity House on 4 September. In a will drawn up two years earlier he bequeathed his estate in Bermondsey to his wife, Mary, and their two sons, Robert and John. 


@@@@@


doc= 37211


Bowyer, Robert (c.1560-1621), parliamentary official and politician, was the younger son of William Bowyer (d. 1569/70) of Wimbledon, Surrey, bailiff of Westminster and keeper of the records in the Tower, and his wife, Agnes, daughter of Sir John Harcourt of Stanton Harcourt, Oxfordshire, and widow of John Knyvet of Ashwellthorpe, Norfolk. His only brother died young; his sister married Richard Highgate. Bowyer's father came from a well-known Sussex family, and left him a lease of Selsey prebend in his will of 15 April 1569. 
Bowyer graduated BA at Oxford in March 1579, and went on to Clifford's Inn, and in 1580 to the Middle Temple. He attached himself to the Sussex magnate Thomas Sackville, then Lord Buckhurst and later lord treasurer and first earl of Dorset, who in 1594 recommended him to act as deputy to John Parker in a chancery post as 'of honest sort and behaviour, of such good knowledge and skill for the discharge of such a place, and withall having so good means and ability to live'. He received the appointment, but Parker himself was never sworn into office. Even with Sackville's favour Bowyer failed to secure more than the reversion in 1597 to the clerkship of the parliaments, the successful candidate averring that he was unfit 'by reason of a great imperfection he hath in his speech'. Sackville took him into his own service as secretary, and secured his return to the parliament of 1601 for the Sussex borough of Steyning. He left a distinctive mark of his presence, protesting on 12 December that a member had been 'pulled back' from voting in a close division, and fainting six days later: 'It was said he had a spice of the falling sickness'. 
In 1604 Bowyer was appointed with a relative, Henry Elsynge, to his father's post of keeper of the Tower records. On 31 October 1605 he was chosen in a by-election as the member for Evesham, taking the place of a man who had been an exchequer colleague of one of his Bowyer cousins. He was more active as a member of the first Jacobean parliament, often called on in his official capacity to supply precedents, but he is best remembered for his diary of the parliament, which has been described as 'indispensable'. On a more personal level he concerned himself with a land bill for William Essex, who had married a Harcourt, acting as a feoffee for his Berkshire estate. He was sworn clerk of the parliaments on 30 January 1610, relinquishing his seat in the House of Commons. He devoted the rest of his life to bringing order to the parliamentary records after what he called the 'negligence' of his predecessors. Among his achievements was the recovery of the Lords' journal for 1536. 
Bowyer died on 14 or 15 March 1621. He had never married, but his will shows that he regarded Elsynge, his successor in the clerkship, more or less as a son. He was particularly grateful to him for the 'extraordinary kindness' he had shown his wife, Bowyer's niece Blanche Highgate, near whom he was buried in St Dunstan-in-the-West. 
Alan Davidson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37212


Boyle, Constance Antonina (1865-1943), women's rights campaigner, was born in Bexley, Kent, on 21 December 1865, the second daughter and fifth of the six children of Robert Boyle (1830-1869), great-grandson of the second earl of Glasgow and a captain in the Royal Artillery, and his wife, Frances Sydney Fremoult Sankey (died 1909), daughter of Francis Fremoult Sankey MD. Little is known about her early life or education. 
About the turn of the century Nina Boyle spent several years in South Africa, including performing hospital duty during the South African War, in which two of her brothers also served. She also worked as a journalist, and during this time commenced her activism for women's rights, founding the Women's Enfranchisement League of Johannesburg. After returning to Britain in 1911, she became active in the Women's Freedom League (WFL), which had been formed in 1907 after a split within the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU) over autocratic control by the Pankhursts, and which adopted civil disobedience and propaganda tactics in preference to the occasionally more violent methods used by the WSPU. 
Boyle became head of the WFL's political and militant department in 1912. She wrote extensively for 'The Vote' (the journal of the WFL) and took a leading role in the league's campaigns and numerous demonstrations. She was arrested on several occasions and imprisoned three times. Partly as a means of improving the treatment of women by the police -- particularly given her own experiences -- and also as part of the WFL's aim to make all employment areas open to women, Boyle attempted to gain approval for women to be employed as special constables. When this was officially refused, in the autumn of 1914 Boyle, with Margaret Damer Dawson of the National Vigilance Association, established the first voluntary women's police force, the Women's Volunteer Police Corps (WVP). The WVP represented also an attempt within the women's movement to begin to challenge male control of the law -- particularly in regard to sexual matters. In correspondence with Asquith in 1914, Boyle complained in regard to the possible revival of the 'Contagious Diseases Act' that it was unjust that male officers should police laws that were 'almost exclusively concerned with matters in which women are involved to a greater extent than men' (Levine, 57). But it was the policing of such matters that led to divisions within the WVP. From the first the corps had acted at least to some extent as 'moral police', concentrating on young women and prostitutes loitering near railway stations used by servicemen. This type of work became officially sanctioned, but Boyle split away from the organization over the use of the WVP to enforce a curfew on women of 'loose character' near a service base in Grantham. Boyle saw this as a 'slur upon 'all' women' (Carrier, 17). Dawson, the organizational strength in the WVP, carried on and developed the corps into the women police service, ultimately leading to official acceptance of women as police officers. In late 1916 Boyle went to Macedonia and Serbia to do war relief work, for which she was awarded the Samaritan order of Serbia and the allied medal. 
Although women over thirty gained the vote in 1918, there was some doubt as to whether women were eligible to stand for parliament. In March 1918 Boyle attempted to stand as a WFL candidate in the Keighley by-election. Although her nomination was rejected because of a technical flaw, the returning officer's willingness to accept her candidature established the desired principle. 
During the 1920s and 1930s Boyle remained active in a broad range of women's organizations. She campaigned on behalf of the National Union of Women Teachers, the Women's Election Committee, the Open Door Council (which aimed to remove protective barriers that restricted women's employment opportunities), and also organizations concerned with the welfare of women and children in developing countries. She was particularly active in the Save the Children Fund (SCF). In 1921 she went to the USSR to work in an SCF famine relief programme, she wrote articles for SCF publications, and she made frequent speeches as an SCF representative. On 20 May 1936 the SCF honoured her with a tribute at the Lyceum Club. 
In 1920 Boyle had a novel, 'Out of the Frying-Pan', published. Although it was not received particularly well by reviewers, she went on to write a string of adventure romance novels ending with 'Good Old Potts' in 1934. In many of her books 'remarkably capable' women were apparent ('TLS', 12 March 1925, 173), and the reviewer of her 1927 work, 'The Rights of Mallaroche', thought readers should enjoy the book 'then go back to p.289 to smile at the feminism which Miss Boyle has kept hot from her suffragette days' ('TLS', 27 Oct 1927, 769). 
Boyle was a committed and principled activist whose actions led in part to increased opportunities for women to be involved in both the making and the enforcement of the law. Her courage and determination for her causes were remembered as being complemented by a developed sense of humour and modesty. She never married. She died in a nursing home at 99 Cromwell Road, London, on 4 March 1943, and was cremated at Golders Green on 9 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 37213


Bozon, Nicholas (fl. c.1320), Franciscan preacher and Anglo-Norman writer, produced a substantial literary output, but very little information about his life survives. He himself says that he was 'del ordre de freres menours', and that he was 'ordenours', which probably means that he had the right to administer absolution (a right much sought after by the mendicants). It has been suggested that he belonged to the Bozon family of Norfolk, and that he may have studied at Oxford. It is likely that he belonged to the friary in Nottingham (he refers to the rivers Trent and Derwent as if they are familiar to him). He writes in Anglo-Norman, but sometimes quotes a proverb or a pithy saying in English, and sometimes uses an English word (like 'wapentak'). Works attributed to him (either by himself or by scribes) include allegories in verse (such as the 'Char d'orgueil', or the 'Passion', in which Christ is a lover-knight who, wearing the arms of his squire Adam, fights Belial in order to rescue his beloved, Mankind), several poems on the Virgin Mary, a number of saints' lives in verse, some lively sermons in verse, and the 'Plainte d'amour', a powerful satire on corruption, which may well have been inspired by the bull 'Exivi de paradiso' (1312). The poem 'De bonne femme la bounte' in BL, Add. MS 46919, is also now commonly attributed to him. The best-known, however, is the 'Contes moralises' (probably written after 1320), a collection of prose stories and 'exempla' illustrating some moral point, which were perhaps intended to be used in sermons. It includes animal fables, contemporary anecdotes, and material drawn from bestiaries or natural history. The stories are told in a vivid and direct manner, and show a curiosity about the world and human behaviour and a practical and down-to-earth attitude. 


@@@@@


doc= 37214


Braddock, Elizabeth Margaret (1899-1970), trade union activist and politician, was born at Zante Street, Liverpool, on 24 September 1899, the elder daughter of Hugh Bamber, bookbinder, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Andrew Little, an Edinburgh lawyer. Mary Bamber became national organizer of the Union of Distributive and Allied Workers and was a passionate socialist, once described by E. Sylvia Pankhurst as the finest fighting platform speaker in the country. 
Bessie Bamber left elementary school at fourteen to take a job filling seed packets for 5's'. a week; later she worked for a draper and subsequently for the Co-op, where she joined the union movement of which she was to be a lifelong member. Her main interest, however, was in politics. From socialist Sunday school she moved to the Independent Labour Party, leaving this in 1920 because she found it insufficiently radical, and going on to join the recently formed Communist Party of Great Britain instead. In 1924 she repudiated communism and returned to the labour movement. 
On 9 February 1922 Bessie married John Braddock (known as Jack; 1892-1963) who shared her political and social interests. They had no children. Their marriage, which was very close, lasted until Jack's death in 1963: by then the Braddocks had become legendary in the politics of Merseyside. He became leader of the Liverpool city council; she was a member of the city council from 1930 to 1961, for the last six years as an alderman. 
In 1936 Bessie Braddock was adopted as the prospective parliamentary candidate for the Exchange division of Liverpool. Because of the extension of the life of the 1935 parliament as a consequence of the war, she had to wait until 1945 to fight an election, which she won with a majority of 665. She was the first Labour candidate to be returned for that constituency and the first woman MP for a Liverpool seat. She was elected to the Labour Party national executive committee in 1947 and remained an MP until 1970, despite an attempt by her local party to oust her in 1955 because of her right-wing position. 
Bessie Braddock became one of the notable personalities of the House of Commons, and in 1952 she was the first woman MP to be suspended from a sitting. Always outspoken -- and there were some who found her language over-rich for the Palace of Westminster -- she was defiant in her support of working people. She argued passionately for better housing, education, and welfare services for the poor, and was a particularly strong advocate of the National Health Service, making herself an expert on mental health. She was also a defender of the sport of boxing. A large woman, who confessed to weighing 15 stone, she championed the manufacture of outsize clothes at modest prices. She was not gracious to those whose arguments she rejected, whether they came from the opposition or her own party, as Aneurin Bevan and Michael Foot were both, at different times, to discover. Deeply antagonistic towards the left, she opposed Bevanism. When offered a post in the Labour government of 1964 she refused, saying that she could do more fighting for the government in Liverpool. Thus she stayed on the back benches, retained her roots in Merseyside, and fought for the people and ideals which she had always supported. She died in Liverpool on 13 November 1970. 


@@@@@


doc= 37215


Bradstreet, Simon (bap. 1604, d. 1697), colonial governor, was baptized on 18 March 1604 at Horbling, Lincolnshire, the son of Simon Bradstreet (died 1621), puritan clergyman, and his wife, Margaret. The Revd Bradstreet had been one of the overseers of Emmanuel College, Cambridge. Simon remained at grammar school until the age of fourteen, at which time he was taken into the family of Theophilus Clinton, fourth earl of Lincoln. Eight or nine years later Dr John Preston persuaded Lord Lincoln to allow Simon to go to Emmanuel and serve as a tutor to Lord Rich. When Rich failed to arrive, according to Cotton Mather, Bradstreet returned briefly to the household of the earl of Lincoln, and then became steward to the dowager countess of Warwick. 
Bradstreet joined the group planning a puritan colony in New England, and in March 1630 was named secretary of the Massachusetts Bay Company. He was chosen an assistant in the following month, shortly before he accompanied Governor John Winthrop to the New World on the 'Arbella'. He served as an assistant (councillor and justice of the peace) in the Massachusetts Bay colony for the next forty-nine years. Though an assistant himself, he generally stood against exercises of discretionary magisterial authority. He served on important committees and helped to organize the United Colonies of New England, a confederation of the Massachusetts, Connecticut, New Haven, and Plymouth colonies. Bradstreet was one of the commissioners of the United Colonies, serving for thirty-three years. In 1662 he represented Massachusetts as an agent to Charles II. He received confirmation of the colony's charter, but the king demanded greater religious toleration and Bradstreet temporarily lost some of his popularity in Massachusetts when he returned as the bearer of these tidings. But in 1678 he was chosen deputy governor, and in the following year he was elected governor of the colony. 
Bradstreet was a moderate who became increasingly unpopular with those who wished to resist royal attacks on the colony's charter. Despite this he was re-elected governor annually until the charter was revoked in 1684. When the colony was subsumed into the dominion of New England in 1686, he refused a seat on the dominion council on the grounds that the new government lacked a representative assembly. Following the revolt that overthrew the dominion in April 1689, he was made a member of the council of safety that ran the colony's affairs until a popular convention voted to resume the old charter government. Bradstreet again served as governor until the arrival in May 1692 of William Phipps, the first governor appointed under a new royal charter. 
Bradstreet's first wife was Anne Dudley ['see 'Bradstreet, Anne (1612/-1672)], daughter of Thomas Dudley, head steward of the earl of Lincoln's estates, whom he married in 1628. She achieved note as a distinguished poet. Much of her poetry described aspects of their family life, most famously the poem 'To my Dear and Loving Husband', which begins with the lines 'If ever two were one, then surely we'. The couple had four sons and four daughters. After Anne's death on 16 September 1672 Bradstreet moved to Boston, and on 6 June 1676 he married Anne Gardner ('bap'. 1633, died 1713), the daughter of Emanuel Downing and niece of John Winthrop. Following the establishment of the new charter government they moved to Salem, where Bradstreet died on 27 March 1697 and was buried. 
A moderate in matters of both religion and politics, Bradstreet became a symbol of continuity with the founders in his last decades. The longest-surviving member of the colony's original leadership, he was referred to by Cotton Mather as 'the Nestor of New England'. 


@@@@@


doc= 37216


Braham, John Robert Daniel (1920-1974), air force officer, was born at the manse, Holcombe, Somerset, on 6 April 1920, the only son (there was also a daughter) of Ernest Goodall Braham, a Church of England clergyman and himself a Royal Flying Corps pilot in the First World War, and his wife, Ethel Randall. He was educated at Taunton School, Somerset, but left before he was seventeen to work in the Lancashire county police as a boy clerk in Wigan. In December 1937 he applied for a short-service commission in the RAF, and to his evident amazement was accepted and sent for elementary flying training in 90 m.p.h. Tiger Moths. He received his wings at Shawbury near Shrewsbury in 1938. Though chafing to fly single-engined fighters, by the outbreak of war he was still flying twin-engined Blenheim F1 night fighters in 29 squadron from Debden, Essex. With several pilots called John already in his squadron, Braham's radio call sign became Bob, and this remained his service nickname for the rest of his career. 
On 24 August 1940, flying from Digby, Lincolnshire, Braham downed his first victim -- a Norwegian-based Heinkel III night intruder -- over the North Sea off Spurn Head. In 1941 he teamed up with his remarkable navigator and operator of the then new airborne AI radar set, William James Gregory, known as Sticks because of his proficiency as a drummer. This pair became the most formidable night-fighting combination in the RAF. By 12 November the thrice-decorated Braham had destroyed twelve enemy aircraft and in 1942 he was posted to command 141 squadron at Ford, near Chichester, Sussex, as the youngest wing commander in the RAF. After a period supporting Coastal Command based at Predannock, Cornwall, in 1943 Braham was switched to the experimental task of escorting bomber streams over Europe. For this purpose sensitive Serrate detectors were fitted into Beaufighters -- aircraft which had been developed by the Bristol Aircraft Company from the 'Britain First', with substantial private sponsorship. 
In February 1944, after his twentieth victory, nineteen of them at night, Braham was taken off intruder and escort work and put in charge of night operations at 2 light bomber group headquarters. Typically he extracted an understanding from his air officer commanding, Basil Embry, that he would still be allowed a 'ration' of operational flights. After he had raised his score to twenty-nine, and now uniquely entitled to wear the ribbons of both the DSO and the DFC, each with two silver rosettes denoting two bars, Braham's luck ran out over Denmark on 25 June 1944. He was jumped by a Focke Wulf FW 190 flown by the German ace Robert Spreckels, and forced down on to a Danish beach. Braham flew 316 operational sorties and was hit eleven times in forty-one attacks on his aircraft. He also survived five crash landings. 
Braham was developing combat fatigue. Despite his consummate low-flying ability he had already had a brush with some trees and had also once even grazed the ground in a Mosquito. Some felt he owed his life to spending the last ten months of the war in Stalag Luft 3 at Sagan, near Breslau. But for the intervention of a lone SS soldier in black battledress, he and his navigator, the Australian Donald Walsh, might well have been lynched by a hostile crowd aboard the train carrying them to interrogation. Braham was liberated by the British 11th armoured division near Lubeck on 2 May 1945. He was wearing the tunic in which he had been shot down. Depressed by what he perceived as a work-shy post-war Britain, Braham in May 1952 sailed with his wife and his three young sons to take up a commission in the Royal Canadian Air Force. He was posted as a group captain to SHAPE headquarters in Paris in 1960. 
Since 1914 only ten British officers had ever been six times decorated for gallantry. Braham, who was one of these, uniquely achieved a seventh decoration: in 1951 he was awarded the AFC for hazardous developmental work on all-weather fighter aircraft. He was also awarded by the Belgians their Croix de Guerre and the order of the Crown. His book ''Scramble!'' was published in London in 1961 and described frankly and modestly the unrelenting exploits of one of the sharpest thorns in the side of the Luftwaffe. In April 1941 he married Joan Helen, the daughter of Edward Hyde, a grocer, of Leicester. Braham died in Halifax, Nova Scotia, on 7 February 1974. 
Norris McWhirter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37217


Smith, Ernest Brammah (1868-1942), writer, was born on 20 March 1868 at 1 Rushton Street, Hulme, Manchester, the son of Charles Clement Smith, a Manchester warehouseman, and his wife, Susannah Brammah. He left school in Manchester to go into training as a farmer at Erith, Kent, but, after two years' training and five years' practice, eventually decided that he had no future in farming. He later explained his reasons in 'English Farming, and Why I Turned it Up' (1894), in the preface to which he wrote: 'I can remember the time when people used to talk to me about farming and explain how I ought to go about it. Alas! I now know.' This, like all his other books, was written under the pseudonym Ernest Bramah and gave no clues to his personal life. Throughout his career Smith was extremely reticent about his personal affairs and shunned publicity. He once wrote: 'I am not fond of writing about myself and only to a less degree about my work.' 'Who Was Who' gives only his pen-name, a list of his works, and his death date. 
His farming having failed, Smith decided to try journalism and, after a brief period as correspondent on a provincial newspaper, he went to London to work as secretary to Jerome K. Jerome. He then joined the staff of Jerome's paper 'Today', a twopenny weekly, which was founded in 1893 and folded in 1897. 
The name of Ernest Bramah first came to public notice with 'The Wallet of Kai Lung' (1900), the first of his collection of stories told by a wandering Chinese man in the manner of the 'Arabian Nights' tales and in an elaborate Mandarin style ostensibly of Chinese translated into flowery English language. Hilaire Belloc, one of his most persistent champions, wrote: 'These parable-like tales obtain their effect of subtle humour and philosophy by the adaptation of Chinese conventions to the English tongue.' Other Kai Lung books include 'Kai Lung's Golden Hours' (1922), 'Kai Lung Unrolls his Mat' (1928), 'The Moon of much Gladness' (1932), and 'Kai Lung beneath the Mulberry Tree' (1940). Smith's creation captured the public imagination to the extent that the Kai-Lung Club was founded in London to celebrate the novels. 
In 1914 Smith began an entirely different set of stories with 'Max Carrados', the eponymous hero of which, on the dust jacket of the first edition, is described as 'a detective of a totally new and unexpected type, for he is blind; but the alluring peculiarity of his case is that his blindness is more than counterbalanced by an enormously enhanced perception of the other senses'. Further books in this series include 'The Eyes of Max Carrados' (1923) and 'Max Carrados Mysteries' (1927). 

'The Specimen Case' (1924) contains stories of both Kai Lung and Max Carrados, the main reason for which Smith, emerging from his usual seclusion, explains in the preface. In consequence of the marked contrast between the styles of the two series, some critics had questioned how such stories could all be the work of one author. Grant Richards enquired in the 'Times Literary Supplement', 'Is there really such a person as Ernest Bramah?' and Rose Macaulay wrote in the 'Nation and Athenaeum', 'The crude stilted Conan Doylish English of the detective stories certainly goes far to bear out the common theory that Ernest Bramah has a literary dual personality'. 'There is one retort still left', wrote Smith, 'whereby to confound the non-existence and the dualists alike -- I can produce both a Kai Lung and a Max Carrados between one pair of covers -- and here they are.' 
As a hobby Smith studied numismatics and published 'A guide to the varieties and rarity of English regal copper coins -- Charles II, 1671, to Victoria, 1860' (1929). He died at 40 Boulevard, Weston-super-Mare, his home in Somerset, on 23 June 1942. His wife, Maisie, survived him. 
H. F. Oxbury', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37218


Brampton, Sir Edward (c.1440-1508), soldier and merchant, was born in Lisbon 'c'.1440, reputedly the illegitimate son of Rui Barba and the wife of a Jewish blacksmith. About 1468 he travelled to England and converted to Christianity. As was usual in such cases, the king of England stood godfather. Brampton may have fought for Edward IV during the political upheavals of 1469-71. In 1472 he was given joint command of an armed force sent to sea to resist the king's enemies. In October that year he was made denizen and rewarded 'for his good service to the king in many battles' with property in London. In the following year he was commissioned to raise mariners for service against the king's enemies. 
Brampton may have been the namesake 'of the king's household' who entered Lincoln's Inn in 1475, although he can rarely have been in England in the next few years. He came to the attention of Charles, duke of Burgundy, in 1475, presumably as a consequence of the English invasion of France that year, and remained in Burgundy until the duke's death. He was back in Edward IV's service by 1479, when he was a gentleman usher of the chamber. In the following year he received a major grant of land in Northamptonshire formerly held by Isabel Peche, who had died in 1479. In 1481 Brampton served under John Howard, later first duke of Norfolk (died 1485), on the naval expedition against the Scots, commanding a Portuguese carvel. By 1482 he had become an esquire of the king's body and was made captain and governor of Guernsey. He remained in the royal household under Richard III, who knighted him and gave him further land in Northamptonshire and London in 1484. In March 1485 he was sent to Portugal to pursue negotiations for a bride for the recently widowed king, and was thus out of England when Richard III was killed at Bosworth. 
From the mid-1470s Brampton maintained extensive business interests. He was master of the Drapers' Company of London in 1477-8, and in the latter year appears buying goods abroad for the royal wardrobe. He lent money to both Yorkist kings, repayment generally being made from the customs due on goods shipped by him. He also developed trading interests in Portugal. In return for financial help to Alfonso V he was renaturalized as a Portuguese subject in August 1479 and given trading privileges; in Portugal he was known as Duarte Brandao. 
After Bosworth, Brampton did not return to the English court. His grants were cancelled by the new regime, and he pursued his career elsewhere, settling initially in Bruges and returning to Portugal in 1487. It was during this period that he came to know Perkin Warbeck (died 1499), who later claimed to be Edward IV's son, Richard, duke of York. Warbeck's knowledge of the Yorkist court, which impressed contemporaries, may have come partly from Brampton, although there is nothing to associate him with the conspiracy itself. Brampton was finally pardoned by Henry VII in 1489. There is no evidence that he returned to England, though his son was knighted by Henry VII in 1500. 
The grant of land made to Brampton in 1480 describes Isabel Peche as his late wife. She was the daughter of William Vaux of Northampton, and the widow of William Tresham (died 1450). On Tresham's death she married William Peche of Lullingstone, Kent, who outlived her. At her death, Isabel is elsewhere described as Peche's wife, and the nature of her liaison with Brampton is thus uncertain. By 1487 Brampton had remarried; his wife is named variously as Catherine de Bahamonde and Margaret Boemond. His licence to settle in Portugal in 1487 refers to his children, but his only known child is Henrique Brandao (died 1515). Edward Brampton died in Lisbon on 11 November 1508. 
Rosemary Horrox', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37219


Bray, William Trewartha (1794-1868), Methodist Bible Christian preacher, was born at Twelveheads, in the parish of Kea, near Truro, on 1 June 1794, the only son and eldest of three children (one of the daughters was of unsound mind) of William Bray, Methodist tin miner, and his wife, Ann, daughter of Robert and Jane Trewartha of Chengenter, Gwennap. At the age of seventeen he left home to pursue his trade as a tin miner in Devon, and succumbed to drink and a profligate lifestyle. 
After seven years Bray returned to Cornwall and on 16 July 1821, at Kea church, he married Joanna, also a lapsed Methodist. The manner of Bray's conversion, gradually accomplished in November 1823, assisted by the reading of John Bunyan's 'Visions of Heaven and Hell' and driven by fear of the consequences of drunkenness for his family life, indicated that a remarkable revivalist was about to emerge. The crucial step began with a determination to rise and pray in the middle of the night; he continued in prayer the following morning, and took for spiritual nourishment the 'Bible' and Wesley's hymnbook. It was only afterwards that he roared away his 'load' at the Bryanite (or Bible Christian) meeting. 
Twelveheads was near Wesley's revival centre at Gwennap pit; Bray's grandfather had been one of his converts and had helped to build the Twelveheads chapel. Bray now became a locally celebrated revivalist on his own account, becoming a local preacher in 1824 and labouring outside as well as within the Bible Christian denomination, to which he gave lifelong allegiance. He built many chapels with his own hands, including his first at Bethel, Cross Lanes. 
The distinctive thing about Billy Bray which made him a legend in his lifetime and made his biography one of the Methodist best-sellers of the century was an immediate apprehension of the divine glory which issued naturally in leaping, dancing, and cheerful controversy with the world. His claim that 'if they were to put me into a barrel, 'I would shout glory out through the bunghole!'' was not a facetious pose, but the normal expression of an irrepressibly good-humoured Christian. His charismatic leadership included an emphasis on prayer, healing, and reverence for the sabbath, as well as a vehement dislike of drinking and smoking. He died on 25 May 1868 at Twelveheads and was buried in Baldhu. 
W. R. Ward', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37220


Brayne, John (d. 1654), clergyman and Seeker, was settled by parliament as minister of St John's, in the Soke, Winchester, from the late 1640s until his death. His fame rests on the flurry of tracts he published in his last years, and little is known of his background. He may have come from Somerset: one tract was dedicated to his kinsman Thomas Churchey of Wincanton, and he may be identical with the John Brayne of Crewkerne, a gentleman's son who entered New Inn Hall, Oxford, in 1636, aged twenty-two. He was certainly fluent in the classical languages and Hebrew, and was once described as 'Dr Brayne' ('CSP dom.', '1654', 289). 
By the later 1640s Brayne had developed radical political and religious ideas. In September 1647 he had a vision of the impending downfall of monarchy in England, France, and Spain, heralding the reign of Christ on earth. He sent this prophecy to the MP John Lisle, and it circulated in the army. In 1649 he revealed that General Thomas Fairfax ('and none else'; Brayne, 'The Gospel-Pattern', sig. A2) was the avenging angel of 'Revelation' 14: 16, and that God would use the army to restore the true church, paving the way for the calling of the Jews. In the same year he welcomed news from France of the overthrow of Cardinal Mazarin, 'the first of the foolish virgins' (Brayne, 'Babels Fall', 19), and predicted an English invasion of Scotland to root out presbyterianism. This prophecy too was sent to Lisle. Other works reveal connections with the members of the Rump Parliament John Pyne and William Sydenham, and with the millenarian polymath John Sadler, 'a dear and faithful friend' (Brayne, 'An Exposition', sig. A2). 
Brayne's primary interest lay in the nature of the church. He regarded all existing churches as false, believing that the true church would emerge only at the end of the 1260 years in the wilderness ('Revelation' 12: 6), which would be in 1666. There were, however, some true ministers, typified by the two witnesses of 'Revelation' 20, and it was in this sense that he described himself as 'an unworthy witness' of the Lord (Brayne, 'The New Earth', title page). Such ministers were to preach the gospel (as Brayne did four or five times a week), but should not administer the sacraments. He devoted much thought to the shape of the future church. In 1648 he wrote to the Westminster assembly, criticizing the presbyterian system it had devised, but the only result was the suspension of his augmentation at Winchester. His own studies led him towards a much modified congregationalism, with a threefold ministry of evangelists, pastors, and teachers. Church members would observe the seventh-day sabbath and practise adult baptism; all others would continue to keep the first-day sabbath, and would be barred from the sacraments. Brayne also held idiosyncratic views on the hereafter. His version of mortalism distinguished between the soul, remaining with the body until the last judgment, and the spirit, which God quickened only in the elect and which returned straight to heaven. Those with such an awakened spirit might be blessed in this life with divine dreams and revelations. His views on predestination and the Trinity were remarkably conventional. 
Like the Fifth Monarchists, Brayne saw the judicial laws of the 'Old Testament' as an essential part of Christ's reign. He supported parliament's measures against blasphemy and the 'Adultery Act' of 1650, though he regarded them as inadequate and insufficiently close to scripture. He also advocated sweeping changes in education. He attacked Latin authors as profane, wanted schools to use only biblical and early Christian writings in teaching Greek, and urged greater study of Hebrew. Existing translations of the 'Bible' were so faulty, he complained, that they should be called in. Astrology was condemned as the doctrine of demons. Brayne had considerable influence on other millenarian and spiritual writers. His polemical tracts drew replies from, among others, John Gadbury, the astrologer, and the Baptist Peter Chamberlen (1601-1683). Brayne was buried in Winchester on 20 February 1654. He had died in poverty, and in August of that same year the council of state settled a pension of $30 on his widow, Dorcas, and their eight small children. 
Bernard Capp', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37221


Brearley, Harry (1871-1948), metallurgist, was born on 18 February 1871 at 23 Spital Street, Sheffield, the youngest of five sons and the eighth of nine children of John Brearley, steelworker, and his wife, Jane Senior. Brearley's father was 'an expert steel melter and also an expert ale-supper' (Brearley, 'Knotted String', 20); his mother, a blacksmith's daughter, took in washing to help raise her large family. He grew into a delicate child, whose slum upbringing -- and especially his mother's hard life -- sowed the seeds of his later socialism. Educated at Woodside board school, at the age of twelve Brearley worked briefly in the crucible steel furnaces alongside his father at Thos Firth & Sons (an experience he immortalized in 'Steel-Makers', 1933). By 1883 he had gravitated to Firth's laboratories, where he washed bottles. The firm's chemist, James Taylor -- a crucial influence on Brearley -- encouraged him to study metallurgy. By the age of twenty Brearley had become a laboratory assistant and was apprenticed for a premium of $50. Shortly afterwards, now earning about $2 a week and describing himself as a metallurgical chemist, he married, on 23 October 1895, Helen Theresa Crank (1874-1955), the daughter of James Crank, a coal dealer. 
Brearley progressed rapidly in his chosen profession and in 1901 he left Firths to start a new laboratory at another Sheffield steelworks, Kayser Ellison. While there, he wrote the first of his technical texts (with Fred Ibbotson), 'The Analysis of Steel-works Materials' (1902). Brearley returned to Firths in 1903, after its merger with John Brown & Co. After a spell as chief chemist at Firth's Salamander works at Riga, in 1907 Brearley became the first director of a newly created research division -- the Brown-Firth Research Laboratories. 
In May 1912, while researching steel for small arms, Brearley made trials with low carbon steels containing about 12 per cent chromium. These steels had the happy ability (due to the formation of a chromium oxide film on the steel's surface) to resist corrosion, a fact recognized by Brearley almost immediately. He also saw the commercial possibilities of the product and alerted Firths. According to Brearley, Firths showed little interest, and he was left to find a use for it. He suggested that it might be useful for cutlery, a view vindicated when the Sheffield cutlery firm of George Ibberson succeeded in 1914 in making knife blades from the alloy. Stainless (or as it was then known, 'rustless') steel had arrived, and by the First World War commercial production in Sheffield was well under way. 
Brearley's claims as stainless steel's discoverer did not go unchallenged. In America the metallurgist Elwood Haynes had pre-empted his chromium formula; while in Germany, Eduard Maurer and Benno Strauss at Krupps had patented, in 1912-13, a chromium nickel stainless alloy that was to have even more potential than Brearley's composition. Nevertheless, Brearley's claim as the pioneer of the commercial development of martensitic stainless steel (the type used in cutlery) can be accepted. An individualist of socialist leanings, he intended sharing in the credit and rewards of his discovery, an attitude which led to many disputes with his employers. In 1915 he left Firths and became a works manager of Brown Bayley's steelworks in Sheffield, a company he was to be associated with until his death. Remarkably, stainless steel was never patented in Britain (the discovery appears to have spread so quickly in Sheffield that patenting was not thought worth while). However, Firths and Brearley (after they had settled their differences) soon tied up the rights on stainless steel in the USA, Canada, Italy, France, and Japan, so that any Sheffield firm intending to export to these countries needed a licence from the Firth-Brearley Stainless Steel Syndicate -- an organization founded in 1917, which made good profits for Firths and Brearley in the 1920s. 
In 1920 Brearley was awarded the Bessemer gold medal by the Iron and Steel Institute. Five years later he became a director of Brown Bayleys, and shortly afterwards, at about the age of fifty-five, he began enjoying a period of semi-retirement on the rewards of stainless steel. He wrote several books, notably an evocative autobiography, 'Knotted String' (1941). In 1942 he established the Freshgate Trust Foundation, a charity which he hoped would 'help lame dogs over stiles'. Brearley lived at Walton, near Chesterfield, and later in life moved to Livermead, Torquay, where he died at his home, Walton Cottage, 21 Mead Road, on 14 July 1948. He was cremated at Efford crematorium, Plymouth, on 16 July. He left $80,881 gross, of which he bequeathed $1000 a year to his widow for life (his only child, Leo, born in 1896, had died in Australia in 1946) and the remainder to the Freshgate Foundation. 


@@@@@


doc= 37222


Bridge, John (1755-1834), jeweller, was born in Piddletrenthide, Dorset, on 21 January 1755, the eldest son of Thomas Bridge (died 1792) and his wife, Mary (died 1779). Following in the footsteps of his future partner, Philip Rundell, he was apprenticed in 1769 to the jeweller William Rogers of Bath. His apprenticeship over, Bridge migrated to London about 1776, where he was employed as a shopman by Pickett and Rundell, goldsmiths and jewellers, at the Golden Salmon, Ludgate Hill. William Pickett, the senior partner, retired from business in February 1786, and Philip Rundell, by then in sole control, invited Bridge in December 1787 to join him in a partnership; thereafter the firm continued as Rundell and Bridge. The two partners, so different in character that they were respectively known by their employees as 'Oil' (Bridge) and 'Vinegar', worked tirelessly to place the business at the forefront of their trade. By 1805, when the firm had become Rundell, Bridge, and Rundell, Joseph Nightingale wrote that it exceeded 'all others in the British Empire, if not in the whole world, for the value of its contents'. 
Bridge was described as 'mild and affable in his deportment, possessing great equality of temper, and a very engaging suavity of manners'. It is said that in 1789 he was introduced to George III by a wealthy cousin, also called John Bridge, who shared the monarch's interest in farming. The jeweller so pleased the king and other members of the royal family that Rundell and Bridge received many fresh orders. Their growing success was then assured. 
Bridge remained a partner in the firm until his death. He never married. Towards the end of his life he bought Wood House with its estate at Wood Lane, Shepherd's Bush, where he lived with two cousins, Amelia and Maria Bridge. He died on 9 April 1834 at the Manor House, Piddletrenthide, and was buried in the family vault in the local churchyard. In the aisle of the church a carved stone tablet with a portrait profile of John Bridge in marble was erected 'by his surviving relatives in testimony of their grateful and affectionate remembrance'. 
John Culme', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37223


Bridgeman, William Clive, first Viscount Bridgeman (1864-1935), politician, was born on 31 December 1864 at 89 Harley Street, London, the only surviving child of the Revd John Robert Orlando Bridgeman (1831-1897), third son of the second earl of Bradford and rector of the family living at Weston under Lizard, Staffordshire, and his wife, (Marianne) Caroline (1841-1930), only child of the Ven. William Clive, great-nephew of Lord Clive of India and archdeacon of Montgomery. He was educated at a preparatory school in Malvern, at Eton College (1877-84), where he became captain of oppidans, and then at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated as thirteenth classic in 1887. He was a lifelong Etonian: he briefly worked as an assistant master at the school, and that his sons each succeeded him there as captain of oppidans and that he was himself elected an Eton fellow in 1929 were sources of great personal satisfaction. Another early and enduring involvement was in cricket: a member of his school and university elevens (he gained a blue in 1887), he became a considerable 'gentleman' cricketer and played for county sides (Shropshire and Staffordshire), I Zingari, and the MCC, of which he was elected a committee member and, in 1931, president. 
Bridgeman established himself as a country gentleman on a Clive family estate at Leigh, near Minsterley, Shropshire, but also prepared himself for a career in politics, in which he continued his family's attachment to the Conservative Party. He was assistant private secretary to the colonial secretary, the first Viscount Knutsford, in 1889-92, and to the chancellor of the exchequer, Sir Michael Hicks Beach (later Earl St Aldwyn), in 1895-7. On 30 April 1895 he married Caroline Beatrix ['see 'Bridgeman, Dame Caroline Beatrix (1873-1961)], elder daughter of Cecil Parker, land agent to the duke of Westminster. She was a strong force behind her husband's career, and from the 1920s had a distinguished public career of her own. 
During a long search for a parliamentary seat, Bridgeman was active in London politics as chairman of the Marylebone Conservative Association and a member of the London school board from 1897 to 1904, and of London county council in 1904. After three unsuccessful contests in various constituencies, he became Conservative MP for the northern (Oswestry) division of Shropshire from 1906 to 1929. 
Bridgeman's political rise remained slow, but this was not for want of commitment and significant activity. Adhering to the Disraelian tradition of social reform, to unionism, and to closer imperial unity -- a belief deepened by a world tour in 1892-3 -- he first became prominent as an activist in Joseph Chamberlain's tariff reform campaign and as a critic of Balfour's party leadership. As an Anglican lay churchman he also participated in movements to defend church schools and to resist Welsh church disestablishment. After becoming an opposition whip in 1911 he helped organize the bitter division-lobby warfare against the peacetime Liberal government, and as a government whip in the Asquith coalition government of May 1915 he worked hard -- despite his own misgivings about cabinet vacillation -- to hold the Unionist parliamentary party together amid successive crises over the Dardanelles, conscription, and Ireland. During 1916 he was additionally assistant director of the war trade department. In Lloyd George's coalition governments he became parliamentary secretary successively at the newly created Ministry of Labour (December 1916-January 1919) and at the Board of Trade (January 1919-August 1920), and then the inaugural secretary of the new mines department (August 1920-October 1922). In these posts, and from membership of the archbishops' committee on industrial relations (1917-18), he acquired that contempt for strike leaders and doctrinaire socialists yet admiration for moderate, 'patriotic' trade unionists which characterized Conservative Party leaders in the mid-1920s. 
Participation in the 1922 Conservative under-secretaries' revolt against the coalition leadership propelled Bridgeman to the political front rank. As home secretary in the Conservative governments, October 1922-January 1924, he achieved notoriety for refusing to reprieve Edith Thompson from execution after the Thompson-Bywaters murder case, and for deporting over 100 Irish Republican Army suspects, an action ruled illegal by the criminal court of appeal and for which he had to obtain an act of indemnity. With similar resolution, as first lord of the Admiralty, November 1924-June 1929, he upheld naval effectiveness and morale in the face of disarmament opinion and successive economy drives by the chancellor of the exchequer, Winston Churchill. He ordered resumed construction of the Singapore base and in the 'cruiser crisis' of July 1925 he successfully wielded a resignation threat to obtain the building of new warships. As leader of the British delegation at the 1927 Geneva naval disarmament conference he resisted American claims to 'parity' in cruisers, which in reality threatened a relative weakening of the British navy, even though this resulted in the failure of the conference and a marked deterioration in Anglo-American relations. 
Bridgeman was of short stature, rosy-faced, and slow of speech, yet this appearance of a simple country squire was misleading. He had varied and respected political experience, exemplified by his joining the inner group of cabinet advisers during the coal dispute and general strike in 1925-6. His manifest sincerity, common sense, directness, and social ease made him widely admired in the House of Commons, a quality which persuaded the archbishops in December 1927 that he could best introduce the measure for a revised prayer book there -- though on this occasion he badly miscalculated, and could not prevent the measure's defeat. Through the 1920s he was the closest cabinet friend of Stanley Baldwin and contributed to the tone of Baldwinite Conservatism, with its emphasis upon moral seriousness and social reconciliation. In May 1923 he canvassed notables for Baldwin's appointment as prime minister, in the autumn supported his adoption of protection, and in December encouraged him to remain leader after his general election defeat. He similarly supported Baldwin in adversity after the Conservative government's 1929 election defeat, and in a dramatic intervention in March 1931 helped persuade him to withdraw his resignation as party leader. 
Bridgeman retired from the House of Commons at the 1929 general election. He was created a viscount in June of that year, and found new outlets for his commitment to public service. In 1930 he led a British Legion inquiry into its organization and finance. During 1932 he chaired a committee of inquiry on the Post Office, became chairman of the standing committee of the Church of England's National Society (responsible for administering church schools), and was appointed to the BBC board of governors. In March 1935 he succeeded J. H. Whitley as chairman of the BBC, but his tenure was too short to leave any mark. He was also a Shropshire JP and deputy lieutenant, a privy councillor (1920), an elder brother of Trinity House (1928), honorary LLD of Cambridge University (1930), and a long-serving chairman of the governors of Shrewsbury School. Bridgeman died at home at Leigh Manor, near Minsterley, on 14 August 1935, and was buried in the churchyard of the nearby village of Hope. The Bridgemans had three eminent sons: Robert Clive Bridgeman, the second viscount, had a distinguished army career and became lord lieutenant of Shropshire; Geoffrey John Orlando Bridgeman (1898-1974) was a leading eye surgeon; and Sir Maurice Richard Bridgeman was a senior civil servant and later chairman of British Petroleum. 


@@@@@


doc= 37224


Bromhead, Sir Edward Thomas Ffrench, second baronet (1789-1855), mathematician and landowner, was born in Dublin on 26 March 1789, the eldest of three sons (there were no daughters) of General Gonville Bromhead (1758-1822) of Thurlby, Lincolnshire, who was created baronet in 1806, and his wife, Jane (died 1837), youngest daughter of Sir Charles Ffrench, baronet. After schooling in Halifax and two years at Glasgow University he entered Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in June 1808. 
Bromhead won the college mathematical prize in 1809 and graduated BA in 1812. He left Cambridge the following year, not having sat the mathematical tripos because of his delicate health, and became a barrister of the Inner Temple. In 1817 he was elected to a fellowship of the Royal Society, in whose 'Philosophical Transactions' his sole mathematical paper, 'On the fluents of irrational functions', had appeared in 1816. He succeeded to the baronetcy in 1822 and spent the remainder of his life as a leading public figure in Lincoln, of which he became high steward, and its county. 
Bromhead was a key figure in the renaissance of English mathematics brought about by the efforts of a generation of Cambridge mathematicians which included Sir John Herschel, George Peacock, and Charles Babbage. The Analytical Society, their pressure group for reform, was Bromhead's suggestion, mooted at a gathering in his lodgings in 1812, and he read a paper, 'On notation', at its first meeting. The prime object of the society was to secure the adoption of the continental, or Leibnizian, notation for the calculus, in preference to the Newtonian notation then used in England, and thereby to open English mathematics to the eighteenth-century continental developments. Bromhead was the link between the society and Robert Woodhouse, a fellow of Caius who in 1803 had published the first book in England employing the continental notation, 'Principles of Analytical Calculation'. When Bromhead contributed the article 'Differential calculus' to the 1819 supplement to the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' he emphasized Woodhouse's influence. 
Bromhead rendered further service to mathematics through his support of two outstanding self-taught mathematicians from the east midlands, George Green and George Boole. Bromhead was a subscriber to Green's first memoir, published in 1828, and the contact led to Green's visiting Thurlby Hall and eventually to his career as a Caius undergraduate and fellow. Bromhead was active in communicating Green's later memoirs to the Cambridge Philosophical Society and the Royal Society of Edinburgh (of which Bromhead had been elected a fellow in 1823). George Boole's father had been curator of the Lincoln Mechanics' Institute when Bromhead was president, and the connection led to the latter's support and encouragement for the younger Boole, to whom he lent mathematical books. 
Bromhead was shrewd in his advice and generous in his support. Kindness and humour shine through his letters. He combined the best English traditions of amateur science and patronage by the landed gentry, to the great benefit of mathematics. Always of weak constitution, he suffered progressively from blindness in his last years, and died, a bachelor, on 14 March 1855 at Thurlby Hall, Thurlby. His brother, Sir Edmund de Gonville Bromhead (1791-1870), succeeded as third baronet. 
A. W. F. Edwards', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37225


Bronescombe, Walter of (c.1220-1280), bishop of Exeter, was born in Exeter; of his parentage nothing is known. He was trained at university, no doubt at Oxford, appears to have obtained his first benefice 'in commendam' (Coningsby, Lincolnshire) in 1243, and, probably having been attached to the 'familia' of William of Raleigh, bishop of Winchester (died 1250), was archdeacon of Surrey by 1245. Between 1245 and 1257 he obtained dispensations to hold several benefices in plurality, which included the rectory of Farnham, annexed to the archdeaconry of Surrey, the rectory of East Clandon in Surrey, the chapel of Bloxworth in Dorset, and a prebend in the king's free chapel of St Nicholas at Wallingford Castle. 
During the same period Bronescombe clearly became involved in royal service, for in 1250 he acted for Henry III at the papal curia in securing the confirmation of the highly controversial election to the bishopric of Winchester of Aymer de Lusignan (died 1260), the king's half-brother; in the following year he was appointed to be the king's proctor at the papal curia. Favour with the king was combined with papal favour, for he was styled papal chaplain by 1250. By 1254 he was a canon of Exeter Cathedral, and became chancellor of the cathedral soon afterwards. His election as bishop of Exeter on 23 February 1258 was apparently undisputed. Royal assent was given on 3 March, and the temporalities were restored on the 6th. Along with the new bishops of Norwich and Coventry and Lichfield, Bronescombe was ordained priest on 9 March and consecrated as bishop on 10 March by the archbishop of Canterbury, Boniface of Savoy (died 1270). He was enthroned in Exeter Cathedral on 14 April. 
In common with most bishops in the thirteenth century, especially those with university training, Bronescombe did not combine his ecclesiastical duties with a high office of state. Even so, he continued in royal service, acting from time to time as royal negotiator and adviser, notably at times of crisis. He gives the strong impression of having been practical and conciliatory, a man who inspired confidence in those with whom he had dealings. He was already in Paris on the king's business during July 1258, and early in 1263 he was one of Henry III's proctors in the French king's court. In these years he was one of a few markedly royalist bishops among a generally Montfortian episcopate. 
Between 1263 and 1265 Bronescombe was much involved in treating for peace at home between the king and his barons. When peace came he was one of the committee of six who, having co-opted a further six, devised the settlement: the dictum of Kenilworth of 31 October 1266. On 11 December 1272 he transferred the spiritualities of the see of Canterbury to the new archbishop, Robert Kilwardby (died 1279), and on the following day was the only bishop recorded as present in London at an important declaration concerning royal rights in respect of the pope's provision of Kilwardby. With the bishop of Winchester he presented Kilwardby with his pallium in May 1273, and immediately set out for Burgundy, to meet Edward I on his return from crusade. He rejoined Edward in Gascony in the autumn, and baptized Edward's son Alfonso, born at Bayonne on 24 November. He then attended the general council at Lyons from May to July 1274, returning to England for Edward's coronation on 19 August. Scarcely any evidence survives to shed light on his particular role during these various activities, but he was clearly a staunch and respected supporter of both Henry III and Edward I. 
Bronescombe's diocesan work can be studied in much more detail, for his register is the first extant episcopal register for the diocese of Exeter, and probably in fact the first to be compiled. It reveals a vigorous and conscientious bishop, active in visiting, and often rededicating, the churches of his large diocese. He restored and augmented the collegiate church of Crediton, and founded and endowed another college on a large scale at Glasney in Cornwall, near Penryn, consecrating the church on 27 March 1267; eight years later he endowed a chantry there. In 1268, and again in 1275, he issued statutes for his cathedral church, as he also did for his collegiate foundation at Glasney. Bronescombe is remembered also for his work on the manor house at Bishop's Clyst, where he founded or refounded the chapel and dedicated it to St Gabriel, to whom he had a special devotion. During his last years he was involved in a bitter and ramified dispute with Edmund, earl of Cornwall (died 1300), in the defence of ecclesiastical rights following the encroachments of the earl and his agents. It was during these years, too, that an eastern extension was begun to Exeter Cathedral, with the addition of a square-ended lady chapel with flanking chapels. From this important beginning a major new project of rebuilding developed, which eventually embraced the whole cathedral. The chapel on the south side of the lady chapel was St Gabriel's chapel, and here on 20 July 1280 the bishop ordained a chantry, where he chose to be buried. Bronescombe died in Bishopsteignton on 22 July 1280, and on his tomb, under the northern arch of his chantry chapel, was placed an impressive monumental effigy, notable for its flowing drapery. An elaborate canopy was added in the fifteenth century. 
J. H. Denton', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37226


Brooke, Sir (Charles) Vyner de Windt (1874-1963), third and last raja of Sarawak, was born on 26 September 1874 at Albemarle Street, London, the eldest son of Sir Charles Anthoni Johnson Brooke (1829-1917), second raja of Sarawak, and his wife, Margaret Lili Alice de Windt (died 1936) of Blunsdon Hall, Highworth, Wiltshire. Educated at Winchester College, he went on to Magdalene College, Cambridge, where his interests in boxing, horse-racing, and fast cars prevailed over his studies. His first visits to Sarawak were in 1876 as a child, in 1888 with his two younger brothers Bertram (1876-1965) and Harry (1879-1926) and their tutor Gerard Fiennes, and in 1893 when he was seventeen. In 1891 he was given the title of 'raja muda' (heir apparent) by his father and six years later went out as a cadet government officer. Serving first at Simanggang in the second division and then at Muka and Oya in the third division, he was appointed resident in late 1903. In May 1900 he took part in an expedition against the Muruts of the Trusan and in June 1902 helped lead the notorious 'cholera expedition' when one-fifth of 10,000 Dayaks recruited to pacify the rebels of the Ul Ai died of the disease. This experience scarred him for life. 
Contrary to her parents' wishes, on 21 February 1911 at St Peter's Church, Cranborne, Brooke married Sylvia (1885-1971), second daughter of Reginald Baliol Brett, second Viscount Esher, and Eleanor Frances Weston. Contrary to his own father's wishes, he took her and her brother Oliver on a visit to Sarawak the following year. This, together with his knowledge of Vyner's gambling debts, his fear that he would hand Sarawak over to British interests, and Sylvia's failure to produce a son, caused Charles seriously to consider disinheriting Vyner in favour of Bertram. Instead, he issued a proclamation in 1912 which established a supervisory Sarawak government commission in London and recognized Bertram as having almost equal status with Vyner. This caused a serious rift between Vyner and his father. After Charles's death and Vyner's proclamation as raja in May 1917, he and Bertram took it in turn to spend half a year in Sarawak as head of state, Vyner always avoiding the English winter. An unwilling raja, he was nevertheless unprepared to hand over the reins to the able and conscientious Bertram. His interest in government was slight and in the resulting power vacuum effective executive control passed first to his brilliant but unstable protege and adviser, Gerard MacBryan, and then to a group of senior government officers known as the committee of administration. Acute problems brought about by the depression and rubber restriction were left to others to resolve. When the committee's centralizing push caused out-station officers, supported by his nephew Anthony ['see below'], to rebel against it in April 1939, Vyner appointed him 'raja muda' and left him in charge of the government for six months. Subsequently convinced that high office had gone to Anthony's head, he dismissed him but later reinstated him on Bertram's intervention. 
Wearying of his role and pressured by the rani and their three daughters, Leonora, Elizabeth, and Valerie, to make a financial settlement and retire to England, Brooke negotiated a secret agreement with the committee of administration in early 1941. This brought him 1 million Sarawak dollars from state funds in return for abandoning most of his prerogative powers and implementing a written constitution. It was duly enacted in September 1941 during the celebration of the centenary of Brooke rule. MacBryan, who was out of favour in the 1930s, had re-emerged in early 1941 to broker the agreement and take charge of the celebrations. Anthony, who had bitterly opposed the constitution as dishonouring Charles's political will, was sent back to England in disgrace. 
When the Japanese invaded Sarawak by sea on 16 December 1941, Brooke was on holiday in Australia with MacBryan. On hearing the news the raja flew to Batavia with MacBryan hoping to return to the state but was forced by events to seek sanctuary in Australia. The next two years he spent in Melbourne with MacBryan, who had been held briefly as a suspected Japanese agent in Batavia and then Singapore. Initially critical of the British government's failure to defend Sarawak despite its generous contributions to the war effort, Brooke was pressured into silence. In 1943 he managed to return to London via the United States and remained there for the rest of the war. Handing over responsibility for Sarawak affairs again to Anthony and reinstating him as 'raja muda', he dismissed him once more in October 1945 when negotiations with the Colonial Office over Sarawak's post-war constitutional arrangements broke down. Entering into direct negotiations with the Colonial Office with MacBryan's assistance, Vyner agreed to cede his sovereignty to the crown on condition that he and his family were left 'no worse off' financially. The Colonial Office had misled him into believing that the war had left a task of reconstruction beyond his means. Nor had he any faith in his nephew Anthony as his successor. He visited Sarawak with the rani briefly in April and May 1946 for the Council Negri debate on the cession bill. His announcement of the cession in February had alienated many of his officers and a substantial section of the Malay population whose agitation surprised and horrified him. 
Despite newspaper reports at the time that Brooke had received $1 million from the British government as a quid pro quo for the cession, he received nothing and had to pay tax on his Sarawak pension. Obliged to live in modest circumstances for the rest of his life while supporting Sylvia, he became something of a hermit. He never returned to Sarawak and saw little of his former officers. Towards the end of his life he became reconciled with Bertram, who, together with Anthony, had been disinherited by the cession in 1946. Vyner Brooke died at his flat at 13 Albion Street, Paddington, London, on 9 May 1963, some months before the proclamation of the Federation of Malaysia of which Sarawak then became part. He had been made KCMG in 1928 but the Attlee government declined to elevate him to a baronetcy in recognition of his co-operation over the cession. Sylvia, who had lived for many years in Barbados, died on 11 November 1971. They had kept up a friendly, teasing correspondence to the end. Vyner's portrait was painted by his friend Margaret Noble and is held at Magdalene College, Cambridge, where there is also a stained glass window in his memory. The portrait shows that he had a cast in one eye, something which heightened the inscrutable impression he made on people. Painfully shy in his official role, his carefree and pleasure-loving way of life was in part a reaction to the regime of his ascetic and forbidding father. Loved rather than held in awe by his people, Brooke spoke fluent Malay and Iban and demonstrated an extraordinary ability to remember names and genealogies. He was cremated and his ashes buried in the churchyard at Sheepstor, Devon, alongside his father and great-uncle. 
Brooke's nephew Anthony Walter Dayrell Brooke (1912-2011), raja muda of Sarawak, was born in Kuching, Sarawak on 10 December 1912, the only son of Bertram Willes Dayrell Brooke (1876-1965), 'tuan muda' (or 'little lord') of Sarawak, and his wife, Gladys Milton, 'nee' Palmer (1884-1952), only child of Sir Walter Palmer, first baronet, of the Huntley and Palmers biscuit manufacturers. When he was still young his parents separated and his mother converted to Islam in 1939, taking the name Khair un-nisa binti 'Abdul'llah. He was educated at Eton College, Trinity College, Cambridge (where he stayed for a year), and the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London, where he studied Malay and Islamic law, before joining first the Malayan civil service and then the Sarawak civil service and serving as a district officer. His relationship with his uncle was a fractious one, and he was an opponent of the oligarchical 'committee of administration' which had taken advantage of his uncle's weakness; he was appointed 'raja muda' in April 1939 but was deprived of his titles in January 1940, apparently as a result in part of his uncle's anger that he had married a 'commoner', Kathleen Mary Hudden (1907-1981), daughter of William Edward Cecil Hudden, of Backwell, Somerset, and sister of a Sarawak official; they had a son, James ('b'. 1940), and two daughters, Angela (1942-1986) and Celia (1944-2011). 
Brooke was expelled from the state in September 1941 (three months before it was invaded by the Japanese) after a conflict over the need for a new constitution. In November 1941 he enlisted as a private, later transferring to the intelligence staff as a lieutenant and serving in Kandy, Ceylon. He was restored as 'raja muda' in January 1944 but was deprived of his titles again in October 1945. He opposed the cession of Sarawak to the crown (as did a majority of the 'native' members of the Council Negri), and, after being banned from entering Sarawak after it formally became a colony in July 1946, continued to support the anti-cession and pro-independence movement from his mother's house in Singapore. When Duncan Stewart, the governor of Sarawak, was assassinated by a Sarawak nationalist, Rosli Dhobi, in 1949, he was suspected of involvement in the plot, though the intelligence services subsequently concluded that he was unaware of it. He renounced his claim as heir to the title of raja following further violence in 1951. Subsequently he lived in London and Sussex, and, having become closely involved in the peace movement in the 1960s, at the Findhorn Community, becoming a figure in the 'new age' movement. (Meanwhile, Sarawak was absorbed into Malaysia in 1963.) His first marriage having ended in divorce in 1973, in 1982 he married Brigitte (Gita) Keller ('b'. 1931), a Swedish peace activist and daughter of the Revd Paul H. Lange; together they ran a charity called Operation Peace Through Unity, which linked the peace and environmental movements with support for the rights of indigenous peoples. From 1987 they lived in Wanganui, New Zealand. In the early 1990s he was a prominent supporter of the Penan, a nomadic tribe in the Sarawak interior whose rainforest livelihood was being destroyed by logging companies. He died in Wanganui on 2 March 2011. His ashes were interred in the Brooke family graveyard in Kuching, on 21 September 2013. 


@@@@@


doc= 37227


Brooke, Henry, Baron Brooke of Cumnor (1903-1984), politician, was born at 40 Wellington Square, Oxford, on 9 April 1903, the younger son of (Leonard) Leslie Brooke (1862-1940), an artist, who was the author and illustrator of numerous children's books, and his wife, Sybil Diana Brooke (1870-1957), daughter of the Revd Stopford Augustus Brooke. After attending preparatory schools he was educated at Marlborough College and at Balliol College, Oxford (1922-6), where he gained a first in classical moderations (1924) and seconds in mathematical moderations (1924) and 'literae humaniores' and was a tutor in philosophy (1926-7). Encouraged by Alexander Dunlop Lindsay, the master of Balliol, he spent a year (1927-8) working in a Quaker settlement for the unemployed in the Rhondda valley. After spending a year on 'The Economist' he joined the Conservative Research Department, as a founder member, in 1929 and became its deputy director (1935-7). On 22 April 1933 he married Barbara Muriel Mathews ['see below']; they had two sons and two daughters. She was herself a woman of outstanding political acumen. 
Brooke was elected to Hampstead borough council in 1936 and Conservative MP for Lewisham West in a by-election of 1938. On 7 May 1940 he made an ardent defence of Chamberlain in the parliamentary debate that brought Churchill to Downing Street. Following Brooke's defeat at Lewisham in 1945 he was recruited as the last deputy chairman of the Southern Railway Company before nationalization (1946-8). He was a member of the church assembly during the 1940s, the Central Housing Advisory Committee (1944-54), and the court of London University (1947). Following election to London county council in 1945 he served as leader of its Conservative group (1945-51). He was returned as Conservative MP for Hampstead in 1950, but continued to serve on the London county council until 1955 and on Hampstead borough council until 1957. 
In 1954 Brooke was appointed to the most influential ministerial post outside the cabinet, financial secretary to the Treasury. 'He is a very virtuous and conscientious man though unfortunately no speaker', the government's economic adviser noted (Cairncross, 2.95). On the formation of the Macmillan administration in 1957 Brooke was promoted to the cabinet as minister of housing and local government, and as minister for Welsh affairs. It fell to him to implement two pieces of legislation enacted in 1956: the 'Clean Air Act' and the more contentious 'Rent Act'. Brooke was transferred in 1961 to the new post of chief secretary to the Treasury (retaining his cabinet status). Public expenditure, the civil service, the universities, and the arts became his responsibilities. To provide him with a salary he was additionally appointed paymaster-general. His hard-working and orthodox character was appreciated in the Treasury, where he helped to prepare some unpopular policies associated with the chancellor of the exchequer, Selwyn Lloyd. By 1962 Harold Evans, the prime minister's public relations adviser, considered him a contender for the premiership: 'he is much more human, much less dour and much less metallic than opinion believes' (Evans, 187). 
Macmillan's 'night of the long knives' resulted in Brooke's appointment as home secretary in July 1962. Instead of painstaking work with facts, statistics, and long-term treasury strategies he was plunged into deciding urgent and emotive issues at the Home Office. His declared priorities were to confront the crime wave and to reduce prison overcrowding by a new building programme; but his deliberative pragmatism was ill-suited to his new responsibilities. Brooke's twenty-seven months as home secretary proved peculiarly unsuccessful. He was involved in one rumpus after another, and became widely reviled. His difficulties were aggravated by the stubborn and authoritarian temper of the officials who advised him, and he was unlucky that his difficulties at the Home Office coincided with the heyday of the satire boom. He was pilloried in 'Private Eye' and on the television programme 'That Was The Week That Was', which broadcast a biting sketch, on 30 March 1963, 'This is your life, Henry Brooke' (Carpenter, 253). 
The first controversy, in July 1962, concerned a deportation order issued against Carmen Bryan, a Jamaican who had been convicted of shoplifting goods valued at $2. Then in August Brooke banned an American Nazi from entering Britain, and was dismayed when the man nevertheless appeared in Gloucestershire. In September came the 'cause celebre' of Dr Robert Soblen, who had been convicted in the USA of spying for Russia, and who slashed his wrists while on an Israeli airliner that then landed in London. The Home Office resolved to hand him to the Americans, although his offence was not covered by the 'Extradition Act'. This controversial decision was forestalled by Soblen's fatal overdose of barbiturates, which somehow reached him in prison. In 1963 Brooke's reputation was further damaged by his handling of the case of Anthony Enahoro, a Nigerian chief detained under the 'Fugitive Offenders Act' of 1881. After five angry parliamentary debates, and bitter criticism that Enahoro had not been granted political asylum, he was returned to Nigeria in May. Meanwhile the hapless Brooke had been further discomfited when the Home Office deported the American comedian Lenny Bruce twice within three days (April 1963). 
In March 1963 Brooke met Sir Roger Hollis of MI5 and Sir Joseph Simpson of the Metropolitan Police to discuss rumours surrounding the war minister, John Profumo, whom Brooke's wife later described as 'a man who has sinned against our standards' ('The Times', 5 Sept 2000). Brooke wished to prevent Profumo's associate Stephen Ward from making disclosures to Labour politicians or journalists, and instigated a wide-ranging police investigation. Ward was arrested on trumpery charges in June and after a show trial committed suicide, like Soblen, with barbiturates. 
The state visit of King Paul and Queen Frederica of Greece proved a policing fiasco. After a noisy demonstration (10 July 1963) Brooke fulminated, 'The Queen of England has been booed tonight and I am furious' (Booker, 184). He told his constituents that 'a handful of communists, anarchists, beatniks, and members of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament' was destroying Britain's reputation for hospitality. 'The demonstrators were shouting 'fascist police' at masses of splendid London policemen who had to be taken off their proper work of fighting crime to... quell their filthy abuse' ('The Times', 15 July 1963, 7c). In fact, these officers included a mentally ill sergeant from Savile Row police station, Harold Challenor, who planted half a brick on one of those arrested and together with other officers committed perjury to convict demonstrators. Although these improprieties were swiftly revealed, Brooke prevaricated until some of the innocent had endured prison for over a year. It had become evident that he was 'in the wrong job... an almost painfully straightforward man who worries his way ponderously through to his conclusions and then clings to them like grim death' (Watt, 693). His public statements often sounded dreary or petulant, and on such subjects as the 'Commonwealth Immigration Act' were thought by some to be misleading. His unimaginative approach was typified by his insistence that the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra was not entitled to its prefix 'royal'. He opposed all manner of 'sleazy stuff' ('Hansard 5C', 694, 30 April 1964, 605). Accordingly he declined to reform the criminal laws prohibiting homosexuality and prostitution, despite the recommendations of Sir John Wolfenden's committee. 'Public opinion is not prepared for a change', he declared. 'At this time, when a growing number of people feel free to do anything not specifically condemned by Act, we should be slow to loosen up' (Raison). The latter remark was characteristic of his outlook. 
To rally support for the Douglas-Home government before the general election of 1964 Brooke set out to prove that the Conservatives 'mean what we say about helping the young of our country to grow up straight' (Brooke to Sir A. Douglas-Home, 18 Feb 1964, TNA: PRO Prem 11/4848). This process began with the 'Drugs (Prevention of Misuse) Act' of 1964, whereby the unauthorized possession of amphetamines became a criminal offence. Informed critics condemned the act as hurried and ill-conceived, and indeed it proved counter-productive: the illicit supply of amphetamines flourished, and they became the most common illicitly used stimulant in Britain for the rest of the twentieth century. Brooke's separate 'Dangerous Drugs Act' of 1964 created a new offence, the cultivation of cannabis, and attempted to target people who permitted cannabis to be consumed on their premises. After drugs Brooke turned to pornography. During June 1964 the Home Office rushed through parliament a new 'Obscene Publications Act' as well as the 'Malicious Damage Act', directed against mods and rockers. 
The Conservatives lost the general election of 1964, and Brooke left office. His unpopularity resulted in a massive swing against him in Hampstead. Subsequently, during the general election of 1966, a concerted campaign from within and without the constituency encompassed his defeat. Some months later, in July, he had the consolation of a life peerage. Previously he had been sworn to the privy council (1955) and been made a Companion of Honour (1964). He was a quiet, friendly, honest, and steadfast man, who was regarded by his detractors as a cruel, deceitful ogre. His gentle, affectionate memoir of his father 'Leslie Brooke and Johnny Crow' (1982) belies the public's view of him. Brooke, who latterly suffered from Parkinson's disease, died on 29 March 1984, at home at the Glebe House, Mildenhall, Wiltshire, and was cremated on 2 April. 
Brooke's wife, 


@@@@@


doc= 37228


Brooke, Henry William (1771/2-1842), civil servant, attended none of the leading schools, nor did he go to university, and his origins and much of his career are shrouded in mystery. For several years he drew a salary as distributor of stamps in Ireland, but it seems unlikely that he was one of the Irish Brookes. He was probably from Kent; at any rate he owned property in Deal and Walmer, and was married at Davington, Kent, on 2 March 1799 to Catherine (1769/70-1825), daughter of the Revd John Tucker, rector of Ringwould, near Walmer. A letter of 1809 refers to their five children. 
Brooke's claim to noteworthiness rests on his role in the alien office. Established in 1793 by the 'Alien Act' of that year, the alien office was a branch of the Home Office which ostensibly acted as the administrative centre for the regulation of the conduct of foreigners resident in Britain. In reality, it co-ordinated counter-revolutionary efforts against 'disaffected' Britons as well as suspect foreigners. 
The secretiveness of the alien office's work makes it difficult to provide details of Brooke's activities: 'My duties have ever been of the most confidential nature', he wrote to R. B. Jenkinson, second earl of Liverpool, in 1809. Brooke appears to have joined the alien office about 1796, and he was clerk from about 1798 to 1813. He served briefly (1802-3) as acting superintendent, bridging the gap between the departure of Charles Flint and the appointment of John Reeves. Brooke was employed in Manchester, and then in Ireland at the time of the rebellion. After his return to England, he was involved in the interrogation of Francois Barthelemy, the former French charge d'affaires in Britain, who fled from France in 1799. Two years later, Brooke was given responsibility for the Kent coast from Dover to Whitstable, with the task of preventing any communication between the French and their English sympathizers. To Lord Liverpool he hinted subsequently at the difficulties in 'serving the ends of Government in such a situation of delicacy with limited Legal powers'. 
Ill health obliged Brooke to retire in 1813. His salary at this time was $1000, and upon leaving the service he received a pension of $600 p.a. He devoted his remaining years to Kentish affairs: he was an active local magistrate; he promoted a loyal address to the king from the inhabitants of Walmer in December 1820; and in 1826 he was one of the main subscribers to the enlargement of Walmer church. Brooke died at Walmer on 15 April 1842, aged seventy. 
Stephen Conway', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37229


Brown, Alexander Crum (1838-1922), chemist, was born in Edinburgh on 26 March 1838, the only son of a United Presbyterian minister, John Brown (1784-1858), and his second wife, Margaret Fisher Crum (died 1841), sister of the chemist Walter Crum FRS (1796-1867) and a descendant of Ebenezer Erskine. His half-brother, John Brown MD (1810-1882), was famed as an author; their grandfather was John Brown of Whitburn (1754-1832), and their great-grandfather was John Brown of Haddington. Crum Brown, as he was generally known, spent five years at the Royal High School, Edinburgh, then went to Mill Hill School, Middlesex. He entered the University of Edinburgh in 1854 to study arts, but changed to medicine, and was a gold medallist in chemistry and natural philosophy. He graduated MA in 1858 and MD in 1861. He simultaneously studied science at London University where he gained his DSc in 1862. In the following year he went to Germany to study chemistry, under Bunsen at Heidelberg and Kolbe at Marburg. He returned to Edinburgh to teach medical students, as extramural lecturer in chemistry in 1863 and professor from 1869 to his retirement in 1908. He obtained his FRCP (Edinburgh) in 1865. In 1866 he married Jane Bailie (died 1910), daughter of the Revd James Porter of Drumlee, co. Down. There were no children. 
In keeping with his medico-chemical interests, Crum Brown's Edinburgh MD thesis, 'On the theory of chemical combination' (1861), proposed a new way to represent chemical constitution: each atom was to be indicated by the chemical symbol for the element concerned, bonds between atoms being symbolized by lines. Essentially this was the system of notation later employed universally. For clarifying atomic relationships within a molecule, according to the new valency theories of Edward Frankland and Kekule, this simple device was of untold value and greatly facilitated the emergence of the theory of structure upon which later chemistry was predicated. It transformed the teaching of organic chemistry, particularly in the hands of Frankland, becoming known, somewhat unfairly, as 'Frankland's notation'. The system was introduced to a wider audience at a lecture on chemical constitution and its relation to physiological action, reported in 'Chemical News' complete with the new 'graphic formulae'. His name is remembered now chiefly for the Crum Brown-Gibson rule, enunciated with his assistant J. Gibson (1855-1914) in 1892, concerning substitution in a benzene molecule. 
Though his most enduring concern was the establishment of a truly mathematical theory of chemistry (in which he was unsuccessful) Crum Brown also worked on optical activity, organo-sulphur compounds, and electrolytic synthesis of half-esters. He wrote on the physiology of the inner ear, where he correctly related vertigo to the motion of fluid in channels of the inner ear. He was proficient in Japanese, and an expert in systems of knitting. His other interests included the university senate, the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and the synod of his church. He was the first holder of a London DSc (1862), received honorary degrees from all four Scottish universities, and became FRSE in 1863 and FRS in 1879. He was president of the Chemical Society from 1891 to 1893. Crum Brown died on 28 October 1922 at his home, 8 Belgrave Crescent, Edinburgh. 
Colin A. Russell', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37230


Browne, John (fl. c.1480-c.1505), composer, was in 1490 one of the chaplains of the household chapel of John de Vere, earl of Oxford; the identification is confirmed by a contemporary musical source in which the composer is named as 'Johannes Browne Oxoniensis'. No further information survives of the circumstances of his life, but that he was known also to royalty is suggested by the fact that his six-voice setting of 'Stabat iuxta Christi crucem' was apparently written for Elizabeth of York following the untimely death of her son Prince Arthur in 1502. Musicians of this period in aristocratic employment commonly composed songs and devotional pieces to vernacular texts, as well as church music; three compositions surviving in a songbook of 1501 attributed just to Browne, two to devotional texts and one to secular, may well be the work of this John Browne. 
In the quality of his accomplishment Browne may be considered the greatest English composer of the period between John Dunstaple, who died in 1453, and John Taverner, who died in 1545. In the compilation ('c'.1502-5) of the Eton choirbook of sacred music his work was accorded pride of place ['see 'Composers of the Eton choirbook]. His fifteen compositions originally included there comprised eleven Marian antiphons and four settings of the Magnificat. Of these, nine survive in a state either complete or completable; most noteworthy among them are the eight-voice 'O Maria salvatoris mater' and the three six-voice settings of texts derived from the sequence 'Stabat mater'. Browne's polyphony is dense and endlessly resourceful. He is a master of cogency of overall planning, deploying 'cantus firmus' technique and the alternation of reduced-voice and full scoring with an effortless artistry that wholly conceals the fact that several compositions stand upon an elaborately mathematical disposition of their successive and component proportions. He is representative of the English florid style of composition at not only its most assured, but also its most imaginative. Few closing periods approach in breadth and sweep the 'Salve' concluding Browne's five-voice 'Salve regina', or in poignancy the setting of 'gaudia' ending 'Stabat iuxta Christi crucem' and, long before the contrivances of the madrigalists, he could create in his masterpiece, the six-voice 'Stabat mater', a mood of brooding, despairing introspection and melancholy that gathers an inexorable momentum and energy until its eruption into a startling and percussive outburst of 'Crucifige, crucifige!' ('Crucify, crucify!') that is articulated at the very top of the treble register and represents the work's greatest climax -- an unforgettable piece of composition unequalled anywhere in the European music of its time. 


@@@@@


doc= 37231


Brown, John (1826-1883), servant to Queen Victoria, was born on 8 December 1826 at Crathienaird in the parish of Crathie, Aberdeenshire, the second among the nine sons and two daughters of John Brown (1790-1875), a tenant farmer, and his wife, Margaret Leys (1799-1876). In 1831 the family moved to the Bush Farm, Crathie, where Brown spent his childhood. He had some formal education (in English and Gaelic) at Crathie school, and became a voracious reader, but the traditional skills of the highlander -- deerstalking, fishing, shooting, riding, mountain walking, and natural history -- he learned outside the schoolroom. At the age of fourteen he became a stable-boy, and eventually found work in the stables at Balmoral, which was then leased by Sir Robert Gordon. He became a gillie, and was kept on in that position when Queen Victoria and Prince Albert took over the tenancy of the estate in 1848 after Gordon's death. 
Queen Victoria first mentioned Brown by name in her journal for 11 September 1849, when she noted him as one of the gillies attending the royal party on an expedition to Loch Dhu. He made himself useful and prominent, assisted by his rugged good looks, and in 1851 he was taken into the permanent royal establishment and began leading the queen's pony while she was out riding. In 1858 he was selected by Prince Albert to be the queen's personal servant in Scotland, which gave him considerable authority in the servants' quarters. Johnny Brown was soon a great favourite with the queen, who described him time and again as 'discreet, careful, intelligent, attentive... handy and willing to do everything and anything, and to overcome every difficulty' ('Leaves', 201). When the duke of Atholl offered to lead her pony on a royal jaunt up Glen Tilt, the queen replied 'laughingly, 'Oh, no, only I like best being led by the person I am accustomed to'' (ibid., 232). Brown was a fixture in the highlands. 
When the queen went into her prolonged mourning and seclusion after the death of the prince consort in December 1861, fears were entertained for her health, and it was as a medical precaution that John Brown and her favourite pony, Lochnagar, were brought from Balmoral to Osborne, to enable the queen to take more exercise. He rapidly became indispensable. In April 1865 the queen wrote an account of his duties to her eldest daughter: he was taken 'entirely and permanently as my personal servant for out of doors -- besides cleaning my things and doing odd 'jobs''. She found it convenient to deal only with one person, who went 'to my room after breakfast and luncheon to get his orders -- and everything is always right' (Fulford, 3.21-2). He was given the title the queen's highland servant, and in the deeply hierarchical and class-segregated royal household he answered only to the queen. But Brown's utility to the queen rested in more than the details of his constant daily service (he took no leave). Victoria needed to be of the first importance to somebody: with her husband and mother dead, her older children marrying and developing new emotional ties, her younger children as yet too immature to receive her confidences, and with no possibility of genuine friendship with the aristocratic women of her household -- who were still her subjects -- she found herself profoundly isolated. As she said after Albert's death, 'There is no-one to call me Victoria now' (M. Charlot, 'The Young Queen', 1991, 425). Brown could not call her Victoria (although it was not beyond him to call her 'Wumman'), but he was genuinely devoted to her: his 'only object and interest is my service', Victoria told her daughter. 'God knows, how I want so much to be taken care of' (Fulford, 3.22). 
Inevitably, rumours about the nature of the relationship between Brown and the queen began to flourish. By 1866 provincial Scottish newspapers were publishing scandal about Brown, and on 7 July 1866 'Punch' printed its famous spoof 'court circular': 'Mr John Brown walked on the Slopes. He subsequently partook of a haggis. In the evening Mr John Brown was pleased to listen to a bag-pipe. Mr John Brown retired early.' This apparently innocuous paragraph summed up the ill feeling which was beginning to swirl around the reclusive queen and her court, suggesting the overthrow of the social order, and an inappropriate relationship between the queen and her servant. Moreover, the very dullness of the activities denoted -- which resembled the more usual, genuine 'The queen drove out in the afternoon' -- emphasized the failure of the queen herself to resume her place as the social, political, and ceremonial head of the country. The privacy Victoria sought to nurse her grief left her vulnerable to suspicion, and the scandal flourished, virtually unchecked. The queen, it was said, had secretly borne a child by Brown, whom she had married morganatically; other rumours made Brown her medium in attempts to contact the dead Prince Albert, while still others suggested that the queen had lost her mind and that Brown was her keeper. The public scandal escalated between 1865 and 1871, fuelled both by the queen's invisibility and by her one attempt to offer a substitute for her actual presence. She published 'Leaves from a Journal of our Life in the Highlands' (1868) as a memorial to her life with Albert, and to set (especially to the upper classes) an example of pure family life and 'kind and proper feeling towards the poor and the servants' (Fulford, 3.172). It was this latter that caused further difficulties, for the text was littered with references to servants, including Brown, with regular footnotes outlining their careers and characters, which fuelled speculation. No plausible evidence or proof of a sexual relationship between Brown and the queen was ever offered (nor was it likely that it should be), but the balance of probabilities makes such a relationship extremely unlikely: while Victoria was no prude, her deep moral and religious convictions would have inhibited a sexual relationship outside marriage, while her immovable sense of her own position would make marriage with a domestic servant unthinkable. And Albert, she knew, would be watching her from heaven. 
The queen would hear no word spoken against Brown. Outspoken, arrogant, increasingly confident of his position with the queen, Brown made enemies at court. Many courtiers -- and all of Victoria's children -- found him intolerable: he was brusque and rude to them, often drunk, and his familiar, bullying manner towards the queen was viewed as unforgivable 'lese-majeste'. They were more put out by the way he acted as gatekeeper to the queen: no one could see her without Brown's permission. The queen's private secretary, Sir Henry Ponsonby, almost alone maintained a sense of perspective: she could have chosen many more dangerous intimates than Brown. He had no political axe to grind, had no thoughts of being the power behind the throne ('Punch' cartoons such as 'A Brown study!' from 1867 notwithstanding). Ponsonby knew the limits of Brown's position, and, as one of the prince of Wales's courtiers observed after Brown's death: 'his successor might do a great deal more harm than Brown, who after all... confined his interference chiefly to the stables, shooting and the servants. But if he had been an ambitious man... he might have meddled in more important matters. (Ponsonby, 128)' Moreover, Brown was 'the only person who could fight and make the Queen do what she did not wish' (ibid.). He could also prevent her from doing things he did not like: he disliked foreigners and felt uncomfortable out of his usual environment, and when obliged to travel abroad with the queen he rigidly imposed the routine to which he was accustomed at home, which greatly curtailed the queen's pleasure in new places. 
When Victoria reluctantly resumed a fuller programme of public commitments in 1872, the public scandal about Brown waned. He continued to be a source of tension at court and in the queen's family, but his place on the queen's carriage came to be seen as inevitable. At a time when little attention was given to Victoria's personal safety, he took it upon himself to patrol the grounds around the queen's rooms every evening, and he slept with a revolver under his pillow to defend her against possible assassins. His fears were not groundless: on five previous occasions she had been attacked, and on 29 February 1872 it was Brown who apprehended Arthur O'Connor, who was approaching the queen with a pistol to make her sign a petition. For this she awarded him a faithful service medal and an annuity, together with a specially instituted devoted service medal (which was never awarded to anyone else). No one took Brown's place with the queen, and at Balmoral in particular he continued to reign supreme, but once her interest in politics was stimulated again and she began to look outwards, his position as sole confidant had less significance: Disraeli became from 1874 until his death in 1881 the most important man in her life. Besides, Victoria was no longer a young widow, and so was a less likely target for salacious gossip. 
On 18 March 1883 the queen sent Brown to gather evidence about an alleged attack on Lady Florence Dixie in Windsor Great Park. He caught a severe cold and, although he continued to attend to his duties, his condition declined. By 25 March he was suffering badly from erysipelas and a high fever, and in the evening he lapsed into delirium tremens. On 27 March he sank into a coma, and he died later that evening in his rooms at Windsor Castle. After funeral services at Windsor, his body was taken to Crathie cemetery and buried on 5 April. The queen, suffering badly from rheumatism, was distraught, and her tributes to Brown's memory revived speculation about the nature of their relationship. The tombstone she ordered bore the inscription: 'In affectionate and grateful memory of John Brown, personal attendant and beloved friend of Queen Victoria in whose service he had been for 34 years' (Lamont-Brown, 144). If the love and affection caught the eye of the prurient, it was the service that was most important to Victoria. 
Brown's influence continued to be felt for years after his death. Victoria marked his anniversaries and dedicated the second volume of her highland diary, 'More Leaves from the Journal of a Life in the Highlands' (1884), 'To my loyal Highlanders and especially to the memory of my devoted personal attendant and faithful friend John Brown'. The prominence given to Brown in the journal (in itself surely indicative of the innocence of the relationship) once again caused unfavourable comment, and when the queen sought to follow it up with a memoir of Brown, her horrified courtiers passed the manuscript to Randall Davidson, the dean of Windsor, who took his career in his hands and told the queen he thought it unwise. Eventually she decided to drop the idea, and the manuscript, and Brown's diaries, were apparently burnt. After her own death in 1901, and in accordance with her instructions, a picture of Brown, a lock of his hair, and various mementoes of Brown and his family were secretly placed in her coffin by her doctor, Sir James Reid. Soon after the funeral the new king (who had always loathed Brown) ordered a mass destruction and dispersal of all his mother's artefacts, pictures, and papers relating to Brown. But he could not obliterate the public memory of Brown, or the continuing fascination of his relationship with Queen Victoria. Twentieth-century commentators determined to expose the 'hypocrisy' of the Victorians seized on the business with glee: the byword for prudery, sexual repression, and stern morality caught with her crinoline disarranged. Periodically it is suggested that a cache of papers exists which will 'expose' their relationship once and for all; if they exist, they have yet to see the light of day. Cinema has been more circumspect in its portrayal of the relationship, emphasizing Brown's drinking rather than possible sexual scandal: Gordon McLeod played him opposite Anna Neagle in 'Victoria the Great' (1937) and 'Sixty Glorious Years' (1938), and opposite Fay Compton in 'The Prime Minister' (1941); Findlay Currie played him in 'The Mudlark' (1950); while a sympathetic, allusive account of the relationship is given in 'Mrs Brown' (1998), with Billy Connolly playing opposite Dame Judi Dench. 
The Victorians found it hard to understand or appreciate John Brown's place at their queen's court. The role of the jester had long fallen into abeyance, but, dressed in his own kind of highland motley, Brown had the licence of the fool, albeit a peculiarly Victorian fool. Surrounded by courtiers and children cowed by her rank and afraid of her anger, after Albert's death Victoria needed one person who would tell her the truth about herself, who was not intimidated by her position or alarmed about her mental health, but who was also genuinely solicitous of her welfare and uninterested in wielding political power. In 1840 the queen had put up a tombstone to her childhood companion, a King Charles spaniel, Dash. It read: 'Here lies Dash the favourite spaniel of Her Majesty Queen Victoria in his 10th year. His attachment was without selfishness, his playfulness without malice, his fidelity without deceit. Reader, If you would be beloved and die regretted profit by the example of Dash.' John Brown shared, in human form, many of Dash's virtues, and was similarly beloved. In John Brown, Victoria found her perfect fool; he had no successor. 


@@@@@


doc= 37232


Browne, Sir Denis John Wolko (1892-1967), paediatric surgeon, was born on 28 April 1892 in Melbourne, Australia, the eldest in the family of four sons and two daughters of Sylvester Browne, explorer, gold prospector, and farmer, whose father had emigrated from Ireland in 1831, and his wife, Anne Catherine (Nancy), daughter of Sir William Jonas Foster Stawell (1815-1889), chief justice of Victoria, Australia. He was nephew of the author Thomas Alexander Browne (Rolf Boldrewood) (1826-1915). Denis Browne was educated at King's School, Parramatta, Sydney, and Sydney University (MB, 1914). He joined the 13th light horse regiment and served in Gallipoli before being invalided home. He spent the last two years of the war in France as a major with Australian field ambulance units. Between 1922, when he gained his FRCS, and 1927, he was appointed successively house surgeon, registrar, and resident surgical officer at the Hospital for Sick Children, Great Ormond Street, London. He was also appointed consultant in congenital abnormalities to the London county council, working at Queen Mary's Hospital for Children, Carshalton. He was made consultant surgeon to the Hospital for Sick Children in 1928. He worked there until his retirement in 1957. 
Browne was the first surgeon who operated exclusively on children and was the founder of modern paediatric surgery in England. He made outstanding contributions to all branches of children's surgery but his lifelong interest was the aetiology of malformations. From his great clinical experience he was able to postulate his 'mechanical theory', a conception of the fundamental part played by intra-uterine position and pressure on the production of congenital malformations. He was a magnificent surgical technician, a perfectionist who constantly improved his techniques, and ingenious in developing many new surgical instruments and splints. His methods of treatment were new and often revolutionary and were frequently attacked and criticized, but they worked. 
Browne was Arris and Gale lecturer (1934 and 1954) and Hunterian professor (1947, 1949, 1950, and 1951) of the Royal College of Surgeons, and co-founder and first president of the British Association of Paediatric Surgeons in 1953. In 1957 he received the Dawson-Williams prize for services to paediatrics and the William E. Ladd medal in the USA for outstanding contributions to paediatric surgery. In 1961 he was appointed KCVO and a chevalier of the legion of honour. In 1965 he was made an honorary fellow of the Australasian College of Surgeons and became president of the International College of Surgeons. He was visiting professor at many universities in all five continents. Later, the Denis Browne gold medal became the highest honour the British Association of Paediatric Surgeons could bestow. 
Browne was widely read, had a keen cynical sense of humour, and was intolerant of ignorance, illogicality, and conformity. He disliked committee procedures and bureaucracy. All his life he fought against prejudice, a struggle he greatly enjoyed. He was tall and elegant, a tennis player of a high standard, and an excellent shot. 
In 1927 Browne married the novelist Helen de Guerry Simpson (1897-1940), daughter of Edward Percy Simpson, solicitor, of Sydney. They had one daughter. In 1945 he married Lady Moyra Blanche Madeleine, daughter of Vere Brabazon Ponsonby, ninth earl of Bessborough, former governor-general of Canada. They had a son and a daughter. Browne died at his home, 16 Wilton Street, Grosvenor Place, London, on 9 January 1967. He was survived by his second wife. 
P. P. Rickham', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37233


Browne, Frances (1816-1879), writer, was born on 16 January 1816 in Stranorlar, co. Donegal, the seventh of twelve children of Samuel Brown, the village postmaster. She lost her sight following smallpox at the age of eighteen months. The family was Presbyterian, and her conscious effort to acquire an education began at the age of six, when she heard a sermon she could not understand. From that time she adopted a plan for acquiring information through asking the meaning of every new word she heard. She also learned by listening to her siblings repeating their lessons. She had a thirst for facts and a tenacious memory, and bribed members of her family to read 'the drier, but more instructive books' which she latterly preferred, though in rural Ireland books of any kind were hard to come by. 
Three early poems were published in the 'Irish Penny Journal' (1840), and this volume was the first book Browne ever possessed. Encouraged, in 1841 she sent poems to 'The Athenaeum', and later to 'Hood's Magazine' and to Marguerite, countess of Blessington, for 'Keepsake'. A volume of poems, 'The Star of Atteghei', was published in 1844. With her literary earnings she paid for the education of a young sister, who became her amanuensis and moved to Edinburgh with her in 1847. In 1852 they moved to London. 
Browne made what would seem to have been a precarious living as a journalist, contributing poetry, reviews, and articles on contemporary issues to the 'Leisure Hour', 'Sunday at Home', 'Chambers's Journal', 'Tait's Magazine', and other periodicals. Between 1860 and 1866 she made three successful applications for money from the Royal Literary Fund, whose archives give details. Early in her career Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, third marquess of Lansdowne, had given her a generous sum; she also received grants from the Royal Bounty Fund and a pension from the civil list. 
Browne wrote three three-volume novels: 'My Share of the World' (1861), 'The Castleford Case' (1862), and 'The Hidden Sun' (1866). All were set in a wide range of localities, were powerful and dramatic, but lacked organization. 
The handful of stories that Browne wrote for children were remarkable for their strong sense of place and feeling for landscapes she had never seen. 'The Eriksons' (1852), for instance, described Norwegian life in great detail; 'Our Uncle's Story' ('Our Uncle the Traveller's Stories', 1859) was set in the Black Forest, two others in the Lincolnshire fens and in southern Africa respectively. None of her books was reprinted in her lifetime, not even 'Granny's Wonderful Chair' (1857), a collection of seven fairy-tales within a frame story, owing something to Grimm. It is for this book, her only attempt at fantasy, that she is remembered. Although it achieved classic status, it did not become generally known until the late Victorian period, when Frances Hodgson Burnett, who had read the book as a child, retold part of it from memory in 'St Nicholas' in 1887, and the proper text was 'rediscovered'. Frances Browne died from apoplexy at her home, 19 St John's Grove, Richmond, Surrey, on 21 August 1879. She was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 37234


Browne, John (c.1590-1651), gun-founder, was born in Chiddingstone, Kent, the son of Thomas Browne, founder of iron ordnance to Elizabeth I and James I. He joined his father's thriving business, although not apprenticed in iron making, and took over Thomas's patent in 1615. The Brownes cast iron ordnance for both the crown and private merchants, and exported guns when permitted by the crown. 
Browne supplied ordnance to the Dutch until 1619, at which time he employed 200 men at ironworks in Brenchley and Horsmonden, Kent. Half of his production was exported, and from 1618 to 1621 he also cast cannon for Spain. In 1621 his domestic sales were cut sharply by a patent issued to Sir Sackville Crowe to supply ordnance to all English merchants. The rival patentees quarrelled for over a decade, taking the fight to parliament in 1624. Crowe subcontracted half his sales to Browne in 1626 and finally resigned his patent in 1635. From the mid-1620s Browne developed new, lighter, iron cannon. These 'turned' guns (or drakes) weighed a third less than conventional iron cannon and were intended to replace the costlier (but lighter) bronze guns on ships. 
The tempo of Browne's gun-founding business followed the cycles of peace and war from the 1620s to the 1640s. A stagnant market and trade rivalries in the early 1620s were followed by expansion in the later 1620s (between 1625 and 1629 Browne's sales to the crown were over $4300 per annum), and then another slow period in the early 1630s. Renewed efforts to sell ordnance in the Netherlands, from 1629, met with intense competition from Swedish suppliers and resulted in substantial losses, including the $12,000 Browne paid the king for the licence. But within a few years Browne's fortunes were restored: he acquired monopolies of the manufacture and sales of both iron and bronze ordnance, as well as iron pots, kettles, chimney backs, and iron weights 'in the French manner'. The crown renewed purchases of bronze and iron naval guns, and the ordnance market expanded further with the Scottish rebellion of 1639-40 and the outbreak of civil war in 1642. Browne, the king's gun-founder, became parliament's gun-founder. His business grew as parliament gave him control of a number of ironworks, including the former royal ironworks in the Forest of Dean. 
Browne's prosperity and monopolies were only once endangered, in 1645, when an intercepted letter named him as a royalist sympathizer. He and his son John protested their innocence to a parliamentary committee, and nothing could be proved against them. When, in 1651, the Rump ordered guns from a former employee of his, Browne delivered an emotional remonstrance to the House of Commons: the state's security, he claimed, depended upon a single gun-founder; his enterprise employed a 'stock' of $30,000, had overheads of at least $4000 per annum, and had to be kept busy. 
Browne resided in Brenchley from about 1615 to 1635, then in Horsmonden. His stock in trade was valued at $16,000 'c'.1650. Browne married Martha, daughter of Henry Tilden, gentleman, in 1616. They had a daughter and three sons. After Martha's death in 1644 Browne married Elizabeth, daughter of Lancelot Bathurst, alderman of London. His will, made on 15 May 1651, included cash legacies totalling $14,000, and named his son George and his son-in-law Thomas Foley (1617-1677) as executors. He was buried in Horsmonden on 13 June 1651. 
Michael Zell', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37235


Browne, John (c.1608-1691), parliamentary official, was the only child of Thomas Browne (died 1621), citizen and grocer of London, and his wife, Joan, whose surname may have been Wilson. He belonged to a family which originated at Bury St Edmunds. On his father's death in 1621 he was adopted by his uncle John Browne, a merchant tailor, from whom he eventually inherited a substantial fortune. He was admitted a student by the Middle Temple on 28 October 1628 but was not called to the bar. On 13 March 1638 he was appointed clerk of the parliaments. Parliament was then dissolved and he did not enter fully upon his duties as clerk of the House of Lords until the assembly of the Short Parliament in April 1640. 
Browne was a firm adherent of the parliamentarian cause and following the final break between the king and parliament in 1642 he remained at Westminster to serve the House of Lords there. The abolition of the house in March 1649 deprived him of his employment until the Restoration. On 25 June 1650 the House of Commons ordered the records of the House of Lords in Browne's custody to be delivered to Henry Scobell, whom they had appointed their clerk and designated clerk of the parliaments. However, at the first meeting of the convention on 25 April 1660 the House of Lords ordered Scobell to return the records to Browne, who was reinstated as clerk of the parliaments, making a declaration of loyalty to Charles II on 30 May. He served the house for a further thirty years until his death. 
Although not a profound scholar like some of his immediate predecessors Browne consolidated their work during his long term of office by bringing order and regularity to the procedure of the House of Lords. His reputation as a record-keeper has, however, suffered due to the loss through his agency of the Braye and Nalson manuscripts from the archives of the house. Browne was much interested in music and accumulated a large collection of musical manuscripts. He also acquired a considerable amount of property, mainly in Northamptonshire where his principal seat, Eydon, lay and possessed a house in Twickenham in addition to his official residence in the palace of Westminster. 
Browne was twice married. His first wife was Temperance, third daughter of Sir Thomas Crew of Steane, Northamptonshire, speaker of the House of Commons in 1623 and 1625. They were childless and she died on 22 September 1634, aged twenty-five. His second wife, whom he married on 28 January 1636, was Elizabeth, daughter of John Packer of Shillingford, Berkshire, clerk of the privy seal and secretary to George Villiers, first duke of Buckingham; the marriage produced two daughters. Browne was buried at Eydon on 8 June 1691 and his second wife five days later. 
J. C. Sainty', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37236


Brunner, Sir John Tomlinson, first baronet (1842-1919), chemical manufacturer and politician, was born on 8 February 1842 in Everton, Liverpool, the second of the three sons and the fourth of the five children of John Brunner, a Swiss protestant minister, who migrated to Lancashire in 1832 and became a Unitarian and a schoolmaster, and his wife, Margaret Curphey, from the Isle of Man. Brunner's mother died in 1847 and in 1851 his father married Nancy Inman, who had run a successful school near Birkenhead. He was educated at his father's school, St George's House, Everton, until, at the age of fifteen, of his own volition, he decided to pursue a commercial career. The young Brunner had been greatly influenced by both his father's liberal Unitarian teaching and his affectionate stepmother's businesslike principles of household management. 
Brunner spent four years at a Liverpool shipping house and then in 1861 obtained a clerical post at Hutchinson's alkali works in Widnes. During the next twelve years he rose to the position of general manager, in charge of finance and personnel, and during this time established a reputation in the business community for ability and honest dealing. Here, about 1862, he first met and befriended Ludwig Mond ['see under 'Mond family (per. 1867-1973)], born at Kassel in 1839, a chemist educated at Heidelberg. 
In 1864 Brunner married Salome, daughter of James Davies, a Liverpool merchant. She died in 1874 leaving a family of three sons and three daughters. In 1875 he married his children's governess, Jane (died 1910), daughter of William Sanderson Wyman, a Kettering physician. They had three daughters. 
The bond struck between Brunner and Mond, both ambitious men, was to endure. In 1873 they formed a partnership, born of mutual respect and trust, to manufacture soda ash at Winnington in Cheshire. Having little money they required financial backing and Brunner's high business reputation, no less than Mond's scientific eminence, was crucial for their success. After two years of grinding work they produced a small profit, which was to herald the creation of wealth unsurpassed in the British chemical industry of the nineteenth century. A managing partner from the start, Brunner was chairman of Brunner, Mond & Co. from 1891 until 1918. When the company became a founder member of ICI in 1926 the enterprise, which had been launched in 1873 with less than $20,000, had a capitalization of more than $18 million. 
In 1885 Brunner became Liberal MP for Northwich and held the seat, with one short break, until he resigned in 1909. His eldest son, John Fowler Leece Brunner, sat with him in the House of Commons from 1906. In the management of their chemical business Brunner and Mond were ahead of their times in introducing such socially enlightened measures as sickness and injury insurance, apprentice education, shorter working hours, and holidays with pay. As an MP Brunner could now promote his philanthropic principles through parliament. A supporter of home rule, trade unions, and free trade, he was an influential back-bencher and a prominent Liberal advocate, whose wide business experience informed his sometimes humorous but always cogent participations in debate. Before 1914 he earned himself obloquy in some quarters by urging a less provocative British stance towards Germany. He was created baronet in 1895 and sworn of the privy council in 1906. He declined several offers of a peerage. 
Brunner was a generous benefactor. In Cheshire alone he provided schools, guildhalls, and social clubs, and he gave Northwich a free library. He endowed three chairs at Liverpool University and funded many scholarships. His benefactions included gifts to the Landesmuseum in Zurich and a hospital, now the Spital Bulach, for the town of his father's birth in canton Zurich. In the political field he supplied munificent financial support to the Liberal Party and its numerous causes. Dubbed by 'The Times' a 'chemical Croesus', he rejoiced in using his wealth for philanthropic ends. Brunner died on 1 July 1919 at his home, Silverlands, Chertsey, Surrey. 
Francis Dick', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37237


Bryant, Sophie (1850-1922), educationist and suffragist, was born in Sandymount, near Dublin, on 15 February 1850, the third of the six children of the Revd William Alexander Willock, fellow of Trinity College, Dublin, mathematician, and his wife, daughter of J. P. Morris of Skreen Castle. As a child she was mainly taught by her father, but in 1866, three years after the family moved to England, she won a scholarship to Bedford College, London. The Cambridge local examinations had only just been opened to girls, and her performance in mathematics placed her alone in the first class. She married in 1869, but her husband, Dr William Hicks Bryant, died the next year. In 1875 she was appointed to teach mathematics by Frances Buss of the North London Collegiate School. The conventional view that this was not a subject for girls was challenged by Sophie Bryant's success, notably in sending a succession of North Londoners to study mathematics at Girton. She worked at the same time for her own degree and in 1881 took a BSc (London), gaining a first in mental and moral science and a second in mathematics. Three years later she became the first woman to be awarded a DSc. 
George Bernard Shaw, a friend of her youth, remembered Sophie as having a sunny and engaging personality; and this personal warmth, combined with intellect, moral purpose, culture, and commitment to making girls think, launched her as an outstanding teacher, Frances Buss's right hand and natural successor. By the time she herself became headmistress of the North London in 1895 she was well known in wider circles, as a member of the London county council's technical education board and of the Bryce commission on secondary education, and as the author of 'Educational Ends' (1887) and of many articles in journals of education and philosophy. She was an apostle of teacher training, and as the first woman to be elected to the senate of London University promoted the foundation of the London Day Training College and the accompanying chair in education. 
'Ireland was in the heart of her heart', said Sir Michael E. Sadler, and Sophie Bryant always felt a touch of the exile's longing. A Gladstonian Liberal, she backed home rule, pressing that cause among English people. In Ireland she heartened the embryonic movement for the higher education of women by personally securing the involvement in it of the Roman Catholic convent-school nuns. Three of her ten books were about Ireland, and she was awarded in 1904 an honorary DLitt from Dublin University. 
Bryant's feeling for freedom as 'the condition of all development' infused her teaching, her patriotism, and her support for women's suffrage. In Hampstead she was president of the local committee of the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies. She took great delight in physical freedom, was one of the first women to cycle, loved to row, and climbed the Matterhorn twice. She retired in 1918. On holiday in 1922 she disappeared, climbing alone near Chamonix. Her death is recorded as having taken place on 14 August 1922. After a search her body was found on 28 August 1922. 
Sheila Fletcher', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37238


Bubwith, Nicholas (c.1355-1424), administrator and bishop of Bath and Wells, was born at Menthorpe in the East Riding of Yorkshire, and brought up in nearby Bubwith. T. S. Holmes speculated that he was the son of Thomas and Isabel Bubwith and had two brothers, Henry and Thomas. His protege and servant, Thomas Bubwith (son of William), was almost certainly a kinsman. If he was ever at Oxford University, he left no mark. His family evidently had existing contacts with royal administration, and he may well have been a chancery clerk as early as June 1379, enjoying church preferment regularly thereafter, although only on 7 February 1387 was he first called 'king's clerk'. 
Bubwith's career in chancery remained solid if unspectacular throughout the 1390s. During Richard II's two Irish expeditions (in 1394-5 and 1399), he served as attorney in England for many leading participants. Early in 1399 he was promoted master in chancery. The revolution of 1399 affected him not at all. Briefly, in 1402, he became Henry IV's secretary, proof of that king's continuing difficulty in running an effective government rather than of special intimacy. He returned to his chancery career as keeper of the rolls from 24 September 1402. 
In these years Bubwith was frequently a proctor for prelates and religious institutions in parliament. In March 1404 he was nominated to serve on the king's council, again as proof to sceptics of the king's intentions to provide competent government. None the less, he did not attend until his appointment as keeper of the privy seal on 2 March 1405, a post he held until his promotion to the episcopate. In faction-ridden and difficult times for governments Bubwith's value had been his simple ability to keep the machinery of state in motion, and for that he was well rewarded. In March 1403 his numerous benefices were reckoned to be worth over $800 a year. 
Since July 1400 Bubwith had been archdeacon of Dorset, absentee but perhaps not without interest. In 1401-2 he briefly also held the powerful northern archdeaconry of Richmond. On 26 September 1406 he was consecrated at Mortlake after his promotion to the see of London. In a period of fraught domestic politics and Anglo-papal aggravations Bubwith was twice translated in reshuffles in 1407, first to Salisbury (which he never visited as bishop) and then, on 7 October, to Bath and Wells, not unwillingly. The temporalities were restored on 2 December. Still a councillor, he was persuaded on 15 April 1407 to assume the office of treasurer of the realm, and he rode out yet another financial crisis before retiring on 14 July 1408. Even thereafter, when factional purges were regular, Bubwith was always named to the council. In fact he rarely came out of Bath and Wells, where he was proving a conscientious diocesan, predictably of a brisk, administrative turn of mind. 
Such congenial rustication was unexpectedly disturbed by Bubwith's appointment as a principal envoy of Henry V to the Council of Constance on 20 October 1414. While his colleague Robert Hallum of Salisbury was chosen to provide the intellectual lustre, Bubwith was selected for his reliability. Only in spring 1418 could Bubwith return to England and his diocese. His vigour left him in September 1422. His deathbed will of 10 October 1424 reflected him fairly: considerable wealth, portioned out in particular for the completion of ambitious rebuildings of Bubwith church ($300) and Wells Cathedral ($667), roadworks in Somerset ($667), and prayers for his soul, especially by poor priests in Oxford and friars in London and his diocese ($667). It was in character that he referred to detailed oral instructions about all this. He died on 27 October 1424 and was buried in Wells Cathedral, in the chantry chapel which, of course, he had already constructed. 
R. G. Davies', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37239


Buddicom, William Barber (1816-1887), mechanical and civil engineer, was born in Everton on 1 July 1816, the second son of Robert Pedder Buddicom (1781-1846) rector of Everton and later principal of St Bees College, and his wife, Ellin, 'nee' Barber. He was educated at home and in 1831 was apprenticed to Mather, Dixon & Co. of Liverpool. 
In 1836 Buddicom was appointed resident engineer of the Liverpool-Newton Bridge section of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway, with responsibility for its maintenance including the winding engines for the steeply graded tunnel sections at Edge Hill, as well as for the replacement of the original rails which were far too light to carry heavy traffic. At this time he came to the attention of Joseph Locke, who was to play an important part in developing his career. In 1838 Locke invited him to become resident engineer on the Glasgow-Paisley railway. In 1840, on Locke's recommendation, he became locomotive superintendent of the Grand Junction Railway where he introduced to locomotive drivers a system of premiums for economies in fuel and oil, which enabled working expenses to be reduced considerably. He was involved with Alexander Allan, the works manager at Liverpool, in rebuilding existing inside-cylinder locomotives, the crank axles of which frequently fractured, with outside-cylinder drive. This was the origin of the Crewe locomotive type, which was built on a large scale after the transfer of the Grand Junction Railway works to Crewe, in the planning of which Buddicom was deeply involved. 
In 1841 Locke invited Buddicom to France to work on the Paris-Rouen railway, which opened in 1843 and was subsequently extended to Le Havre. There he became manager with William Allcard of the Allcard Buddicom works near Rouen. These works were founded by Buddicom in association with the contractors William Mackenzie and Thomas Brassey, and capitalists involved in the line, to supply locomotives and rolling stock for the railway, and to manage its operation. In 1845 he married Marie Jeanne (died 1892), daughter of Joseph Robert Howman RN, who had been involved from 1832 in the management of the Martin Cie ironworks at Sotteville. They had three daughters and at least three sons. 
During the revolutionary period in France which followed the fall of Louis Philippe in 1848, Buddicom struggled valiantly to keep the railway in operation despite considerable financial problems and physical danger to himself and to his family. In addition to work for the Paris-Rouen-Le Havre lines, Buddicom supplied locomotives and equipment for the Orleans-Tours and Amiens-Boulogne railways. In 1849 a second works was built at Bordeaux-La Bastide to meet the locomotive and rolling-stock requirements of the Midi (Southern) Railway. The Buddicom company was wound up in 1861, after the works had been bought by the Chemin de Fer de l'Ouest on the expiration of existing contracts. 
In 1854 a contractors' consortium, in which the Belgian contractors Parent and Schaecken joined Thomas Brassey and Buddicom, undertook to build the Bellegarde tunnel, 21/2 miles long, for the Lyon-Geneva railway, and in 1860 Buddicom and Brassey undertook the conversion of the Rouen to Dieppe railway from single to double track. In 1863 Parent, Brassey, and Buddicom undertook to build part of the southern railway of Italy and Buddicom joined Brassey and Charles Jones in the construction and supply of motive power and rolling stock for the Maremma Railway in that country. With the deaths of Parent and Brassey in 1870 Buddicom wound up the partnership. 
Buddicom purchased an estate near Mold in 1853 and became a JP and high sheriff of Flintshire (1864). In 1847 he was made a member of the Legion d'honneur by Louis Philippe for his services to France. He was a member of the institutions of civil and mechanical engineers and of the Societe des Ingenieurs Civils de France. Buddicom died at his home, Penbedw, Nannerch, Holywell, Flintshire, on 4 August 1887, and was buried at St Mary's, Nannerch. 


@@@@@


doc= 37240


Bulleid, Oliver Vaughan Snell (1882-1970), mechanical engineer, was born on 19 September 1882 in Invercargill, New Zealand, the eldest in the family of two sons and a daughter of William Bulleid, a businessman from North Tawton, Devon, and his wife, Marian (daughter of Oliver Vaughan Pugh), from Llanfyllin, Montgomeryshire, to which she returned with her children in 1889 on the death of her husband. Bulleid was educated at Spa College, Bridge of Allan, Scotland, and at Accrington Technical School. In 1901 he began a four-year premium apprenticeship for the Great Northern Railway at their Doncaster works, under Henry Alfred Ivatt, locomotive carriage and wagon superintendent, with academic studies at Sheffield and Leeds universities. In 1908 Bulleid married Ivatt's youngest daughter, Marjorie Campbell (1888-1985). They had three sons (one of whom died in 1938 at the age of fifteen) and one daughter. 
In the same year Bulleid became assistant works manager and chief draughtsman at the French Westinghouse Company's brake and signal works in Paris, where he had his first contacts with French railway engineers. In 1910 and 1911 he was mechanical engineer for the Board of Trade at the British pavilions at the Brussels and Turin exhibitions. 
In 1911 Bulleid returned to railway service as personal assistant to H. Nigel Gresley who had just taken over from Ivatt on the Great Northern Railway. This was the beginning of a close association and collaboration lasting for twenty-six years, interrupted only by Bulleid's war service from 1915 to 1919, when he was involved mainly in the operation of military railways serving ammunition dumps near the front in France. He attained the rank of lieutenant-colonel in the Royal Engineers. Shortly after his return Gresley appointed him assistant carriage and wagon superintendent, and they introduced numerous innovations including modernized train interiors; twin articulated sleeping cars; a completely articulated five-coach train set carried on only six bogies, in whose kitchen electric cooking was pioneered. 
In 1923 Gresley became chief mechanical engineer of the London and North Eastern, the second largest group railway, formed from six individual companies, with Bulleid as his personal assistant. Bulleid's innovative outlook on design matters and study of overseas engineering practice complemented Gresley's, and they were both closely involved in the technical work of the International Railway Congress Association. Bulleid was an active participant in developing Gresley's locomotives and rolling-stock and was a pioneer in the application of welding, including its use for boilers. 
In 1937 Bulleid succeeded Richard Maunsell, chief mechanical engineer of the Southern Railway, which had concentrated its capital expenditure on widespread electrification and relatively little on improvement of its steam-operated services. Bulleid strongly advocated the need for more modern and powerful steam locomotives and obtained authority for these. His first heavy main-line passenger and fast freight locomotive, of the 4-6-2 type, was built in 1941. It was of striking 'air-smoothed' outline and embodied many innovations, including welded steel fire-box and totally enclosed internal driving mechanism housed in an oil-bath. It rapidly demonstrated its power and haulage capacity, despite teething troubles, and 140 of these and a slightly smaller variant transformed train operation over most of the steam-worked Southern lines. From 1942 a class of more powerful 0-6-0 freight locomotives also gave excellent results. Bulleid introduced new and more comfortable main-line and electric suburban trains, the latter including a double-deck prototype train for the crowded Kent suburban lines and a revolutionary prototype general-purpose steam locomotive carried on two steam-driven power bogies. 
On retirement in 1949, after the formation of the nationalized British Railways system, Bulleid was invited to join Coras Iompair Eirann, the Irish state transport system, as consulting mechanical engineer and later chief mechanical engineer. He was responsible for introducing modern carriage and wagon designs embodying welded construction, workshop modernization, and, encouraged by the high cost of imported coal, diesel locomotives and railcars. He also produced a prototype steam locomotive burning indigenous peat, which embodied features of the prototype Southern locomotive. He retired again in 1958. 
Bulleid was president of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1956-7, of the Institution of Locomotive Engineers in 1939-45, and of the Institute of Welding in 1949. He was also an honorary member of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. He was appointed CBE in 1949 and received an honorary DSc from Bath University (1967). He combined great innovative ability and enthusiasm with charm, humour, and kindness to his staff, many of whom were devoted to him. He was a devout Roman Catholic. Bulleid died on 25 April 1970 in Malta. 
George W. Carpenter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37241


Bullen, Frank Thomas (1857-1915), merchant seaman and writer, was born at 40 Alfred Road, Paddington, London, on 5 April 1857, the son of Frank Robert Bullen, journeyman stonemason of Crewkerne, Dorset, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Brown. When he was eighteen months old the family broke up, his upbringing passing to a maiden aunt. An elder sister disappeared, and he saw his mother only once again, though he re-established contact with his father later in life. Existence depended on his aunt's ability at home sewing, yet two foundations of his later development were laid down: an awareness of literature and familiarity with religion. A natural pre-school reader, he attended dame- and junior schools and a Sunday school chapel in Paddington, but was otherwise cloistered until, in 1866, aged nine, he was thrown out on the streets following his aunt's death. Thereafter he was self-educated. 
In and out of errand-boy jobs, Bullen now lodged for the cost of his keep or, between jobs, slept rough and lived on scraps. Thus he learned a 'street wisdom' which helped him through similar periods between passages at sea. In January 1869, when not yet twelve, he persuaded an uncle, a ship's master, to take him as cabin-boy. So began the most influential phase of his life, largely in the lower strata of British merchant shipping. By the age of thirteen he had twice been shipwrecked and had survived two epidemics of yellow fever, a hurricane, and two serious illnesses. Most of his sea service was in sail. He served in over twenty-five ships, rising to able seaman and, after passing the examinations for second mate and first mate, in those capacities when such employment offered. 
On 1 September 1879 Bullen married Amelia (died 1945), daughter of Voltaire Lucifer Grimwood, shoemaker. They had two sons, both of whom died young, and three daughters. The couple separated about 1905. In 1882 he became a clerk in the Meteorological Office, augmenting his income by running simultaneously a picture-framing business and haberdashery shop in London. This led to a collapse from overwork and, in the mid-1890s, to voluntary bankruptcy. Although he disliked clerical employment, his writing ability and theoretical understanding of marine science were developing. Following a conversion at sea he became an evangelical Christian, and through spare-time preaching he developed an ability at public speaking. 
The acceptance of Bullen's first article about 1894 led to regular contributions to popular journals, including 'The Spectator' and the 'Cornhill Magazine', with syndication in American journals. Appointed columnist on the 'Morning Leader', and financially stable, he left the Meteorological Office in 1899 and also began accepting engagements as a paid circuit lecturer. His illustrated lectures commanded large audiences. Later he undertook lecture tours in Australia, New Zealand, and North America. His first of thirty-six books, and most widely acclaimed, 'The Cruise of the 'Cachalot'' (1898), established his international reputation. 
All Bullen's writing and lectures derived from his sea experience, keen observation, and a good memory, and were concerned mainly with marine science and sea life. His easy, natural style made his non-fictional writing compulsive reading and he did much to explain the maritime world to the public ashore. Maritime historians rate his revelations of seafaring conditions in the 1870s highly, though his fictional work was not of the same calibre. Born the same year as Joseph Conrad, his reputation became established earlier, though his work did not retain the same general literary esteem. 
Bullen was awarded a civil-list pension in 1912. He died on 26 February 1915 at Reid's Palace Hotel in Funchal during a visit to Madeira and was buried there on the 27th in the English cemetery. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 37242


Bullock, George (1784/5-1818), sculptor and cabinet-maker, was the fourth son of James Bullock and his second wife, Sibylla, of Bristol, the owners of a travelling waxworks. His elder brother, William Bullock, became an artist, naturalist, explorer, and museum proprietor; a sister, Mary Ann, was also born in 1784/5. Little is known of Bullock's early life, although the family appears to have spent time on the English south coast, at Plymouth and Portsea before his birth. By March 1797 'Mrs Bullock and Son' were conducting modelling and drawing lessons at their 'Modelling and Statuary Warehouse' at 29 Bull Street, Birmingham. 
On 16 September 1799 Bullock advertised as a 'modeller in rice paste' at 12 Ann Street, Birmingham. He remained in Birmingham until 1801. His brother William, who had started a 'cabinet of curiosities' in Birmingham in 1800, moved to Liverpool in 1801 and opened a museum. George moved to Liverpool and produced his first documented work, a wax portrait relief of Henry Blundell of Ince, the connoisseur and sculpture collector. This is signed 'G. Bullock 1801'. Bullock worked as a sculptor, showing six busts at the Royal Academy in London in 1804. In 1804-5 he was in partnership with William Stoakes as general furnishers and marble workers and in 1809-10 with the architect J. M. Gandy as 'architects, modellers, sculptors, marble masons, cabinet-makers and upholsterers' (Wainwright, 'George Bullock', 144). On 11 May 1805 Bullock married, at St Thomas's Church, Liverpool, Margaret Casson ('b'. 1783/4), who was from that city. 
By 1806 Bullock had purchased 'some marble quarries containing two beds of rocks, the one resembling, in colour and effect, the Oriental porphyry, and the other the 'verd antique''. This was on the Isle of Anglesey and Bullock, using the ancient Welsh name as a clever marketing ploy, began to sell his 'Mona marble'. At this time of war continental marbles were hard to obtain and his chimney pieces and marble tops for furniture sold very well. Capitalizing on this patriotic British theme he soon manufactured furniture made of native woods and decorated with elaborate brass inlay based upon native plants, depicting hops, for instance, instead of grapes. He provided the furniture and marble fittings for a number of houses, including Cholmondeley Castle in Cheshire, Storrs Hall in Westmorland, and Hafod in Wales. 
In 1809 William Bullock moved to London and in 1812 George sold up and joined him at the Egyptian Hall in Piccadilly. In 1813 he formed a partnership with Charles Fraser, a colonel in the East India Company's service, as 'upholder, cabinet-maker and marble mason' (Levy, 146). This probably brought the injection of capital needed to establish extensive cabinet-making and marble-working workshops. They leased a grand house at 4 Tenterden Street, just off Hanover Square, the garden of which ran north and contained the workshops which fronted on to Oxford Street. 
The furniture which Bullock manufactured (and unusually for a cabinet-maker also largely designed) was stylistically in advance of any then being made. His firm expanded, supplying Sir Walter Scott, Sir Geoffrey Webster, the dukes of Atholl and Buccleuch, and the marquess of Abercorn. His most famous commission was to supply all the furniture and furnishings for the house constructed for Napoleon on St Helena. 
Strikingly handsome with an artistic and very engaging personality, Bullock entertained fashionable London at Tenterden Street. He died at home in Tenterden Street on 1 May 1818, and was buried at St George's, Hanover Square. 
Clive Wainwright', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37243


Burdett, Peter Perez (1734/5-1793), cartographer and draughtsman, was probably born in Eastwood, Essex, the only son of William and Elizabeth Burdett. His Christian names derive from his maternal grandfather, Peter Perez, vicar of Eastwood (1697-1748), from whom he inherited a small estate. 
Of Burdett's first twenty-five years there is little record. By the early 1760s he lived in Derby and had launched a career as a cartographer. His map of Derbyshire at a scale of one inch to a mile, begun in 1763 and published in 1767, won him the $100 premium offered by the Society of Arts. His many talents in the arts and sciences brought him a wide circle of acquaintances in Derbyshire, especially the painter Joseph Wright, in several of whose paintings he appears, notably in 'A Philosopher Giving a Lecture on the Orrery' (1766) where Burdett is seen sketching. In 1765 Wright painted a fine portrait of Burdett and his first wife, Hannah, which hangs in the Narodni Galerie, Prague. Wright, who lent him money that he never repaid, continued to consult him on technical matters after he left Derby; Burdett in turn seems to have procured purchasers for some of Wright's pictures, including Washington Shirley, fifth Earl Ferrers, and Catherine the Great. 
In 1768 Burdett moved to Liverpool and launched, in his impetuous way, several cartographic and artistic projects. His experiments with printmaking included aquatint, for which his claims to be the inventor are strong: he certainly published, in 1771, the first aquatint in England after a painting by his friend John Hamilton Mortimer, and, ever short of money and frequently in debt, sold the process to Paul Sandby, to whom it is usually credited, for $40. His interest in transferring aquatinted designs to pottery led him in 1771 to approach Josiah Wedgwood, who after considerable interest finally lost patience with the headstrong Burdett, who had hopes of years of lucrative work from his process. Frederick the Great of Prussia and Benjamin Franklin, with whom he corresponded over several years, were equally discouraging; Franklin remarked that the colonies were not yet ready for Burdett. A fine draughtsman and noted expert in perspective, he was the first president of the Liverpool Society of Arts and exhibited in London at the Society of Artists. His ambitious but financially unprofitable venture with George Perry, ironmaster for the Coalbrookdale Company, to publish views of Liverpool by Michael Angelo Rooker, a map (1769), and a history of the town was completed after Burdett withdrew to chase more promising interests, but his drawings of public buildings, engraved by Edward Rooker, appeared in the history, published in 1773. 
Burdett's plan to survey Lancashire failed for lack of sufficient subscribers. His map of Cheshire, begun in 1774, must have been completed by assistants, for early in 1775 he entered the service of the margrave of Baden, leaving a wife, whose subsequent fate is unknown, with his considerable debts. He was engaged to conduct the official survey of the margravate, reaching the rank of major. From the school of surveyors and mathematicians he founded grew the Karlsruhe Technical School. On 11 June 1787 Burdett married Friedericke Kottewski. Their daughter Anne married Count Friedrich Nostitz. Burdett died in Karlsruhe on 9 September 1793. 
Paul Laxton', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37244


Burgess, Guy Francis de Moncy (1911-1963), spy, was born on 16 April 1911 at 2 Albemarle Villas, Devonport, the elder son of Commander Malcolm Kingsford de Moncy Burgess RN and his wife, Evelyn Mary, daughter of William Gillman, gentleman. Burgess's father died in 1924 and his mother subsequently married John Retallack Bassett, a retired lieutenant-colonel. Following a period at Eton College Burgess spent two years at the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth, but poor eyesight ended his naval prospects and he returned to Eton. He won an open scholarship to read modern history at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1930, gained a first in part one of the history tripos (1932) and an aegrotat in part two (1933), and held a two-year postgraduate teaching fellowship. He became a member of the Apostles, home to the intellectual elite of the arts and sciences, and he was already well known for his drinking and homosexuality. His conversion to communism and his recruitment into Soviet intelligence remain unclear, but he joined the party while at university. 
Marxism swept Cambridge in the autumn of 1933, and Maurice Dobb, a don and a communist and also a member of the Apostles, introduced Burgess to Kim Philby, thus founding the Cambridge network of Soviet agents. In May 1934 Burgess met Arnold Deutsch, a Comintern officer and recruiter for Soviet intelligence, and began learning how to operate as a secret agent. That summer he visited Moscow. Philby asked Burgess to suggest other recruits, and he suggested Anthony Blunt and Donald Maclean; Blunt and Burgess later recommended John Cairncross to the NKVD, the Soviet intelligence service. Burgess became a key member of the Cambridge network, including Kim Philby, Anthony Blunt, Donald Maclean, and John Cairncross, who secretly worked for the downfall of capitalism and the triumph of communism. How many people Burgess recruited or attempted to recruit is not known but Soviet intelligence valued him for his ability to meet useful people. In 1935-6 he was secretary to Captain Jack Macnamara, a Conservative MP, having joined the Anglo-German Fellowship to mask his allegiance to communism. 
In October 1936 Burgess accepted a prestigious post in the BBC's talks department, thereby gaining access to the British establishment. In March 1938 he was a courier between Chamberlain and Daladier, and in September he urged Churchill to repeat his warning against Hitler to Stalin; he received a signed copy of Churchill's 'Arms and the Covenant' (1938). He invited friends such as Blunt, Roger Fulford, Lord Elton, E. H. Carr, David Footman, and John Hilton to broadcast. The BBC's internal hierarchy, together with effective political control from the Foreign Office, severely reduced Burgess's opportunities to influence opinion, although he enabled Ernst Henri, a Comintern agent, to boast about the Soviet intelligence service. 
In December 1938 Burgess joined the British secret service. He was appointed to section D of MI6, dedicated to sabotage and subversion. He arranged pro-British and anti-Nazi broadcasts to Europe but his greatest achievement was to secure Philby's entry into MI6. In 1940 Burgess was charged for driving a War Office car while drunk, but the charge was dismissed, as he was carrying out confidential duties under the strain of working up to fourteen hours a day. He rejoined the BBC in 1941 and spent the next three years as a producer in the talks department of the Home Service at Broadcasting House. 
On 4 June 1944 Burgess joined the Foreign Office news department. In December 1946 he became private secretary to Hector McNeil, then minister of state at the Foreign Office. Excitedly he told his Soviet controller about his rapid and sensational advance to the centre of British foreign and defence policy-making. Regarded as an expert on communism and with experience in propaganda, he was appointed to the information research department (IRD), a secret unit created to combat Soviet propaganda. Visiting European embassies to introduce IRD he was dangerously indiscreet and was peremptorily moved to the Far East department in November 1948. His arguments for recognizing communist China were possibly influential but many officials supported recognition to advance British strategic and economic interests. 
In August 1950 Burgess was appointed second secretary to the Washington embassy. He shared accommodation with Philby and gained a reputation for dissolute and insulting behaviour. In the summer of 1951 he was sent home in disgrace, and was about to be discharged from the Foreign Office when he disappeared with Maclean on 25 May 1951, 'en route' to Moscow. In a final theatrical flourish he had posed as Roger Styles to Maclean's wife, naughtily challenging MI5 officers to know two Agatha Christie novels: 'The Mysterious Affair at Styles' (1921) and 'The Murder of Roger Ackroyd' (1926). On 13 February 1956, at a press conference, Burgess and Maclean announced that they had left Britain to work for peace in the Soviet Union. Burgess contacted Tom Driberg, the Labour MP, to collaborate on a book that was the KGB's first attempt to use British defectors as vehicles for Soviet propaganda and psychological warfare. Philby became the KGB's preferred spokesman. Burgess worked in the Foreign Languages Publishing House while using the name Jim Andreyvich Fraser. Isolated in Moscow, where homosexuality was not officially tolerated, he turned to drink. He died from a heart attack in the Botin Hospital, Moscow, on 30 August 1963. His ashes were later interred in the churchyard at West Meon, Hampshire. 
Burgess's defection had a devastating impact during the Korean War. Whitehall floundered in this unpleasant scandal of espionage, sex, and conspiracy. An anonymous series of articles in 'The People' in 1957 depicted Burgess's life as a narrative of 'drunkenness, in addition to drugs, homosexuality and loose-living' (Mort, 112). The revelation that the author was Goronwy Rees (1909-1979), fellow of All Souls and principal of the University College of Wales at Aberystwyth (and himself a member of the Wolfenden committee on homosexual offences), was another blow to the establishment. The revelations (like those of W. J. Vassall later) did much to prolong and accentuate repressive attitudes to homosexuality. 
It was feared that Burgess and Maclean had passed over military secrets causing American casualties. This was not the case, but the myth was born. The defection struck at the heart of the 'special relationship' with America. US intelligence believed that MI5 and MI6 were incompetent and untrustworthy. Continued intelligence co-operation cost Philby's recall to London. The defection also delayed the renewal of atomic co-operation until 1954. The government tried to limit the damage by extending secrecy but this eroded trust within the British polity. One positive outcome was to reduce Foreign Office complacency about security, and positive vetting was introduced. Despite much fevered speculation about the damage that Burgess had caused there is too little evidence on the effects of his espionage and his influence upon international politics for a credible assessment to be feasible. 
Guy Burgess achieved notoriety in British post-war history because he was a gifted son of the establishment who betrayed the realm by becoming a Soviet agent. His image has been etched onto Britain's collective memory by the ebb and flow of cold-war international politics and propaganda. Western perceptions of him underline his treachery and point to the damage that his espionage and subversion inflicted upon western interests and values. Soviet perceptions of him underline his loyalty to the communist revolution and point to his achievements in serving Soviet interests and values. History's final verdict must find some adjustment between these two dichotomous views, recognizing that the labyrinthine world of intelligence may never yield all its secrets. Burgess was intellectually brilliant but treacherous, ideologically committed but undisciplined; an ambitious extrovert but destructive when drunk, he remains a peculiarly English conundrum. His unhappy sojourn in Moscow and his eagerness to talk to visitors from London were memorably portrayed in Alan Bennett's 1983 BBC television play 'An Englishman Abroad'. 


@@@@@


doc= 37245


Burgh, Ulick John de, first marquess of Clanricarde (1802-1874), politician, was born on 20 December 1802 in Belmont, Hampshire, the only son and second child in the family of one son and two daughters of John Thomas de Burgh (1744-1808), thirteenth earl of Clanricarde, army officer, and his wife Elizabeth (1763/4-1854), daughter of Sir Thomas Burke, bt, of Marble Hill, co. Galway. The family had been settled in the west of Ireland from the early thirteenth century and on the death of his father in 1808 Ulick John de Burgh inherited, in addition to the earldom, 56,000 acres in co. Galway. In 1825 he married Harriet (1804-1876), the gifted daughter of George Canning (1770-1827), foreign secretary and later prime minister. They had two sons and five daughters. Macaulay wrote of her: 'She is very beautiful, and very like her father... she showed much cleverness and information, but, I thought, a little more of political animosity than is quite becoming in a pretty woman' (GEC, 'Peerage', 3.238). After his marriage it was rumoured he had been involved in a gambling scandal, but his father-in-law stood by him and it was largely through him that Burgh was created a marquess in the peerage of Ireland in 1825 and Baron Somerhill in the peerage of the United Kingdom in 1826. 
Clanricarde was appointed under-secretary of state for foreign affairs in 1826, a post he resigned after Canning's death in 1827. A few years later he was accused of having speculated on the Paris bourse, using official information. This he vehemently denied. A Canningite, he became a whig. In 1830 he was appointed captain of the yeomen of the guard and in 1831 knight of St Patrick. In 1834 he resigned his office because he felt slighted by the ministry (another Irish peer, the second Marquess Conyngham, having been appointed postmaster-general). In 1838 he was appointed ambassador to St Petersburg. He served there until 1841, and, moving easily in Russian society, was a shrewd commentator on Russian social conditions, personalities, and policy. 
From 1846 until 1852 Clanricarde was in Lord John Russell's cabinet as postmaster-general. He was an administrative reformer, working cordially with Rowland Hill, who was much pleased with 'his businesslike, straight-forward manner' and his courageous willingness to follow 'a novel and decided course of action'. As a member of the cabinet which had to cope with the Irish famine, Clanricarde pressed hard for remedial measures, pointing out that from time to time 'an adherence to sound principle will cause an immediate sacrifice'. 
Clanricarde was not included in Aberdeen's coalition cabinet in 1852. He took a strongly anti-Russian line in 1854, encouraging the government to war. In 1855 his name was opprobriously mentioned in the Irish case of 'Handcock v. Delacour', which attracted much attention. It was alleged that John Delacour ('b'. 1841), a minor, was Clanricarde's illegitimate son from a liaison with Catherine Josephine Handcock, the wife of William Henry Handcock, an Irish landowner, and that Clanricarde had schemed that Handcock's property should pass to Delacour. The case ended in a compromise. Clanricarde published long statements in which he denied the allegations and explained that he had become involved with the Handcock family's legal arrangements purely out of a good-natured wish to be of assistance. Nevertheless when Palmerston at the close of 1857 invited Clanricarde to join his cabinet, a large section of public opinion professed to be shocked. 'Punch' published two harsh cartoons and, when at the end of February 1858 the government was defeated, 'The Times', with possibly a touch of exaggeration, declared that Clanricarde had been able by his 'mere presence' in the cabinet to destroy an exceptionally strong administration. He was the model for Trollope's Lord Brittleback. 
For about forty years Clanricarde spoke frequently in the House of Lords on a wide range of subjects. Although it was said that his main contribution to debate was his sonorous 'hear, hear', his speeches, reflecting the outlook of a liberal-minded whig, were usually sensible and to the point. He seems to have possessed an ingenuous self-assurance which could get him into difficulties and arouse antagonism. In 1847 he was described as 'a tall, thin, aristocratic man, bald and bland, wearing... tight pantaloons, striped silk socks, and pumps' (GEC, 'Peerage'). He died at his home, 17 Stratton Street, Piccadilly, London, on 10 April 1874 and was succeeded in the marquessate by his second son, Hubert George de Burgh Canning. Despite the allegations made in the court proceedings of 1855, John Delacour was unlikely to have been the son of Clanricarde, who was in St Petersburg during the relevant period; Clanricarde did, however, have 'various mistresses' and 'an apparently unlimited number of illegitimate children', as his heir complained (second marquess of Clanricarde to Captain McDonagh, 10 Nov 1876, Roche, 18). 
Clanricarde's first son, 


@@@@@


doc= 37246


Burlamachi, Philip (d. 1644), financier, was born in Sedan, France, of Italian stock. Before settling in London around 1605 he had been active in the Netherlands. He became an English denizen in 1614, and was naturalized by statute in 1624. His marriage to Elizabeth Calandrini cemented important business ties with her family, and one of her brothers, Philip Calandrini, was to be particularly closely associated with him, acting frequently as his agent in Amsterdam in a variety of business, including the pawning of jewels for Charles I in 1625. 
Burlamachi's prime corresponds with the period of more active English involvement in continental affairs from about 1618 to 1630. Both the scale of his operations and the degree of his specialization in financial business made him a unique figure in early Stuart England, though he did have a few other economic irons in the fire: among these were a share in the tobacco monopoly, the export of iron ordnance in the 1620s, and huge purchases of East India Company pepper in 1623 and 1628. In 1619, together with other merchants of alien extraction, he was fined in Star Chamber for illegally exporting gold. Both the smallness of his fine of $2000 and the fact that it was later remitted in return for a loan of $10,000 to James I provide early testimony of his value to the government. Beginning with a modest advance of $6000 to James I in 1613, his formal loans culminated in his truly massive advances of the war years 1624-9, amounting to more than $127,000, much of it to finance English and foreign military operations; and this sum does not include the $55,000 which he and the Russia Company magnate Sir Ralph Freeman advanced in 1624. His last recorded loan was $5000 in July 1631. 
Impressive though the scale of such formal loans was, they were not the most substantial of Burlamachi's financial services. Hardly less important was his willingness to lend his credit to the government by standing security for its borrowings. Here, his skill in playing the bill market was often of crucial importance, as it was in providing funds abroad for such purposes as the payment of English ambassadors, the purchase of art treasures for the Royal Collection, and, above all, the transmission of subsidies for Charles I's foreign allies. Most spectacular of all were Burlamachi's services as a sort of unofficial paymaster, notably of English and English-financed expeditions abroad, which provided the occasion for a multitude of ways and means advances in anticipation of slowly and irregularly mobilized government funds. His occasional demands for 'surplusage' respecting the extent to which his disbursements exceeded his receipts on particular accounts are eloquent illustrations of the scale of these activities: for example, $26,000 for operations in the Palatinate in 1624, and $30,000 on another account in 1630. Both sums were repaid, but by 1631 a further 'surplusage' of $12,000 had arisen on the latter account. 
By this time the coming of peace had ended Burlamachi's usefulness to the government, but not his own indebtedness, notably for recurring interest, reckoned by him at $14,763 in 1632. His bankruptcy in 1633 was the result of his inability to meet such charges due to the failure of the undertaking from the lord treasurer, Richard Weston, first earl of Portland, to keep up payments due to him. In the meantime he was accorded royal protection from his creditors and the crown's principal debt to him was discharged in 1637. Interest and miscellaneous expenses were, however, quite a different matter, and the fact that it had been in the nature of his employment to disburse vast and unspecified amounts, as he put it, 'upon the simple word of the treasurer', who had died in 1635, did not help matters. He was ultimately allowed $49,752 of such 'pretences', but as an 'ex gratia' payment which did not take in further claims of $46,803. It is perhaps ironic that a financier whose fortunes had foundered on the unreliability of the royal credit should have busied himself three years after his bankruptcy with devising a project for a national bank, the impracticability of which his own fate had spectacularly demonstrated. In 1640 he was given the minor office of master of the posts, but did not retain it beyond 1641, at the end of which year he suffered a short spell of prison for alleged defiance of a parliamentary order. He died in penury in 1644, and it was said that his daughters had to enter into service as paid gentlewomen in order to live. 
Robert Ashton', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37247


Burnett, Frances Eliza Hodgson (1849-1924), children's writer and novelist, was born on 24 November 1849 in Cheetham Hill, Manchester, the third child and eldest daughter in the family of two sons and three daughters of Edwin Hodgson (1816-1854) and his wife, Eliza, 'nee' Boond (1815-1870). Edwin Hodgson, wholesaler of decorative ironmongery, died aged thirty-eight. His widow struggled to run the business herself until her brother, who had established a dry-goods store in Knoxville, Tennessee, USA, persuaded her in 1865 to emigrate with the children. The early years in Tennessee were hard and the family was frequently hungry, but in 1868 Frances, who from her earliest childhood had been a compulsive inventor of romances, sold her first two stories to 'Godey's Lady's Book', raising the money for paper and postage by selling wild grapes. Until her marriage she supported the family by a constant stream of magazine stories, her only object, as she said herself, being remuneration. 
On 19 September 1873 Frances Hodgson married an ophthalmologist, Swan Moses Burnett ('c'.1847-1906), the son of John Burnett, a Tennessee physician, and his wife, Lydia Peck. They lived first in Knoxville, and moved to Washington, DC, in 1877. There were two sons, Lionel ('b'. 1874) and Vivian ('b'. 1876). Mrs Burnett took her marital duties lightly, and though she did not formally end the marriage until 1898, from early days she made a practice of absenting herself from her family, often for months on end, travelling in North America and Europe, and spending long periods in England, where she moved in high society and had many literary friends, Henry James and Israel Zangwill among them. In spite of frequent and prolonged separation from them, she was devoted to her sons and they to her, and the death of Lionel, from tuberculosis, in 1890 was a shattering blow. Early in 1900 in Genoa, Italy, she married Stephen Townesend (1859-1914), a young physician with stage aspirations whom she had tried to help, and who in his turn assisted her in her business affairs. Ten years younger than his wife, he was the youngest son of the Revd George Fyler Townesend and grandson of the Revd George Townsend (1788-1857), a redoubtable cleric who had travelled to Italy in 1850 to try to convert the pope. They were divorced in the following year, and she continued to publish under her first married name. 
Frances Hodgson Burnett had early had to turn herself into 'a pen-driving machine' (Burnett, 75) to support the ever-increasing opulence of her lifestyle, and her adult fiction (she wrote more than twenty novels and innumerable short stories) for the most part is facile and superficial. She was never to equal her first novel, 'That Lass o' Lowrie's' (1877), a robust account of a Lancashire mining community in which she had taken great care with background and dialect, though 'Through One Administration' (1883), a study of a failed marriage against a turbulent background of Washington political life, was noteworthy, and the much shorter 'The Making of a Marchioness' (1901) is an effective indictment of Edwardian society. She adapted many of her novels, including the first, for the stage, with mixed success. 
Frances Hodgson Burnett's first children's book, 'Little Lord Fauntleroy', appeared in 1886. This account of how a sturdy and friendly young American wins the heart of the irascible and hostile earl of Dorincourt, the grandfather who has hitherto refused to see him, acquired a largely undeserved reputation for sentimentality. This was in part due to Reginald Birch's illustrations which kept the boy always in black velvet and lace, even when he was riding his pony, and in part to the intense relationship between mother and son; Frances Hodgson Burnett here had in mind herself and her son Vivian, upon whom Fauntleroy himself was modelled. It was a huge success, stage and film versions were made of it, and it led to thousands of unwilling boys being dressed in black velvet suits. When E. V. Seebohm presented it as a play in London in 1888 without her permission, she challenged him in the courts and succeeded in getting the current copyright laws changed. 
'She wanted to be in the land of make-believe as often and as long as possible' (Burnett, 331), her son Vivian said of her. In her books this is to be found at its most extreme in 'Sara Crewe' (1888) -- expanded, following the stage version, as 'The Little Princess' (1905) -- a Cinderella story where a bullied little drudge at a girls' school is restored to riches and esteem and the tyrannical headmistress humiliated. Her finest book was undoubtedly 'The Secret Garden' (1911), which achieved classic status. This describes how two disagreeable and unloved children are transformed by the discovery of a hidden garden which they appropriate and which they watch springing into life as the year advances. The garden depicted with such passionate intensity is based partly on an abandoned one she had seen near her Manchester home when she was a child, and partly on the rose garden at Maytham Hall, Rolvenden, near Tenterden, Kent, a house she rented for many years and last visited in 1907. 
Frances Hodgson Burnett had to the last a youthful enthusiasm, an erect carriage, and a firm step. Stocky in childhood, she became stout in middle age and the auburn of her hair was maintained by henna. She always loved clothes and dressing-up, particularly in 'clinging, trailing chiffon things with 'miles' of lace on them' (Thwaite, 212). She took American citizenship in 1905. A libel action brought by her nephew's wife brought her much unpleasant notoriety in 1918. 'She has shattered the mirrors which might betray her to herself' was one of the milder comments. The last years of her life were divided between Bermuda and Plandome, Long Island, New York, USA, where she built herself an Italian-style villa and where she died on 29 October 1924. She was buried at God's Acre, Roslyn, Long Island, and a memorial to her was placed in Central Park, New York city, consisting of statues of a boy and girl. 


@@@@@


doc= 37248


Burrows, Ronald Montagu (1867-1920), classical scholar and university principal, was born in Rugby, Warwickshire, on 16 August 1867, the youngest of the three sons of the Revd Leonard Francis Burrows, a master at Rugby School and later rector of Limington, Somerset, and his wife, Mary Vicars (died 1886). He was educated at Charterhouse School and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he held a scholarship and took firsts in classical honour moderations (1888) and 'literae humaniores' (1890). From 1891 to 1897 he was assistant to the professor of Greek at Glasgow University. In 1892 he married Una Geraldine, daughter of Charles John Ridgeway, later bishop of Chichester. They had no children. 
In 1898 Burrows was appointed professor of Greek at University College, Cardiff, moving to Manchester University as Hulme professor of Greek in 1908. In 1907 he published 'The Discoveries in Crete and their Bearing on the History of Ancient Civilization', which was well received by contemporary scholars, including Arthur Evans. A Christian socialist (and lifelong speculator on the stock exchange), Burrows, during his travels and archaeological expeditions, acquired a fascination for the history and politics of modern Greece. He became an Oxford DLitt in 1910. 
Like many of his contemporaries Burrows was bowled over by the charismatic personality of Eleutherios Venizelos, the Greek politician. His enthusiastic championing of the Greek, and more particularly the Venizelist, cause found its fullest expression during his energetic and popular principalship of King's College, London, between 1913 and 1920. A founder in 1913 of the Anglo-Hellenic League, he wrote numerous articles supporting Greek territorial claims and upholding Venizelos in his feud with King Constantine I. With R. W. Seton-Watson, a colleague at King's, Burrows formulated in the autumn of 1915 the unsuccessful scheme, which was taken up by the Foreign Office, to lure Greece into the First World War on the side of the entente through the offer of Cyprus. So closely did Burrows identify with Venizelos that the Greek statesman invited him in 1916 to act as the 'semi-official' representative in London of his breakaway provisional government in Salonika. 
With Seton-Watson, Burrows was instrumental in the establishment in 1915 of the School of Slavonic Studies (subsequently the School of Slavonic and East European Studies of the University of London). This became a powerhouse of academic propaganda in favour of self-determination for the peoples of eastern Europe. Thomas Garrigue Masaryk (subsequently president of Czechoslovakia) was appointed a professor in the school and, in October 1915, delivered a highly influential lecture entitled 'The problem of small nations in the European crisis'. 
Besides his pioneering support for Russian and east European studies, Burrows was also responsible for the establishment of the Cervantes chair of Spanish and the Camoens chair of Portuguese. His most cherished foundation, however, was the Koraes chair of modern Greek and Byzantine history, language, and literature which was endowed by well-to-do Anglo-Greeks, by Venizelos himself, and by the Greek government. Burrows lived long enough to secure the appointment of Arnold Toynbee to the chair in 1919. But his death in the principal's residence at King's College, Strand, London, on 14 May 1920, at the early age of fifty-two, spared him the furious controversy that arose when the donors sought Toynbee's removal on political grounds. 
A romantic philhellene to the end, in a letter written on his deathbed Burrows expressed his 'boundless faith' in Venizelos ('my Pericles') and his love for Hellas. Burrows was one of the progenitors of 'area studies' in Britain. His enthusiastic and entrepreneurial promotion of these studies, however, was combined with a political naivety that blinded him to the problems that can arise from reliance on external sources of funding in politically charged fields of study. 
Richard Clogg', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37249


Buss, Frances Mary (1827-1894), headmistress, was born in London on 16 August 1827, the eldest child of Robert William Buss (1804-1875), a painter and etcher, and his wife, Frances Fleetwood (died 'c'.1860). Frances and her four brothers were the only survivors to adulthood among their ten children. She later described how her education began: her grandparents, whom she was visiting in Aldersgate, sent her to a private school housed in the most rudimentary accommodation 'to get me out of the way' (Ridley, 3). She was next sent to a similar school in Kentish Town kept by a Miss Cook, which she remembered as simply consisting of children learning Murray's 'Grammar'. At the age of ten she proceeded to a more advanced school in Hampstead presided over by a Miss Wyand. By the age of fourteen she herself was teaching there and by sixteen was sometimes left in sole charge of the school. Her father was not a particularly successful artist nor, it appears, a good manager of money. To help the family finances her mother, who was the strongest influence on her early life, set up a private school in Clarence Road, Kentish Town, in 1845. 
Frances Buss assisted with the teaching in her mother's school, which was based on the ideas of Pestalozzi, while attending during 1848-9 evening lectures at the newly opened Queen's College in Harley Street, London. She was taught by F. D. Maurice, Charles Kingsley, and R. C. Trench, and gained certificates in French, German, and geography. To Dorothea Beale, a contemporary at Queen's, she described the education gained there as opening 'a new life to me, I mean intellectually' (Buss to Beale, 13 Jan 1889, North London Collegiate School archives). She was strongly influenced by the ideas and concerns of Revd David Laing (1800-1860), one of the founders of the college and secretary from 1843 of the Governesses' Benevolent Institution. The poverty of many governesses made him aware of the plight of middle-class women forced onto the labour market, and he aimed to provide education and certification to enable such women to qualify as teachers. Frances Buss's own experience of having to earn a living as a teacher continuously from her teens to help support her family (two of her younger brothers, Alfred Joseph Buss and Septimus Buss, were enabled to attend King's College, London, and enter the church) lent a particular immediacy to Laing's objectives. 
The Busses' school, renamed the North London Collegiate School for Ladies, moved to 46 Camden Street, with Frances Buss as its head, on 4 April 1850. She was to be head of the school, which started with thirty-five pupils, for over forty years. It was started under the auspices of the clergy of St Pancras. Laing, as vicar of Holy Trinity, Haverstock Hill, taught divinity there and was a close adviser until his death. Buss's first speech to parents paid tribute to Queen's College, which was 'in all respects equivalent to a university course for gentlemen' (North London Collegiate School archives), and indicated her intention to prepare her students for further study there. She presented the school as being principally concerned with the education of girls intending to become governesses. Her purpose was not so much inspired by an egalitarian ideology (indeed, she still saw the chief role of women as that of homemaker) but a pragmatic one, and fits with much of the language of the women's movement at this time. Her aim was to provide 'a useful education' based on 'an authorised system', justifying her new school in terms of economic necessity, 'so as to fit them for the important position in society they will be called upon to follow' (ibid.). The first prospectus stressed that the school was for 'daughters of limited means, clerks and private offices and persons engaged in trade and other pursuits'. She insisted that a sound education was as essential for the daughters from such families as it was for the sons. Unlike Miss Beale, the contemporary headmistress with whom she was often associated, she did not exclude tradesmen's daughters. At governors' meetings she regularly delighted in demonstrating the wide range of social backgrounds from which her students were drawn. Her denominational policy was similarly inclusive: non-Anglicans were admitted, and a 'conscience clause' allowed parents to withdraw their children from the religious instruction. 
By 1865 the school had 200 day girls (there were a few boarders), but was still run as a private, family concern, R. W. Buss and Septimus Buss teaching art and scripture respectively. A feature of North London Collegiate was the organization of lectures outside the ordinary curriculum, notably a series on political economy by Professor W. B. Hodgson, a close associate. In July 1870 Frances Buss handed over the school to trustees, and in the following year a second school, the Camden School, was established in Kentish Town with lower fees to cater especially for girls from lower-middle-class families. Making the case for an additional school, she argued that the 'increasing number of girls who, as they grow up, must become breadwinners as certainly as boys, makes their claim to education more pressing than ever' (D. Burchell, 'Miss Buss' Second School', 1971, 20). 
Miss Buss's efforts to establish publicly accountable girls' schools were hampered by lack of funds. She raised only $47 by an appeal, at a time when boys' schools received lavish support. Her campaign to secure an endowment for the two schools was assisted by the endowed schools commissioners, who sympathized with her object, and they were able to obtain funds from the Platt charity belonging to the Brewers' Company. In 1875 a scheme to administer the schools under the 'Endowed Schools Act' was laid down by the charity commissioners, and in the following year a successful inspection was carried out by London University. As the first public day school for girls, the North London Collegiate School was a model for the schools founded by the Girls' Public Day School Company, established in 1872, and new headmistresses at the company's schools were sent to observe its methods. 
Miss Buss quickly gained a reputation as one of the leading authorities on girls' education. On 30 November 1865, on the same day as Emily Davies, she gave evidence to the schools inquiry commission (the Taunton commission) both about her own school and the two wider educational missions for which she is best remembered: the importance of the training and professional standing of teachers, and the value of competitive, external examinations for girls. From the outset she was concerned about the training of her staff, sending them to the Home and Colonial Institute, where her mother had attended a training course, for further instruction. She bemoaned the lack of properly trained teachers, calling for every teacher to be taught the art of teaching and the 'power of imparting knowledge'. In 1869 she became the first woman fellow of the College of Preceptors, helping to establish the college's professorship of the science and art of education in 1872. Her election to a fellowship of the college in 1873 was the only public recognition she ever received. She was also a member of the council of the Teachers' Training and Registration Society. Rather than establish a training department attached to her school, as Miss Beale had done at Cheltenham, Miss Buss promoted separate training institutions, including the Maria Grey Training College and the Cambridge Training College. At her own school she made a policy of appointing only staff trained in the theory and practice of education, using staff meetings as opportunities for further training. The minutes for 6 June 1887 record that 'a lesson on teaching decimals was given' (North London Collegiate School archives). 
Miss Buss regarded teaching as 'one of the noblest professions, not second even to medicine' ('Educational Review', February 1895). She gave much time and energy to promoting professional associations among her fellow teachers. At the first meeting of the Teachers' Guild, intended to unite all branches of the profession, held at the North London Collegiate in 1883, she urged that teaching should 'cease to be a trade -- where in return for so much coin so many hours were grudgingly given -- and that instead it should be a learned profession' (ibid.), though one measure of her own success was a high salary, which reached $1454 a year by 1893. In 1866 she was one of the founder members of the London Association of Schoolmistresses. With Dorothea Beale she established the Association of Head Mistresses, which first met at her house in 1874, with the purpose of holding conferences 'in order to know what we ought to assert and what surrender' ('DNB'). She had a sometimes fiery relationship with the governors of her own schools, especially the first chairman, Dr John Storrar. Given the economic reasons she advanced for female education, it was appropriate that she should also have been influential in establishing the Teachers' Providential Association and the Teachers' Loan Society to assist teachers in financial need. 
Frances Buss saw competitive external examinations as the best preparation of her students for professional life, and was adamant that girls should compete to the same standard as boys. In December 1863, when the Cambridge local examinations were opened to girls on an experimental basis, twenty-five of the eighty-three candidates who took part were pupils of Miss Buss. She helped Emily Davies to organize the memorial sent to Cambridge in 1864 calling for this arrangement to be made permanent, which was granted in 1865. Her annual speeches to parents explained her emphasis on these external examinations: in 1868 she spoke of their importance in setting a standard; in 1870 she pointed to their impartiality as a relative measure of schools; and in 1871 she insisted on their good effects upon girls' education. She saw no harm in competition and had no objection to prizes, also encouraging games such as hockey and gymnastics. 'I would like girls trained to match their brothers', she reiterated in an interview ('Women's Penny Paper', 8 June 1889). She made a point of ensuring that mathematics, a subject some thought unsuited to girls, was well taught, appointing Sophie Bryant (whom she groomed to be her successor as headmistress) to teach the subject. Many of her former pupils went on to study at the women's colleges founded at Cambridge; twelve were at Girton in 1879. Clara Collet became the first former North London Collegiate pupil to obtain a degree when she took a London BA in 1880. 
Frances Buss was a supporter of reform movements, taking an interest in anti-slavery, Italian unity, the National Indian Association, and later Irish home rule. She assisted in the temperance work of her brother Septimus, an east London vicar. She believed in the importance of women taking part in public life, organizing leaflets to women ratepayers in support of Elizabeth Garrett's candidature for the London school board in 1870 and encouraging the candidature of one of her staff, Jane Chessar, to the same body in 1873. Her association with Emily Davies dated from a shared interest in the Society for Promoting the Employment of Women. As a headmistress she had a keen eye for the development of employment opportunities for women, and would change curricula accordingly, introducing lessons on the working of municipal government after the 1888 'Local Government Act'. Active in the campaign to admit women to the medical profession, she was a governor of the London School of Medicine for Women. In 1874 she hosted a meeting of the Friends of the Women's Peace Movement, where a paper on 'the best way for women to use their influence to prevent war' was read. Although she sympathized with Josephine Butler's purity campaigns, her position prevented her from taking a public stand. She belonged to the Central National Society for Women's Suffrage, and saw a link between the difficulties encountered in securing satisfactory educational opportunities for women and their exclusion from the parliamentary franchise: 'If we had only had the vote some of the difficulties I have described would never have existed' ('Women's Penny Paper', 8 June 1889). She was convinced that the full effects of these movements would be felt over the long term: 'I should like to revisit the earth at the end of the twentieth century to see the result of the great revolution of the nineteenth -- the women's rights movement' ('Woman's Signal', January 1896). 
Pupils remembered Miss Buss with a mixture of respect and fear; she was a strict disciplinarian, boasting to Dr Thring of Uppingham School that she had no need for corporal punishment since she could reduce a girl to tears in minutes. Although she was extremely nervous on public occasions, and was by her own admission not a good speaker, she grew to value public occasions, especially the annual prize-givings. She had a keen eye for publicity and cultivated the press. Her regular addresses to her pupils on moral and philosophical questions were published after her death as 'Leaves from the Note-Books of Frances M. Buss', edited by G. Toplis (1896). She was well travelled, often taking younger members of staff with her on trips to Italy, her favourite destination, and Sweden, where she made a study of the school system in 1871. Described as 'short of stature and heavy of figure', she was said to possess 'the artist's gift of knowing how to dress', favouring garments of lace (Burstall, 39). Her unremitting work as a teacher prematurely aged her -- she was white-haired in her forties -- and she became worn down by a debilitating kidney ailment. Frances Buss died at her home, 87 King Henry's Road, Hampstead, London, on 24 December 1894, and was buried in the churchyard at Theydon Bois, Essex, near the country cottage where she spent her vacations. Memorial windows were placed in the school hall of North London Collegiate School for Girls (as it was named in 1870) and in Theydon Bois church. 
Frances Buss's ideas laid the foundations for girls' day education in England. They were absorbed by a whole generation of headmistresses and schoolmistresses, many of whom were taught by her. One of them, Sara Burstall, who was both a pupil and an assistant mistress under her, spoke of Miss Buss's decisive influence, 'which was destined to shape my whole life, as it has of many others' (S. A. Burstall, 'Retrospect and Prospect', 1933, 43). 


@@@@@


doc= 37250


Butler, (Christina) Violet (1884-1982), social work trainer, was born on 25 January 1884 at 14 Norham Gardens, Oxford, the youngest child in the family of one son and three daughters of Arthur Gray Butler (1831-1909), first headmaster of Haileybury College and fellow of Oriel College, Oxford, and his wife, Harriet Jessie, daughter of M. Pakenham Edgeworth, botanist and Indian civil servant, and niece of Maria Edgeworth. With Josephine Butler for an aunt, and with so many relatives in literary, philanthropic, and educational circles, Violet was almost predestined to a life of social service. Deeply fond of her parents, she was educated at home until aged fourteen. She then went to Wycombe Abbey, left at seventeen, and took a first in modern history from the Society of Home Students (later St Anne's College) in Oxford in 1905. Equipped with a knowledge of four languages, she was the first woman to gain a distinction in the diploma in economics and political science; she then took a teaching diploma at London University. 
Social work came naturally to an intelligent unmarried Edwardian middle-class young woman, especially since her mother had visited the local workhouse once a week for half a century and her elder sister Olive had become warden of the Lady Margaret Hall settlement in Lambeth, London. Besides, Violet admired the sense of civic duty that inspired seven women, all wives of dons, who were then prominent in Oxford for their voluntary social work: an older trio consisting of Charlotte Green (Mrs T. H. Green), Bertha Johnson (Mrs A. H. Johnson), and Charlotte Toynbee (Mrs A. Toynbee); and a quartet who were Violet's near-contemporaries -- Mabel Prichard (Mrs H. A. Prichard), Mary Smith (Mrs A. L. Smith), Frances Wells (Mrs J. Wells), and her much-loved former tutor in economics, Mrs H. A. L. Fisher. A lifelong member of the Oxford Cottage Improvement Society, Violet Butler joined the local branch of the Charity Organization Society, and her links with the Christian Social Union encouraged in her the unsectarian broad-church outlook that was taken for granted within a family so deeply influenced by Thomas Arnold, T. H. Green, and Henry Scott Holland. Throughout her life she operated on the fruitful margin that arbitrarily separates the statutory from the voluntary body. 
Butler's 'Social Conditions in Oxford' (1912) grew out of her three earlier local preoccupations: housing reform, getting adolescents into skilled work, and (through the Women's Industrial Council) extending women's job opportunities. This work was one of several provincial surveys (of Norwich and Cambridge, for example) inspired by the work of Benjamin Seebohm Rowntree, whose 'Poverty: a Study of Town Life' appeared in 1901. Family connections gave Butler an inside view of Oxford's local government, and hers is the best account of it in all the surveys. Suffused with a sense of history, precise yet pragmatic in mood, the book's readability gains from its author's gentle sense of irony and exemplifies an Edwardian affinity between literature and 'social science' that has since been lost. The work also displays the combination of intellectual curiosity, affectionate interest in human nature, and down-to-earth practicality that the Charity Organization Society so often encouraged. 

'Social Conditions in Oxford' gave Butler the academic credentials she needed, and from 1914 to 1945 she combined her local social work with acting as tutor in economics at St Anne's and tutor-secretary (1914-19) for women students at Barnett House, Oxford's centre for training in social work. From 1919 to 1948 she was secretary for social training there, and later she published privately a booklet on its history. The union of social thought and social action at Barnett House admirably suited her temperament. After 1914 she concentrated on teaching, but she found time to compile an attitude survey, the Women's Industrial Council report 'Domestic Service' (1916), and her pamphlet 'Village Survey-Making' (1929), which encouraged country schools to hunt out information about the past and present of their localities. 
Selfless, retiring, and personally somewhat disorganized, Butler founded her influence on friendships. Her determination sometimes degenerated into obstinacy, but her gentle wit and bright eyes softened the impact, and she came to seem the embodiment of practical Christianity. Subtly combining progressive and conservative attitudes, she was cautious in her feminism and rather regretted her college's gradual evolution into an ordinary undergraduate college. She remained active and intellectually alert until well into her eighties, a much-loved figure who was often seen cycling about north Oxford on her many errands, still pursuing her Edwardian aim of using friendly personal contact to draw together paid and voluntary welfare workers, town and gown, and rich and poor. She died in Oxford on 19 May 1982. 
Brian Harrison', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37251


Butler, Sir Edwin John (1874-1943), plant pathologist and mycologist, was born on 13 August 1874 in Kilkee, co. Clare, the youngest of three sons of Thomas Butler, of Suirville, co. Tipperary, resident magistrate, and his wife, Annie Barry. He was educated first in Gainsborough, Lincolnshire, and from 1897, owing to illness, at home where he had the run of a large library. In 1890 he went to the Christian Brothers' School in Cork, after which he studied medicine at Queen's College, Cork. In 1898 he took the degrees of MB, BCh, and BAO of the Royal University of Ireland, but he never practised. His main interest lay in botanical research and especially in aquatic phycomycetes. Awarded an 1851 Exhibition two-year travelling scholarship, from 1899 he worked in Paris, Antibes, Freiburg, and finally the Jodrell Laboratory of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. 
At the end of 1900 Butler was appointed to the new post of cryptogamic botanist to the government of India. Before leaving England he married, in February 1901, Nina, daughter of Alfred John Le Mesurier, head of an old Guernsey family. They had one son and two daughters. On arrival in India Butler's first posting was to Calcutta. In 1902 he was transferred to Dehra Dun, and in 1905 he became the first imperial mycologist at the new agricultural research station at Pusa, Bengal. While in India he published some forty scientific papers on diseases of tropical crops, investigations which provided an authoritative background for his textbook, 'Fungi and Disease in Plants' (1918), a landmark for tropical plant pathologists. He also published his classic account of the genus 'Pythium' (1907). At the same time, he and his Indian staff, in collaboration with European taxonomic mycologists, began the census which culminated in Butler and G. R. Bisby's 'The Fungi of India' (1931). 
In 1920 Butler left India to become director of the newly founded Imperial Bureau of Mycology at Kew. After assembling a small staff and laying plans for the abstracting journal, the 'Review of Applied Mycology', Butler visited plant pathologists in the United States and Commonwealth countries to obtain support for the bureau, which flourished. In 1927 it became a unit of the Imperial Agricultural Bureaux as the Imperial Mycological Institute and in 1930 moved into purpose-built accommodation on land leased from the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. 
In 1935 Butler resigned from the institute in order to join the Agricultural Research Council, of which he became the first paid secretary. After leaving the institute, where he retained a small laboratory which he visited at weekends, Butler's administrative duties were so heavy that he had little time for mycological research. He did, however, find time to complete, with S. G. Jones, the general part of the textbook, 'Plant Pathology', published in 1949. 
Butler had an easy manner but his searching cross-questioning gave him a reputation as a somewhat intimidating examiner or assessor for appointments. He was also a practised diplomat, often getting his own way by inducing others to propose the course of action he desired. He was appointed CIE in 1921 and CMG in 1932; he was knighted in 1939, and was elected FRS in 1926. He was president of the British Mycological Society in 1927 and the Association of Economic Biologists in 1928-9, and in 1938, the University of Aberdeen awarded him an honorary LLD. Butler died in the Shiel Nursing Home, Elgin Road, Weybridge, following an attack of influenza, on 4 April 1943. 
G. C. Ainsworth', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37252


Byng, John, fifth Viscount Torrington (1743-1813), diarist, was born on 18 February 1743, the younger son (there were no daughters) of George Byng, third Viscount Torrington ('bap'. 1701, died 1750), of Southill, Bedfordshire, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1759), daughter of Lyonel Daniel of Clapham, Surrey. Both his parents died while he was still young. He was nephew to the unfortunate Admiral John Byng (1704-1757), who was executed in 1757. Byng followed his brother, George, to Westminster School, but was, as he wrote, primarily 'Train'd up to glory' ('Torrington Diaries', 1.344), that is, to follow his grandfather, father, and uncle in some form of military or naval career. He was page of honour to George II; from January 1760 cornet of the Royal Horse Guards; from March 1762 captain of the 58th foot (a nominal appointment, this regiment then being in America); then, from August of that year, lieutenant and captain of the 1st foot guards (Grenadier Guards). He served with both horse and foot in Germany during the Seven Years' War, an experience to which he often subsequently referred. 
In 1776 Byng was made lieutenant-colonel. Not being detached for service in America, he probably spent most of the next few years in London. Financial troubles marred these years: fear of arrest for debt probably motivated his flight to the continent in November 1777; his resignation from the army in May 1780 may likewise have been prompted by such troubles. He accepted minor administrative office under Lord North's ministry, then from 1782 to 1799 served as a commissioner of stamps. He succeeded his brother, George, as viscount on 14 December 1812, but held the title for only a few weeks before his own death. 
In his lifetime an obscure figure (he was ignored by contemporary obituarists), Byng became known in the twentieth century through the publication of his 'Diaries', journals of horseback tours through England and Wales. Byng did not chronicle his earlier travels; it is known from the diary of William Windham that he and Byng toured the midlands and north in 1774. Only in 1780 was Byng 'first seized with this journalizing frenzy' ('Torrington Diaries', 1.104). His writings fill twenty-four manuscript volumes, spanning the years 1781-94. Byng wrote partly to enhance and prolong his pleasure in 'tourism', but also to preserve details of 'the manners of our travelling, the rates of our provisions; and of castles, churches and houses' (ibid., 1.249). His diaries -- particularly the manuscript originals, which are scattered with engraved prints (the picture postcards of the day) -- do serve this function, but are most valuable as a record of individual sensibility. Byng pertinaciously sought out ruined castles and abbeys -- relics, in his view, of an age in which spiritual and temporal lords had accepted duties of stewardship they had since abnegated. Though generally critical of his own era, Byng none the less extended qualified sympathy to developments that served ends he valued: to Methodism, inasmuch as it instilled 'wholesome morals' (ibid., 1.141), and to spreading industry, inasmuch as it provided employment, though he worried that, like religion, which had 'overstretch'd her power... and was blown up... the cotton trade... may crack!' (ibid., 3.114). 
On 3 March 1767 Byng married Bridget ('bap'. 1748, died 1823), daughter of Commodore Arthur Forrest (died 1770) and his wife, Frederica. The marriage produced five sons and eight daughters, one of whom died young. Three of the sons followed military or naval careers, with two attaining the rank of admiral. Their youngest son was known to Regency society by the sobriquet Poodle Byng. 
Although sometimes morose and tetchy, particularly when subjected to the formalities and 'longueurs' of polite society, or when contemplating his reduced fortunes, Byng had yet a fund of good spirits, and endeavoured 'to be pleased with the world, and content with its comforts' ('Torrington Diaries', 1.205). He wrote of himself that he had a 'heart full of blood & quick of impression' (ibid., 1.115), was 'hasty of determination', and 'leaky of secrets' (ibid., 1.135). According to his wife, he had generally 'a pleased or lively look' (ibid., 1.xxxviii). John Byng died on 8 January 1813 at Tenterden Street, Hanover Square, London. 
Joanna Innes', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37253


Byron, (Augusta) Ada (1815-1852), mathematician and computer pioneer, was born on 10 December 1815 at 13 Piccadilly Terrace, London, the only child of George Gordon Noel Byron, sixth Baron Byron (1788-1824), poet, and his wife, Anne Isabella Noel, nee Milbanke, Lady Byron (1792-1860), daughter of Sir Ralph Milbanke Noel, bt. Soon after her birth and the subsequent celebrated break-up of her parents' marriage she became famous through the opening lines of canto three of Byron's poem 'Childe Harold': '
Is thy face like thy mother's, my fair child! 

Ada! sole daughter of my house and my heart? 

When last I saw thy young blue eyes they smiled, 

And then we parted -- not as now we part, But with a hope. 

' Ada was brought up in the sole custody of her mother, who kept her out of the limelight. She was educated to be a mathematician and a scientist because her mother feared that she might turn out to be a poet like her father. A lonely but imaginative child, she was taught by a series of tutors (including the celebrated mathematician Augustus De Morgan) and at an early age was fascinated by mechanical things and toyed with the idea of designs for a flying machine powered by steam. When she was seventeen, in 1833, she met Charles Babbage, most likely through the natural philosopher Mary Somerville, a mutual acquaintance. Babbage showed Ada his first calculating engine, the difference engine, and her interest in mathematics was transformed from a duty to a joy. She attended lectures about the engine, examined the plans, studied and taught mathematics, and became part of the same social circle as Babbage. They had many friends in common, in addition to De Morgan and Somerville, including Charles Dickens and Sir Charles Wheatstone. 
Ada is best-known for her incisive notes and comments on Babbage's plans for an analytical engine. Because she was an independent (albeit enthusiastic) observer, and possessed a marked talent for conveying new and sometimes difficult concepts in limpid prose, her writings on this topic are much valued by historians. In November 1834 Babbage first shared with her his general idea for a new calculating engine that would not only have foresight but could act on that foresight. According to Lady Byron's diaries, Ada was touched by the 'universality of his ideas' (Toole, 69). In 1843 she translated a paper by General L. F. Menabrea, later to be prime minister of Italy, describing Babbage's main attempt to implement this notion, the projected analytical engine (which was to supersede the aborted difference engine but which was never built). She added extensive notes to Menabrea's paper which contain not only what is regarded as one of the earliest computer programs but also prescient comments about the future of such an engine, which have stood the test of time. Her correspondence with Babbage about the time that she was preparing this work for publication elaborates further on her idea of what would now be termed a program, and, moreover, places it in the context of its possible use. Thus on 10 July 1843 she suggested to him: 'I want to put in something about Bernoulli's Number, in one of my Notes, as an example of how an explicit function, may be worked out by the engine, without having been worked out by human head and hands first. (Toole, 198)' Though other instances of what might be regarded as a program of instructions for the engine to calculate numbers have been found, the Bernoulli numbers were a perfect choice of example with which to differentiate Babbage's analytical engine from all other calculating engines. 
Ada's work was published in September 1843 in Taylor's 'Scientific Memoirs' (vol. 3) as 'Sketch of the analytical engine invented by Charles Babbage esq. by L. F. Menabrea, of Turin, officier of the military engineers'. The translator and annotator is not identified on the title page, but each of her notes is individually signed AAL (Augusta Ada Lovelace). She asked penetrating questions about how the analytical engine might be applied, and hypothesized that if it could understand the relations of pitched sounds and the science of harmony 'the engine might compose elaborate and scientific pieces of music of any degree of complexity and extent' ('Scientific Memoirs', 3, 1843, 694). She also saw the graphical potential of the analytical engine, and that by changing to a new medium, the punched card, scientific information would be seen in a new light. Thus, in a famous and influential metaphor, she wrote 'Analytical Engine 'weaves algebraical patterns' just as the Jacquard loom weaves flowers and leaves' (ibid., 696). 
Interestingly, Ada also saw the limits of such a technological innovation and described the tendency people have to 'first, 'overrate' what we find to be... remarkable, and secondly, by a sort of natural reaction, to 'undervalue' the true state of the case' ('Scientific Memoirs', 3, 1843, 722). Her comment 'The Analytical Engine has no pretension whatever to originate anything' (ibid.) evokes and anticipates the heated debate between proponents of artificial intelligence and those who believe the human mind cannot be reduced to a machine. 
On 8 July 1835 Ada married William King, eighth Baron King of Ockham (1805-1893), lord lieutenant of Surrey. He was created earl of Lovelace in 1838. They had two sons, Byron Noel (1836-1862) and Ralph Gordon (1839-1906), who were successively Baron Wentworth (Ralph succeeding his father as second earl of Lovelace), and a daughter, Anne Isabella Noel Blunt, an equestrian, who wrote 'A Pilgrimage to Nejd' (1881) and was married to the poet Wilfrid Scawen Blunt. 
After Ada, Lady Lovelace, wrote the 'Sketch' in 1843 her health, which was always fragile, became worse. Physicians prescribed laudanum, and many of the extensive letters she left were written under the influence of her illness and drugs. She hypothesized a 'calculus of the nervous system' (Toole, 296) but at the same time was sceptical of the claims of mesmerism's ability to cure tumours. Her social circle expanded to include not only Sir David Brewster and Michael Faraday but intellectual characters who were also great followers of the horse races, such as members of the Zetland family. She gambled and won on the horses, and gambled and lost, and was at the mercy, both emotionally and financially, of several of her gambling friends. According to the bank books, her involvement in gambling stopped in June of 1851 when she suffered severe haemorrhages. In a panic Lord Lovelace went for help to Lady Byron, only to be faced with Lady Byron's concern being Ada's gambling, not her health. Until Ada's tragic death, from cancer of the uterus, at 6 Great Cumberland Place, London, on 27 November 1852, she was in excruciating pain, bedridden, and, because of financial need, at the mercy of Lady Byron who took over the Lovelace household and prevented Babbage from seeing her daughter. 
On 3 December 1852 Ada was buried (at her own request) next to her father in the parish church of St Mary Magdalene in Hucknall near Lord Byron's ancestral home at Newstead Abbey. In 1979 a computer software language, the official language of the United States department of defense, was named 'Ada' in her honour and in 1993 a blue plaque was erected at her home at 12 (formerly 10) St James's Square, London, in commemoration of her being a 'pioneer of the computer'. 


@@@@@


doc= 37254


Cadbury, John (1801-1889), cocoa and chocolate manufacturer, was born on 12 August 1801, at 92 Bull Street, Birmingham, into a family of four generations of Quakers, the fifth child and third son in the family of five sons and five daughters of Richard Tapper Cadbury (1768-1860), draper, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of John Head of Ipswich. He was educated from 1810 to 1815 at Joseph Crosfield's Quaker school at Hartshill. 
In 1816 Cadbury was apprenticed to John Cudworth, a Quaker, of the firm Broadhead and Cudworth, Leeds, to learn the retail tea trade. After six years his father sent him to work in the bonded tea house of Sanderson Fox in London, to broaden his experience. In 1824 he was given a sum of money, and was able to set up his own business as a tea dealer and coffee roaster at 93 Bull Street, Birmingham. On 9 March 1826 Cadbury married Priscilla Ann (1799-1828), daughter of John Dymond of Exeter, a draper and Quaker minister. She died two years later. In 1832 he married Candia (1805-1855), eldest daughter of George Barrow, merchant and shipping-fleet owner, of Lancaster. They had five sons and one daughter. 
Cocoa powder for making an instant drink was first marketed about 1830. John Cadbury saw the potential for the product, and with his experience in roasting beans and preparing nib (crushed cocoa beans) for his shop, decided to open a factory. He purchased a former malthouse at Crooked Lane in 1831, and this is considered the founding date of the Cadbury manufacturing firm. During the first ten years he developed many new lines, and the earliest existing price list (1842) offered sixteen varieties of drinking chocolate and eleven cocoas. In 1846 he took his brother Benjamin (1798-1880) into partnership and changed the name of the firm to Cadbury Brothers, moving it in 1847 to larger premises at Bridge Street. In 1853 Cadbury Brothers were appointed cocoa manufacturers to Queen Victoria. 
Convinced that there were practical solutions to the social evils of his day, Cadbury devoted himself particularly to the temperance movement. His campaigns for total abstinence were based on appeals to reason. The abstainer, he pointed out, could afford a good joint of beef on a Sunday. He was appointed to the Birmingham board of commissions in 1829 and in 1851 was chairman of the committee which steered through parliament the bill to transfer the board's powers to the elected council. He also served as an overseer and guardian of the poor (1830-41). He was prominent in the movement to replace 'climbing boys' with machines to sweep chimneys. 
Cadbury's second wife, Candia, died from tuberculosis in 1855, and later that year Cadbury suffered a severe attack of rheumatic fever. This was a double blow from which he never fully recovered. The business declined seriously and in 1861 Cadbury retired, handing over to two of his sons, Richard and George Cadbury. He died on 11 May 1889 at his home, 10 Harborne Road, Edgbaston, Birmingham, and was buried at Witton cemetery, Birmingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 37255


Cade, William (d. in or before 1166), financier, is first noted in the early 1150s and was dead by 1166, when a note of his debts came to the exchequer. It shows that he was owed approximately $5000 by about 200 individuals. In just a few cases the bonds that lie behind these transactions have survived, and they show how his loans were arranged and secured. Cade occurs frequently in the early pipe rolls of Henry II's reign, where payments to him of about $5600 are recorded, in settlement of various loans that he had made to the crown. These records establish his importance (his operations were crucial to the establishment of the Angevin dynasty in England) but supply little by way of biographical information. 
It is clear that Cade was a Fleming from St Omer: he had a house there, close connections with local monasteries, and members of his family have Flemish names. The names of his parents are not known, nor is that of his wife, but he had brothers Baldwin and Eustace, and sons Eustace and Ernulf. The latter gave to the hospitallers land in Stalisfield and Oare close to Faversham in Kent; and a descendant of the same name held a manor at Ospring, which was known as Cade's manor as late as the eighteenth century. Faversham was one of the main centres in England of the honour of Boulogne, which county lay against the border of western Flanders, whose mercantile centre was at St Omer. The supply of wool from England to Flanders provided the main economic link between the two areas; and it is not surprising to find a merchant financier with a base at each end of this trade. 
The Flemings who surrounded King Stephen and sustained his cause were not popular in England, and the peace settlements of 1153 provided that they be sent home. William Cade, however, was clearly indispensable to the financial operations of the crown. The exchequer was still functioning, but in a limited and 'ad hoc' way. Cade could provide for both the crown and its debtors credit and financial expertise. He was one of a select group, which included the justiciars Robert, earl of Leicester (died 1168), and Richard de Lucy (died 1179), and the treasurer Nigel, bishop of Ely (died 1169), who provided continuity between the old and the new regimes. Cade was the man behind the men behind the scenes. 
The evidence for Cade's operations suggests that they shared many of the characteristics of the better-known Italian merchant bankers of the late middle ages. It was a family firm. Cade was in partnership with his brother and son, and debts were repayable to any partner, in London or in St Omer. Careful arrangements were made to secure loans. The crown's credit was good, but still it needed to assign some regular revenue: thus Cade had the farm of Dover from 1154 (and presumably earlier) until 1161. Individuals might assign the income from specified lands to pay off their debts, pledge their own faith, and produce guarantors. The position of churchmen in such transactions caused some debate, and their giving security was forbidden in the constitutions of Clarendon of 1164. This was because of the element of usury involved. At times it was blatant, as when the sheriff of Hampshire, presumably in order to enable him to settle a debt at the exchequer, borrowed $61 12's'. 8died, paying 'for each pound 2died in interest a week' (Jenkinson, 'A money-lender's bonds', no. 2). More often Cade exacted a bond for a sum larger than the amount of cash advanced. 
Towards the end of his life Cade was being superseded by Jewish moneylenders, and as a Christian usurer he would come to appear as something of an anomaly after his death. He was, however, long remembered. About 1202 the canonist Robert de Courson (died 1219) cited him as a man 'who became immensely rich through lending money to innumerable merchants throughout the world' (Haskins, 730), objecting that in his partnerships he shared the profits but kept the capital safe. Cade founded no dynasty, but in his day he was a major operator in what R. H. Tawney in 1958 called 'the ambiguous 'demi-monde' between politics and business' (Tawney, 81). 
Edmund King', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37256


Calandrini, Cesar (1595-1665), Reformed minister, was born in Stade, in Germany, on 6 February 1595, the son of Giovanni Calandrini ('b'. 'c'.1542, died after 1607) and his first wife, Marie, daughter of Jean de Maistres, a wealthy Antwerp merchant. His father, who belonged to an influential Calvinist family of Italian origin, had fled Lucca in 1567 because of his Reformed faith, and lived subsequently in France, Antwerp, Germany, and then London. There, during the first years of James I's reign, Calandrini senior founded an influential merchant banking house with his son-in-law, Philip Burlamachi. Cesar appears to have been destined for a clerical career from the start. In May 1612 he matriculated at the Academy of Geneva and later attended the Calvinist Academy of Saumur. In April 1616 he was admitted as a reader to the Bodleian Library in Oxford, and he matriculated in theology at the University of Leiden on 7 November 1616. In Leiden he met his lifelong friend and correspondent, the Dutch poet and diplomat, Constantijn Huygens. 
In late 1617 Calandrini became a trainee minister in the French church in London and in March 1618 he was ordained by the joint body of ministers from the Dutch and French churches. Their support and the backing of the apostate archbishop of Spalato, Marco Antonio de Dominis, secured Calandrini the appointment of minister to the Italian Reformed church in London. Initially, Calandrini was on excellent terms with his mentor, de Dominis, lodging with him at the Savoy Hospital. Later, after Calandrini had attended the Synod of Dort and finished his studies in theology under John Prideaux at Exeter College, Oxford, from where he graduated BD on 18 July 1620, he found it increasingly difficult to reconcile his Calvinism with de Dominis's Catholic syncretism. Before the archbishop left England for Rome he apparently denounced Calandrini to James I as a dangerous puritan. That he was a hardline Calvinist is corroborated by Anthony Wood, who described him as 'a puritanical theologist' (Wood, 1.393). 
Shortly before he received his BD, Calandrini was instituted on 20 June 1620 at the rectory of Stapleford Abbots in Essex. In August 1621 he married Elizabeth Harderet, a granddaughter of Robert Le Macon (d. 1611), who had been minister of the London French church. It was probably through the patronage of John Prideaux that he came into contact with James Ussher, later archbishop of Armagh, whom he assisted in his scholarly activities during the latter's three-year stay in London. He became closely involved in Ussher's great protestant scheme, the 'Bibliotheca theologica', accompanying him to Ireland. Not until the collapse of Ussher's project in 1626 did Calandrini live in Stapleford Abbots. 
Calandrini corresponded with an impressive number of leading European Calvinists, and among his English correspondents were such leading puritan divines as Herbert Palmer, John Davenport, Stephen Marshall, Thomas Gataker, Hugh Peters, and Cornelius Burgess. In 1639 he was appointed minister to the Dutch church in London, thus becoming a colleague of his stepbrother, Ambrosius Regemorter. Calandrini's excellent contacts with leading puritans such as William Kiffin and Sidrach Simpson helped to ease many of the difficulties the Dutch community in London faced during the turbulent 1640s. As the son of a protestant immigrant, and a pivotal figure in the international Calvinist republic of letters, Calandrini remained actively involved in relief work for European co-religionists until his death from the plague in London on 26 September 1665; he was buried a day later. He left at least one son, Lewis Calandrine, who had been ejected from the rectory of Stapleford Abbots in 1662. 
Ole Peter Grell', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37257


Calvert, Cecil, second Baron Baltimore (1605-1675), colonial promoter, was born on 8 August 1605, probably in Kent, and baptized on 2 March 1606, the son of George Calvert, first Baron Baltimore (1579/80-1632), statesman, and his first wife, Anne (1579-1622), the daughter of George Mynne of Hertingfordbury. George Calvert, a protege of Sir Robert Cecil, after whom he named his eldest son, was a member of the privy council and principal secretary of state in the reign of James I. He resigned his office in November 1624, but was retained on the council when he announced his family's conversion to Roman Catholicism. 
Cecil matriculated from Trinity College, Oxford, on 16 July 1621 but did not proceed to a degree. A year before his father's conversion Cecil journeyed to Rome and made his own avowal of Catholicism. In 1628 he married Anne, the Catholic daughter of Thomas Arundell, first Baron Arundell of Wardour, and became even more firmly identified with the Catholic faction. They had at least five children, including two sons, the elder of whom died in infancy. 
Cecil Calvert shared his father's interest in the New World and was actively involved in his effort to establish a colony. When the charter to Maryland sought by George Calvert passed the great seal on 20 June 1632, Cecil Calvert was named the grantee since his father had died earlier in the year and Cecil had inherited the barony. The charter granted Calvert palatinate powers over a domain of almost 7 million acres that had once belonged to Virginia. Disputes with that Chesapeake neighbour would trouble the new Lord Baltimore for the remainder of his life. He was himself forced to remain in England to defend his interests and never settled in his colony, appointing in his stead first his brother Leonard Calvert and then his second son, Charles, to the post of governor. 
Although concerned like his father to offer relief to Catholics, Calvert was also motivated by the desire for profit that characterized most colonial promoters. The manuscript 'Account of the Colony of the Lord Baron of Baltimore' (1633), written by the Revd Andrew White and edited by Calvert, was a promotional piece that enthused about the natural blessings of the region. Calvert sought to attract large investors to whom he would grant large manors in the expectation that they would then bring indentured servants with them to work the land. 
Vulnerable to the attacks of his enemies because of his religion, Calvert said little about the role of Catholics in the colony and urged them to maintain a low profile. He worked to prevent the Jesuits from acquiring land and influence. Though he supported their spiritual ministry, he believed their efforts to be divisive in the colony and he came close to expelling them in 1642. In 1643 he invited New England settlers to move to Maryland, and in 1648 and 1649 he encouraged disgruntled Virginia puritans to settle there, hoping these moves and the appointment of a protestant governor and council would avoid action against his colony by the English parliament. Through his instructions he was partly responsible for the 1649 'Maryland Act of Toleration', which was the earliest legislation in the English-speaking world that explicitly guaranteed toleration to all Christians. These efforts did not, however, prevent parliament from appointing commissioners to take control of the colony in 1652. Oliver Cromwell, however, restored Calvert's proprietary rights in 1658. 
Calvert's last years as proprietor were troubled by growing political, religious, and economic divisions within Maryland. He responded with policies that restricted the franchise and gave the governor power to manipulate the composition of the lower legislative house. These in turn prompted greater resistance, and eventually a successful uprising against the proprietary in 1689. 
Calvert died on 30 November 1675 in London, and was buried at St Giles-in-the-Fields, Middlesex. He was succeeded in the barony by his second son, Charles. 


@@@@@


doc= 37258


Cameron, Charles (1745-1812), architect, was born on 1 June 1745, at Bolton Street, London, the son of Walter Cameron (died after 1780), master carpenter and speculative builder, and his wife, Hannah. His grandfather Archibald Cameron came from Edinburgh, and Cameron may have been distantly related to the Cameron of Lochiel family. It is certain that the architect's father was closely connected to one of the main figures of the Jacobite rising of 1745, Dr Archibald Cameron, whom he visited in prison before his execution in 1753. It is likely that Walter Cameron took care in London of Dr Cameron's wife and his son Charles, probably named -- as was Walter's own son -- after the Pretender, before they emigrated to the continent. 
In 1760 Charles Cameron was apprenticed to his father in the Carpenters' Company, but about 1764 he developed different interests: an album of 100 drawings consists of remarkable images of vases, plates, and silverwork in a variety of styles (although towards the end of the album his taste for classical antiquity was clearly increasing). It was probably the talent of the young draughtsman that attracted the attention of the architect Isaac Ware. Ware was planning a new edition of Lord Burlington's 'Fabbriche antiche' ('c'.1732), a book of engravings from the drawings of Palladio, mostly of Roman baths. After Ware's death in 1766, Cameron wanted to go to Italy, in order to update the drawings of the ancient monuments. Altering the character of the book, he made it a model of Enlightenment scholarship, with an extensive commentary and a strong neo-classical bias. After arriving in Rome in 1768, Cameron spent less than a year there. He may have met Charles Louis Clerisseau, the French architectural draughtsman and one of the leading figures in the neo-classical movement, but it is more likely that he learned of his works later, when Clerisseau travelled to England in 1771. Certainly Cameron socialized with Jacobites in Rome and they helped him to obtain permission from the Vatican for the excavation of the baths of Titus. In the book of another Charles Cameron -- possibly the son of Dr Archibald Cameron -- 'Memori per le belle arti' (1785), the activity of the young architect investigating the Roman thermae is described with sympathy. 
Charles Cameron returned to England in 1769, and published his book in folio under the title 'The baths of the Romans explained and illustrated, with the restorations of Palladio corrected and improved', with English and French texts, in 1772. Two other editions were issued in 1774 and 1775, but the book did not bring success to the author in spite of the dedication to Lord Bute and other efforts to obtain patronage. During these years Cameron produced his only known architectural work in Britain: drawings for the decoration of Jervoise Clarke's house in Hanover Square, London, built by Cameron's father in 1770-74. In 1774 Cameron applied for a district surveyorship in Middlesex, but did not attend the interview. About this time his financial troubles began: in 1775-6 his father was put into the Fleet prison for debts, and Charles lost the family fortune and his own belongings (including his 1500 books). His father was still in the Fleet when the architect left for Russia. 
Cameron arrived in St Petersburg in 1778, in response to an invitation from the Russian court. Catherine the Great had been planning to build a Roman bath in her summer residence, Tsarskoye Selo, for several years, an idea suggested by Clerisseau. However, his design, based on the thermae of Diocletian, was too large and the empress looked for a specialist to build a smaller and more private bath for her. Cameron was clearly the best-qualified architect in Europe for the task, although it is likely that Catherine's Scottish physician John Rogerson may have proposed his compatriot. The empress proudly proclaimed Cameron to be a Jacobite and a nephew of Jenny Cameron, 'the Pretender's Diana'. 
Cameron held a unique position among his Russian contemporaries: he was officially the private architect to the empress and worked only for her and the heir to the throne, the Grand Duke Paul. In 1779-96 he worked at the palace and gardens of Tsarskoye Selo, near St Petersburg. There he created between 1779 and 1786: the private apartments; the Roman thermae, including the cold bath; the Agate Pavilion, decorated with precious stones; a hanging garden; a ramp; and a colonnaded gallery, which was named after him. At the same time he completed the Chinese ensemble in the park, the largest in eighteenth-century Europe. He designed and built the model town of Sofia as part of the landscaping of the park, and constructed there the monumental cathedral of St Sophia. The town united Tsarskoye Selo and Paul's residence, Pavlovsk; here, in 1782-6, Cameron built the palace and several garden pavilions (including the famous Temple of Friendship) and created the 1000 hectare landscape park. 
On Catherine's death in 1796, Paul I -- hostile to the memory of his mother -- dismissed her beloved architect Cameron. After the emperor's murder, however, Cameron returned to Pavlovsk to design garden pavilions for the Dowager Empress Maria, among them his masterpiece the Three Graces. About 1800 he may have made designs for the Baturin palace in Ukraine for Count Kirill Rasumovsky; another Scottish architect, Adam Menelaws, was also involved in this project. It seems that Cameron never left St Petersburg and did not visit Moscow, Ukraine, or the Crimea; his design for a triumphal arch, displayed by J. L. Bond in the Royal Academy in 1793 as 'to be erected in the Crimea', must be the one built at Tsarskoye Selo to celebrate the conquest of the Crimea. 
In 1803 Alexander I appointed Cameron to the important post of the architect-in-chief of the admiralty. The next three years were a period of intensive, mostly technical work. In 1806 he left this post to resume his role as the emperor's private architect. In 1784 Cameron had married Catherine Busch (died 1817), daughter of the British head gardener of Tsarskoye Selo. He died at his home, Ingeneering Castle, St Petersburg, on 26 March 1812. The main collections of his drawings are in the Hermitage and the Academy of Fine Arts museums, the library of the Institute of Railway Engineers in St Petersburg, the Museum of Pavlovsk, and the Museum of Architecture in Moscow. 
Cameron was the leader of the neo-classical architectural movement in Russia: he was the first to introduce the Greek revival style, using the publications of James Stuart and Nicholas Revett, while the dome of the cathedral of St Sophia was the earliest example of the Byzantine revival style in Russia. Cameron also encouraged the Chinese taste in Russia, inspired by the work of Sir William Chambers. Most importantly, he combined an enthusiasm for the archaeology of antiquity with a firm grasp of English Palladianism, both of which are apparent in the palace at Pavlovsk, which became the model for the country residences of the Russian gentry. Similarly, his park in Pavlovsk established in Russia landscape gardening in the style of Capability Brown: it is considered to be the best one in the country. In fact, Cameron created the 'language' of the architecture of the Russian Enlightenment which expressed the spirit of the epoch of Catherine the Great: his buildings became symbols of this period in Russian literature. 


@@@@@


doc= 37259


Campbell, Donald Malcolm (1921-1967), land and water speed record-holder, was born on 23 March 1921 at Canbury, Kingston Hill, Surrey, the only son and younger child of Sir Malcolm Campbell (1885-1948), racing motorist, and his second wife, Dorothy Evelyn, daughter of Major William Whittall. He left Uppingham School in 1937, following rheumatic fever, to serve with a Lloyd's underwriting firm. Invalided from the RAF in 1940, having been rejected for flying training, he spent a frustrating war as a special constable. In the late 1940s he invested in the Kine Engineering Company of Redhill, where he became managing director and fifty per cent shareholder. Always involved in his father's ventures, he decided after Sir Malcolm's death in 1948 to defend his water title, set in 1939 at 141.74 m.p.h., using his father's boat. Only after unsuccessful attempts in 1949, 1950, and 1951 did he seek and find funds for a new boat, called, like all his cars and boats, 'Bluebird'. With this all-metal hydroplane, powered by two Metro-Vickers Beryll jet engines, he regained the record on Ullswater on 23 July 1955 at 202.32, raising this on six successive occasions, ultimately to 276.33 m.p.h. on Lake Dumbleyoung, Australia, on 31 December 1964. 
In September 1960 Campbell turned to the land record. Driving a 'Bluebird', newly designed by Kenneth and Lewis Norris, using a Bristol-Siddeley Proteus jet engine, he sustained a hairline skull fracture in a crash at 365 m.p.h. while assaulting the land record of 394.2 m.p.h., set by John Cobb in 1947. Three years later, another new 'Bluebird' was prevented from going for the record by floods at Lake Eyre, Australia, a delay which brought much criticism of Campbell from his backers, led by Sir Alfred Owen. But the following July Campbell returned to cover the measured kilometre at an average speed of 403.1 m.p.h. for the two runs, becoming the first person to take a shaft-driven vehicle over 400 m.p.h. and to break both land and water speed records in the same year. The next year the American Craig Breedlove took a jet-propelled car over the distance at 600 m.p.h. At the time of his death Campbell was unsuccessfully seeking backers for a jet-driven car to go through the sound barrier. 
Campbell now turned back to the water. In 1966 a more powerful Bristol-Siddeley Orpheus jet engine with a 5000 lb thrust was fitted to 'Bluebird', intended to take the record over 300 m.p.h. After two months of frustrating delay, caused by bad weather and technical difficulties which reduced public interest and renewed public criticism, Campbell finally made his attempt on Coniston on 4 January 1967. On the outward run he achieved 297 m.p.h. Returning even faster to get his average over 300 m.p.h., Campbell's fears were confirmed: at this speed the bow lifted, and the boat somersaulted and plunged into the lake. The remains of Campbell's boat were located in 2000 and removed from the water in March 2001. His body was recovered from the lake in May 2001 and, after a funeral at St Andrew's Church, Coniston, was buried in the parish churchyard. In October 2002 an inquest returned a verdict of accidental death. 
Though a trained engineer, an enthusiastic and effective advocate of his own cause, courageous and deeply patriotic, Campbell was not an easy man. He seemed driven to defend and challenge his father's achievement, but his enthusiasms were too boyish and his concerns overshadowed by the public shift in interest to the achievements of space scientists and astronauts. Campbell's crusade became uninteresting and irrelevant to the New World and advertisers were finding more rewarding ventures for sponsorship. He lived into a world which had outgrown him. He was appointed CBE in 1957. 
Campbell married three times: on 8 September 1945, Daphne Margaret Harvey Harvey ('b'. 1923/4), daughter of William Calvert, engineer (marriage dissolved 1952); in 1952, Dorothy, daughter of Amos McKegg of Palmerston North, New Zealand (marriage dissolved 1957); in 1958, Antoinette Maria (Tonia Bern, the cabaret singer), daughter of Antoine Joseph Bern of Belgium. His third wife survived him. He had a daughter, Georgina, born in 1946. 
H. G. Pitt', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37260


Cannon, Thomas (1846-1917), jockey and racehorse trainer, the elder son of Thomas H. Cannon, a Windsor livery stable keeper, and his wife, Harriett Townsend, was born on 23 April 1846 in Eton, where his father later kept the George Hotel. At the age of thirteen he was apprenticed to a Mr Sextie, who ran a small training stable in Wiltshire. His first win came the following year when, weighing only 3 st 12 lb, he piloted Lord Portsmouth's My Uncle to victory in a six-furlong heats race at Plymouth. In 1872 he became champion jockey with eighty-seven winners. He rode only one Derby winner -- Shotover in 1882 -- but his thirty-two years in the saddle brought him twelve other English classics, several major French victories, and a career total of 1544 winners. 
Cannon was one of the four outstanding professional jockeys of the second half of the nineteenth century, along with George Fordham, John Osborne, and Fred Archer. Fordham and Cannon were both attached to John Day's Danebury stables and George acted as Tom's mentor, teaching him the advantage which could be gained from steadying a horse before the final effort. To this Cannon added his own gentle touch. He rarely used his whip and was renowned for his ability to coax the best from even a highly strung two-year-old. Indeed many contemporaries regarded him as unequalled in his handling of young horses. His one fault, shared with other jockeys, was his habit of attempting to win by the narrowest possible margin in an attempt to deceive the handicapper, though his judgement was such that it cost him fewer races than most. What he did not share with other jockeys of the time -- Archer, Fordham, and Osborne excepted -- was a reputation for dishonesty: no trace of scandal tinged his career. 
While still a professional jockey Cannon turned to training, taking over the lease of the Danebury stables at Stockbridge, Hampshire, from his father-in-law, John Day, in 1879, though he did not take actual possession until after Day's death three years later. Most of the horses which he trained he also owned, many of them in partnership with Tom Robinson of High Wycombe; the most celebrated were Reminder (third in the 1894 Derby), Curzon (second the following year), and Playfair (winner of the 1888 Grand National). His ownership, breeding, and training of horses meant that at times he had over eighty animals in his care. Nevertheless George Lampton, turf raconteur, maintained that Cannon was better at training riders than horses and certainly three leading jockeys -- John Watts, Sam Loates, and W. T. (Jack) Robinson -- served their apprenticeships at Danebury. He also passed on his riding knowledge to Arthur Coventry, an outstanding gentleman rider, as well as to his own sons. His colours last appeared on a course in 1913 but he had relinquished training well before that, when part of the Danebury training grounds passed into the hands of a lady who refused to allow racehorses on her land. Stockbridge races, at which Cannon served as clerk of the course from 1892 to 1898, had to be abandoned for the same reason. 
Cannon was physically slight, riding as a lightweight for most of his career, but he was a graceful jockey to whom the epithet 'polished' was often applied by contemporaries. Although he was said rarely to smile when racing, he had a sense of humour: in his later years as a trainer he often allowed early-morning visitors to mount a little hog-maned horse which he later revealed to be Duke of Palma, informing his guests that they could therefore rightfully claim to have ridden the winner of the Cambridgeshire. 
Cannon's first marriage was to John Day's daughter Catherine (Kate). Three of their sons made a name on the racetrack: Tom junior lost by a length to his father in the 1888 Eclipse Stakes; Kempton (named after the course), in strict contrast to the upright seat of his father, was an English pioneer of the crouched, 'monkey-on-a-stick' riding style introduced to Britain by American jockeys in the 1890s; Mornington (Morny), like both Kempton and his father, won a Derby, as well as the Hanworth Plate at Kempton Park in 1891, when his father, in his last race, finished third. Another son, Charles, also became a jockey, and a daughter, Margaret, married Ernest Piggott, a steeplechase rider; their son Keith was the father of the jockey Lester Piggott. Kate died in 1891 and Cannon later remarried but his second wife also predeceased him. His younger brother Joe was a renowned racehorse trainer. 
Cannon suffered recurrent ill health for the last two decades of his life and after a final, long, wearying illness, in which dropsy supervened on serious heart trouble, he died on 13 July 1917 at his Grosvenor Hotel, Stockbridge, Hampshire, where he had settled after the death of his second wife. He left the bulk of his estate, valued at $5306 gross, to his son Ronald Portland, whom he advised 'to make his will'. 


@@@@@


doc= 37261


Carleton, George (1529-1590), landowner and puritan, was the second son of John Carleton of Walton-on-Thames, Surrey, and Brightwell Baldwin, Oxfordshire, and his wife, Joyce, daughter of John Welbeck of Oxenheath, Kent. His maternal grandmother was Margaret Culpepper, an aunt of Queen Katherine Howard. Carleton's father was receiver to the abbot of Westminster and later deputy receiver-general to the dean and chapter, a connection which secured his son a Westminster exhibition at Christ Church, Oxford, whence he passed to Gray's Inn in 1552. In 1557 Carleton served as a captain at St Quentin, and later in life he renewed his military career, in 1573, as treasurer to the Irish expedition of Walter Devereux, first earl of Essex. In 1559 Carleton married Audrey, daughter of Sir John Gainsford (died 1540) of Crowhurst, Surrey, and his fifth wife, Audrey, daughter of Sir John Shaa, lord mayor of London. She was the widow successively of George Taylor of Longfield, Surrey, and of Sir George Harper of Sutton, Kent. She died early in 1560. 
Carleton built up a sizeable estate in the eastern and midland counties, partly by inheritance and partly, in 1561, through the second of his three marriages. This was to Elizabeth (died 1587), daughter of Walter Mohun of Overstone, Northamptonshire, and widow of Edward Cope of Hanwell, Oxfordshire. This marriage brought Carleton the manor of Overstone, where he mostly resided. He was a JP in Oxfordshire, Northamptonshire, Lincolnshire, and the Isle of Ely, and he sat in four sessions of parliament: for Poole in 1571 and for Dorchester in 1572, 1576, and 1581, boroughs in which Francis Russell, second earl of Bedford, had a commanding interest. Carleton employed his considerable legal and managerial powers in business partnerships, trusts, and other, sometimes disordered, financial affairs of various kinsmen and friends, and he was a persistent litigant. In the Lincolnshire fens he had public responsibilities as a commissioner for sewers, and private interests as an early 'adventurer'; he was 'one of the very first that inned any marsh in Holland', and a pioneer of windmills and other 'engines', 'toys', and 'gewgaws' (HoP, 'Commons, 1558-1603'). He became superintendent of the Jesuits and other Catholic recusants imprisoned in Wisbech Castle. 
Carleton's diverse interests were connected and charged with a kind of demonic energy by his ardent puritanism. In parliament most of his activity was directed towards a further reformation of the church along Presbyterian lines. He supported the successive initiatives of William Strickland, Paul Wentworth, and Wentworth's brother Peter, 'my beloved in the Lord', as well as the principles of parliamentary liberty for which these puritan members stood. Carleton believed that hardline protestants such as himself were the queen's only reliable subjects, her very 'bowels', and that these 'servants of God' should be concentrated in the counties nearest London as a militia to protect the regime from Catholic subversion (HoP, 'Commons, 1558-1603'). Alternatively, he argued, they should be encouraged to settle in Irish plantations, which in his thinking looked like blueprints for both Ulster and New England. 
In the last year of his life Carleton's connections with the tightly knit puritan gentry of the midlands involved him in the puritan literary conspiracy of the Marprelate tracts. Also in 1589 he married Elizabeth Crane, daughter of Sir Robert Hussey of Linwood, Lincolnshire, and widow of Anthony Crane of St Martin-in-the-Fields. It was at her house at East Molesey, Surrey, that the first Marprelate tracts were printed, and she was to be heavily fined in the Star Chamber for her involvement. The Marprelate press then moved to Fawsley, the Northamptonshire seat of Sir Richard Knightley, an enthusiast not entirely 'compos mentis', whose affairs were in Carleton's hands. Several elusive references in the tracts themselves suggest that Carleton's involvement in this illicit venture may have been more than merely managerial. Carleton died early in January 1590, and was survived by his third wife. 
Patrick Collinson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37262


Carrington, Dora de Houghton (1893-1932), painter, was born in Hereford on 29 March 1893, the second of the two daughters and fourth of the five children of Samuel Carrington, railway engineer, and his wife, Charlotte Houghton. When the family settled in Bedford, Dora went to Bedford high school, whose records show that her skill in drawing was soon noticed. 'I had an awful childhood', she wrote later, probably because she 'hated' her strict, fussy mother, a former governess. However, she was devoted to her more unconventional father, who agreed that she should go to art school, and in 1910 she became a student under Henry Tonks at the Slade School of Fine Art. This new and fertile soil rapidly developed her character and painting style. Among her fellow students were John and Paul Nash, C. R. W. Nevinson, Dorothy Brett, and, most important of all, the gifted young Mark Gertler, who fell deeply in love with her. She was an attractive and popular figure with her large blue eyes and her shock of thick hair bobbed in the fashion she had set -- she also set that of using her surname alone. Lady Ottoline Morrell described her as 'a wild moorland pony'. Moreover, her individual sense of fun and fantasy made her an enchanting companion, though a neurotic strain was also apparent. Carrington worked hard, and with dedication, winning a scholarship. Her oil paintings were much influenced by Gertler in their careful, smooth technique, three-dimensioned effect, and dense, rich colour. Her skill as a draughtsman appears in innumerable witty pen-and-ink illustrations to her letters. However, her lack of confidence was shown in her reluctance to exhibit or even sign the work she sent to the London Group, where it was seen and admired by Andre Derain. When she left the Slade in 1914 she had many new friends. Virginia and Leonard Woolf commissioned her woodcuts; Roger Fry sought her help in restoring a Mantegna for Hampton Court; Aldous Huxley put her in a novel (as Mary Bracegirdle in 'Crome Yellow'). 
Carrington's fateful meeting with the essayist and biographer (Giles) Lytton Strachey (1880-1932) caused a 'coup de foudre' which grew into lifelong love for him, despite his homosexuality. The pair set up house at Tidmarsh Mill, Pangbourne, Berkshire, and their relationship developed regardless of love affairs on both sides and Carrington's marriage in 1921 to Reginald Sherring Partridge 
(1894-1960; always called Ralph from 1919 onwards)
, who joined the menage. He was the son of Reginald Partridge, of the Indian Civil Service. In 1924 Ralph Partridge and Strachey bought Ham Spray House in Wiltshire, where a studio was made for Carrington and a library for Strachey. This peaceful working life ended in 1931 when Strachey became ill. He died of cancer in January 1932, leaving his companions grief-stricken. Carrington never wavered from her suicidal intentions, and despite all efforts to deter her, shot herself at Ham Spray House on 11 March 1932. 
Carrington left striking portraits of Lytton Strachey (1916, NPG), E. M. Forster (1920, NPG), Gerald Brenan ('c'.1921, NPG), and others; and landscapes, still lifes, and glass pictures, as well as a large number of brilliant and amusing letters. First brought to the attention of the public through Michael Holroyd's two-volume biography of Lytton Strachey in 1967, interest in her work grew with the publication in 1970 of her letters edited by David Garnett, and the biography of her by Gretchen Gerzina in 1989. Her work became much sought after. In 1995 the film 'Carrington', written and directed by Christopher Hampton and starring Emma Thompson as Dora Carrington, won the special jury prize and Jonathan Pryce (as Lytton Strachey) the best actor award at the Cannes film festival. In the same year 'Carrington: the exhibition' was held at the Barbican Art Gallery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 37263


Carvajal, Antonio Fernandez (d. 1659), merchant, was probably born in Portugal, for in his youth he seems to have lived in Fundao. He may have fled to Spain at some time, and apparently owned land in the Canary Islands. By the early 1630s he was in London, masquerading as a Roman Catholic in order to evade the prohibition of Jewish settlement in England. 
Although no evidence of his activities before 1643 survives, by then he had married, had established a house and warehouse at Leadenhall Street, and had brought over many of his relatives to work for him in England. On 14 March 1643 he petitioned the House of Lords for payment for 300 barrels of gunpowder which he had shipped from Amsterdam, but which had been confiscated by Robert Rich, second earl of Warwick, for use by the parliamentary armies. 
Carvajal was also very active in the bullion trade by that time, importing as much as $100,000 per annum during the early 1650s, and thus made himself so indispensable to the parliamentary side that, when he was denounced as a recusant in 1645, a number of City merchants petitioned parliament to have the charge dropped, and the House of Lords soon put an end to the prosecution. Like many other very wealthy Jews during the early modern period Carvajal became an army purveyor, and in 1649 was one of the City merchants who were given the corn contract for the parliamentary forces. His reward came in July 1655 when Carvajal and his two sons were endenizened, thus making him the first English Jew since the expulsion in 1290. His becoming a British subject put his Spanish goods at risk, and Oliver Cromwell himself took extraordinary precautions to ensure that they could be spirited out of the country and sent to England. 
Like other Marranos in London, Carvajal prayed at the Catholic chapel of the Spanish ambassador, while simultaneously playing a leading role in the secret Jewish community, which met at the clandestine synagogue at Creechurch Lane. Although he sat on the fence with the rest of London's Jews during the noisy campaign of Rabbi Manasseh ben Israel of Amsterdam to secure a public readmission of the Jews to England, eventually he was forced to show his hand. Spain's war with England in February 1656 put the Spanish subjects in the Jewish community at risk, and when the goods and ships of a fellow Marrano, Antonio Rodrigues Robles, were seized as belonging to an enemy alien Carvajal finally joined with Manasseh ben Israel and five others on 24 March 1656 in petitioning the protector for a formal statement permitting Jewish residence. In doing this, Carvajal and his colleagues finally threw off the disguise of Roman Catholicism, which by then must have worn very thin. The following February, Carvajal and Simon de Caceres successfully petitioned Cromwell to allow the Jews to lease a bit of land at Mile End for use as a cemetery. 
Carvajal's character may perhaps be gauged from his actions in the summer of 1658 when $15,000 worth of his logwood was seized by English customs off a Dutch vessel docked in London. Carvajal and his associates raided the warehouse, kidnapped the customs official, and liberated the logwood. The council of state was still examining the incident when Carvajal died in November 1659, according to Samuel Pepys after having been 'lately cutt (by the same hand with my selfe) of the Stone'. He was buried in the new Jewish cemetery at Mile End, and the great bell of St Katharine Cree was rung in his honour. Carvajal was survived by his wife, Maria, and two sons: one of them became a broker on the exchange, but neither of them seems to have married. 
David S. Katz', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37264


Carver, Robert (b. 1487/8, d. in or after 1568), composer, was born between 25 March 1487 and 24 March 1488, possibly in Aberdeen. He is of uncertain parentage and upbringing, but a maternal uncle, Andrew Gray, was a chantry chaplain of St Nicholas's Church, Aberdeen; Andrew's parents, Robert and Ellen Gray, were thus the composer's maternal grandparents, and he may have been the son of a Robert Carver and Marjorie Gray of Aberdeen. Ample opportunity for a musical education was available in this city, through a choristership at the cathedral church, the chapel of St Mary's College, or the parish church of St Nicholas. 
At about the age of fourteen Carver entered the noviciate at the Augustinian abbey of Scone, and he took his vows as a canon of the house in his sixteenth year. The key to understanding the next stage of his career is provided by the manner in which he chose to use in musical contexts the pseudonym Arnot. It appears that he took this name in recognition of patronage conferred by David Arnot, a trusted servant of James IV, who for some years after 1501 acted with the abbot of Scone to endow and found the royal collegiate church (sometimes called Chapel Royal) of St Mary and St Michael located within Stirling Castle. Established by 1503 for a dean and six dignitaries, and for ten other canons, ten minor canons, and six boy choristers all to be skilled in music and to form the choir, this immediately became the foremost institution in Scotland for the performance of divine service enhanced with elaborate polyphonic music. In 1508 Arnot was appointed its dean, and it seems likely that his particular service to Carver consisted of his persuading his colleague the abbot of Scone (an institution offering the composer no local scope for the exercise of his talents) to permit the young musician to accept appointment as a member of the Stirling choir. No documentation yet discovered fully substantiates this hypothesis; nevertheless, perhaps no choir in the kingdom other than that at Stirling could have tackled the monumental demands made by some of Carver's music, and such an act of patronage amply explains Carver's adopting the name of Arnot in gratitude. 
Probably the composer is to be identified with the Robert Arnat who on 15 July 1543 was collated to a full canonry and prebend of the Stirling chapel; it seems likely that this promotion was conferred as due recognition for some thirty-five years' work at the college, and also as a sinecure source of income serving as a pension in his retirement. He returned to Scone Abbey, where he was at perfect liberty to continue composing and where his signature occurs frequently on a series of documents beginning in 1544. The community persisted even after the destruction of the abbey buildings in 1559, and Carver may well have remained in a form of religious life until his decease. 
A single manuscript apparently originating at the Stirling royal chapel now serves as the sole surviving repository of Carver's attributed works, which extend to five masses (two dated) and two votive antiphons. The mass 'Dum sacrum mysterium' (1508-13), for ten voices, was conceived on a gigantic scale; its cantus firmus honours St Michael, and probably it was begun when Carver (putatively) joined the Stirling chapel, dedicated to this saint, in 1508. Later works include the only extant mass composed by a Briton on the continental cantus firmus 'L'homme arme', a votive antiphon, 'O bone Jesu', for the remarkable number of nineteen voices, masses for six and five voices, and finally -- dated 1546 -- a mass, 'Pater creator omnium'. Between the earliest and latest works Carver travelled from a somewhat overblown engagement of the English late fifteenth-century style of ornamental, rhapsodic, and non-imitative polyphony to more concentrated forms of contrapuntal writing, admitting imitation and other points of structural integration, and examples of chordal orientation. He was capable of creating passages of considerable sonic beauty, and his vocal lines are never less than finely spun. His early achievement was commonly beset by a tendency to overwrite and by a somewhat stunted sense of harmonic structure and progression capable of generating rather graceless periods of static monotony. His finest compositions, especially the five-voice mass, overcame these debilities to yield work of high accomplishment. Advanced in years, Carver is presumed to have died soon after his latest documented appearance in 1568. 


@@@@@


doc= 37265


Cary, John (1755-1835), cartographer, was born on 23 February 1755 in Corsley, Wiltshire, the second of the four sons and one of possibly five or more children of George Cary, maltster, and his wife, Mary (died 1799). In 1770 he entered a seven-year engraving apprenticeship under William Palmer of New Street, London. 
Cary set himself up in business as an engraver before 1782 at Johnson's Court, Fleet Street, London. By about 1783 he was at 188 Strand and about 1791 moved to 181 Strand, which he occupied until January 1820 when fire destroyed his workshop and his brother William Cary's adjacent premises, bringing forward a planned move to 86 St James's Street. The Cary business continued to operate here until after John's death. Although he generally worked independently, Cary did collaborate, notably with John Wallis, who seems to have inspired his diversification into publishing about 1783 or 1784, with his brother William in globe production and his brother Francis ('c'.1756-1836) in engraving, and, most significantly, with the geologist William Smith and others in the development and publication of geological maps, including Smith's great map of 1815 and a county series, begun in 1819 but not completed. 
Cary's first known engraved plan is dated 1779. Henceforth, the quality of his engraving established new standards and a new style, with his effective, starkly beautiful, plain design being widely adopted. His firm's cartographic output was prolific and diverse, ranging through maps, plans, atlases, astronomical and educational works, road-books (including works based on surveys by Aaron Arrowsmith the elder, who probably trained him), guides, and globes. Particularly noteworthy are the immensely popular 'New and Correct English Atlas' (editions from 1787), which became the standard county atlas of the period, and the 'Traveller's Companion' (from 1790), the printing plates of both of which had to be replaced having become worn in the effort to meet the huge demand, and the particularly fine 'New English Atlas' (from 1801) and 'New Universal Atlas' (from 1808). 
Despite the high quality of his maps, Cary's only public recognition was the award of the Society of Arts gold medal (1804) for publishing Singer's Cardiganshire survey (1803). Cary's appointment as surveyor of the roads to the General Post Office (1794) led to his publication of authoritative road measurements (measured by perambulator) in his influential 'New Itinerary' (numerous editions from 1798). 
Cary probably married Ann Jackson ('c'.1752-1824) of Clerkenwell on 21 June 1779. They had three sons and one daughter. The Elizabeth Jackson of Clerkenwell who later married his brother William may have been his sister-in-law. In 1820 he was joined in business by his eldest son, George, who served his engraving apprenticeship under his father from 1802 and took over the business about 1821 in partnership with his brother John, although their father probably remained a partner until his death. The newly styled firm of G. and J. Cary continued at 86 St James's Street until 1850, although map production apparently ceased about 1846. It carried on William Cary's scientific instrument and terrestrial and celestial globe making business after his death (1825) until about 1853. The firm's cartographic materials were subsequently acquired by George Frederick Cruchley and later Gall and Inglis, with both publishing adaptations of original stock and plates. 
Cary died in Mortlake, Surrey, on 16 August 1835 and was buried in Kensington, London, on 22 August. He and the firm he created dominated British map production for a generation at least, being the most influential private-sector map maker of the age. His contemporary reputation is confirmed by the extended life of much of his output and by the widespread plagiarism of his productions. 
David Smith', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37266


Cary, Mary (b. 1620/21), millenarian, is known only through her publications, which reveal little of her background. At first she identified herself by initials alone, styling herself a 'minister or servant of the Gospel' ('The Resurrection of the Witnesses', 1648), and she did not indicate her gender or give her full name until 1651. She explained then that her surname had changed to Rande, presumably by marriage, but she continued to write under her maiden name. Her husband has not been identified. Christopher Feake described her as a gentlewoman, and her fluent and confident style points in the same direction. She tells us that she had studied scripture from childhood, and had been drawn to the prophecies of 'Daniel' and 'Revelation' at the age of fifteen, in 1636. Dedications in an early work to the puritan MPs Francis Rous and Thomas Boon may indicate a west-country origin, though she was living in London during her years as a writer. 
In her first published work, in 1645, Cary defended free grace while condemning the 'licentious' antinomianism with which it was often associated (Cohen, 5). In 'A Word in Season' (1647) she championed lay preaching, and urged that godliness was to be found in many forms. She always condemned the use of force against religious nonconformists, and prayed that the presbyterians and Independents would never be in a position to impose their own brands of orthodoxy. 
Cary's major interest was in the establishment of Christ's kingdom on earth. Her prophetic framework was based largely on the writings of Thomas Brightman and John Archer; she expected the conversion and restoration of the Jews in 1656, and the full establishment of Christ's kingdom by 1701. Her own contribution lay in revealing the apocalyptic significance of the English civil war. In 'The Resurrection of the Witnesses' (1648) she interpreted the outbreak of the Irish rising in 1641 as the killing of the two witnesses ('Revelation' 11), and the creation of the New Model Army in April 1645 as their resurrection. 'The Little Horns Doom & Downfall' (first drafted in 1644, published in 1651) interpreted Daniel's prophecies in a similar manner, identifying Charles I as the little horn of the beast. It was dedicated to Oliver Cromwell's wife and his daughter Bridget, and appeared with testimonials from three leading radical preachers, Hugh Peter, Henry Jessey, and Christopher Feake. In a sketch of the New Jerusalem, Cary insisted that Christ would appear to reign in person. She spoke mostly of the spiritual blessings to come, but she promised material joys too, predicting that infant mortality would cease and that poor men would no longer work 'to maintain others that live vitiously, in idleness' (Cary, 'Little Horns Doom', 308). 
Like many radicals Cary became disillusioned with the Rump Parliament and welcomed its fall. In July 1653 she published a set of reform proposals addressed to Barebone's Parliament. Many were concerned with the propagation of the gospel and with ways of maintaining the clergy by means other than tithes. She wanted university endowments to be used to fund poor preachers and scholars from humble backgrounds. She also suggested raising a fund to relieve the poor and unemployed by a levy on all letters or contracts, and called for drastic simplification of the laws and the establishment of local courts. 
Cary's final work, an enlarged edition of 'The Resurrection' (1653), was addressed to the saints' meeting at Blackfriars and Christ Church, showing that she was now closely associated with the Fifth Monarchists. Within a few years, she predicted, Christ's kingdom would spread through Europe, and she warned the Dutch and Danes that in fighting England (in the First Anglo-Dutch War) they were fighting God. Readers were told to beat their ploughshares into swords. 
Cary then disappears from view. Whether she had died or lapsed into silence as the millennial dream faded is not known. 
Bernard Capp', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37267


Castner, Hamilton Young (1858-1899), industrial chemist, was born on 11 September 1858 in Brooklyn, New York, the second of three sons (there were no daughters) of Samuel Castner and his wife, Julia. His early education is unknown, but he attended the Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute before enrolling in 1875 in Columbia University School of Mines. He left after three years without a degree, not from any lack of ability but because he selected from the course only those subjects -- analytical and applied chemistry -- which appealed to him. 
In 1879 Castner and his elder brother, E. B. Castner, set up as consulting chemists in New York. The consultancy prospered, but some chemical processes which Castner developed were not successful commercially. About 1884 he sold his share and turned his attention to devising an improved process for manufacturing aluminium, a metal whose unique properties could not then be adequately utilized because of its high cost. Production at that time was by reducing aluminium chloride with sodium, which cost 14's'. a pound. Castner devised a process, involving the reduction of caustic soda with carbon, by which the cost of sodium could be reduced to less than 1's'. a pound. He failed to interest American industrialists and in 1886 travelled to England, thereafter the centre of his working life. 
In England Castner aroused the interest of the Webster Crown Metal Company of Solihull, which was then manufacturing small quantities of aluminium at a cost of $3 a pound. Substantiation of Castner's claim led to the formation in 1887 of the Aluminium Company. Potential annual output was 100,000 pounds. After initial difficulties, they succeeded in producing aluminium of high purity but in 1889 the process was rendered obsolete by the advent of a much cheaper electrochemical process invented independently in France and the USA. With characteristic resource Castner developed new uses for his cheap sodium, his only asset. From it he manufactured sodium peroxide, a valuable bleaching agent, especially for straw hats, and sodium cyanide for the booming gold-mining industry, particularly in South Africa. 
The now misnamed Aluminium Company flourished, and it was difficult to keep pace with the demand for sodium. In 1890 Castner devised a new process for its manufacture, based on the electrolytic decomposition of caustic soda. Difficulties arose because of the relative impurity of even the best available caustic soda, and this led to his greatest success -- a process for manufacturing very pure caustic soda by the electrolysis of brine in a rocking cell containing mercury. Valuable by-products were chlorine (yielding bleaching powder for the textile and paper trades) and hydrogen. On seeking to patent his process, Castner discovered that a similar patent had been lodged in Germany by Karl Kellner and made over to the powerful Solvay Company in Belgium. To avoid expensive litigation, the two companies combined in 1895 to form the Castner-Kellner Alkali Company, with large works in Runcorn. 
Castner's originality brought him little public acclaim, for the chemical industry was such that its products were largely the raw materials of other industries. Nevertheless, he ranked high among the pioneers of twentieth-century chemical technology. His life was clouded from the 1880s by the onset of tuberculosis, which led him to spend his winters in Florida. In spite of this, he had a remarkable record of achievement when he died, on 11 October 1899, at his home in Saranac Lake, Franklin county, New York state. He was unmarried. 
Trevor I. Williams', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37268


Catchpool, (Egerton) St John Pettifor (1890-1971), social worker, was born in Leicester on 22 August 1890, the sixth child and fourth son in the family of five sons and two daughters of Thomas Kingham Catchpool, hosiery manufacturer, and his wife, Florence Emma Pettifor. He was educated at Quaker institutions: Sidcot School and Woodbrooke College, Birmingham, where he took the social studies course. During the First World War his pacifist convictions led him to serve with the Friends' ambulance unit in France and then with the Friends' war victims' relief committee in Russia. He returned to England and took up the post of sub-warden of Toynbee Hall, the universities' settlement in the East End of London, which he held from 1920 to 1929, and he served also as a co-opted member of the London county council education committee from 1925 to 1931. In 1920 he married Ruth Allason, daughter of Henry Lloyd Wilson, chemical manufacturer. Trained as a doctor, she never practised, devoting her life instead to the care of their son and four daughters and to support of her husband's work. 
The years in east London gave Catchpool an insight into the restricted lives of inner-city youth, and when in 1930 he was invited to become the first national secretary of the newly formed Youth Hostels Association, he readily accepted. 'This seemed just the movement', he wrote in a letter, 'to give scope for all my enthusiasms and even hobby-horses'. He threw himself into the cause with immense energy, addressing meetings all over the country, persuading, lobbying, and begging for funds. He recruited G. M. Trevelyan, the historian, as president of the association, and William Temple, then archbishop of York, as vice-president. He secured financial support from the Carnegie Trust, the King George V Jubilee Trust, and, later, from the government's National Fitness Council. He acted as the focal point for the enthusiasm of many hundreds of volunteer workers of every social background up and down the country. Soon, tens of thousands of young city-dwellers, on bicycle or on foot, were enjoying their first taste of the countryside with the aid of the new network of youth hostels. 
Catchpool also saw the importance of the youth hostels as centres of international contact and friendship among people. He worked closely with the German founder of the movement, Richard Schirrmann (later ousted by the Nazis), and with the idealists who were establishing youth hostels in other countries. In 1938 he was elected president of the International Youth Hostel Federation, an office which he held for the next twelve years. After his retirement as secretary of the English Association in 1950 he spent four years in India, encouraging the growth of youth hostels in that country, and subsequently paid two extended visits to Africa for the same purpose. 
Catchpool (known to his friends as Jack and to his colleagues as Catch) combined the innocent enthusiasm of a child and the tenacity of purpose of a mature and deeply spiritual man, enlivened by a puckish sense of humour. Impatient with committee work, he was at his best when exploring new paths and communicating his enthusiasms to others. He was appointed chevalier of the Dutch order of Orange-Nassau in 1948 and CBE in 1951. Catchpool died in Welwyn Garden City, where his home was 17 Meadow Road, on 13 March 1971. 
Graham Heath', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37269


Cavendish, Michael (c.1565-1628), composer and courtier, was the youngest of three children of William Cavendish, landowner, and his wife, Ann Cox, and a grandson of George Cavendish (b. 1494, d. in or before 1562?), the biographer of Cardinal Thomas Wolsey. The family, which can be traced back to the thirteenth century, lived at the manor of Cavendish Overhall, Suffolk, until the house and lands were sold in 1596 by William Cavendish, Michael's eldest brother. However, the dedication of Michael Cavendish's sole publication, '14. Ayres in Tabletorie to the Lute' (1598), is 'From Cavendish this 24 of July', so the family may have retained connections with the area. 
Only one copy of Cavendish's book is extant, now in the British Library. It is dedicated to Lady Arabella Stuart, Cavendish's second cousin, and comprises twenty-eight compositions: fourteen songs for voice and lute or two voices and bass viol, six more lute songs with alternative versions for four voices alone, and eight madrigals for five voices -- a range of performing options which justifies the claim in the dedication that the book 'hath in it humours variable for delights sake'. 
The songs are tuneful and well crafted, sometimes delicate in expression. The madrigals, more clumsy and old-fashioned, look back to the models of Alfonso Ferrabosco the elder rather than forward to the looser, more expressive style of Thomas Morley; two of them (21 and 22) borrow musically as well as textually from Ferrabosco's settings, published by Nicholas Yonge in the influential second volume of 'Musica transalpina' (1597). With 'Come gentle swains' (24) Cavendish has the distinction of being the first composer to introduce into a printed collection the English refrain which three years later concluded every composition in Morley's collection dedicated to Elizabeth I, 'The Triumphs of Oriana' (1601): '
then sang the shepherds and nimphes of Diana 

Long live faire Oriana. 

' A heavily revised version of this madrigal was included in Morley's collection. 
Little is known of Cavendish's life. The dedication contains the somewhat bitter generalization that 'the policie of times may hold it unfit to raise men humbled with adversities to titles of dearnesse', which could apply to Cavendish's own situation at the end of Elizabeth's reign. But his fortunes may have revived after the accession of James I, since a manuscript tracing the pedigree of the family states that Cavendish was 'Servant in the Bedchamber to Prince Charles', who was born in 1601 (BL, Add. MS 19122). 
Whatever Cavendish's personal fortunes, it is likely that his connections with the more favoured branch of the family headed by William Cavendish, first earl of Devonshire and heir to Chatsworth and Hardwick, brought him into association with several other composers and musicians. His book of songs and madrigals has similarities in style with the 'Songs of Sundrie Kindes' (1604) by Thomas Greaves, and both end with a group of five-part madrigals. Greaves was employed by Sir Henry Pierrepoint, whose wife, Frances Cavendish, was sister of the first earl and cousin to Michael's father. The madrigalist John Wilbye dedicated one set of published madrigals to Lady Arabella Stuart and the other to Sir Charles Cavendish, the earl's younger brother, who was himself connected by marriage to the Kytsons, Wilbye's patrons at Hengrave Hall. Lady Arabella was also the patron of Tobias Hume and the lutenist Francis Cuttinge. Two of the lyrics set by Cavendish (19 and 20) were later set by Michael East in his 'Madrigales to 3. 4. and 5. Parts' (1604) and Cavendish's only other extant work, besides his published book, is a contribution to 'The Whole Booke of Psalmes', published in 1592 by Thomas East, thought to be the father of Michael East. 
As a gentleman amateur with a place at court, Cavendish was not himself fully a member of 'a profession worthie some grace' (as he described music in his dedication). But the quality of his few compositions makes him not the least important of an influential group of musicians active around the turn of the century. Other than his service to Prince Charles, nothing is known of his later years. Cavendish's will was dated 5 July 1628 and proved six days later. He died, unmarried, in the parish of St Mary Aldermanbury, London. 
Christopher Hogwood', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37270


Cawarden, Sir Thomas (c.1514-1559), courtier, was the son of William Cawarden, shearman and fuller of London, and his wife, Elizabeth. Apprenticed in 1528 to Owen Hawkins, mercer of London (a date which suggests he was born 'c'.1514), he later became free of the Mercers' Company. He was probably identical with the Thomas 'Hawarden' admitted to Gray's Inn in 1528. 
Cawarden probably attracted Henry VIII's favour through Thomas Cromwell. In 1539 or 1540 he became a gentleman of the privy chamber, a post he retained under Edward VI. A committed evangelical, he and his wife, Elizabeth (whom he had married by 1542; her surname is unrecorded), were accused of heresy in March 1543 with the 'Windsor martyrs', but in September they were pardoned. In 1544 Henry appointed him keeper of the tents and master of the revels; in the former capacity Cawarden helped to organize the Boulogne expedition of 1544, to which he brought a retinue of fifty-one horse and 200 foot, and was knighted for his services on 30 September. He was licensed to keep forty liveried retainers in 1545. Between 1538 and 1547 Henry granted him lands in Bedfordshire, Kent, Sussex, Warwickshire, and especially Surrey. He became Anne of Cleves's steward for Blechingley in 1540, acquired the manor itself in 1547, and represented the borough in parliament in 1542, 1545 (probably), and 1547. He became keeper of numerous royal manors, most notably Nonsuch Palace in 1544. In his will Henry left him $200 and lands worth 100 marks per annum. 
Protector Somerset made Cawarden a Surrey JP and he was also sheriff of Surrey and Sussex in 1547/8. He was elected Surrey's senior knight of the shire in a 1548 by-election and was returned again (at the council's recommendation) in March 1553. He served on Surrey commissions for the subsidy (1547-51), dissolution of chantries (1547), musters (1548), and seizure of church goods (1553). Following Somerset's fall the council entrusted Cawarden with the Tower of London garrison. In 1550 he became steward of Hampton Court and was granted the site of the London Blackfriars, to which he removed the revels office from Warwick Inn. He turned the parish church of St Anne's (part of the Blackfriars complex) into a store for tents, having ordered the parishioners to remove the sacrament over the altar before he did so himself. He also enjoyed good relations with the duke of Northumberland, and Princess Elizabeth addressed him in a letter as 'loving friend'. With Sir Christopher and William More of Loseley, Cawarden headed a gentry faction in Surrey which was at odds with a rival group led by William, Lord Howard of Effingham. He was a contentious figure in other ways too, arousing hostility over enclosures during the 1549 insurrection, quarrelling with his fellow JP William Sackville, and in 1550 suing Philip Paris for implicating him in the murder of Robert Paris, killed that year at Newbury. Cawarden was an active supporter of Northumberland's unsuccessful scheme to secure the throne for Lady Jane Grey in 1553. He seems to have tried to raise men on Jane's behalf among the royal tenants at Wimbledon, and in his capacity as master of the tents was ordered by the duke of Suffolk on 16 July to provide tents for the garrison appointed to secure the tower for his daughter. Three days later Jane herself sent a warrant directing Cawarden to deliver four tents to her 'beloved father and counsellor the Duke of Suffolke' ('Seventh Report', HMC, 610). He was also suspected of involvement in Sir Thomas Wyatt's rising at the beginning of 1554. On 25 January Lord Howard arrested him; the following day Bishop Stephen Gardiner questioned Cawarden and then released him to raise forces against the rebels. Acting without Gardiner's knowledge, Howard then rearrested Cawarden on the 27th, detaining him at Reigate until the 30th while the sheriff of Surrey confiscated eighteen wagonloads of his equipment, including sixteen pieces of ordnance. Finally the council placed Cawarden under house arrest at Blackfriars until the rising was suppressed. 
Cawarden escaped punishment, was elected a knight of the shire in November, and was restored as a JP in 1555. But in the latter year he had to pay Mary $1000 for an unspecified offence and was cited in king's bench for leaving parliament early. He clearly remained suspect in government eyes, and in March 1556 he was arrested on suspicion of involvement in the Dudley conspiracy. But though his servant John Dethicke was executed, Cawarden himself was not indicted. Nevertheless a year later he was briefly in the Fleet prison, and he lost the keepership of Nonsuch to the twelfth earl of Arundel. No doubt his religious stance was largely responsible for his difficulties. Mary's regime forced him to provide the parishioners of St Anne's with another place of worship -- according to Stow he gave them only 'a lodging chamber above a staire', which later fell down (Stow, 1.341) -- but it was unable to win him for Catholicism, for he maintained a secret protestant conventicle in his own house near by. 
Elizabeth restored Cawarden's fortunes, appointing him lieutenant of the Tower in 1558. He was again elected knight of the shire for Surrey in 1559 and helped Thomas Browne win a contested election for the county's other seat. He died on 25 August that year at Horsley, probably at John Agmondesham's house, and was buried on 29 August in Blechingley church beneath a prominent monument. His heir was his brother Anthony's son William; his executors were his wife (who was buried beside him after her death on 20 February 1560) and William More. Having kept house 'right bounteously' ('DNB'), with a hundred servants and retainers, he left an estate valued at $1611 14's'. 8died, though debts and legacies perhaps consumed it. 
As master of the revels (a position he was the first to hold) Cawarden was a significant figure in the development of mid-Tudor court culture. His activities took a variety of forms. In 1551 he was involved in the construction of a substantial banqueting house (possibly modelled on Nonsuch) for the reception of French ambassadors in Hyde Park, being responsible for its interior decoration. But he is more often recorded in the context of court entertainments. He was later described as 'skilfull and delightinge in matters of devise' (Colvin, 1.93), and there is evidence that he played a part in the choice of entertainments, notably a letter which William Baldwin sent him during Mary's reign concerning the latter's play 'Love and Lyve', in which, according to its author, Cawarden had expressed an interest three years earlier. But he is more often recorded as an enabler than as a deviser of revels, being called on to provide costumes and other necessary gear, often both elaborate and expensive. It cost nearly $300 to enable the courtier George Ferrers to make his state entry into London as the lord of misrule for the Christmas season of 1551/2. 
Cawarden was particularly active in Edward VI's last years, for instance with the five masques he helped stage between 7 January and 12 February 1553 to distract the sickening king -- 'a Maske of Greek Woorthyes, a Maske of Medyoxes, beinge halfe deathe, halfe man, a Maske of Bagpypes, A Maske of Cattes, a Maske of Tumblers goinge upon theyre handes with theyre feet upward' ('Seventh Report', HMC, 606). But he also provided costumes for a play at Queen Mary's coronation feast, for entertainments later in her reign by Nicholas Udall, and finally for London citizens preparing to greet Elizabeth when she in turn processed through the city on her way to be crowned. Cawarden sometimes had to be pressed to deliver what was needed for such occasions, but no one seems to have doubted his competence, suggesting that in this respect, at least, he earned the dedication of Robert Burrant's translation of Cato's 'Preceptes', praising his 'politique wisdom'. 


@@@@@


doc= 37271


Cayley, Sir George, sixth baronet (1773-1857), aeronautical designer, was born on 27 December 1773 in Scarborough, Yorkshire, the only son of Sir Thomas Cayley (1732-1792), and his wife, Isabella Seton (died 1828); there were also four daughters. After brief schooling in York he was educated privately by George Walker FRS in Nottingham and George Cadogan Morgan in Southgate, Middlesex, two nonconformist ministers selected by his mother. He succeeded his father as baronet in 1792, and lived at Brompton Hall, between Pickering and Scarborough, throughout his life. On 9 July 1795 he married Sarah (died 1854), the daughter of his first tutor, the Revd George Walker; they had three sons and seven daughters, of whom three children died young. 
As a landowner, Cayley was actively interested in agricultural improvements, and in 1800 he took a leading part in obtaining an act of parliament for the Muston drainage scheme, covering 10,000 acres frequently flooded by the rivers Derwent and Hertford. He was chairman of the directors of the scheme, which was executed by the engineer William Chapman, who developed a novel system using drainage ditches parallel to the main river channels. 
Throughout his life Cayley showed keen interest in science and engineering developments, particularly in aeronautics. As early as 1799 he formulated the concept of the classical fixed wing aeroplane with separate mechanisms for generating lift and propulsion, and soon afterwards began experiments with a whirling arm rig to measure the lift of wings. In 1809 he experimented with a glider capable of lifting a person, and he published a paper in 'Nicholson's Journal' (November 1809-March 1810) setting out clearly the basic principles of aeroplane flight. This paper was thought sufficiently perceptive and important to be reprinted in England in 1876, in France in 1877, and in the USA in 1895. 
Cayley also experimented with lighter-than-air flight: he wrote three papers on airships in the 'Philosophical Magazine' (February 1816-July 1817) of Alexander Tilloch, and in 1820 he successfully flew a model airship at Brompton. In a period when ballooning was an activity only for itinerant showmen, any interest in flying invited ridicule, but he made several unsuccessful attempts to form a society to encourage aeronautical developments. He continued to speculate on the subject, and wrote letters to various journals, but seems to have done little further practical work until 1849, when a glider large enough to carry a small child was launched in free flight at Brompton. This was followed by a full-sized machine, reputedly piloted by his coachman, in 1853. Although the evidence for these flights is little better than anecdotal, sufficient information is available in his published and private papers to make possible the construction of a reproduction of the latter machine, which was successfully flown for a television film in 1972. 
The aeronautical pioneers in the nineteenth century were constrained by the lack of a lightweight power source. Cayley was convinced that the steam engine would never be suitable, and he experimented from 1799 with hot air engines, and from 1807 with engines fuelled by gunpowder. Nothing came of the latter, but about 1838 he demonstrated a fairly successful hot air engine in London, suitable for a road vehicle. 
Letters published in 'Mechanics' Magazine' from 1826 to 1856 attest to Cayley's interest in many technical topics, including a projected caterpillar tractor, the safety of railway travel, projectile design, and an artificial hand made for one of his tenants. Convinced that the general public had an unsatisfied thirst for knowledge, he took an active part in several educational activities. He was president of the York Mechanics' Institute from its foundation in 1827, and was a founder member of the Yorkshire and Scarborough philosophical societies, and of the British Association, which first met in York in 1831. 
In London, Cayley supported the formation of the Adelaide Gallery at the Strand, where lectures and demonstrations and an exhibition of machines and models were intended to educate and amuse the public. When it appeared that the intent to educate had been overwhelmed by the need to amuse, Cayley became chairman of the Royal Polytechnic at Regent Street, which from 1838 sought to do what the Adelaide Gallery had failed to do. 
From early youth Cayley was a keen proponent of parliamentary reform, and he took an active part in local whig politics. He became president of the York Whig Club from 1821 to 1827, and was MP for Scarborough from 1832 to 1834. Among a wide circle of friends and correspondents Cayley seems to have been recognized as a generous and modest man of great personal charm. He died at Brompton Hall on 15 December 1857, and was buried at Brompton church. He was succeeded in the baronetcy by his only surviving son, Digby (1807-1883). 


@@@@@


doc= 37272


Cecil, William, second earl of Salisbury (1591-1668), politician, was born in Westminster on 28 March 1591 and baptized on 11 April at St Clement Danes. He was the only son of Robert Cecil, first earl of Salisbury (1563-1612), and his wife, Elizabeth (1563-1597), daughter of William Brooke, tenth Baron Cobham. His mother died when William was six years old and he and his only sister, Frances, were placed in the care of their aunt, Lady Frances Stourton, while their father attended to the boy's education. William attended Sherborne School and matriculated as a fellow-commoner in 1602 from St John's College, Cambridge, Sir Robert's former college. 
Cecil inherited the title of Viscount Cranborne upon the creation of his father as first earl of Salisbury in 1605. In 1608 he was sent to France, but brought home to marry Catharine (died 1673), daughter of Thomas Howard, first earl of Suffolk, on 1 December that year. He then returned to France, his father insisting that he should reside abroad for two years. However, in the arrangements made for the investiture of Henry, James I's eldest son, as prince of Wales, Salisbury, now lord treasurer, saw an opportunity for Cranborne to win royal favour and he was summoned home to share the privilege of holding the king's train at the ceremony on 4 June 1610. He then resumed his tour and travelled to Venice. He fell ill of a fever at Padua, left Italy, and arrived in England resolved never to go abroad again. 
Becoming second earl of Salisbury upon his father's death in 1612, the death of the prince of Wales in the same year left the new earl to his own resources. He became lord lieutenant of Hertfordshire in 1612 and his punctilious implementation of orders from the privy council impressed the king, who made him a knight of the Garter in 1624. Charles I was equally well disposed towards Salisbury and made him a privy councillor in 1626. During the period of Charles's personal rule Salisbury conformed. He was disappointed at being denied the mastership of the court of wards, but his ambitions were partially satisfied with the captaincy of the band of the king's gentlemen pensioners in 1635. Until 1639 he employed much of his time in improving his estates. He also made Hatfield House a centre of taste and culture, patronizing the painters George Geldrop and Peter Lely, the musicians Henry Oxford and Nicholas Lanier, and the gardener John Tradescant the elder. 
In 1633 Salisbury accompanied Charles to his coronation in Edinburgh and became a member of the council of Scotland. But the king's failure to impose his ecclesiastical policy on Scotland and the tension between him and the English parliament in 1640 forced the earl to reconsider his position. He gradually inclined to the moderate party in the Lords while supporting the Commons in the removal of the instruments of arbitrary government. Since he did not commit himself unreservedly to any party he earned a reputation for political inconsistency, and had to confront the hazards of non-alignment when war broke out in 1642. While Hatfield was saved from depredation, the estate at Cranborne in Dorset suffered much damage. Salisbury's reaction at the end of hostilities was to seek security wherever it could be found. The House of Lords could offer none, since the victorious army was determined to suppress it. But that did not prevent Salisbury from acting as a member of the commission charged with negotiating an agreement with Charles in the Isle of Wight in 1648. When that failed he refused to approve the king's trial and execution. 
With the disappearance of the old order Salisbury decided to support the republic. He found no difficulty in signing the engagement drawn up by parliament which bound him to be faithful to a Commonwealth without king and House of Lords. That two of his sons had fought for parliament may have played a part in this transfer of loyalty. He may also have been influenced by the favour shown by parliament to his friend, Philip Herbert, fourth earl of Pembroke, when it voted that he should be indemnified for his losses in the war. Many of his closest friends among the nobility, notably Algernon Percy, tenth earl of Northumberland, Salisbury's son-in-law, had declared for parliament, and this again may have encouraged him to join the new regime. He became a member of the council of state from 1649 to 1651, and its president for a while, and entered the Rump Parliament as MP for King's Lynn. The protectorate, however, led to a change in the official attitude towards him, and by 1656 he was ousted from public activities, being excluded from Oliver Cromwell's second parliament, though elected for Hertfordshire. Salisbury retired to Hatfield where he died on 3 December 1668, but not before Charles II had appointed him high steward of St Albans in 1663. He was succeeded in the earldom by his grandson James Cecil (d. 1683), his eldest son, Charles, having died in December 1660. 
G. D. Owen', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37273


Cenwulf (d. 821), king of the Mercians, was the son of Cuthbert and, according to a contemporary genealogy, descended from Cenwalh, brother of King Penda (d. 655). He succeeded the son of Offa, Ecgfrith ['see under 'Offa], whose brief reign ended in December 796. Alcuin says that Offa shed much blood to secure Ecgfrith's position, and if this refers to a purge of the royal kindred it may explain why Cenwulf succeeded, despite being a distant relative. 
Cenwulf's early years as king were troubled. Offa had been overlord of much of southern England, but in 796 Kent rebelled under Eadberht Praen. In 798 Cenwulf attacked, captured Eadberht, and took him to Mercia, where his eyes were put out and his hands amputated. Cenwulf's brother Cuthred was made sub-king of Kent in the same year and they granted land there jointly and individually until Cuthred's death in 807. The coins of a King Eadwald precede Cenwulf's in East Anglia, and hint at another short-lived rising against Mercian overlordship. Relations with Essex are obscure until 811, when King Sigered first witnesses Cenwulf's charters; in 812 he is described as 'subregulus' and in 814 as 'dux'. Thus Cenwulf seems to have deprived him of royal status, as Offa did rulers of Kent and Sussex. Cenwulf's dealings with Sussex are witnessed only by a grant to the bishop of Selsey of 801. He had little power in other kingdoms. King Beorhtric of Wessex had married Offa's daughter and witnessed Ecgfrith's charters, which suggests some kind of association between the two. But there is no evidence of Cenwulf's influence in Wessex beyond a grant by Pope Leo III in 798 of Glastonbury Abbey to Cenwulf's son Cynehelm, and a confirmation of it by Cenwulf himself, both of which may well be later forgeries. On Beorhtric's death in 802, which also saw the repulse of a Mercian invasion under Ealdorman AEthelmund, Wessex probably passed out of Cenwulf's orbit. 
King Eardwulf of Northumbria attacked Mercia in 801, probably for sheltering political refugees, and a long campaign ended in a peace agreement. By 808 Eardwulf had been expelled from his kingdom, and Mercian involvement is suggested by a papal letter revealing that Cenwulf and the Northumbrian rebels had written to Charlemagne, to whom Eardwulf had fled. Nevertheless, he was reinstated by envoys of Charlemagne and Pope Leo III in 809. Cenwulf also fought the Welsh, presumably because the difficult situation which had necessitated the building of Offa's Dyke persisted. The Welsh annals record a battle at Rhuddlan, perhaps involving the Mercians, just after Offa's death in 796; in 816 they attacked Rhufoniog and Snowdonia, and in 818 Dyfed. Cenwulf was probably engaged in another Welsh campaign when he died near Chester. 
Little is known of Cenwulf's administration, though charter witness lists suggest some continuity with previous regimes in the dozen or so ealdormen also present at grants of Offa and Ecgfrith. Coins, after 'c'.805 bearing portraits derived from Roman models, were struck at Canterbury, Rochester (after 'c'.810), London, and an East Anglian mint. Their royal title, 'COENVVLF REX M[ERCIORVM]', matches that of the charters. Although Offa may once have aspired to be 'king of the English', Cenwulf did not, and it is arguable, for all his control of southern England apart from Wessex, that Mercian power declined in his reign. In 825 the Mercians were heavily defeated by the West Saxons, and were subsequently unable to cope with viking raids. Sixty years after Cenwulf's death their monarchy no longer existed. 
In 797 Alcuin wrote to Cenwulf praising his goodness and nobility and exhorting him to be a model Christian king. In 798 Cenwulf founded a monastery at Winchcombe, where a new church was dedicated in 811. Nevertheless, like his predecessors, AEthelbald and Offa, he had problems with the church, which was too powerful to be left uncontrolled, and Alcuin eventually felt obliged to commiserate with the abbess AEthelburgh, Offa's daughter, because ecclesiastics were ruled by tyrants not kings. Presumably as part of his attempt to rule Kent, Cenwulf gave the monastery of St Peter and St Paul, Canterbury, to his relative Cunred and the nunnery of Minster in Thanet to his daughter Cwenthryth. He may also have obtained from popes Leo III and Paschal I privileges giving him control of all the monasteries he had acquired. Offa's difficulties with the archbishop of Canterbury had resulted in the creation of a Mercian archbishopric at Lichfield. Possibly pressed by his churchmen, Cenwulf reversed this. In 798 he suggested to Pope Leo III that the province of Canterbury be reconstituted and moved to London -- a Mercian city. This Leo rejected, but after further negotiations he did suppress the archbishopric of Lichfield, and this was accepted by an English synod at 'Clofesho' in 803. For a time Cenwulf's relations with Canterbury were good, but by 808 a papal letter suggests that he and Archbishop Wulfred (died 832) were in dispute. No more is known of this and in 814 and 815 Canterbury received a number of royal land grants; but in 816 a synod at Chelsea attempted to challenge lay control of monasteries. A dispute then arose between Cenwulf and Wulfred over the Kentish houses of Reculver and Minster in Thanet, and the pope seems to have suspended the archbishop at the king's request. He was probably not reinstated until 821. 
Known relatives of Cenwulf are his brothers Ceolwulf and Cuthred, his queen, AElfthryth, daughter Cwenthryth, Cuthred's son Cenwald, and Cyneberht and Abbot Cunwald, who appear in charters. Also his son Cynehelm who was evidently buried at Winchcombe and may be the Cynehelm who last witnesses a genuine charter in 811. By the late tenth century Cynehelm was venerated as St Kenelm, and an eleventh-century life claimed that he succeeded his father as a child but was murdered by Cwenthryth. Cenwulf died in 821, at Basingwerk, near Chester, according to the twelfth-century poet Geoffrey Gaimar, and was buried in Winchcombe. Contemporary sources say he was succeeded by his brother Ceolwulf. It may have been his association with St Kenelm which led John of Worcester to call Cenwulf a saint. 


@@@@@


doc= 37274


Alexander Macomb Chance (1844-1917), chemical manufacturer, was born on 28 June 1844 in Edgbaston, Birmingham, the ninth and youngest child of George Chance, hardware merchant, and his wife, Cornelia Maria, daughter of Arent Schuyler de Peyster of New York. George was a brother of Robert Lucas Chance, who had founded Chance Brothers & Co., glass makers of Smethwick, in 1824; Alexander was therefore a cousin of James Timmins Chance. Alexander was educated at King Edward's School, Birmingham, and then in Lausanne, subsequently joining the family firm. 


@@@@@


doc= 37275


Chantrell, Robert Dennis (bap. 1793, d. 1872), architect, was baptized on 24 January 1793 in Newington, Southwark, the eldest of the seven children of Robert Chantrell (1765-1840), a businessman, then of Newington and later of Bruges, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Dennis (1766-1829). He was an articled pupil of Sir John Soane from 1807 to 1814. On 12 February 1814 he married Elizabeth Caroline Boham (died 1863), with whom he had four sons and four daughters. One son, John Boham Chantrell, later trained in his father's office. 
In 1818 Chantrell was employed to carry out repairs on the parish church in Halifax, Yorkshire, and the following year he settled in Leeds, from where he developed a substantial practice in the Yorkshire area, particularly as a designer of churches. From 1823 onwards he built over twenty in the region, a number of them for the commissioners for building new churches established under the 'Million Pound Act', and in 1829 he was appointed surveyor to York Minster. In 1846, however, he returned to London and virtually withdrew from active engagement in his profession. Three years later he became one of the architects who inspected designs for the Incorporated Church Building Society, while the Yorkshire practice was continued for a short time, at a low level of activity, by his son John Boham Chantrell. 
Chantrell's secular buildings were in the Greek revival manner -- notably the South Market at Leeds (1823-4; dem.), which was centred on an ambitious, circular, market cross of the Doric order -- but his churches were mainly in the Gothic style. Most of them are of the lancet type particularly associated with the commissioners' buildings and many -- for example, Christ Church, Meadow Lane, Leeds (1823-6; dem.), and Honley, near Huddersfield (1842-3) -- had thin arcade piers of cast iron; but Chantrell was a serious student of Gothic. His essentially pre-ecclesiological manner was given a variety and solidity by the use of carefully copied detail, and some of his later churches of the 1840s, such as Armitage Bridge, near Huddersfield (1847-8), were based on a system of proportions derived from medieval Gothic buildings, a subject on which he published a paper in 'The Builder' in 1847. His most important work, St Peter's, Leeds (1837-41), a rebuilding of the town's old parish church, was one of the key ecclesiastical projects of the time, a landmark in both the scholarly revival of the Gothic style and the high-church revival of Anglican Christianity, in which an accurate use of Perpendicular Gothic detail was combined with an approximation to a medieval plan form, complete with a fully developed chancel. A further dimension to his work was his occasional use of the neo-Norman style, for example at Shadwell church near Leeds (1841-2), while the steeple he added in 1839 to the early eighteenth-century Holy Trinity Church in Leeds is an ingenious pastiche in the manner of Sir Christopher Wren, and shows an unusual sympathy for the architecture of that period. 
Chantrell exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1812-14 and in Leeds at the Northern Society for the Encouragement of the Fine Arts from 1822, and he became a fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1836. In 1863 he retired to Sussex, and following the death of his first wife that year he married, on 2 December 1867, Mary Elizabeth Dear. He died at the Queen's Hotel in Norwood, Surrey, on 4 January 1872. His second wife survived him. 
Peter Leach', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37276


Chesterton, Cecil Edward (1879-1918), political journalist, was born on 12 November 1879 at 11 Warwick Gardens, Kensington, London, the second son and youngest child of Edward Chesterton (died 1922), a retired estate agent, and his wife, Marie Louise, 'nee' Grosjean (died 1933), whose father's family was of Swiss origin. Chesterton's elder brother Gilbert (G. K.) greeted his arrival with the satisfied response that now he would have someone to argue with, and the brothers went on cheerfully arguing throughout their lives, though Cecil had the more sharply polemical temperament. G. K. Chesterton's 'Autobiography' describes the comfortable, cultivated, and relaxed home in which they grew up. Like his brother, Cecil Chesterton attended St Paul's School. He was destined to join the family estate agency, and qualified as a surveyor, but by 1901 he had turned to journalism. 
A committed socialist, in 1901 Chesterton joined the Fabian Society and in time was elected to the executive committee. He had also met Ada Elizabeth Jones (1869-1962) ['see 'Chesterton, Ada Elizabeth], an independent-minded woman several years his senior, who made her living as a journalist, writing under the pseudonym John Keith Prothero. Chesterton fell in love with her and remained so for the rest of his life. She was happy to work with him as a colleague but for a long time refused his offers of marriage. He became increasingly close to Hilaire Belloc, and by 1911 had abandoned socialism in favour of distributism, the doctrine advanced by Belloc and G. K. Chesterton, that sought social justice in the widest possible distribution of personal ownership, with the Catholic peasantry of Europe as a model. Chesterton shared Belloc's disillusionment with the parliamentary system, and the two men collaborated in an attack on it in 'The Party System', published in 1911; in the same year Belloc launched a weekly paper, the 'Eye-Witness', with Chesterton as assistant editor. In 1912 Chesterton, backed by money from his father, took over the paper. The name was changed to the 'New Witness' and Ada Jones became assistant editor. Belloc's wife urged Chesterton to become a Roman Catholic, and he did so in June 1912. 
Chesterton was a short, pugnacious man, generally regarded as ugly; he was gregarious but aggressive, which made him a difficult companion. He wrote with vigour and clarity, but his polemics were extreme and uncontrolled, and in 1913 led him to the dock of the Old Bailey, charged with criminal libel. This was with respect to the Marconi scandal in which the 'New Witness' alleged that prominent members of the Liberal government, including the attorney-general, Sir Rufus Isaacs, and the chancellor of the exchequer, David Lloyd George, had engaged in corrupt financial dealings in the shares of the Marconi Company, which was setting up a radio communications system throughout the British empire. The case was brought against Chesterton by Isaacs's brother Godfrey, the financier who headed the company; Chesterton was found guilty and fined $100, which was reckoned to be a light sentence, as he might have been imprisoned. His attack on the Isaacs brothers echoed Belloc's antisemitism, but took it a lot further; in the words of Belloc's biographer, Chesterton was 'spittingly, uncontrollably anti-semitic' (Wilson, 184). Belloc himself thought that Chesterton and the 'New Witness' went too far, and that in the Marconi affair a good case had been bungled (Speaight, 311-12). 
On the outbreak of war in 1914 Chesterton adopted a strongly patriotic stance; early in 1915 he visited the United States to lecture and debate in favour of the allied cause. This American experience prompted his 'History of the United States', published posthumously in 1919. It is Chesterton's most enduring book; D. W. Brogan, though acknowledging its errors and omissions, wrote: 'As a political and military narrative it is a success. The qualities of this book far outweigh its defects... It is a deeply personal account of the history of a great political experiment written by a man who cared profoundly for politics. (Brogan, xvi)' In 1916 Chesterton joined the army, serving first in the East Surrey regiment and then in the Highland light infantry, and in 1917 he and Ada Jones were finally married. 
Chesterton was a late victim of the war. Had he survived, his polemical fervour and his nationalistic, racist, and anti-parliamentary attitudes might well have led him towards the ideological extremes of the inter-war years. In the last days of the war he became ill on active service, and on 6 December 1918 he died of nephritis in the military hospital at Wimereux, near Boulogne, France; he was buried soon afterwards in the nearby military cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 37277


Cheney, Edward (1803-1884), art collector and watercolour painter, was born at Badger Hall, Shropshire, the second son in a family of three sons and two daughters of General Robert Cheney (died 1820) and his wife, Harriet, daughter of the merchant and banker Ralph Carr (1711-1806), of Dunston Hill, co. Durham. His father was aide-de-camp to Prince Frederick, duke of York. Cheney passed from the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, into the army, buying a commission in a regiment which was ordered to India, where he spent a few years in inactive service. After his father's sudden death in 1820, his mother and elder brother, Henry, moved to Italy, where Edward joined them about 1825 after leaving the army. At first he lived in Naples and became acquainted with Sir William Gell, the excavator of Pompeii, Edward Dodwell, and other archaeologists and collectors. 
The Cheney brothers were notable in Anglo-Italian society of the 1820s and 1830s, and were especially connected with Rome, where their mother had established herself at the Palazzo Sciarra. Edward Cheney soon became friendly with British residents and regular visitors to Rome, and was welcomed in the great Roman houses. Among these were Lady Coventry and her daughter Lady Augusta, Spencer Compton, second marquess of Northampton, and his daughter Lady Marion Alford, Lord Beverley, later fifth duke of Northumberland, and Michelangelo Caetani, an artist who was to succeed his father as duca di Sermoneta. He formed a lifelong friendship with Henry Edward Fox, fourth Baron Holland, whom he met in Genoa in 1827: Fox's journal for 1827 and 1828 records their crowded social sojourn in Rome. The diarist Charles Greville arrived in Rome in March 1830 and met Edward Cheney: their friendship was quickly established and lasted until Greville's death in 1865. Cheney moved in the 1840s to Venice, where he lived at the Palazzo Soranzo-Piovene on the Grand Canal. Here he became a close friend of Rawdon Brown, the historian of the Venetian archives. 
During his time in Italy, Cheney formed a collection of pictures and works of art, later housed at Badger Hall and at 4 Audley Square, London. He had a fine library (sold by Sothebys in June 1886) and owned superb drawings, Rembrandt etchings, bronzes, maiolica, and furniture. His picture collection, chiefly of the Venetian school, was remarkable for its concentration, unknown at that time, on Tiepolo, including a vast number of this artist's oil sketches. His pioneering interest in Tiepolo led him also to gather a large collection of his drawings, which filled twelve albums. He also patronized contemporary artists, including Thomas Cromek and Dessoulavy. 
In 1851 Cheney began to act as unofficial consultant to the trustees of the National Gallery about the quality and availability of pictures in Italy, sometimes contradicting the purchases proposed by the critic John Ruskin. His London collection was described by Gustav Friedrich Waagen in 1857, and he was a member of the Burlington Fine Arts Club. He was an enthusiastic amateur watercolourist. He was also an original member of the Philobiblon Society, founded in 1853 by his friend Richard Monckton Milnes (later first Baron Houghton), for whose publications the 'Miscellanies' he contributed a number of articles about original documents connected with Venetian painters of the sixteenth century. In 1838 he wrote his only novel, 'Malvagna, or, The Evil Eye', a romantic work set in Sicily, but it did not attract public attention. 
Edward Cheney inherited the Badger Hall estate in December 1866 on the death of his bachelor brother Henry. Edward Cheney died at Badger Hall on 16 April 1884, also a bachelor: he bequeathed his property and collections to his nephew Colonel Alfred Capel Cure. The collection of pictures was sold at Christies and that of prints and drawings at Sothebys; both sales began on 29 April 1885. Two of the nine volumes of Tiepolo drawings were purchased in June that year, from a dealer, by the South Kensington Museum, for $11. 
Charles Sebag-Montefiore', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37278


Chidley, Katherine (fl. 1616-1653), religious controversialist and Leveller, was of unknown origins and background. By 1616 she was married to Daniel Chidley ('fl'. 1616-1649), a tailor of Shrewsbury, Shropshire, and in the same year gave birth to their first child, Samuel Chidley; seven more children were born to the couple by 1629. During the 1620s Katherine and her husband were active in a Shrewsbury conventicle which carried on a running quarrel with the rector of St Chad's, Peter Studley. In 1626 she and Daniel were among twenty people presented to the consistory court for non-attendance at church. She was also reported for refusing 'to come to be churched after childbirth' (Lichfield Joint RO, B/C/1, B/C/5, B/C/2). Persecution by the established church drove her and her family to flee to the relative anonymity of London at the end of the 1620s. There Daniel obtained his freedom of the Haberdashers' Company in 1632; there too they joined other separatists like John Duppa and John Lilburne in their struggle against the bishops. 
Shortly after the Long Parliament met in November 1640 the printer William Larner published Katherine Chidley's first tract, 'The Justification of the Independant Churches of Christ' (1641). It was an eighty-one-page riposte to the arguments of the London preacher Thomas Edwards for hierarchical and centralized church government, and a biblical defence of congregational and wifely autonomy. Conceding that her answers were 'not laid down in a schollerlik way', she nevertheless claimed for them 'the plaine truth of holy Scripture' (sig. A2b). Churches ought to be exclusive in their membership, she averred, because, 'when God brought his people into the promised land, he commanded them to be separated from the idolaters' (sig. A3b). Churches did not require pastors or teachers, for 'all the Lords people, that are made Kings and Priests to God, have a free voyce in the Ordinance of Election, therefore they must freely consent before there can be any Ordination' (p. 5). Bitterly she compared the officers of the Church of England to 'those Locusts, which ascended out of the bottomlesse pit' (p. 11), and denied that any congregation had the power to censure another. The humblest members of society, 'whether they be Taylors, Felt-makers, Button-makers, Tent-makers, shepherds or ploughmen, or what honest trade soever', were better qualified to create churches than 'ill-meaning priests' (p. 22). A future presbyterian, Edwards was afraid that religious toleration would undermine the authority of husbands, fathers, and masters over their wives, children, and servants. Chidley refuted him with a text from the seventh chapter of '1 Corinthians', which declared that a wife may be a believer and the husband an unbeliever: 'I pray you tell me', she taunted him, 'what authority this unbeleeving husband hath over the conscience of his beleeving wife; It is true he hath authority over her in bodily and civill respects, but not to be a Lord over her conscience' (p. 26). She concluded by admitting that she was 'a poor worme and unmeete to deal with you' (p. 81), but that did not stop her from throwing down a challenge to her antagonist to debate her publicly on the merits of religious separatism. 
In January 1645 Chidley crossed swords a second time with the presbyterian polemicist in 'A New-Yeares-Gift... to Mr. Thomas Edwards', a repudiation of the aspersions he had cast on the personal conduct of the separatists in his 'Antapologia'. Dismissing his book as 'a rangling, insinuating, contradictory, revengefull story', she added 'it appeared unto me a taske most befitting a woman... to answer it' (sig. A2a). The Church of England was, she wrote, not a true but a deformed church, which, by admitting all comers to the sacraments, was guilty of 'casting Gods holy things to dogs' (p. 10). Distancing herself from the antinomians she denied that the toleration claimed by the separatists was 'a Toleration to sinne'; it was rather the 'peaceable enjoyment of our liberty to worship God' (p. 16). She ended with the advice, 'doe not seeke shifts and superfuges. Consider and receive admonition, though it be from a woman' (p. 22). The last publication to appear under Chidley's own name was a broadsheet, 'Good counsell, to the petitioners for presbyterian government, that they may declare their faith before they build their Church'. Printed in November 1645 it denounced the presbyterian ministers of London for being interested only in their own maintenance and power. She appealed for the release of imprisoned separatists and reiterated her offer to debate the presbyterians on any matter of church doctrine. 
In his next book, 'Gangraena', Edwards sneeringly dismissed Katherine Chidley as 'a brasen-faced audacious old woman' (Edwards, 3.170). Whatever her physical appearance, there is no doubt about her audacity. Not only did she write boldly about religious questions, she was a zealous evangelist. Edwards records that she won converts in Stepney, where she also tangled with the moderate Independent minister William Greenhill. In 1647 she and her son Samuel travelled to Bury St Edmunds, where they helped found a separatist church. The two signed as witnesses to the covenant whereby the congregation of eight adults and six children bound themselves 'to become a peculiar Temple for the Holy Ghoste to dwell in, an entier spouse of Jesus Christ our Lord of Glory' ('Bury St. Edmunds church covenants', 334). Samuel was the more prolific pamphleteer, but according to Edwards mother and son collaborated closely, 'the one inditing and the other writing' (Edwards, 3.170), and they lived in the same house at least until the end of 1652. Daniel appears to have died soon after 1649, for in the early 1650s Katherine evidently took over his haberdashery business. She landed at least two substantial contracts to supply 4000 and 1000 pairs of stockings to the parliamentary army in Ireland, signing the receipts for her payments in a shaky hand. 
In the late 1640s Chidley and her son flung themselves wholeheartedly into London's radical politics, when she emerged as a leader of Leveller women. In April 1649 several hundred of them besieged parliament, demanding the release of the Leveller leaders from prison. In their second petition, which may have been written by Chidley, they justified their political activity on the basis of 'our creation in the image of God, and of an interest in Christ equal unto men, as also of a proportionable share in the freedoms of this commonwealth' ('Petition of Women, Affecters and Approvers of the Petition of Sept. 11, 1648', 1649). In 1653 the Leveller leader John Lilburne found himself on trial once more. Again Chidley rallied to his defence, organizing a petition to Barebone's Parliament that reportedly garnered over 6000 female signatures. The women boldly knocked on the door, but the house sent out one of its members, Praise-God Barebone, to persuade them to abandon their enterprise. Their persistence wore him down, however, so another MP was sent out. This anonymous member told them that parliament could not recognize their petition, 'they being women and many of them wives, so that the Law tooke no notice of them'. They retorted that not all of them were wives, 'and therefore pressed for the receiving of their petition, which if they refused they should know that they had husbands and friends and they wore swords to defend the libertys of the people &c.' (MS Clarendon 46, fols. 131'v'-132). Chidley's date of death is unknown and perhaps she died soon after this episode, since nothing more is heard of her, whether as religious writer, political activist, or successful woman of business. 


@@@@@


doc= 37279


Chidley, Samuel (b. 1616, d. in or after 1672), Leveller and pamphleteer, was baptized on 13 September 1618 (two years after he was born) at St Chad's, Shrewsbury, the first of eight children of Daniel Chidley ('fl'. 1616-1649), tailor of Shrewsbury, and his wife, Katherine Chidley (fl. 1616-1653). His parents were religious separatists who, to escape persecution, fled to London at the end of the 1620s. Daniel became free of the Haberdashers' Company in 1632, and apprenticed Samuel to the same trade in 1634. Samuel was made free of the company in 1649. 
In the 1630s the Chidleys were active in separatist circles and assisted John Lilburne in his struggle against the bishops. Samuel, who lived with his mother until 1652 or later, collaborated with her in the 1640s in campaigning for religious freedom and upholding the autonomy of individual congregations. A believer in infant baptism, Chidley was also a vehement sabbatarian and iconoclast, who denounced the observance of Christmas. 
In the mid-1640s Chidley became active in the Leveller movement. From the time of the Putney debates (October 1647), if not before, he was a treasurer for the Leveller party. In November 1647 he was at Ware promoting the 'Agreement of the People' among the mutinous troops of the army of Thomas Fairfax. For his pains the House of Commons put him in gaol. His sojourn there was brief, because in January 1648 he was active in promoting the Leveller Smithfield petition. 
With the collapse of the Leveller movement in 1649 Chidley turned his energies to building a separatist congregation in London, promoting social reform, and enriching himself on the spoils of revolution. Besides publishing pamphlets and organizing petitions, he brought out a short-lived newspaper, the 'Flying Eagle' (November-December 1652), in which he denounced the abuses of the day. These included the non-payment of military arrears, the excise tax, the slowness and excessive centralization of justice, and hanging for theft. On the latter subject Chidley published his most famous tract, 'A Cry Against a Crying Sinne' (1652; reprinted 1657). 
Radical activism did not hinder Chidley from treading the path to prosperity during the 1650s. In 1649 he was appointed a registrar of military debentures. From his vantage point in Worcester House he became involved in the speculative buying of soldiers' bills, with which he made fifteen purchases of crown land, mostly on behalf of other men. Thus he acquired the manor of Greens-Norton in Northamptonshire, only to sell it back to thirteen of its tenants. In London, however, he seems to have hung on to most of the properties he bought in St Giles-in-the-Fields and High Holborn for over $3300. 
Chidley's financial dealings led to a number of lawsuits, accusations of fraud, and charges of dealing in forged debentures, but nothing was ever proved against him. Before the end of the interregnum he had amassed a modest fortune and had begun styling himself gentleman. Some time before 1658 he married. In 1659 he and his wife, Mary, were charged in king's bench with 'grievously and dangerously' beating their servant girl (TNA: PRO, KB 9/880/222). The outcome of the trial is not known. 
As it did to other 'new men' of lower social status who prospered in the 1650s, the Restoration spelt economic ruin for Chidley. In spite of Charles II's promise at Breda not to touch the sales of confiscated lands, parliament voted that the crown lands should be resumed by the king. Compounding this misfortune, Chidley landed in prison in 1664 for his refusal to swear the oath of allegiance and supremacy. While we do not know whether he had children, we do read that in 1665 his whole family was carried off by the plague. The following year most of his remaining property was destroyed in the fire. In 1668 he found himself in gaol once again, this time on a charge of disturbing the peace. By 1672, bereft of family and fortune, he had returned to Shrewsbury, where he occupied a dwelling of only one hearth. His date of death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 37280


Christie, John Reginald Halliday (1899-1953), murderer, was born on 8 April 1899 at his parents' home, Black Boy House, near Halifax. He was the sixth child in the family of two sons and five daughters of Ernest John Christie, carpet designer, and his wife, Mary Hannah Halliday. He won a scholarship to Halifax secondary school, sang in the church choir, and became a boy scout. In later life he said that he was terrified of his father and found his mother over-possessive. He served in the First World War in the 52nd Nottinghamshire and Derby regiment, and in France he was seconded to the Duke of Wellington's (West Riding) regiment as a signalman. After the war, in which he was gassed, he returned to Halifax and in 1920 married a typist, Ethel Simpson (died 1952). They had no children. Between 1921 and 1933 Christie served a number of prison sentences for theft and, on one occasion, assault. 
In 1937 the Christies moved into the ground-floor flat of 10 Rillington Place (demolished) in west London, where Christie found employment as a cinema manager. During the Second World War, despite his criminal record, he became a war reserve policeman and won two commendations. 
In 1948 an illiterate van driver, Timothy Evans, who was twenty-three, and his pregnant wife, Beryl, moved into the upstairs flat. In 1949 Beryl found that she was pregnant again, but did not want a second child. Christie offered to abort the baby, impressing the Evanses with his first-aid certificates. Later, Christie told Evans that the abortion had failed and that his wife had died. He warned Evans that they were both guilty of a criminal offence, and advised him to leave London; Christie would dispose of Beryl's body and have the baby, Geraldine, adopted. Evans agreed. 
Eventually Evans went to the police, who found the strangled bodies of Beryl and Geraldine in Christie's wash-house. Evans was brought to London, where, after interrogation, he signed a confession to both the murders, which he later retracted. At his trial Christie was the chief prosecution witness. The jury did not believe Evans's story about his wife's abortion, as there was no evidence of it. Evans was found guilty and hanged for the murder of his daughter in March 1950, protesting his innocence to the last. 
In 1953 Christie left 10 Rillington Place. Shortly afterwards a number of bodies were found buried on the premises, in the garden, in an alcove behind the kitchen, and under the sitting-room floorboards. They were identified as those of Ruth Fuerst, an Austrian nurse, who had been missing since 1943; Muriel Eady, who had been one of Christie's colleagues at work in 1944; Christie's wife; and three other female victims, two of whom were prostitutes. All had been strangled, and according to Christie all except his wife had been subjected to sexual assault at or just after the time of death. 
Christie was convicted of murder and hanged at Pentonville prison, London, on 15 July 1953. The case aroused public disquiet as demonstrating that Evans's conviction and execution had been miscarriages of justice; there were two inquiries, and after the second Evans was granted a posthumous free pardon. The matter played an important part in the subsequent abolition of the death penalty in Britain; it was depicted in the film 'Ten Rillington Place' (1971). 
Ludovic Kennedy', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37281


Markyate, Christina of (b. c.1096, d. after 1145), hermit and prioress of Markyate, was born 'c'.1096, the daughter of an Anglo-Saxon nobleman, Auti, whose family had large possessions in Huntingdon, and his wife, Beatrix. Her baptismal name was Theodora, but she later took the name Christina, presumably to underline her position as one vowed to Christ. At an early age she was taken to the abbey of St Albans, where she made a secret vow of virginity and scratched a cross on its walls as a sign. Some years later her aunt, Alveva, who had been the mistress of Ranulf Flambard before he became bishop of Durham, entertained him on his way to London, and after the feast Christina was left with him in his room, where he attempted to seduce her. On the plea that she feared others might intrude, she asked permission to lock the door and promptly did so from the outside. The bishop, enraged at being deluded by a mere girl, determined to have his revenge. About 1115 he persuaded her parents to give her in marriage to a friend of his named Burhred, and by constant threats and ill treatment she was forced to consent. On refusing to consummate the marriage she was brought before the prior of Huntingdon. She defended her case so well that the prior gave judgment in her favour. The parents then appealed to Robert Bloet, bishop of Lincoln, who also declared in her favour. Subsequently he was persuaded by liberal bribes to reverse his judgment. From that time she was kept in close confinement and treated with cruelty. Eventually, she secretly engaged a local hermit to describe her plight to Ralph d'Escures, archbishop of Canterbury, and on hearing that he supported her case, she decided to escape. 
Christina arranged with the servant of the hermit to bring horses early one morning while her parents were away, and, dressed in man's garb, she escaped on horseback, riding 30 miles to Flamstead, where she took refuge with Alfwen, a recluse. She stayed hidden at Flamstead for two years, eventually moving to Markyate, another hermitage ruled over by Roger, a former monk of St Albans. She remained there for four years, confined to a cell that would allow her neither to sit nor lie down: it was closed by a large stone that could be moved only by Roger. After four years Roger died and, owing to the enmity of the bishop of Lincoln, she appealed for protection to Thurstan, archbishop of York. Probably about 1120, with Thurstan's help, she obtained the annulment of her marriage. 
In 1123 Christina returned to Markyate, where a community which would eventually be formally constituted as a nunnery gathered round her. It may well have been for this community that the celebrated St Albans psalter (now in Hildesheim) was prepared or adapted, with its drawings of episodes in the life of St Alexis (who also made a chaste marriage) and of the appearance of the risen Christ to two disciples as they walked to Emmaus, mirroring events in Christina's own life. By 1130 her reputation had spread far and wide and she was sought after as superior for many communities. Archbishop Thurstan wanted her to rule his foundation of St Clement in York, and suggested her as abbess of Marcigny and Fontevrault in France. By this time she had become friendly with Geoffrey de Gorham, abbot of St Albans, who persuaded her to make her monastic profession before Alexander, bishop of Lincoln. Her life now became peaceful and she gave counsel and encouragement to Abbot Geoffrey when he became involved in the ecclesiastical politics of the early years of Stephen's reign. At this point, apparently around the year 1140, the manuscript containing Christina's biography is cut off, though other sources reveal that a priory was built for her at Markyate in 1145. Gifts of her embroidery were sent to Pope Adrian IV in 1155, but it cannot be safely deduced from this that she was herself still alive at that date and the date of her death is unknown. A contemporary account of her life (which may even have been written before her death) survives in the second volume of BL, Cotton MS Tiberius E.i, which was badly damaged in the fire which devastated the Cottonian Library in 1731, though the fire was not responsible for the loss of the manuscript's concluding folios. Until the mid-twentieth century the story of Christina's life was known only through an abridgement of it made by the recusant writer Nicholas Roscarrock at a date about 1600. However, a careful and prolonged investigation by C. H. Talbot, helped by the resources of modern science, led to the publication in 1959 of as much of the surviving text as remains legible, which is considerably more than might have been expected. As a result, the story of Christina of Markyate has come to be appreciated as one of the fullest and most vivid accounts of a woman's life to survive from the twelfth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 37282


Churchill, Jeanette (1854-1921), society hostess and writer, was born in Brooklyn, New York, on 9 January 1854, the second of four daughters of Leonard Jerome, American sportsman and speculator, of New York, and his wife, Clarissa, daughter of Ambrose Hall, landowner and sometime assemblyman of the New York legislature. Their second daughter was christened Jeanette but known as Jennie after the singer Jennie Lind. 
On 15 April 1874, at the British embassy in Paris, she married Lord Randolph Henry Spencer Churchill (1849-1895), politician, third son of John Winston Spencer Churchill, seventh duke of Marlborough. They had two sons, Winston Leonard Spencer Churchill (1874-1965) and John Strange Churchill (1880-1947). Her relationship to her famous son Winston was affectionate but distant. Absorbed in the complexities of her own affairs, she played little part in the development of his early career. On her death he wrote of her, 'on the whole it was a life of sunshine' (Soames, 200). 
During the early 1880s Lady Randolph supported her husband's political career, electioneering on his behalf, being active in the Primrose League, and entertaining imaginatively (she claimed to have invented 'the dinner party of deadly enemies'). Privately, the marriage was faltering, not least because of Lord Randolph's syphilis, about which he informed her and which he does not seem to have transmitted to her. Lady Randolph acquired a number of romantic attachments; the most serious was with Count Kinsky, a diplomatist in the Austro-Hungarian embassy in London. She became known as 'Lady Jane Snatcher' and, before learning the tricks of discretion, achieved considerable notoriety (Manchester, 136). 
After Lord Randolph's death from syphilis in 1895 his widow began a career in her own right. She was not squeamish about using her considerable social influence in support of her son Winston; she pressed his writing on publishers, sought for favourable reviewers, and appealed directly to the third marquess of Salisbury, then prime minister, to permit him to join the expedition to the Sudan under Sir H. Herbert Kitchener. 
In 1899 Lady Randolph founded and edited the 'Anglo-Saxon Review'; in spite of its contributors and its handsome binding, this monthly magazine was overpriced at a guinea, had no theme, and failed after ten issues. At the outbreak of the South African War in 1899, she chaired a committee of American women which obtained and equipped a hospital ship, the 'Maine'; she sailed to South Africa on its maiden voyage. On her return, on 28 July 1900, she married George Frederick Myddelton Cornwallis-West (1874-1951), an officer of the Scots Guards, who was a fortnight older than her elder son. He was the son of William Cornwallis Cornwallis-West, of Ruthin Castle, Denbighshire. The marriage was not universally welcomed; however, the couple acquired Salisbury Hall, near St Albans, where they entertained with panache: their guests included Edward VII and his entourage. 
In 1908 she published 'The Reminiscences of Lady Randolph Churchill by Mrs Cornwallis-West', which was modestly successful in both Britain and America. She wrote a play, 'His Borrowed Plumes', which was performed in 1909 with Mrs Patrick Campbell as director and leading lady. Cornwallis-West became enamoured of Mrs Campbell; this was the effective end of his marriage, although his wife did not divorce him until 1913, when she reverted to the name of Lady Randolph Churchill. 
During the war of 1914-18 she presided over the American Women's War Hospital in Paignton, and served personally in a hospital at Lancaster Gate in London. She wrote articles for 'Pearson's Weekly' which were later published as 'Small Talks on Big Subjects' (1916). 
On 1 June 1918 she married Montagu Phippen Porch (1877-1964), the son of Reginald Porch, of The Abbey, Glastonbury, Somerset. He was a colonial official serving in Nigeria; he was then forty-one and she was sixty-four. 'He has a future', she remarked, 'and I have a past, so we should be all right' (Churchill and Mitchell, 260). She did not take his name, nor did she return with him to Nigeria, but the marriage was placidly successful. 'My second marriage was romantic but not successful; my third marriage was successful but not romantic.' At the end of the war Porch resigned from the colonial service; in 1921 he returned to Africa, in search of a fortune. During his absence, Lady Randolph fell downstairs while visiting friends in Somerset, breaking her ankle. Gangrene set in, and her leg was amputated. She died suddenly at home, 8 Westbourne Street, London, after a haemorrhage of an artery in the thigh, on 29 June 1921. She was buried in Bladon near Woodstock, Oxfordshire, next to her first husband. Edward Marsh wrote of her: 'She was an incredible and most delightful compound of flagrant worldliness and eternal childhood, in thrall to fashion and luxury (life didn't begin for her on a basis of less than forty pairs of shoes) yet never sacrificing one human quality of warm-heartedness, humour, loyalty, sincerity, or steadfast and pugnacious courage. (Marsh, 154)' 

G. H. L. Le May', rev. ' 


