@@@@@


doc= 37283


Churchill, Randolph Frederick Edward Spencer (1911-1968), journalist and politician, was born at Bolton Street, Mayfair, London, on 28 May 1911, the only son and second of four children of Sir Winston Leonard Spencer Churchill (1874-1965), later prime minister, and his wife, Clementine Ogilvy Churchill, nee Hozier (later Baroness Spencer-Churchill) (1885-1977). He was educated at Eton College and at Christ Church, Oxford. He was a loquacious and precocious boy, drinking double brandies at the age of eighteen -- a habit which did not change over the years. His father disapproved, but told a visitor: 'Modern young people will do what they like. The only time parents really control their children is before they are born. After that their nature unfolds remorselessly petal by petal.' Relations between Winston and Randolph were always uneasy, the father alternately spoiling and being infuriated by the son. They accompanied each other in reasonable harmony on Winston's visit to Canada and the USA in 1929, but Randolph displeased his father soon afterwards by leaving Oxford without a degree in order to become a journalist. He was at an early age a fluent writer and speaker, and a vigorous, if at times embarrassing, supporter of his father's cause. 
In February 1935, without consulting his father, Churchill stood at a by-election in Liverpool Wavertree as an Independent Conservative against the 'India Bill', thus splitting the party vote and letting in Labour. In the general election that autumn he stood, this time as official Conservative candidate, for West Toxteth. He lost, and lost again at a by-election in February 1936 in Ross and Cromarty against Malcolm MacDonald, the National Government candidate and dominions secretary -- another embarrassment for his father, who was then angling for a cabinet post. In 1940, thanks to the party truce, he was elected for Preston, but lost in the election of 1945. 
During the Second World War, Churchill was a major in the 4th Queen's Own hussars, serving on the general staff (intelligence) at general headquarters, Middle East. In January 1944 he was parachuted into Yugoslavia as a member of the Fitzroy Maclean mission to support General Tito. He was joined by Evelyn Waugh and F. W. F. Smith, second earl of Birkenhead. His loquacity maddened his colleagues. There is a story that they bet him a substantial sum that he could not read a certain number of books of the 'Bible' without talking. Well before the end of 'Genesis' he exclaimed 'Christ! This is exciting', and lost his bet, but never paid (private information). 
After two more unsuccessful attempts to get into parliament in 1950 and 1951 Churchill took to authorship, though continuing as a lecturer, journalist, and broadcaster. His ambition was to write the life of his father. The trustees who owned the papers were not too sure. He decided to show that he was a serious biographer by writing the life of E. G. V. Stanley, seventeenth earl of Derby. It is a reputable if rather dull book; Lord Derby was a dull man. It was published in 1959 and the trustees gave their consent. Churchill assembled a team of ever-changing research assistants -- their position was neither easy nor well paid -- at his house, Stour, in East Bergholt, Suffolk. In 1964 he wrote 'The Fight for the Tory Leadership', a very pro-Macmillan account of the accession of Alec Douglas-Home to the premiership. He was blown out of the water on 17 January 1964 by Iain Macleod, who had just become editor of 'The Spectator', in one of the most famous and devastating articles that has ever appeared in that journal. For once Randolph Churchill had no comeback. The first volume of his father's biography appeared in 1966, 'Youth, 1874-1900'; the second, 'The Young Statesman, 1901-1914', a year later, along with five companion volumes of documentation (1967-9). He had set the pattern for a major biographical achievement but he died prematurely. The work was carried to completion by one of his leading research assistants, Martin Gilbert. The eighth and final volume appeared in 1988. Churchill was twice married: on 4 October 1939 to Pamela Beryl Hayward (1920-1997), daughter of Edward Kenelm Digby, eleventh Baron Digby ['see 'Harriman, Pamela Beryl]; they had one son, Winston Spencer Churchill ['see below']. The marriage was dissolved in 1946. In 1948 Churchill married June, daughter of Colonel Rex Hamilton Osborne, of Little Ingleburn, Malmesbury, Wiltshire; they had one daughter, Arabella Spencer Churchill, festival and charity founder. The marriage was dissolved in 1961. 
Slim, blond, and good-looking in his youth, Churchill became somewhat bloated in middle age, and his potations did not improve his appearance. Conversation with him could be exciting and enjoyable, but one was uneasily aware of potential explosions. He was not liked in his father's wartime entourage: 'I thought Randolph was one of the most objectionable people I had ever met' (Colville, 177), wrote Sir John Colville, one of Winston Churchill's private secretaries. The shadow of a famous father can often damage a competitive son. Churchill died at his home, Stour, East Bergholt, Suffolk, on 6 June 1968. 
His only son, Winston Spencer Churchill (1940-2010), journalist and politician, was born on 10 October 1940 at Chequers. After his parents separated he was educated at Le Rosey in Switzerland, Eton College (where he was bullied), and Christ Church, Oxford, where he read modern history and achieved the distinction of a fourth-class degree in 1962. Consciously imitating his grandfather, he then became a war correspondent, covering the Yemen, the Congo, and Angola for 'The Times' and 'The Observer'. With his father he wrote a (pro-Israeli) book on the 'Six Day War' (1967). Adopted as a Conservative candidate, in 1967 he fought a by-election at Manchester Gorton, normally a safe Labour seat, coming within 557 votes of winning it. Having meanwhile covered Nigeria, Biafra, and the Middle East for 'The Times', in 1970 he was elected as Conservative MP for Stretford, holding the seat through three subsequent general elections; after boundary changes he represented Davyhulme from 1983 to 1997. 
For some years a darling of the grassroots of the party, Churchill was a parliamentary private secretary at the Ministry of Housing and Construction and the Foreign and Commonwealth Office under Edward Heath, and a Conservative front-bench spokesman on defence during the early years of Margaret Thatcher's leadership, but he was too outspoken in his generally right-wing views (but perhaps also too mercurial) to progress up the party's hierarchy. He was sacked by Thatcher in 1978 for opposing the renewal of sanctions against Rhodesia, which was by then party policy. He was a staunch supporter of apartheid South Africa, and known also for his hawkish views on the Soviet Union, his support for the re-introduction of capital punishment, and his outspoken opposition to 'coloured' immigration; in 1993 his attack on what he described as 'the relentless flow' of immigration from the Indian sub-continent ('The Times', 28 May 1993) resulted in much embarrassment for his party, and a stinging rebuke from the prime minister, John Major. In 1996 he was much criticized for brokering the sale of his grandfather's wartime papers to the National Heritage Memorial Fund for $12.5 million (of which he was the chief beneficiary); many contended that the papers already belonged to the nation, and it subsequently emerged that they could have been bought for considerably less. He used some of this money to buy a house in Belgravia. Boundary changes in 1997 abolished his Davyhulme seat, and he decided not to seek another. 
Churchill's private life was as colourful as his political career. On 15 July 1964 he married Mary Caroline (Minnie) d'Erlanger ('b'. 1940), daughter of Sir Gerard d'Erlanger, businessman; they had two sons and two daughters. The marriage survived revelations of his affair with Soraya Khashoggi, 'nee' Sandra Daly ('b. c'.1942), wife of the arms dealer Adnan Khashoggi (Churchill's identity being revealed during a court case involving three policemen charged with blackmail), but ended in divorce in 1997. On 15 June 1999 he married, secondly, Angele Monique Lucienne (Luce) Danielson, 'nee' Engelen, a Belgian jewellery maker and designer, and daughter of Guillaume Engelen, businessman. He published his memoirs, 'Memories and Adventures', in 1989; among his other books was one on his father, 'His Father's Son' (1996), and a selection of his grandfather's speeches, 'Never Give In' (2003). He died in London on 2 March 2010 of cancer; his funeral was held on the 9th at St Martin's Church, Bladon, Oxfordshire. 
Robert Blake', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37284


Churchward, George Jackson (1857-1933), railway engineer, was born at Rowes Farm, Stoke Gabriel, south Devon, on 31 January 1857, the second son in the family of three sons and two daughters of George Churchward, a farmer, and his wife, Adelina Mary Churchward, who was his cousin. He was educated at Totnes grammar school. The Churchward family had been squires of Stoke Gabriel from the end of the fifteenth century. George had a keen mathematical flair, and in 1873 became a pupil of John Wright, the locomotive, carriage, and wagon superintendent of the South Devon Railway. Churchward completed his pupillage at Swindon under Joseph Armstrong, the locomotive superintendent of the Great Western Railway. 
From 1877 to 1880 Churchward gained experience in the locomotive, carriage, and wagon drawing-offices at Swindon, and from then until 1882 worked with Armstrong's son on the development of an improved automatic braking system which overcame the defects of previous systems which had been the cause of serious railway accidents. In 1882 he became assistant carriage-works manager at Swindon and in 1885 manager. He was involved in the design of the first British train with vestibuled corridor connections between carriages and other improved rolling-stock, as well as the conversion of large numbers of passenger carriages from the broad gauge of 7 feet originated by Isambard Kingdom Brunel to the standard gauge of 4 feet 81/2 inches, following conversion of the London to Penzance main line in 1892. He also designed new and much improved axle bearings, which largely eliminated the overheating which had caused serious traffic delays. 
Having clearly demonstrated his abilities Churchward was appointed locomotive works manager at Swindon in 1895, and two years later this job was combined with the position of chief assistant locomotive superintendent, with the intention that he should succeed William Dean, whose health was failing. Although not officially appointed locomotive superintendent until 1902, Churchward was effectively in control of the locomotive, carriage, and wagon departments from 1899 and so continued until his retirement at the end of 1921, with the new title of chief mechanical engineer from 1916. He was responsible for over 3000 locomotives, some 9000 carriages, and 80,000 wagons, in addition to a total staff of some 27,000, of whom 12,000 were at Swindon. 
Churchward was determined to provide Swindon works with the best and most modern plant and machinery possible, the works having been founded in 1842 by Brunel and Daniel Gooch. When he took over control, machine tools were steam-driven by shafts and belting, which he replaced quickly by electric power from gas-engine-driven generators. He created a large new workshop complex within a single building of 11/2 acres, where boilers and other locomotive components were made and erected. By 1912 Swindon was the most modern locomotive works in the country. 
Perhaps Churchward's greatest technical achievement was the introduction from 1903 to 1911 of a series of nine standard locomotive types, of which over 1100 were built by 1921. Of advanced design, these were based on detailed studies of the latest practice in Europe and America. Carefully tested prototypes were built and evaluated before quantity production commenced. Churchward purchased three French locomotives of a double expansion type, which had an outstanding reputation, for comparative tests against his own latest locomotives, which proved equally powerful and economical. Nevertheless, he adopted several design features from the French machines. His locomotive designs included the first British heavy freight 2-8-0 type in 1903, the Pacific 4-6-2 express type in 1908, and the first general purpose 2-6-0 type in 1911. Maximum standardization of components was achieved in Churchward's locomotives, the advanced design features of which were later adopted by other railways. He realized the need for a static locomotive-testing plant where detailed scientific investigations could be made. The first British plant was built to his designs in 1904. He was, with George Hughes of the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway, a British pioneer in the application of locomotive superheating, increasing power and efficiency. 
Churchward was a fine figure of a man and his even temperament and dignified bearing suggested the country squire, an impression heightened by his liking for tweed suits. He was a tactful administrator and leader of men. His depth of vision, grasp of essentials, logical thinking, and the intuition by which he seemed to sense what was in the minds of those about him always ensured the best results. He gathered about him a technical staff of diverse talents, whom he inspired with an enthusiasm to give of their best. 
During the First World War the Swindon works was devoted largely to the production of munitions under Churchward's direction. He was appointed CBE in 1918. He was an active member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, the Institution of Civil Engineers, and the Association of Railway Locomotive Engineers, of which he was president in 1917. He was also active in the civic life of Swindon, then very much a 'railway town'. With the incorporation of the town in 1900 he was elected to the council, and became its first mayor. 
Churchward was unmarried. He was killed by a train on 19 December 1933, when crossing the railway between his home and the Swindon works in foggy weather. He was buried at Swindon parish church on 23 December. 
George W. Carpenter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37285


Chute, John (1701-1776), architect and connoisseur of the arts and literature, was born on 30 December 1701, the youngest in the family of five sons and five daughters of Edward Chute (1658-1722) of The Vyne, Sherborne, Hampshire, and his wife, Catherine, daughter of the lawyer Sir Anthony Keck (bap. 1630, d. 1695), and widow of Ferdinand Tracy. Francis Chute was his brother. His education included a year at Eton College. For a period of seven years, from 1740 to 1746, he lived in Italy, where at the beginning of his stay he met and formed a close and lasting friendship with Horace Walpole. As a youngest son Chute's prospects had been poor -- his sojourn abroad had been in the company of his rich younger cousin Francis Whithead, to whom he may initially have acted as tutor -- but on the death of his only surviving brother, Anthony, in 1754 he unexpectedly succeeded to the family estates. 
Chute's activity as an architect was confined to a small number of projects only but in them he established a distinct contribution in two different directions: one was as a significant figure in the early Gothic revival, the other as a classical designer of marked independence. As a member of Walpole's 'committee of taste' he played a leading role in the creation of the latter's celebrated Gothic villa of Strawberry Hill. Walpole later described him as 'an able geometrician and an exquisite architect, and of the purest taste both in the Grecian and Gothic styles' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 21.263), and as 'my oracle in taste, the standard to whom I submitted my trifles, the genius that presided over poor Strawberry!' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 24.209); and from about 1753 onwards he designed much of the exterior, as well as a number of the interiors. Other works in the Gothic style included the tomb chamber he added to the sixteenth-century chapel at his own house of The Vyne ('c'.1756), to receive a monument to his ancestor Chaloner Chute (died 1659), and Donnington Grove, near Newbury, Berkshire, built in 1763 for the antiquary James Pettit Andrews. 
Of Chute's designs in a classical manner the first identified was a proposal of 1752 -- in the form of an Italianate 'palazzo' and based in part on an elevation in book 7 of Sebastiano Serlio's 'Tutte l'opere et prospectiva d'architettura' -- for rebuilding Hagley Hall, Worcestershire, for Sir George Lyttelton; but this was rejected in favour of a conventionally Palladian one by Sanderson Miller. At The Vyne in 1770, however, he constructed a spectacular staircase within the former great hall, a 'tour de force' which Walpole accurately described as 'theatric' -- meaning after the manner of stage design -- and which has no parallels in English country-house architecture. The monument to Chaloner Chute, also designed by him and in a seventeenth-century classical style, was eventually erected after his death by his cousin T. L. Chute. 
Chute was a man of unimpressive appearance, frail and near-sighted, and although abstemious he was a lifelong sufferer from gout. Like Walpole he was a vivid and witty correspondent and conversationalist and a discriminating connoisseur of literature and the arts. In 1757, like his father before him, he served as high sheriff of Hampshire. He died, unmarried, on 26 May 1776 and was buried in Sherborne St John, Hampshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 37286


Clanvow, Sir John (c.1341-1391), courtier and poet, was probably the son and heir of John Clanvow, a minor landowner in the Welsh borders. In his early years John the younger saw active service abroad. In 1364 he fought in Brittany, and he was with Sir John Chandos, in 1370 when the latter fell at Lussac in Poitou, and afterwards with Sir Robert Knolles in Picardy. In 1373-4 he accompanied John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, on his great 'chevauchee' across France from Calais to Bordeaux. In 1378, in another foray into Brittany, he was again with Gaunt when the latter launched his abortive attack on St Malo. 
Between campaigns Clanvow formed attachments of a more lasting kind. Possibly as a result of connections forged in his native county, he came into contact with Humphrey (IX) de Bohun, seventh earl of Hereford, by whom he was retained with a life annuity of $40. When the earl died without a son in 1373, Clanvow was taken on as a king's knight by Edward III who, in addition to confirming the earl's grant, awarded him an annuity for life of $50. Payment of the annuity was continued by the king's successor, Richard II, whose favour Clanvow was to enjoy for the rest of his life. In 1381 or a little earlier he was appointed one of the group of 'chamber knights', who were the most trusted executants of the royal will. His annuity was first raised to 100 marks ($66 13's'. 4died), assigned on the lordship of Haverford, and then on 20 August 1385 replaced by a grant for life to him of that lordship. 
Clanvow's retention by the crown brought him a variety of employments. In Herefordshire he was a JP and several times a commissioner to investigate disturbances, while at court he was entrusted, among other responsibilities, with a number of diplomatic missions. Important though these duties were, they were fairly routine in character; they did not bring Clanvow to the notice of a wider public. What did was his espousal of unorthodox religious views. According to the chronicler Thomas Walsingham, Clanvow was one of a group of Lollard knights who were adherents of the ideas of John Wyclif. Of this group Clanvow is the only one known to have committed his beliefs to writing. In a tract, known from its principal theme as 'The Two Ways', he reflects, significantly in English, on the choice that the Lord offers men between the pain of hell and the bliss of heaven. There are no avowedly Wycliffite thoughts in the piece; it is not doctrinally polemical; and it eschews comment on the real presence. But its silences may be considered suggestive of dissent: there is no mention of confession, pilgrimage, or the veneration of the saints. Authority throughout rests on the scriptures. Support for Wycliffite positions is therefore implicit, if not entirely explicit. 
Clanvow's literary activity also extended to the writing of poetry. The 'Book of Cupid', his one surviving work, is a piece of sufficient merit to have been thought until the nineteenth century to have been written by his friend Geoffrey Chaucer. Like the latter's 'Parliament of Fowls', to which it is indebted, it takes the form of a dream vision incorporating a debate about the nature of love. The two protagonists, the cuckoo and the nightingale, present a series of antithetical statements about the power of love, in which the cuckoo finally gains the edge. The narrator himself -- the subject of his poem -- joins in, and offers sympathy to the defeated party. It is an ingenious and accomplished poem. Though it lacks the tension of Chaucer's 'Parliament of Fowls', it is possessed of a wry, self-mocking quality which makes it one of the most attractive works of the age. 
In his final years Clanvow participated in the revival of crusading activity in Europe and north Africa. In 1390 he took part with other English knights in a Genoese-led attack on the port of Tunis, and in the following year was on his way to Constantinople when he died, on 17 October, in a village in Greece. From the subsequent descent of his estates it can be established that John's heir was one Thomas Clanvow, either a son or a brother; but the general uncertainty attending the family pedigree makes it impossible to establish with accuracy the relationship between him and other members of the family. 
Nigel Saul', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37287


Clark, Alfred Joseph (1885-1941), pharmacologist, was born on 19 August 1885 in Northover, near Glastonbury, Somerset, the elder son and second of four children of Francis Joseph Clark, partner in C. and J. Clark Ltd (shoe manufacturers at Street, Somerset), and his wife, Elizabeth Mary Smithson. As with earlier generations of his Quaker family, his secondary education was at Bootham School, York. He entered King's College, Cambridge, in 1903, and gained first classes in both parts of the natural sciences tripos (1905 and 1907). From childhood he had been fascinated by natural history, and at Cambridge he decided on a career which would enable him to combine medical research with his interest in comparative biology. To this end a medical degree was essential, and he undertook his clinical training at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, where he again excelled. Once qualified (MB, 1910; MRCP, 1912; MD, 1914; FRCP, 1921), he began a career in pharmacological and physiological research which was interrupted only by service in both world wars. In December 1918 he was appointed professor of pharmacology at the University of Cape Town. In Cape Town he met his wife, Beatrix Powell (died 1948), daughter of Robert William Hazell, medical practitioner in that city. They married in 1919 and had two sons and two daughters. From 1920 to 1926 he held the chair of pharmacology at University College, London. Then from 1926 until his death he was professor of materia medica at the University of Edinburgh. 
Clark made two key contributions to the development of pharmacology and hence medicine. The first was to establish that the primary effects of drugs on cells (here 'drug' is used in its broader sense) are in principle fully understandable in terms of the known laws of physical and biological chemistry. This was achieved partly by a classical series of experiments to study the action of acetylcholine and atropine on their targets (receptors) in 'simple' test objects such as the isolated heart of the frog, and partly by a painstaking and even-handed re-evaluation of the welter of information of very variable quality that was already available. The outcome was 'The Mode of Action of Drugs on Cells' (1933) and an immensely influential monograph on general pharmacology ('Heffter's Handbuch der experimentellen Pharmakologie', vol. 4, 1937). His work in this area greatly strengthened what can fairly be described as the British school of pharmacology, which is exemplified by Clark himself, and included Sir John Gaddum, H. O. Schild, and, later, R. P. Stephenson, William Paton, H. P. Rang, D. Colquhoun, and James Black. Its emphasis on careful measurement and exact analysis of the events mediated by receptors was to be justified by the key role this was to play in the subsequent development of novel drugs for the treatment of, for example, angina and hypertension. 
A second major contribution was through Clark's textbook 'Applied Pharmacology' (1923). This was characterized by its physiological and pathophysiological emphasis, by the inclusion of experimental evidence wherever possible, and by its quantitative approach. Clark had always loved computation, and a childhood estimation of the minimum possible capacity of Noah's ark foreshadowed his later demonstration in 'Applied Pharmacology' that the preparation of some homoeopathic remedies involved dilutions of such order that there would be only one drug molecule in a volume of solution equal to that circumscribed by the orbit of the planet Neptune. New editions of 'Applied Pharmacology' were prepared at regular intervals, first by Clark himself and then by his successors at University College, London. 
Clark also served the wider scientific community, and the general public, by his influential membership of the Medical Research Council from 1934, and by his lifelong interest in the provision of safe and effective medication. The latter led him to publish a pungent tract on patent medicines. He was as vigorous physically as intellectually, and rowed for his college at Cambridge. Later he became a keen and accomplished mountaineer. 
Clark was profoundly influenced by his service as a field medical officer in the First World War. He also served in the Second World War, becoming a lieutenant-colonel. His total and sometimes even austere commitment to the highest professional and personal standards can be understood in the context of that harrowing early experience. It was also the occasion of his resignation from the Society of Friends in 1917. His many honours included the award of the MC in 1917 and election to fellowship of the Royal Society in 1931. He became MRCPE in 1926 and FRSE in 1927. Clark died in Edinburgh on 30 July 1941, leaving a widow and four children. His son David Hazell Clarke (1920-2010) was later an eminent psychiatrist. 
D. H. Jenkinson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37288


Clark, Esther (bap. 1716, d. 1794), poet, was baptized on 10 April 1716 in Holt, Wiltshire, the only child of the Revd John Lewis (died 1761), incumbent at the parish church of St Katharine, Holt, from 1714 until his death, and his wife, Esther (died 1744). Little is known of Esther Lewis's early life or education, except that her interest in literature was probably stimulated by her father, who was an antiquary with a particular interest in heraldry. 
Following her mother's death in 1744, Esther Lewis continued to live with her father in Holt. She suffered smallpox at some point in the 1740s. It is believed that she was attended by Samuel Bowden, a physician who lived in Frome, Somerset. Bowden was an accomplished minor poet who promoted Lewis's work. Her poems were appearing in the 'Bath Journal' by 1749 under the name Sylvia. Poems by herself and Bowden appeared in various London periodicals at about this time. Bowden's 'Poems on Various Subjects' (1754) contained a number of Lewis's compositions. During the 1750s and 1760s Lewis made other literary acquaintances, including Dr Samuel Salter, master of the Charterhouse in London, and Sarah Fielding, who lived near Bath after 1758. 
John Lewis died at the beginning of November 1761, and Esther Lewis appears to have been left without a home. On 2 October 1762 she married Robert Clark of Tetbury, Gloucestershire, whose first wife had died in 1755 shortly after the birth of a daughter, Mary. Clark owned an estate in Tetbury which was eventually given the name Highgrove by his grandson John Paul Paul. Esther Clark was about eighteen years older than her new husband, but may not have revealed her actual age to him. Esther Clark moved to Tetbury, where she cared for her stepdaughter and took an active interest in local charities. In 1774 she donated $50 for the maintenance of alms women in the town. A collection of her work, 'Poems Moral and Entertaining' (1789), was published for the benefit of charities in Bath and Gloucester and of Sunday schools in Tetbury. Although many of the poems in this volume displayed genuine wit as well as acute social observation, they passed largely unnoticed by reviewers at the time. 
An inscription in the church at Tetbury records Esther Clark's death on 8 May 1794 at the age of seventy-five. 
Richard Greene', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37289


Clarke, Alexander Ross (1828-1914), geodesist, was born on 16 December 1828 in Reading, the eldest son of David Ross Clarke, merchant, and his wife, Eliza, daughter of Charles Hall. After early years in Jamaica and Eriboll, Scotland, the family settled in London. Clarke entered the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, and in 1847 came first in his class and was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the Royal Engineers. In 1850 he was posted to the Ordnance Survey in Southampton; from 1851 to 1854 he was in Canada, returning in 1854 to serve from 1856 under Henry James as the survey's chief mathematical and scientific adviser. 
Clarke entered the Ordnance Survey just as the observations from the principal triangulation (a term taken from Clarke's 'Account') of Great Britain were nearly complete. He was a skilled mathematician and, building on the work of William Yolland, reduced the measurements into a usable form with the method of least-squares, developed by leading continental mathematicians such as F. W. Bessel, C. F. Gauss, and F. G. W. Struve. The results were published as an 'Account... of the Principal Triangulation' (1858), which greatly enhanced the Ordnance Survey's reputation for precision and contributed to the debate over the dimensions of the reference spheroid used for geodetic calculations, or, in the words of the time, the 'Figure of the Earth'. The principal triangulation stood until the retriangulation began in 1935, but it was not used as a framework for the mapping of the United Kingdom, most of which depended on separate minor triangulations for each county or group of counties. Clarke's scientific achievement thus had few practical consequences. 
In 1860 Clarke began an elaborate comparison of the standards of length used in England, France, Germany, Belgium, and Russia, as well as those of India and Australia. This was part of a European project, organized by F. G. W. Struve, to measure an arc from Valencia in Ireland to Orsk in Russia. The aim was to co-ordinate triangulations across Europe. Clarke thereby played a major part in the thrust towards international standardization that became so important in late nineteenth-century European science. 
Clarke had a passionate interest in calculating the figure of the earth, another central problem for an accurate topographical survey. He tackled the problem on at least five separate occasions, and his results (especially one in the 1866 survey of standards of length) were employed throughout the world. In 1880 he published 'Geodesy', a textbook based on a major article written for the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. This remained a standard work well into the next century. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1862 and received a royal medal in 1887. He was appointed CB in 1870, and served as a delegate to the International Geodetic Congress in 1883. 
The pursuit of abstract science within the military was not without critics. When the War Office discovered in 1881 that Clarke had been at a home station for twenty-seven years, it ordered him to sever his connection with the Ordnance Survey and take up a post in Mauritius. Clarke was furious and retired. Despite protests, the official decision stood and the Ordnance Survey thus lost a man who might well have become director, and, with no one to replace him, the survey declined into scientific mediocrity. For his last three decades Clarke played no part in science or public affairs. 
Clarke was a deeply religious man who enjoyed mathematics, music, and domestic life. In 1853 he married Frances (died 1888), daughter of Major-General Matthew Charles Dixon of the Royal Engineers. Clarke usually worked at home, often with some of their numerous children (they had four sons, one of whom died in infancy, and nine daughters) playing in the same room. He died on 11 February 1914 at his home, Strathmore, West Street, Reigate, Surrey. A plaque at 21 Carlton Crescent, Southampton, commemorates his residence there from 1861 to 1881. 


@@@@@


doc= 37290


Clarke, Edward (1649x51-1710), politician, was the only son of Edward Clarke (died 1679), gentleman, of Chipley, near Taunton, Somerset, and his first wife, Ann, daughter of Mark Knight of Buckinghamshire. He matriculated at Wadham College, Oxford, on 30 March 1667 (when his age was given as sixteen), moved to the Inner Temple in 1670, and was called to the bar in 1673. He became involved in whig politics and in 1680 was appointed trustee of the estate of Anthony Ashley Cooper, first earl of Shaftesbury. He marked his arrival in county society by rebuilding Chipley in the 1680s, and engaging in rivalry with the nearby tory, John Sanford of Nynehead. He was an agricultural improver, introducing Friesland sheep and turnips to his estates. 
In 1675 Clarke married Mary ['see 'Clarke, Mary (d. 1705)], daughter of Samuel Jepp and Elizabeth Buckland of Sutton Court, Chew Magna, distant kin of John Locke. The 'Correspondence of John Locke' contains nearly 400 letters to and from the Clarke family, from 1682 to 1704. One series (1684-91), for the benefit of Edward junior, formed the basis of Locke's 'Some Thoughts Concerning Education' (1693). Locke sent Clarke drafts of 'An Essay Concerning Human Understanding', and left papers with him when he fled to the Netherlands in 1683. He was devoted to Clarke's children, nicknaming Betty 'his wife' and minutely advising on their upbringing. 
Locke called his west-country friends 'the Row': Clarke, Sir Walter Yonge, third baronet, of Escott, and Richard Duke of Otterton. They shared whig politics and were arrested on suspicion during the Monmouth rebellion. They were tempted to make peace with James II when offered revenge against toryism: Clarke secured the backing of James's electoral agents. Consequently he suffered at the polls in the revolution elections of 1689 and did not enter parliament until 1690. He had been defeated at his first attempt in 1685, and in 1689 petitioned the Commons against tory violence at the hustings. His seat throughout was Taunton, and once successful he sat until his death. Although an Anglican, his sympathies lay with his dissenting, textile-artisan constituents. In 1689, through Locke, he was appointed auditor-general to Mary II; her death in 1694 was a great blow. He remained a court whig, becoming an excise commissioner in 1694, and serving the junto leader, John Somers, Baron Somers. He resisted Locke's urging that he become a director of the Bank of England. 
Clarke mainly lodged in London, directed the education of a brood of children, and left Chipley and the nursing of his constituency to the redoubtable Mary. He became Locke's voice in parliament, the keystone of 'the College', which included Locke, John Freke, Yonge, and Somers. Clarke's papers include many draft bills and policy documents. He was engaged in the ending of press censorship (1695), the great recoinage (1695-6), and the 'Irish Woollen Act' (1697-8). Among the nicknames he earned were Edward the Grave and Standard Clarke, and the widespread hardship resulting from the recoinage reduced his electoral popularity. 
Illness rendered Clarke inactive in the 1700s. Mary died in January 1705; he died at Chipley on 20 October 1710 when he was, according to a memorial tablet in Nynehead church where he was buried, aged sixty-one. They had five sons and six daughters (born between 1676 and 1694), eight of whom survived infancy. One son, Jack, was apprenticed to the Quaker merchant of Amsterdam, Benjamin Furly. Clarke left about $17,000, mainly in Bank and East India stock. Chipley was demolished in the nineteenth century and the Sanford descendants withdrew to the smaller house adjacent, where legends persist about Locke composing philosophy on the bowling green. 


@@@@@


doc= 37291


Clement, Joseph (bap. 1779, d. 1844), engineer, was baptized on 13 June 1779 at Great Asby, Westmorland, one of several children of Thomas Clemmet, a hand-loom weaver, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Elliotson. The village school taught him only to read and write, but he learned from his father, who had a taste for natural history and mechanics and had built himself a lathe. Joseph first worked alongside his father as a weaver, then as a slater, and devoted his spare time to metalworking skill, taking lessons from the local blacksmith and building his own lathe. On this he turned various woodwind instruments, which he also learned to play. 
By 1805 Clement (it is not known when he adopted this form of his name) had decided to earn his living by engineering, and was making looms at a factory in Kirkby Stephen, moving to Foster & Sons, Carlisle, then in 1807 to Glasgow where he took drawing lessons from Peter Nicholson and became a competent draughtsman. Later he was with Leys, Masson & Co. of Aberdeen, where in 1812-13 he found time to attend lectures in natural philosophy given by Professor Copland at Marischal College. 
Having saved $100, Clement moved in 1813 to London, then the world's foremost centre for engineering. His rare combination of mechanical and drawing skills enabled him to progress rapidly to the top; from a humble beginning with Galloway at Holborn, he soon rose to be works manager for Joseph Bramah at Pimlico and by 1815 he was chief draughtsman at the leading firm of Maudslay, Son, and Field. His experience at these two renowned firms was to prove invaluable. In 1817 Clement set up his own business, specializing in technical drawing and the manufacture of high-precision machinery, working from premises behind his house at 21 Prospect Place, Southwark. Turnover was modest until in 1823 Charles Babbage employed Clement on his project to design and construct the complex 'difference engine', a large mechanical calculating device. Clement was required to build large, highly accurate machine tools, the best-known of which was his planing machine, built in 1831. According to general practice, the cost of building workshop tools was chargeable to the project but they were considered to be the property of their maker. Clement's machinery was, however, so much larger and more costly than the tools usually considered under this head that he fell out with Babbage on this score, and they eventually parted company. These tools brought him a good income for many years for customers were attracted by his skill and the quality of his products, despite his justifiable reputation for charging remarkably high prices. 
Clement was an outstanding toolmaker and draughtsman. He introduced both headless and fluted screw-cutting taps and was one of those urging the adoption of a standard system of screw threads. His works was regarded as one of the best schools for practical mechanics; and perhaps the most distinguished engineer to be employed there was Joseph Whitworth. From 1815 Clement provided technical drawings for the publications of the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, and he was awarded three medals by the society for his various tools and inventions. 
Clement never lost his Westmorland accent and was described by the engineering historian Samuel Smiles as 'a heavy-browed man without any polish of manner of speech' whose head was 'a complete repertory of inventions' and who liked nothing better than a 'tough job' (Smiles, 245, 257). 
In his later years Clement returned to his old love of music and constructed an organ, which Smiles reported as sounding very well. He died unmarried at 31 St George's Road, Southwark on 28 February 1844. The major bequest in his will was the legacy of Bank of England stock valued at $4000 to his natural daughter Sarah Clement, daughter of Agnes Esson of Tanfield, Durham. Sarah was also to receive his gold watch and two of the medals awarded him by the Society of Arts. Other bequests went to the offspring of his four brothers and sisters, while his machine tools and the contents of his workshop, which he valued at $4000, were to be offered to his nephew Joseph, son of his sister, Barbara Wilkinson, at that price. Joseph Wilkinson did take up this offer, and he continued Clement's business, but only for a short time. 


@@@@@


doc= 37292


Clementi, Muzio (1752-1832), composer, pianist, and teacher, was born on 23 January 1752 in Damaso, Rome, the eldest of seven children of Nicolo Clementi (1720-1789), a silversmith, and his wife, Magdalena, 'nee' Kaiser (died 1785). He received the standard musical training of a church organist from various teachers in Rome, and became organist in his local church at thirteen. His playing attracted the attention of Peter Beckford (1740-1811), cousin of the novelist William Beckford (1759-1844), who in 1766 contracted with Clementi's father to 'buy' his son's services for seven years, taking him back to his country estate in Dorset. Though isolated from the mainstream of musical life, Clementi laid important foundations for his future career as a musician and virtuoso, spending hours at the harpsichord and studying scores by older composers such as Handel, Domenico Scarlatti, J. S. Bach, and C. P. E. Bach. He dedicated his first set of six sonatas, op. 1, to Beckford. 
Leaving Beckford's service in 1774, Clementi travelled to London. Although he published a set of bravura variations, 'The Black Joke', as 'M. C.' in 1777, he made his reputation as a virtuoso with the publication of his op. 2 sonatas in 1779. Typically, this was a set of six sonatas, three to be accompanied by a violin or flute, and the remainder for piano solo. The second, which became well known as 'the celebrated octave lesson', epitomized the virtuosic style that became associated with Clementi. At this time the piano was still in its infancy and had not yet supplanted the harpsichord. As the piano developed, so did Clementi's style, and he gradually blended his bravura writing with a more expressive style, eminently suited to the piano. 
Clementi went on the first of his continental travels in 1780, performing in Paris and in Vienna, where he took part in the famous 'competition' against Mozart, who acknowledged but derided his virtuosity in a now famous letter to his father. Paradoxically, Clementi's sonatas opp. 7-10, written at this time, mark a turning away from empty virtuosity and reveal more depth in his musical style. After returning to London he was noted by 1785 not just as a performer but also as a composer: his symphonies were performed in 1786 and 1787, but they could not stand comparison with those of his famous contemporary Haydn. He conducted his own symphonies until 1796, but made his last concert appearance as a pianist in 1790, after which he turned instead to teaching. This appeared to be a reasonably lucrative pursuit, and Clementi attracted good pupils, including J. B. Cramer, John Field, and Theresa Jansen. The 1790s were a period of prolific composition of solo and accompanied sonatas as well as sonatinas for younger players; the latter are still played and enjoyed. Clementi's pedagogical interests of this time are also reflected in his 'Introduction to the Art of Piano Playing' (1801), which is as interesting for its selection of 'lessons' by a variety of composers as it is as a guide to contemporary pianism. 
Clementi was as much a businessman as a musician, being involved with music publishing and piano manufacture. In 1798 he took over the firm Longman and Broderip with a partner, James Longman, who left in 1801, when Clementi took over with several partners at 26 Cheapside; additional premises were acquired in 1806 at 195 Tottenham Court Road. 
Clementi travelled extensively from 1802 to 1810, penetrating as far as eastern Europe and St Petersburg in order to sell his instruments and to court various composers for their compositions. Accompanying him was Field, whom he took first to Vienna in 1802, and then to St Petersburg, where Field remained. During this time Clementi attracted other pupils, notably Alexander Klengel and Ludwig Berger. Clementi's letters to his chief partner, Frederick William Collard, reveal an astute businessman who nevertheless seemed in constant need of money. Keenly conscious of competition from other London makers such as Broadwood and Tomkison, he bullied his way from dealer to dealer, venting his frustration at his partners' occasional mistakes by quoting Virgil -- 'let us not 'renovare dolorem'' (Clementi to Collard, 17 Aug 1803) -- and generally adopting a hectoring tone. The letters reveal a keen, highly literate man, with a flair for languages and with a certain dry humour. It was probably due to Clementi's considerable acumen that the firm remained successful even after a disastrous fire in 1807. 
Letters of this period reflect the frenetic pace of Clementi's life. While in Berlin on 18 September 1804 he married Caroline Lehmann, the eighteen-year-old daughter of a noted Berlin musician. The marriage ended tragically less than a year later when she died shortly after giving birth to a son, Carl. Clementi wrote of his 'fatal and irreparable loss... God alone can give me strength to bear it' (Clementi to Collard, 31 Aug 1805). Throwing himself into his business, he announced in a letter of April 1807 his conquest of 'that haughty Beauty, Beethoven', who agreed to let him publish several of his works, though the arrangement was bedevilled by communication problems between the composer and the firm. After returning to London in the summer of 1810, Clementi swiftly made amends for whatever mistakes had occurred, issuing first editions of ten works. 
Clementi married Emma Gisborne ('bap'. 1785), a contemporary of his first wife, on 6 July 1811; they had four children. In 1813 he was invited to become a director of the newly formed Philharmonic Society, which offered a forum for the performance of his own symphonies. In December 1814 he was elected to the Swedish Royal Academy of Music. His public success in England prompted him to set off again for the continent, this time to promote his own symphonies in Paris and in Leipzig. 
Clementi's most important work of this period, and indeed of his life, was the aptly named 'Gradus ad Parnassum'. Far more than just a collection of exercises for the piano, the three-volume 'Gradus' encompasses a variety of genres and styles of keyboard composition; it is a vast compendium of Clementi's works for the piano written over many years, and published between 1817 and 1826. It is a monument to a composer who was called 'the father of the pianoforte'; though he was not the first composer to write for the piano, his contribution to its development was inestimable. Indefatigable to the end, he retired to Lichfield in 1830, and died in Evesham, possibly at Elm Lodge, on 10 March 1832. He was buried with full honours in the cloisters of Westminster Abbey on 29 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 37293


Clerke, Richard (fl. 1572-1596), navigator and privateer, claimed to have been born at Buckhurst, Essex, but is generally referred to as 'of Weymouth'. He presumably learned his trade in the ships of the latter port, being master of the 'Pilgrim' between Weymouth and Bordeaux in 1572. Part at least of the next ten years was evidently spent in the Newfoundland fishing trade, as he developed a specialist knowledge of the waters round that island. He entered the service of Henry Oughtred of Southampton, a major international merchant and shipowner. In command of Oughtred's 'Susan Fortune' he accompanied the 'Popinjay' of Sir John Perrot to Newfoundland in 1582. Oughtred claimed he had suffered losses in Spain and employed Clerke to help recover them from Spanish (in fact Portuguese) vessels in Newfoundland. At Fermeuse the two English vessels attacked and robbed three Portuguese vessels, lading their catch and goods into the 'Sao Joao', which they brought back to Southampton, presumably dividing the returns between Perrot and Oughtred. Masters of English ships at Fermeuse were shocked at this disruption of a peaceful fishing community. The Portuguese took an action against Clerke in the high court of admiralty, supported by testimonies from an English ship's master who had been at Fermeuse, though no conclusion to the action has been found. 
When, later in 1582, Sir Humphrey Gilbert was preparing an American colonizing expedition, Clerke entered his service and, between June and August 1583, served as master of his flagship, the 'Delight', first under William Winter as captain and then under Maurice Browne. The 'Delight' met with opposition at St John's harbour from the mixed fishing community, but on sight of the queen's commission the squadron was admitted, and Gilbert went through the ceremony of annexing Newfoundland to England and issuing passes to non-English vessels to fish there. Clerke had a shallop built for exploration of the harbours of south-eastern Newfoundland, and fortunately it remained on tow when the ships left for the mainland. Off Sable Island -- Clerke maintained as the result of a changed order from Gilbert -- the 'Delight' went aground, losing most of her men and all the data so far collected. Clerke bravely secured the shallop and with fifteen men contrived to sail northward to Newfoundland. Without stores or adequate sails they suffered great hardships, but eventually arrived in south-west Newfoundland, where Clerke knew the French Basques had fishing stations. They took his men, restored them to health, and brought them safely to Pasaje, where they were nearly taken by the Spanish, but eventually they reached England at the end of 1583 to find that Edward Hayes, whose 'Golden Hind' was the only vessel to survive, accused Clerke of having cast away the 'Delight'. Clerke made a technical and convincing reply, illustrating his knowledge of these waters. Richard Hakluyt printed both versions of the disaster in 1589. 
Clerke presumably returned to the Newfoundland fishery, as he is not found in the Armada lists. He was still involved in the fishery in 1596, when he took the 'Pilgrim' of Newport, Isle of Wight, into St John's harbour to purchase additional salt. He was received in a friendly fashion by the master of a French Basque ship of St Jean-de-Luz, who then turned on him, imprisoned him and his men, and stripped the 'Pilgrim' of all but a minimum of food and sails. Clerke had to make his way home with such limited resources but succeeded in doing so successfully. He then fades out of the records. 
David B. Quinn', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37294


Clough, Charles Thomas (1852-1916), geologist, was born in Huddersfield on 23 December 1852, the third of four sons and fifth of six children of Thomas William Clough, solicitor and later an alderman, of South Parade, Huddersfield, and his wife, Amelia Jane, daughter of James Ibeson, surgeon. He was educated at Rugby School and at St John's College, Cambridge, where he graduated first class in the natural sciences tripos in 1874, proceeding MA in 1878. On graduating he joined the Geological Survey in 1875, working in the Teesdale and Cheviot districts until 1884, when he was posted to the survey's Edinburgh office. In 1881 he married Anne Mary, daughter of Thomas Durham Usher, gentleman. They had a son and two daughters. 
On Clough's appointment in Scotland he formed part of a group of geologists who, in the period before the First World War, were internationally without parallel for their original insights into metamorphic and igneous rocks and the intricate problems of structural geology. On his promotion to district geologist in 1902, he became the leader of that group. He made major contributions to the geology of Dalradian rocks along the highland border between Callander and Loch Lomond and in the Cowal district of Argyll. In Wester Ross, western Inverness-shire, and on Skye he unravelled the intricate metamorphic and structural history of the Moine schists and Lewisian gneisses, and on Mull he demonstrated complicated, intrusive, igneous relationships in the Tertiary Igneous Complex. 
Clough's particular strength lay in the meticulous detail in which he recorded field data. His contemporaries considered him a master of geological field-mapping techniques and his original maps of many parts of Scotland confirm his observational skills and his ability to locate himself in the wilderness with astounding accuracy. However, his passion and concern for minutiae may have diminished the impact that his work had on his contemporaries and successors. The detail recorded on his maps was extended into his writings, where his conclusions about many geological relationships, later taken for granted but then original and often fundamental, were hidden in a mass of detailed evidence and justification. 
The obscuring by detail of some of Clough's more fundamental and original conclusions may have resulted in formal recognition of his contributions coming rather late in his life, although he was awarded the Murchison medal of the Geological Society in 1906 and was president of the Geological Society of Edinburgh from 1908 to 1910. It was not until the year of his death that he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh and awarded an honorary LLD by St Andrews University. 
Clough was small with disproportionate strength and powers of endurance. He had golden-brown hair and beard and a voice high in pitch but rich in timbre. He had dogged determination and was of undeviating rectitude, although without well-defined religious beliefs. He had a profound influence at a personal level on his contemporaries. Clough died at Edinburgh Royal Infirmary on 27 August 1916 of injuries sustained three days earlier in a railway accident while examining rocks in a narrow cutting. He was buried on 30 August in Lasswade churchyard. He was commemorated by creation of the Geological Society of Edinburgh's Clough memorial medal, awarded annually to geologists who have done significant original work in Scotland or northern England. 
A. L. Harris', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37295


Clyde, James Latham McDiarmid, Lord Clyde (1898-1975), judge, was born on 30 October 1898 at 17 Heriot Row, Edinburgh, the elder son (there was no daughter) of James Avon Clyde (1863-1944), later lord justice-general of Scotland, and his wife, Anna Margaret McDiarmid (died 1956), daughter of Professor Peter Wallwork Latham of Cambridge. His parents were formidable personalities. Having, as a small boy, saved his pocket money to buy his mother a scarf for her birthday, he was sharply told to take it back: he had bought it at a shop owned by supporters of the Liberal Party. Although he later followed almost every step of his father's career, he did so under constant pressure to succeed without the advantage of his father's majestic presence, intellect, or self-confidence. His stern upbringing may explain a certain insensitivity to the feelings of others less resilient than himself which he sometimes displayed on the bench, particularly in criminal appeals. 
Clyde was educated at the Edinburgh Academy, Trinity College, Oxford, and the University of Edinburgh. He was commissioned in the Royal Garrison Artillery towards the end of the First World War. He obtained a third class in 'literae humaniores' at Oxford in 1921 but a pass with distinction in the LLB examination at Edinburgh in 1924. In 1928 he married Margaret Letitia (1901-1974), daughter of Arthur Edmund DuBuisson, barrister; they had one son, James John Clyde (1932-2009) (the third Lord Clyde on the Scottish bench, and lord of appeal in ordinary, 1996-2001), and one daughter, Margaret Ann (Lady Butler). 
Clyde was admitted to the Scots bar in 1924 and was counsel in three 'causes celebres' of the period. As junior to Craigie Aitchison he appeared for John Donald Merritt at his trial for the murder of his mother in 1927, and for Oscar Slater at his appeal in 1928. In 1932 he appeared in the House of Lords in 'Donoghue v. Stevenson'. He took silk in 1936 and became one of the leaders of the bar, retained in particular by the City of Edinburgh. The uncertain life of an advocate attracted him because, as he said, he loved living on the edge of a precipice. Like most advocates in those days he took an active part in politics, and became Conservative MP for North Edinburgh (1950-54). Appointed lord advocate and sworn of the privy council in 1951, he became lord justice-general and lord president in 1954. Slight of build and exceptionally agile in body and mind, he was rarely at rest. Like his father, he did not practise unreceptive judicial silence. Hitching of his gown, which was always falling off his shoulders, and faster twiddling of his pencil, meant that counsel would be wise to move on. Further argument was profitless when he started shuffling his notes for the judgment which he would, in almost every case, deliver without hesitation or correction as soon as counsel sat down. 
Clyde was not popular with some sections of the legal profession and of the press, which suggested that his appointment to high office was due more to birth and political influence than to legal talent. But his shortcomings (of which he was engagingly aware) reflected those very traits of character which made him, in the words of 'The Times' obituary, a great public servant and a most lovable man. He was decisive and never wasted time on second thoughts. His deceptively simple judgments dealt only with the essential points, stated the law tersely and clearly, and rarely provoked dissent. Although (or perhaps because) his filing system consisted of used envelopes and a blunt pencil, his court administration was quick, simple, and efficient. An agenda was something to be got through, not discussed. He had a deep contempt for the bureaucratic mind and took particular delight in circumventing bureaucratic obstruction. The backlog left by his predecessor (Baron Cooper of Culross) was soon cleared and was not allowed to build up again. He sought out (he did not summon) those he wished to consult, and if persuaded would act at once. Under his guidance Parliament House was transformed from a nineteenth-century warren into a modern court house and nothing gave him greater pleasure than to explore, and share with others, its secrets and treasures. 
Known to everyone as Hamish, Clyde was quite without side (he refused a peerage), and off the bench, and sometimes on it, he had the charm and endless curiosity of a small boy. (His appearance on the bench was nicely caught in a caricature by David Langdon.) He loved Scotland, its countryside, its history, its monuments, and its books. He was happiest in old clothes, with a pipe in his mouth and his much loved wife at his side, gardening, tending trees, reading, or playing with his model railway, at Briglands, the house at Rumbling Bridge, Kinross-shire, designed for his father by Sir Robert Lorimer. He served for twenty years as vice-chairman of the National Library of Scotland. With the chairman, David Lindsay, earl of Crawford and Balcarres, he worked tirelessly for the library at a critical period in its history. He was appointed a deputy lieutenant of Kinross-shire in 1964, and was awarded the honorary degree of LLD by the universities of Edinburgh (1954), St Andrews (1955), and Aberdeen (1960). Clyde died at home in Rumbling Bridge on 30 June 1975. 
David Edward', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37296


Coade, Eleanor (1733-1821), manufacturer of artificial stone, was born on 3 June 1733 in Exeter, the elder daughter (there were no sons) of George Coade, wool merchant, of Exeter, and his wife, Eleanor, daughter of Thomas Enchmarch, wool merchant, of Tiverton, Devon. She was brought up as a nonconformist. The family remained in Exeter until about 1760, when they moved to London. In the mid-1760s Eleanor was in business in the City on her own as a linen draper. 
In 1769 George Coade died, bankrupt, and later in the year Eleanor joined Daniel Pincot, who was already established at Narrow Wall, Lambeth, making a form of artificial stone. They were there together until 1771, when Eleanor Coade sacked him for representing himself, instead of herself, as the proprietor of the factory. Shortly afterwards, she appointed John Bacon (1740-1799) as supervisor, and his neo-classical models set a very high standard of design. He designed for the firm until the end of his life in 1799. 
Soon Eleanor Coade was working for all the eminent Georgian architects, including Robert Adam, James and Samuel Wyatt, Sir William Chambers, John Nash, and John Soane. A talented modeller, she exhibited at the Society of Artists between 1773 and 1780. As her mother's name was the same as her own, it has been mistakenly assumed that Mrs Coade, the mother, ran the factory until her death in 1796, but 'Mrs' was a courtesy title for any unmarried woman in business at that time, and bills show that Eleanor Coade was in charge from 1771. 
It was widely believed that Eleanor Coade had invented a new process for making artificial stone. Long thought to be a mystery, Coade stone is now known to be a ceramic material, and the British Museum research laboratory's analysis in 1985 showed that it was a form of stoneware so resistant to the weather that it is as precise today as when it was originally made. Its versatility allowed it to be used for all architectural details, commemorative and funerary monuments, fonts, statues, busts, coats of arms, chimney-pieces, garden ornaments, and furniture. Most is neo-classical, but there were also Gothic commissions such as Dalmeny House, Scotland, or Battle Abbey. Sizes range from the statue of Lord Hill in Shrewsbury (16 feet tall) to ornaments 1 inch long. Over six hundred and fifty examples have been traced, all over the British Isles, and in Canada, the United States, Brazil, and the Caribbean. Pieces were also sent to Russia, Poland, and South Africa. 
In 1799 Eleanor Coade took as partner her cousin John Sealy, and the firm became Coade and Sealy. A showroom was opened at the east end of Westminster Bridge. Eleanor Coade had the royal appointment to George III, for whom she made the Gothic screen at St George's Chapel, Windsor, and to the prince of Wales, for whom, successively as prince regent and George IV, she did work at the first Royal Pavilion, Brighton, and Carlton House. Much work was done in the 1790s at the Royal Naval Hospital, Greenwich, and in 1810 work began on the pediment there, which was 40 feet long, designed by Benjamin West and Joseph Panzetta, and made in Coade stone. Sealy died in 1813, and Eleanor Coade appointed William Croggon as manager. The firm reverted to being Coade, and continued to flourish. 
Eleanor Coade was unmarried. She died on 16 November 1821 in Camberwell, and rated an obituary notice in the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. Croggon bought the factory and made many thousands of pounds' worth of Coade stone for Buckingham Palace, but in the late 1830s trade declined, and the firm came to an end about 1840. 
Alison Kelly', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37297


Cocks, Sir Richard, second baronet (c.1659-1726), parliamentary diarist and religious controversialist, was the eldest son of Richard Cocks (1633-1669) of the Middle Temple and his wife, Mary (died 1669), daughter of Sir Robert Cooke of Highnam, Gloucestershire. Cocks was only ten years old when his father and mother both died, leaving him heir to his paternal grandfather's baronetcy and estate at Dumbleton, Gloucestershire, and the remainder of his upbringing seems to have been entrusted to the strict guidance of his elder sister, Dorothy, who regulated the family to her own pattern of godliness. Cocks was admitted to the Middle Temple in 1667, while still a child, but he does not appear ever to have taken up residence. In 1677 he matriculated at Oriel College, Oxford, where he spent at least a year, and where he later claimed to have suffered a worthless and drunken tutor. Cocks married Frances (1663-1724), daughter of Richard Neville of Billingbear, Berkshire, in October 1688, the godly daughter of a family with strong puritan traditions. On his grandmother's death in 1690, he came to reside at Dumbleton and inaugurated an extensive programme of improvement, involving the construction of an entirely new manor house and the creation of fashionable gardens in the Dutch style. 
Cocks's taste for public speaking was frequently indulged as chairman of the Gloucestershire quarter sessions, and in 1698, after several unsuccessful attempts to enter parliament, he secured election as knight of the shire. Various family connections, including his father's friendship with the lord chancellor, John, Baron Somers, drew him to the whig side in politics, despite his grandfather's support for the royalist side in the civil war. But he was no slavish follower of a party. Indeed, his stern morality and adherence to the ideals of classical republicanism, as mediated through such writers as Algernon Sidney and his own uncle by marriage, Henry Neville, made him into an archetypal 'country' member, and he was quickly to the forefront in the agitations against a standing army, the presence of placemen in the Commons, and political corruption in general. At the same time his pathological detestation of 'popery' guaranteed that he would vote with the whigs over other great questions of policy, such as the settlement of the Hanoverian succession and the resumption of war with France. So deep-rooted were his political principles and prejudices, and so pronounced his self-importance in pursuing them, that he came to be regarded in some quarters as not merely an individualist but something of a crank. 
Cocks was not re-elected in the general election of 1702, nor thereafter, despite trying again more than once. Out of parliament he retired to his study and began to write -- fragments of history, religious meditations, political satires, in prose, verse, and even in dramatic form -- none of which were published, though some circulated in manuscript among his friends. From notes and other materials he was also able to construct in retrospect a diary of his parliamentary career, covering in particular detail the sessions of 1701-2, which, surviving in manuscript form, now constitutes his chief claim to fame. Not until 1717 did he appear in print, with a grand jury charge denouncing Jacobites. Then in 1721-2 he waded into the paper war over the so-called 'Bangorian controversy' initiated by the sermon on church government by Benjamin Hoadly, bishop of Bangor. 
In rapid succession Cocks produced four pamphlets promoting an Erastian view of ecclesiastical authority and a comprehensive religious settlement designed to include presbyterians: 'A Perfect Discovery of Longitude' (1721), 'The Church of England Secured' (1722), 'Over Shoes, Over Boots' (1722), and his 'Farewel Sermon' (1722). Their violently anti-clerical tone, occasionally stooping to scurrilous abuse, provoked sharp replies from churchmen, some of whom themselves descended to the level of personal insults, mostly on the score of Cocks's diminutive size and renowned eccentricity. To Thomas Hearne, for example, he was 'a whimsical, crazed man'; to another high tory he was a 'peevish elf' ('Parliamentary Diary', xiii). Undaunted, Cocks hit back with yet another tract, 'A True and Impartial Inquiry... into the Late Bloody Execution at Thorn' (1727), though this was no more than a stale reprise of past polemic, and was published only posthumously. 
Within a few months of the death of his first wife, in 1724, Cocks took as his second wife Mary Bethell (died 1765), daughter of William Bethell of Swindon in Yorkshire and sister of Hugh Bethell MP. There were no children of either marriage, so that on his death, about 21 October 1726 at Dumbleton, where he was buried at St Peter's Church, the baronetcy passed to his brother Robert, rector of Bladon, in Oxfordshire. The estate at Dumbleton was, however, willed directly to his nephew, Robert's second surviving son and namesake. In characteristic style, Cocks's will included a political valediction which gave expression to his resolute whiggism. He adjured his 'friends and relations' to 'serve God in a manner worthy of Him, and not to disturb the peace of their country with party and idle distinctions, which in weak persons is only the effect of their folly in cunning of private interest and ambition. I desire them to love one the other, to be kind to their neighbours, and be faithful and loyal to King George and to have more regard to the Protestant interest than to any private views whatever. ('Parliamentary Diary', lix)' 



@@@@@


doc= 37298


Cody, Samuel Franklin (1861-1913), showman and aeronautical designer, was born on 6 March 1861 in Davenport, Iowa, USA, the fourth of five children of Samuel Franklin Cowdery (1833-1902), a former Union soldier and jobbing carpenter, and his wife, Phoebe Jane (1834-1900). After education in local schools, he left home at the age of about fifteen to join a circus, and he adopted the name S. F. Cody, Jr, in emulation of the well-known showman Colonel W. F. 'Buffalo Bill' Cody, leader of a famous 'Wild West' touring company. On 8 April 1889 he married Maud Maria Lee, the daughter of Joseph Lee of Norristown, Pennsylvania, who assisted in his trick shooting act. 
Cody left the USA late in 1890 for England; he was followed a few weeks later by his wife, and they performed a cowboy act in English music halls before moving to the continent in 1892. Soon afterwards Cody and his wife separated, and Cody began living with Lela Marie King (1853-1939), along with two of her younger sons from her previous marriage to Edward King, a licensed victualler. Lela, born Elizabeth Mary Davis, was the daughter of John Blackburn Davis, a horse dealer, and she and her sons took part in Cody's act. Cody's wife appears to have returned home to Norristown in 1892, apparently destitute and feeble-minded; she was later incarcerated in a local psychiatric hospital. 
While touring with the company in Europe, Cody and Lela had a son, born in Basel in 1895. During this period Cody constructed an elaborate account of his life, in which he claimed to have been born in Birdville, Texas, in 1861, and to have spent several years as a cowboy and trail-rider, with a spell of gold mining in the Yukon in 1883-4. He claimed that he had then met Lela in Texas, and that their two sons were born there, before embarking on his career as a 'Wild West' performer. Such a fictive biography was perhaps not unusual in the theatre, but it undoubtedly added to the authenticity of Cody's show. By the time Cody returned to England in 1896 the original trick shooting and horse-riding acts had expanded to a full 'Wild West' show in which his 'wife and sons' took part. Cody's most famous melodrama was 'The Klondyke Nugget', first staged in 1898. 
From 1900 Cody became actively interested in kite flying, and patented a man-carrying kite system in 1901. In 1903 he sold four sets of kites to the Admiralty; in 1905 the army ordered kites and engaged Cody to instruct the Royal Engineers in their operation. He thus became involved with the balloon factory at Farnborough, under Colonel J. E. Capper, and gave up his theatrical activities. Capper wished to develop both airships and aeroplanes for military use, and he took advantage of Cody's mechanical and practical skills to promote this work. Cody was largely responsible for the engine installation of the airship that flew in 1907, and he designed and constructed the machine on which he made the first powered aeroplane flight in Great Britain on 16 October 1908. 
The War Office decided in 1909 to stop work on aeroplanes, but Cody was allowed to keep the machine. By July 1909 he was making successful flights of several miles, and in August he was awarded the Aeronautical Society's silver medal. In October he flew at the first British flying meeting at Doncaster, and there he became a naturalized British subject. 
In the next four years Cody built some half-dozen aeroplanes, which he flew competitively with considerable success, winning four British empire Michelin trophies as well as other prizes. He won the military trials in 1912; the consequent War Office order for two machines was his only commercial sale. Cody was a tall, flamboyant character, and an exceptional pilot. He was widely admired by fellow pilots and show-business colleagues, as well as the general public. 
On 7 August 1913, flying his latest machine, Cody crashed at Ball Hill, Cove Common, Farnborough; he and his passenger, W. H. B. Evans, were thrown out of the aircraft and killed. Cody was subsequently given a funeral on 11 August with full military honours by the Aldershot garrison, and he was buried in the military cemetery there. Following Cody's death, his legal wife's stepmother started a civil action for a share of the estate; settled in 1922, the proceeds were split between Cody's wife, Maud Maria, and his three sisters and brother. His archives were auctioned at Sothebys in 1996. 


@@@@@


doc= 37299


Coffey, Aeneas (c.1780-1852), exciseman and inventor of a still, was born probably in Dublin (though one source gives his birthplace as Calais), the son of Andrew Coffey, the city engineer of Dublin, who was employed in the Dublin city waterworks from 1774 to 1832. He is thought to have attended classes at Trinity College, Dublin, but there is no record of his having graduated from there. 
Coffey entered the service of the excise in 1800 as a waiter, gauger, and searcher. In 1808 he married Sussana Logie. They had four sons. Coffey was appointed surveyor of excise for the city of Dublin in 1809, and in the following year was transferred to co. Donegal, where he was put in charge of operations against illicit distilling. The excise laws were widely regarded by the Irish as unnecessarily strict, and they resulted in harsh repressive measures being taken by excise officers, often in conjunction with military forces, although there is ample evidence that both sides resorted to violence at times. The Revd Edward Chichester published a pamphlet in 1818 entitled 'Oppressions and Cruelties of Irish Revenue Officers', in which he described how, in 1810, a detachment of the army led by Coffey was set upon and disarmed by the country people near Culdaff in Inishowen. Coffey was beaten 'until he was supposed to be dead'. That same year Coffey, by then acting inspector-general of excise, published his 'Observations', on Chichester's pamphlet, in which he restated the official policy but did not produce any very convincing arguments or evidence in its justification. 
In 1821 Coffey began a series of experiments at Carrickfergus distillery on the design of a new type of still, which allowed the distiller to check the strength of the spirit without requiring access to it, while securing the still against any abstraction of the contents. Coffey's objective was to reduce illicit distilling, but his apparatus had obvious commercial advantages over the traditional pot still; it produced whisky more quickly and cheaply, in larger quantities, and in a continuous process. In 1824 he resigned from the excise and four years later established the firm of Aeneas Coffey & Co. at the Dock Distillery, South King Street, Dublin. The patent for his 'apparatus for brewing and distilling' (no. 5974) was granted (for Ireland only) for fourteen years from 1831. 
Initial production problems and the conservatism of Irish distillers meant that Coffey had little success in introducing his apparatus in Ireland, and in 1835 he moved his business to St Leonard's Street, Bromley by Bow, Middlesex. From the 1840s his patent still gained in popularity, notably in Scotland. During his tour of 1887 Alfred Barnard found Coffey stills in all the major Scottish distilleries. Improved versions are widely used in the manufacture of grain whisky, gin, and other potable and industrial spirits. 
Coffey's four sons all entered their father's business, three of them after studying at Trinity College, Dublin. Coffey died at St Leonard's Street, Bromley by Bow, on 26 November 1852, his eldest son, Aeneas Coffey, having died a few months earlier. 


@@@@@


doc= 37300


Colbeck, William (1871-1930), Antarctic explorer, was born at 8 Myton Place, Hull, on 8 August 1871, the second son and second child in the family of three sons and three daughters of Christopher Colbeck, baker, and his wife, Martha Ann Haggitt. He followed a seagoing career against his father's wishes, apparently influenced by the maritime traditions of his mother's family, and after attending Hull grammar school was apprenticed from 1886 to 1890 aboard the square-rigger 'Loch Torridon', sailing between Britain and Calcutta. He passed his master's ticket in 1894 with the aid of private tuition from Zebedee Scaping, headmaster of the Hull Trinity House Navigation School. 
In 1894 Colbeck joined the Wilson Line in Hull as second mate of the SS 'Draco' and three years later a chance meeting with the Norwegian explorer Borchgrevink, a passenger in his vessel, the 'Montebello', led to Colbeck joining the 'Southern Cross' expedition (1898-1900) as magnetic observer, following an intensive course of instruction at Kew observatory. The party was the first to winter in Antarctica. With Ole Larsen, a Finn, Colbeck reached the furthest south (78 degree 50') thus far achieved and made the first accurate map of the Ross ice shelf. These explorations convinced him of the best route to the south pole, later followed by Roald Amundsen, who in 1912 after his triumph sent Colbeck a letter of thanks. Friction between the Royal Geographical Society and Borchgrevink prevented their efforts from receiving due recognition, though Colbeck received the Murchison grant from the society. However, he impressed Sir Clements Markham, who selected him to command the SY 'Morning' (formerly the Norwegian whaler 'Morgen'), sent in 1902 to the relief of the 'Discovery' expedition of Robert Falcon Scott. The crew consisted of Wilson Line men and hand-picked officers, including E. R. G. R. Evans as second mate. 
In December 1902 new land was discovered which Colbeck called Scott Island and its prominent feature, a stone column, Haggitt's Pillar, was given his mother's maiden name. 'Discovery' was found, ice-bound, on Christmas day. Unable to penetrate this obstacle Colbeck left 14 tons of provisions and 20 tons of coal for the marooned expedition. Leaving Hobart in December 1903 the 'Morning' (now transferred to the command of the Admiralty) and 'Terra Nova' reached 'Discovery' early the next year and she was blasted free from the enclosing ice. Outstripped by the 'Discovery', the 'Morning' reached Plymouth too late for the welcome celebrations but arriving back in Hull on 9 October Colbeck and ten of his crew were mobbed at Paragon station. In appreciation of his efforts he received a magnificent loving cup from the Royal Geographical Society, engraved with the course of the 'Morning', and was also given the Back grant. Scott named Cape Colbeck and Colbeck Bay after him. Colbeck remained as master in the Wilson Line until 1912, when he was appointed marine superintendent in the London office. He received the Polar medal in 1914 and in 1926 was a founder member of the Honourable Company of Master Mariners. 
On 7 December 1904 Colbeck married Edith, daughter of John Robinson, a cotton manufacturer. They had four sons, the eldest of whom, Captain W. R. Colbeck RNR, was surveyor with the British, Australian, and New Zealand Antarctic research expedition of 1929-31, for which he received the Polar medal; Sir Douglas Mawson named the Colbeck archipelago after him. Colbeck died at his home, 51 Inchmery Road, Catford, London, on 18 October 1930, his exertions in the Antarctic having taken a considerable toll. He was buried at Hither Green, Lewisham. 


@@@@@


doc= 37301


Colebrooke, Sir George, second baronet (1729-1809), banker, was born on 14 June 1729 in Chilham, Kent, the youngest in the family of three sons and seven daughters of James Colebrooke, a London banker, and his wife, Mary Hudson. He was educated at the University of Leiden between 1747 and 1749, and then entered the family's banking business, where he was left in sole control after the deaths of his father and brother James. He inherited a large fortune from them and succeeded his brother James as second baronet in 1761. In 1754 he married Mary, daughter of Patrick Gaynor of Antigua. They had three sons and three daughters, the youngest son being Henry Thomas Colebrooke, who became a noted Sanskrit scholar. George Colebrook gained election as a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, and was appointed as chirographer to the court of common pleas in 1766. 
A key figure in the world of high finance, Colebrooke sat in the Commons as MP for Arundel between 1754 and 1774, and close links with Thomas Pelham-Holles, first duke of Newcastle, secured him a number of lucrative government contracts. This led to involvement in a wide range of speculative projects throughout Europe, North America, and the West Indies, and the huge resources at his disposal enabled him to embark on a vigorous attempt to secure control over the affairs of the East India Company. He was elected a director of the rapidly expanding company in 1767, and was appointed deputy chairman the following year. He served as chairman in 1769, 1770, and 1772, and was thus at the centre of public attention at a crucial stage in Anglo-Asian relations. His decisions and negotiations with the government shaped the manner in which the British crown extended its control over both the company and its Indian possessions, a process which culminated in the passing of the 'Regulating Act' of 1773. But this success was tempered by the fact that Colebrooke's period in office coincided with the company's financial collapse, and for this he was heavily criticized. At the same time his own business affairs fell into disarray. He became financially involved on his own account in lead and alum mines and speculated heavily and unwisely in raw materials, principally hemp, flax, and logwood. In 1771 he lost $190,000 on a speculation in hemp and then failed in an attempt to corner the world market in alum. His bank closed its doors on 31 March 1773, much of his property was sold in 1774, to be followed by his extensive library and print collection. In 1777 he was declared bankrupt and he departed to live in Boulogne, where his poverty was charitably relieved by a small East India Company pension. 
By 1789 Colebrooke was back in England, living in Bath, with some of his property having been restored. He died on 5 August 1809 in Batheaston. Much lampooned in the press, Colebrooke was a rather pompous, self-important man who considered himself to be the second most influential politician in England. He was succeeded in the baronetcy by his second son, James Edward ('b'. 1761), his eldest son having died in April 1809. 


@@@@@


doc= 37302


Collier, Jane (bap. 1715, d. 1755), novelist, was born at Steeple Langford, near Salisbury, and baptized there on 16 January 1715, one of four children of the Revd Arthur Collier (1680-1732) and Margaret (died 1749), daughter of Nicholas Johnson and niece of Sir Stephen Fox. Her father was rector of Langford Magna, Wiltshire, from 1704, a friend of Bishop Gilbert Burnet, and a theological controversialist. In 1716 money troubles (which Benson blames on his wife) made the family move to lodgings in Salisbury. Jane and her sister, Margaret Collier (1719-1794?), learned Greek and Latin from their father. He died in 1732 'in embarrassed circumstances'; their brother Charles became a soldier, their brother Arthur a lawyer who caused their family friend Henry Fielding to be gaoled in 1746 after standing surety for a sum of $400. Their lives were shaped by poverty and literary friendships. In 1748 Jane had left Salisbury and was living with her mother and brother Arthur in lodgings in London, in Doctors' Commons. Her sister had been living with Samuel Richardson's family in 1750, and by late 1751 she was living in Beauford Buildings with Sarah Fielding (whose example as a published author she must have found an encouragement). 
Jane Collier has been undervalued as a writer. On 4 October 1748 she wrote to Richardson to argue against his proposed alterations to Sarah Fielding's 'The Governess, or, Little Female Academy'. The reasons she advances for maintaining the book's integrity are based on modesty of intention: it is better not to divulge the precise methods of punishment used by its Mrs Teachum, since anything said might antagonize readers of one persuasion or another. Richardson duly published it (1749) in its original form. Whereas her critique of his 'Clarissa', written for the 'Gentleman's Magazine', never appeared there, Sarah Fielding's reached print, anonymously, in 1749. 
Jane Collier's first known appearance in print is 'An Essay on the Art of Ingeniously Tormenting' (1753). The daughter of Collier's old Salisbury friend James Harris later claimed that 'great part' of it was written by him, but she offered no evidence. Its frontispiece shows a cat and mouse with the motto 'Celebrare Domestica Facta'. Quoted by Samuel Johnson in volume two of his 'Dictionary' (in spirit, if not literally, this was one of his few infringements on his principle of excluding living authors), it is couched in the Scriblerian tradition of ironic instruction in undesirable skills, like Pope on poetic bathos, Swift on malpractices of servants, or Henry Fielding on the writing of inspirational biography. Under this guise it probes the 'labyrinths and inward turns of the mind' in abuse of power in human relationships, especially that of mistress to servants or 'humble companion', with acute psychological insight no doubt won while living as a dependant. Its closing fable relates how an account of 'the misery that is endured, from the entrance of teeth and claws into living flesh' was adjudged after much debate to have been written from experience not of preying but of being preyed upon. A reprint of 1804, edited by 'J. S. C.', signs its dedication 'The Invisible Girl'; it notes that Jane Collier's brother Arthur regretted that his sister's abilities should be known only from 'a satirical work'. Jane Collier, however, in ironically claiming kinship with Addison, Swift, Richardson, and (Henry) Fielding, does so as moralist, not satirist. 
Collier produced a second work, 'The Cry: a New Dramatic Fable' (1754), jointly with Sarah Fielding, who was apparently thought by Richardson and other readers to be sole or chief author. Collier's commonplace book (or writer's working notebook), carefully transcribed and edited in manuscript by her sister Margaret, includes her allegorical 'Sallys and Jennys Emblem (1754) concerning The Cry'. This pictures two women co-operating in making a patchwork gown: Jenny shops for silks, Sally weaves, Jenny cuts in pieces and stitches up to Sally's design. 'The Cry' is both experimental and learned, aiming 'to strike a little out of the beaten track of novels and essays', with scenes and dialogue borrowed from the drama, an allegorical framework explicitly borrowed from Edmund Spenser, scholarly footnotes, and invented words like 'turba' for a legion of evil passions, 'trouble, bustle and confusion' (1.194-5). Una personifies Truth; the 'Cry' is the name of 'ERROR and her NUMEROUS TRAIN... when cloathed in mortal forms' (1.20). The central story, of good characters attaining happiness against odds, is unremarkable; the picture of societal forces constricting women's lives (Portia compelled constantly to defend her behaviour to the Cry) recalls that drawn in Sarah Fielding's work. The inventive, non-narrative means of composing this picture was disliked by, for instance, Elizabeth Carter, Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, and the 'Monthly Review'; but it seems to bear Collier's distinctive mark, a natural development from the 'Art of Tormenting'. Jane Collier died in 1755, unmarried, and was buried at St Benet's Church, London, on 28 March 1755. 


@@@@@


doc= 37303


Collier, Mary (1688?-1762), poet, was born near Midhurst, Sussex. There is disagreement about her parents and her date of birth, but 'She is probably the Mary, daughter of William Collyer' baptized in Lodsworth, Sussex, on 9 October 1688 (Klaus, 202). 
Information about Collier's life is mostly drawn from 'Some remarks on the author's life drawn by herself', prefaced to her 'Poems on Several Occasions' (1762). She describes the education she received from her parents, 'by whom I was taught to read when very Young'. On the early death of her mother she did not attend school but was 'set to such labour as the country afforded' (Collier, iii). 
Collier lived with her father, 'who was long sickly and infirm' until his death in the 1720s, when she moved to Petersfield, earning a modest living by washing, brewing, and other manual labour. Nevertheless she kept up her reading, and at some time after 1730 she came to know the work of the thresher-poet Stephen Duck. His poem 'The Thresher's Labour', which Mary Collier read and 'soon got by heart', provoked her by his charge that rural women had an easier life than men. Her riposte, entitled 'The Woman's Labour: an Epistle to Mr Stephen Duck', was intended 'to call an Army of Amazons to vindicate the injured sex' (Collier, iv). 
Collier did not originally intend publication, but after she repeated her verses to a local family news of her 'soon became a Town Talk'. 'The Woman's Labour' was published at her own expense in 1739, the 'Advertisement' stating 'Her Friends are of Opinion that the Novelty of a 'Washer-woman''s turning Poetess, will procure her some Readers'. The novelty was too much for some: the 1740 edition includes a testimony by Petersfield citizens to the authenticity of authorship. Her later comment on this venture was: 'I lost nothing, neither did I gain much, others run away with the profit' (Collier, iv). 
Mary Collier's reputation rests on 'The Woman's Labour': a spirited polemic, sharply descriptive of female labour. Witty and energetic, the poem displays a real quality of mind and technical ability in its depiction of the long hours of toil of both the agricultural labourer's wife and of the domestic servant. 
Collier continued as a washerwoman until she was sixty-three, when she moved to Alton, Hampshire, to take care of a farmhouse. At the age of seventy, in poor health, she retired to a garret in Alton 'to pass the Relict of my days in Piety, Purity, Peace and an Old Maid' (Collier, v). At this time she prepared for publication her 'Poems on Several Occasions', which was well supported by local subscribers. She died soon after, and was buried at St Lawrence, Alton, on 20 October 1762. 


@@@@@


doc= 37304


Colman, Ronald Charles (1891-1958), actor, was born in Richmond, Surrey, on 9 February 1891, the second son and fourth child in the family of two sons and three daughters of Charles Colman, a silk merchant, and his wife, Marjory Read Fraser. He was educated at a boarding-school in Littlehampton, Sussex, but had to leave abruptly at the age of sixteen for financial reasons when his father died suddenly of pneumonia. He started work as a clerk in the British Steamship Company in the City, and he joined the London Scottish regiment as a territorial soldier in 1909. Colman's regiment was the first of the territorials to serve with the regular army in France after the outbreak of the First World War and he was severely wounded by shrapnel in the leg, acquiring the limp which he was to spend much of the remainder of his life and career attempting, often in considerable pain, to conceal from audiences and cameras alike. Invalided out of the army in 1915, Colman began to take up the acting career which had fascinated him since amateur dramatics in childhood. He made his debut with Lena Ashwell at the London Coliseum in 1916, playing a black-faced herald in a short sketch called 'The Maharani of Arakan' by Rabindranath Tagore; he was soon after that taken by Gladys Cooper into her Playhouse company for minor roles, which Miss Cooper considered he played 'with amiable but remarkable clumsiness'. Very soon, however, his natural good looks were recognized by a film producer and by 1919 he had appeared in three short silent dramas, despite a casting card that read 'does not screen well'. 
From 1920 Colman made regular appearances on Broadway and on tour in America, finally achieving fame in 1921 as the temple priest in 'The Green Goddess' with George Arliss. Colman started his American screen career in 1923 with Lillian Gish in 'The White Sister', and three years later he played in one of the classics of the silent era, 'Beau Geste' (1926). But it was with the coming of sound in 1929 that Colman's Hollywood career really came into its own: the producer Sam Goldwyn was the first to realize the magic of Colman's infinitely poetic, English voice, and he put him under a long-term contract that was to last for virtually the rest of his life. Colman's film credits are a roll-call of Hollywood films at their pre-war and most Anglophile best -- 'Bulldog Drummond' (1929), 'Raffles' (1930), 'Cynara' (1932), 'Clive of India' (1935), 'A Tale of Two Cities' (1935), 'Under Two Flags' (1936), 'Lost Horizon' (1937), and 'The Prisoner of Zenda' (1937) -- all establishing him as one of the richest and most reliable of the Hollywood raj, the man on whom a whole later generation of expatriates, led by David Niven, modelled themselves and their officer-and-gentlemanly acting careers. 
Colman's wartime and post-war work before the camera was less distinguished, though he did win an Oscar in 1947 for an uncharacteristically highly charged dramatic role in 'A Double Life'; he then moved on to a lucrative second career in American radio and television, playing the professor in 'Halls of Ivy' (1950-52), a series he also produced and owned. Colman's last screen appearances were a fleeting role in Michael Todd's all-star 'Around the World in Eighty Days' (1956) and, finally, in 'The Story of Mankind' (1957). These were the only two films he had made in seven years, and there could have been little doubt that his particular tradition of uniformed, clenched, period Englishmen had become unfashionable in America with the coming of the new realist cinema immediately after the war. 
In 1919 Colman had married the actress Thelma Raye. This marriage was dissolved in 1933, and in 1938 he married Benita Hume, also an actress. There was one daughter from this second marriage. Ronald Colman died on 19 May 1958 in Santa Barbara, California, and was buried there. 'The Times' called him 'the most complete gentleman of the cinema'. 
Sheridan Morley', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37305


David [i] Colville (1811/12-1898), who was baptized in Campbeltown, Argyll, on 17 February 1813, the eleventh and last child of Robert Colvill ['sic'] and his wife, Janet Mitchell. In early manhood he participated in the family business of owning and controlling a number of coasting vessels and managing several local enterprises, the most important of which was whisky distilling. In the late 1840s he decided to strike out on his own, most probably because his temperance convictions made the family interest in strong drink abhorrent to him. Provided with some capital by his father, he migrated to Glasgow and set up as a provisions merchant in the Trongate. In June 1845 he married Janet (known as Jessie), daughter of the Revd John Barr; they had a family of four sons and seven daughters. 
Within a few years Colville had resolved to abandon dealing in tea and coffee, his principal activity, and to enter the buoyant iron trade. Being completely ignorant of iron making, he required a partner possessing the necessary expertise. Such a partner he found in Thomas Gray, the manager of a small malleable-iron works at Coatbridge. The firm of Colville and Gray was established in June 1861 with a capital of $6500, of which Colville provided $5000. Although the Clifton ironworks was successful, relations between the two men began to deteriorate when Gray's drinking habits became intolerable to Colville. It was resolved to dissolve the partnership in 1870 and to sell the going concern to the partner submitting the higher bid. Colville put in a most generous offer and was mortified to lose out to Gray, who had gained the backing of a Mr Wylie, a licensed grocer and former provost of Hamilton, who saw the Clifton works as both a sound investment and a thriving business in which his sons could become interested. 
It was a bitter disappointment to Colville but, unexpectedly provided with ample funds from the sale of his three-fourths share in the firm, he decided to set up another ironworks entirely under his own control, in the management of which he would be assisted by two of his sons, 


@@@@@


doc= 37306


Common, John (1778-1868), agricultural engineer, was born in High Buston, Warkworth, Northumberland, on 25 January 1778, the second child in the family of five sons (one died in infancy) and four daughters of Robert Common of High Buston, a millwright and cartwright from a family of skilled mechanics, and his wife (probably Jane Wilson of Alnwick). 
Common followed his father's profession and assisted Henry Ogle, a schoolteacher of Newham, in improving a reaping machine design about 1803. His plans, from which two models were made, substituted a clipping or shearing action for Ogle's rotary one. In 1811 a full-size version was demonstrated secretly at night and appeared to 'answer well', and in 1812 a model was sent to the Society of Arts by Hugh, Earl Percy (later third duke of Northumberland). However, the society made no award of its reaping machine premium as the invention was 'incomplete' without proper trials. A second full-size machine, with a reel to bring the standing corn to the knives, and rollers to deliver the cut corn to the ground, was demonstrated in 1812 before witnesses. Common decided to discontinue further experiments because of the trouble and cost, and he passed the patterns to Thomas Brown and his son, iron-founders of Alnwick, who emigrated to New York state with the designs in 1824. 
In 1851 Common claimed that imported American reaping machines, manufactured by Cyrus Hall McCormick, were 'exactly like the one I had made 40 years before'. His supporters subsequently asserted that the Browns had passed Common's patterns to McCormick, but there is no evidence that the American, working in an isolated part of Virginia from 1831, ever encountered them before his reaper improvements of ten years later. Common's achievement was to demonstrate a reaping machine that foreshadowed McCormick's, employing a reciprocating action of the knives. But he failed to persevere with his invention; nor was the era of relatively abundant labour supply, and of machine breaking, propitious for its development, whereas McCormick perfected his reaper at a time favourable to its adoption by farmers in North America and Europe. 
Common gained recognition for other inventions, including a Society of Arts silver medal for a double-drill turnip sower of 1818. Common married Mary (1778/9-1847), daughter of John Leithead of Widdrington, in 1804. Two of their five sons and one of their four daughters died in infancy. He continued as an agricultural machine maker and a cartwright for the Northumberland estate until an advanced age, and he died at his home in Denwick, near Alnwick, on 28 June 1868. 
John S. Creasey', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37307


Condy, Henry Bollmann (bap. 1826, d. 1907), chemical manufacturer, was born at Sloane Street, London, and was baptized on 20 August 1826 at St Luke's, Chelsea, the son of George Thomas Condy, barrister and newspaper proprietor, and his wife, Charlotte, the daughter of Colonel Foot of the Scots Greys. He was educated at Brompton Grammar School and later at the Royal College of Chemistry at Oxford Street, London. 
In 1843 his mother inherited from Dr Bollman, a Hungarian chemist, the chemical manufactory of C. Foot & Co. which had been founded at Battersea in 1816. Mrs Condy maintained the business until her son's education was complete, whereupon he took over. The chief products were acetic acid, acetate salts, mineral acids, albumen, pharmaceuticals, and other chemicals. Condy eliminated unprofitable product lines and made significant improvements to production methods, for which he took out fifteen patents over the period from 1852 to 1888. On 19 October 1850 Condy married Eleanor Chrisse at St Dunstan-in-the-East, London. They had three sons and one daughter. 
Condy's interest in hygiene and disinfection was evident in sales of 'ozone water', in his patents dealing with the preparation and use of chlorine and of highly oxidized compounds of manganese, and in his authorship of five short books on the topic between 1860 and 1867. It was because of this interest that he was awarded a Red Cross medal for services rendered to the sick and wounded during the Franco-Prussian War. Solutions of sodium manganate and permanganate, patented in 1856 and 1876, were marketed as 'Condy's fluid', and the derived solid as 'Condy's crystals'. These were widely used as disinfectants and the crystals in particular for treatment of snakebite after Dr Lacerda recommended potassium permanganate for this purpose in 1881. 
Imitators who marketed potassium permanganate as 'Condy's crystals' (and solutions of it as his fluid) were the subject of litigation which reached its height in Australia at the turn of the century. Although successful, it failed to change the popular belief that Condy's crystals are potassium permanganate. Other litigation between Condy and A. D. Mitchell, who had joined the firm in 1870, led at first to estrangement and then to reconstitution of the company as Condy and Mitchell Ltd, with Mitchell and Condy's eldest son, H. J. Bollmann Condy, as managing directors. From this point the elder Condy gradually withdrew from the business while continuing his interests in industrial chemistry, foreign travel, and horse-riding. He died at his home, 4 The Leas, Folkestone, on 24 September 1907. 
Ian D. Rae', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37308


Connolly, James (1868-1916), socialist and Irish revolutionary, was born on 5 June 1868 at 107 Cowgate, Edinburgh, the youngest of three sons (there were no daughters) of Irish immigrants John Connolly (1832/3-1900), manure carter of Edinburgh, and his wife, Mary (1832/3-1890), daughter of James McGinn, labourer of Edinburgh. Brought up in the slums of Cowgate, Connolly left St Patrick's School at ten and became in turn printer's devil, bakery hand, and tiling factory worker. In 1882, falsifying his age and name, he joined the army, serving in Ireland and possibly elsewhere; hating it he deserted in 1889 at a time when both his mother and father were seriously ill. On 13 April 1889 he married Lillie Reynolds, a domestic servant from a protestant Wicklow family, whom he had met in Dublin. They had one son and six daughters. 
From childhood Connolly had read voraciously; in the army he learned about history, politics, economics, and socialism. In April 1889 he joined the Socialist League in Dundee, then moved back to Edinburgh, where he worked as a night-soil man. He read deeply in socialist literature, even learning some French and German, and applied Marxist theory to his twin preoccupations of Irish nationalism and social inequality. A member of the Scottish Socialist Federation (SSF) from 1890 and the Independent Labour Party from shortly after its foundation in 1893, his powerful mind fed off political discussion. His published branch reports as secretary of the SSF showed that direct, trenchant writing came naturally to him; effective public speaking took longer. As a youth he had difficulty in overcoming physical handicaps that included bow legs, short sight, and a stammer, later cured. He was not tall, but was described by Daniel Figgis as 'sturdy of frame and broad of brow[;] he suggested, and his northern accent conveyed, the thought of a realist who lived to slay illusions' (Figgis, 87). 
In 1894 Connolly lost his job and in 1895 failed as a cobbler, but his reputation in socialist circles throughout Scotland as an organizer and propagandist (he wrote a column in a local left-wing paper as 'R. Ascal'), speaker and campaigner (he stood in two local elections) was high and brought him an offer in 1896 from the Dublin Socialist Club to be their paid organizer for $1 per week. The salary was rarely forthcoming and Connolly had to do labouring work, but his energy was boundless; he created the Irish Socialist Republican Party (ISRP) to spread his message that socialism and nationalism were complementary and incompatible with sectarianism. Despite opposing cross-class alliances he formed a friendship with Maud Gonne, who helped to make him an early convert to female suffrage, and together they organized flamboyant anti-monarchical and anti-imperialist protests. But despite demonstrations, public meetings, numerous articles, pamphlets, poetry, and proletarian songs, and a newspaper called the 'Workers' Republic' (which frequently collapsed), he won few converts, for romantic nationalism was in the ascendant: 'Ireland without her people is nothing to me', he wrote in frustration in 1900. And in international socialist circles, the ISRP was censured for calling for independence from Britain as well as a socialist revolution. 
Connolly was pro-Boer and opposed to home rule, a cause which he regarded as middle class and capitalist. These views had lost him friends in Britain, though he made many speeches there in 1901, leading to an invitation to go to America on a speaking tour under the auspices of Daniel De Leon's Socialist Labor Party (SLP), which had given occasional financial help to the ISRP. De Leon, who believed that a socialist party should be as 'intolerant as science' (Dudley Edwards, 40), hoped that Connolly would win Irish-American recruits for the SLP and return to Ireland ideologically purer and more evangelistic. Connolly's speaking tour from September 1902 to January 1903 took him from New York to California and Canada, and though he disliked the individualism of the United States he found the trip exhilarating and raised some money for his party. On his return to Ireland what a colleague called his 'confoundedly disagreeable integrity and incorruptibility' (John Carstairs Matheson to Connolly, 2 March 1907, Dudley Edwards, 45) resulted in a disastrous split in the ISRP. To support his family, which had been living in grinding poverty in a squalid tenement, he first worked for the new Socialist Labour Party in Scotland, but seeing that it had no future he had to emigrate in 1903 to the United States -- bitterly claiming to have been driven out of Ireland by socialists. 
During seven years in America Connolly's many jobs included agent for an insurance company, lathe operator, and union organizer. An activist in socialist, Irish, and Italian circles, in 1905 he was a co-founder of the syndicalist Industrial Workers of the World, in 1907 founder of the Irish Socialist Federation, in 1908 of 'The Harp' newspaper, and in 1908-9 a paid organizer for the Socialist Party of America. When he left, after numerous rows with American socialists -- De Leon ultimately dubbed the atheist Connolly a Jesuit agent; Connolly alleged De Leon was 'purposely doing the work of the capitalist class' (Connolly to Matheson, 8 Nov 1900, Dudley Edwards, 63) -- though the class struggle was still his main concern he had developed a new sympathy with cultural and political nationalism. Though still irascible he was mellowing, and had matured into a thinker of depth, breadth, and originality, and an orator of force and passion. 
Back in Dublin in 1910 Connolly published a brilliant pamphlet -- 'Labour, Nationality and Religion' -- refuting clerical assertions that Catholicism and socialism were incompatible, and his masterpiece, 'Labour in Irish History', which, although marked by economic determinism and his hatred of the middle-class nationalist tradition, was a ground-breaking application of international thinking to the Irish situation and deeply influenced the thinking of Patrick Pearse. Briefly national organizer of the Socialist Party of Ireland in 1910, Connolly, in 1911, became Ulster district organizer of the Irish Transport and General Workers' Union. Although he had some success as a union representative, increasing membership was an uphill struggle, because of both the sheer poverty of the workers and the rampant sectarianism that meant that most recruits were Roman Catholics. Indeed, while in innumerable speeches (some later printed in 1915 in pamphlet form as 'The Reconquest of Ireland') Connolly stressed the suffering of protestant workers under capitalism, he never understood unionism or the fears of Ulster protestants. 
In 1912 Connolly was a founder of the Independent Labour Party of Ireland, and by persuading the Irish trades union conference to back the labour movement he created the conditions from which the Irish Labour Party later developed -- one of his most practical achievements. When in 1913 the Dublin Employers' Federation staged a lock-out to prevent workers joining the trade union Connolly returned to Dublin to rally the workers, but poverty defeated them in February 1914. In October James Larkin, whose personality cult Connolly deplored and whom he found an almost intolerable boss, left Ireland and Connolly became his highly efficient successor as general secretary of the union, editor of the 'Irish Worker', and military commander of the Irish Citizen Army, set up in November 1913 as a morale-boosting drilling scheme for locked-out workers. Appalled by the outbreak of war in 1914 Connolly launched a massive anti-recruitment drive. Its failure, combined with the dreadful suffering of the Dublin poor, drove him to join forces with the revolutionary nationalist Irish Republican Brotherhood. His influence was evident in the egalitarian wording of the proclamation declaring an Irish republic published on Easter Monday 1916. Connolly directed operations in the General Post Office capably and courageously, for the last two days with a shattered ankle. After the surrender on 29 April he was court-martialled on 9 May and shot (while seated, being unable to stand) at Kilmainham gaol, Dublin, at dawn on 12 May 1916. He was first interred at the gaol; his final resting place is at Arbour Hill cemetery, Dublin. He was survived by his wife. 
Connolly was the fifteenth and last of the rebels to be executed, the killing of an injured man having resulted in a public outcry. His status as a patriotic martyr was at once assured, but an appreciation of his politics took rather longer to develop: socialists disapproved of his participation in an essentially bourgeois nationalist revolution and nationalists disapproved of his socialism. The labour movement in Ireland subsequently developed along broadly non-Marxist lines, and it was only when his writings were rediscovered by civil rights activists in Northern Ireland during the 1960s that his significance as a socialist thinker began to achieve wide recognition. 


@@@@@


doc= 37309


Conroy, Sir John Ponsonby, first baronet (1786-1854), courtier, was born on 21 October 1786 at Maes-y-castell, Caerhun, Caernarvonshire, the eldest of the five sons and one daughter of John Ponsonby Conroy (1759-1797), barrister, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Francis Vernon Wilson, who were both Irish-born. Educated by tutors and at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, he was commissioned into the Royal Artillery in 1803. 
On 26 December 1808 Conroy married Elizabeth (1790-1864), daughter of Major-General Benjamin Fisher and Charlotte Clarke, and niece of Dr John Fisher, bishop of Salisbury, who had tutored Edward, duke of Kent. They had four sons, one of whom died young, and two daughters. Conroy believed his wife to be the duke of Kent's natural child, and this fantasy may have accounted for his arrogance towards Queen Victoria. Through his wife's connections, he became equerry to the duke of Kent on the latter's marriage to Princess Victoire of Leiningen in 1818. Conroy was an organizer of genius. He made it possible for the duke and his wife, in the eighth month of pregnancy, to rush back from Germany to Kensington Palace for the birth, putting up the royal cavalcade at his home in Shooter's Hill, Kent, on the way. When the duke died suddenly in 1820, Conroy became comptroller of the duchess of Kent's household; alone in a hostile environment, she came to place great reliance on him. 
At first Conroy shared his influence on the duchess with her brother, Prince Leopold of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld, but after Leopold ascended the Belgian throne in 1830, Conroy ruled supreme. He survived the 'Cumberland plot' in 1829, when a rumour said to have been started by Ernest, duke of Cumberland, circulated, to the effect that the duchess of Kent was Conroy's mistress. This was intended to discredit the duchess and have Princess Victoria removed from her care, and even, Conroy feared, killed. He established the 'Kensington system', with the intention of seeing Victoria educated as heir presumptive to the crown, her mother created regent if the king died before Victoria was eighteen, himself appointed Victoria's private secretary with a peerage, and a rival court developed at Kensington, cut off from the tory politics and lax morals of William IV, who referred to Conroy as 'King John'. Victoria had no youthful companionship except Conroy's daughters and no personal champion but her German governess, Baroness Lehzen, Conroy's implacable foe. In order to make Victoria known to the people, and to enhance his own importance, Conroy took her around the country on semi-royal tours, after the last of which, in 1835, she succumbed to typhoid. While she was still on her sickbed, Conroy tried to force her to appoint him as her personal secretary when she became queen. Afterwards she told Lord Melbourne: 'I resisted in spite of my illness'. 
As William IV lay dying, Conroy's final desperate attempt to coerce Victoria failed. On her succession to the throne on 20 June 1837, she dismissed him from her household. But he continued to serve her mother, and was partly responsible for the fate of the duchess's lady-in-waiting, Lady Flora Hastings, who died of a tumour while suspected of being pregnant by Conroy. The duchess, too, was reported to be Conroy's mistress, though without conclusive evidence. However, he cannot be absolved of mismanaging her funds and those of Princess Sophia, Victoria's aunt and Conroy's 'spy', from whom he also received gifts and money amounting to $148,000. 
In 1839 Wellington persuaded Conroy to resign from the duchess of Kent's household and go abroad for a time. He had a Guelphic knighthood, an honorary DCL from Oxford, and foreign honours. He was created baronet in 1837, but Sir Robert Peel refused him the Irish peerage promised him by Melbourne. 'JC' was not the arch-villain Victoria painted, but the victim of his own inordinate ambition. He died at his home, Arborfield Hall, near Reading, Berkshire, on 2 March 1854. He was succeeded in the baronetcy by his eldest son, Edward. 
Elizabeth Longford', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37310


Cons, Emma (1838-1912), social reformer and theatre manager, was born in London on 4 March 1838, the second daughter in the family of seven children of Frederick Cons (1810-1870), piano-case maker for Broadwoods, and his wife, Esther Goodair (died 1882), daughter of a Stockport mill owner. She attended a school run by the mother of the painter Henry Holliday, and then went to the art school in Gower Street, London. She continued her education at the school run by Caroline Southwood Hill, but when her father became too ill to work in 1852 she left school. She was employed by the Christian socialist, co-operative Ladies' Guild, which trained girls in glass painting until its closure in 1856. 
Emma Cons had been drawn into social reform circles while at Mrs Hill's school, where she had met Octavia Hill (the schoolmistress's daughter), John Ruskin, Charles Kingsley, and F. D. Maurice. Through Octavia Hill she became involved in the management of working-class housing projects, as a volunteer. Ruskin, meanwhile, employed her in 1856 to work on the restoration of illuminated manuscripts. During a visit to Switzerland she noticed that the work of watch engraving was carried out by women, and, taking the view that this was ideal work for women, when she returned to England she apprenticed herself to a watch engraver, together with a group of female friends. After completing their training the women established a co-operative watch engraving business in Clerkenwell, but they encountered great hostility from male competitors, who intercepted the messenger who brought the women work and injured him so severely that the manufacturers became uneasy at supplying them with further orders. With insufficient work, the co-operative was eventually forced to close. Her next employment also brought Cons into conflict with established male employees. She was the first woman to be hired by the stained-glass manufacturers Powells of Whitefriars, and the men deliberately sabotaged her work until Arthur Powells's personal intervention ended the persecution. One of her most important commissions at Powells was to work on the restoration of the stained-glass windows in the chapel of Merton College, an assignment which kept her in Oxford for two years in the early 1860s. 
Alongside her paid employment Emma Cons continued to work as a volunteer in Octavia Hill's housing projects, looking after properties in Drury Lane and Marylebone. In 1865 Hill had bought three tenements in Paradise Place with money provided by Ruskin, and the following year bought more properties in Freshwater Place. From the beginning Cons was an active worker in the enterprise. Although there were differences in their styles of management, Hill appreciated the qualities which Cons brought to the work; she gave an account of Emma Cons's activities at a housing project near Drury Lane: '[she] enrols her own volunteer workers, founds her own classes, clubs, savings, banks, keeps her own accounts, supervises all the business and personal work, and reports to the owners of the courts direct' (Darley, 148). Housing management involved Emma Cons in every aspect of maintenance, including dealing with workmen. She thought nothing of instructing an obstreperous workman in the art of house construction, and her close friend Henrietta Barnett wrote: 'I can visualise her now: mounting ladders, mixing colours, ordering and laughing at the men, who when too inexperienced, backward, or perhaps indolent, would show resentment at, or disinclination for the job, were made ashamed and also encouraged by seeing Miss Cons seize the brush and give an excellent lesson on distempering, painting or washing down. (Barnett, 3)' By 1870 she had become manager of the Central London Dwellings Improvement Company. In 1879 she initiated the South London Dwellings Company, which bought a property between the Lambeth and Kennington roads that Cons transformed into model dwellings, known as Surrey Lodge. She turned two of the cottages into one, and this became her own permanent office and home, which she shared with her sisters Ellen and Eliza. 
Emma Cons also became an active member of the temperance movement, believing that the only way to discourage men and women from resorting to the gin palace was to provide an alcohol-free alternative. She opened her first 'coffee tavern' in Drury Lane, providing all the social facilities of the public house with non-alcoholic refreshments; the scheme, which acquired the financial backing of several wealthy aristocrats, grew to encompass about fifty establishments throughout London. Cons was to apply the principles of the coffee tavern to the more general reform of working-class entertainment, which centred on drink and the music-hall. She was convinced that there was a close link between working-class recreation, alcohol, and domestic violence, of which she had seen a great deal in her work in housing management. She believed firmly that the only way to solve the problem was to provide 'purified' entertainment, from which both indecency and alcohol had been eliminated. In 1879 she formed the Coffee Music Hall Company with the specific object of providing such entertainment, and in the next year the company leased the Victoria Theatre on the Waterloo Road (widely known as the Old Vic) as the venue for Cons's experiment with 'purified' entertainment. Formerly an insalubrious music-hall, in an area surrounded by gin palaces, public houses, and criminal haunts (and, incidentally, close to Surrey Lodge), the Old Vic was transformed by a $3000 refurbishment, renamed the Royal Victoria Coffee Music Hall, and opened for business on 27 December 1880, with an offering of wholesome entertainment and alcohol-free refreshments. 
Inevitably, the venture ran into immediate financial difficulties, as Emma Cons had greatly overestimated the ability or willingness of the citizens of Lambeth to sit through a performance of elevating entertainment washed down with nothing stronger than tea or coffee. In May 1881 the theatre closed, but after an energetic fund-raising campaign Cons reopened it in October, with a programme of music-hall style entertainment, science lectures, ballad evenings, and temperance meetings. Another financial crisis ensued, and in 1884 the industrialist and Liberal MP Samuel Morley responded to Emma Cons's plea for assistance and bailed the theatre out. The Old Vic could not withstand a further crisis, and Cons and the board of governors launched an appeal to raise the $17,000 necessary to buy the theatre's freehold. With the help of the charity commissioners and private sponsors, including the duke of Westminster, the appeal was successful, and the freehold was purchased in 1891. 
Cons had wanted the Royal Victoria Coffee Music Hall to offer both entertainment and education, and the regular science lectures, given by many eminent scientists, had been a success. Following a request from three members of the audience for a series of evening classes to be set up, she founded the first part-time educational institution for working men and women in south London, which she named Morley College after her benefactor. The earliest classes were held in rooms running beneath the Old Vic's stage, and she officially opened the college on 28 September 1889. It remained under the aegis of the theatre until the 1920s, when it was moved to Westminster Bridge Road. 
Although remembered chiefly for her work in providing 'rational recreation', Emma Cons was active in many other fields. She 'was one of the founders of the first Women's Horticultural College at Swanley in Kent... [and] she found time to travel to Armenia, to report on the Armenian atrocities'; she established a silk factory for the Armenian refugees in Cyprus on her journey home (Baylis and Hamilton, 281). She was a member of the London Society for Women's Suffrage, serving as vice-president in 1908-11. A lifelong champion of women's rights, she was a constitutional suffragist. She was a member of the executive committee of the Women's Liberal Federation, and vice-president in 1892, and served on its temperance committee in 1894. 
In 1889 Cons was appointed an alderman by the newly formed London county council, and as such was caught up in the acrimonious debates and legal cases over women's capacity to act as councillors, along with Jane Cobden-Unwin and Lady Margaret Sandhurst, who had both been elected to the council. Exploiting legal loopholes, Cons and Cobden-Unwin succeeded in holding on to their places on the council (although they both underwent a year of enforced inactivity to prevent their unseating), and in 1890 Cons resumed her place on six committees (asylums, housing, industrial schools, parks, sanitation, and theatre) and a number of subcommittees. She explained her commitment to the cause of women councillors thus: 'I believe that for such work as ours women are not only qualified but needful, and I desire to defend their franchise as far as lawfully I may... those duties are to me a trust, not only for women but for the whole community. (Hollis, 313)' She remained on the council until its term was up, but, with all women, was disqualified for standing for re-election.By the end of the century Emma Cons's health was suffering from the range of her commitments, and in 1899 she invited her niece, Lilian Baylis, to take over the management of the Old Vic. She retained an active interest in the theatre for the rest of her life, but it was Baylis who transformed its repertoire. Emma Cons died at a friend's home, Chippens Bank, Hever, Kent, on 24 July 1912, and her ashes were scattered in the surrounding woods. 


@@@@@


doc= 37311


Constable, William (1783-1861), traveller and photographer, was born on 5 April 1783 at Tedhams, Horley Mill, Horley, Surrey, the fifth child in the family of seven sons and two daughters of James Constable (1749-1838), miller and country shopkeeper of Horley, and his wife, Susanna Jordan (1748-1826). He had virtually no formal education. In 1797 he entered the drapery business of Henry Browne, a high constable of Lewes, Sussex, a keen scientist with a private laboratory and a printing press, who encouraged his assistant's artistic and scientific interests. In 1802 he joined his elder brother Daniel in founding a drapery business at 3 North Street, Brighton, where he drew and published 'A New and Correct Plan of Brighthelmstone'. In 1806 the two brothers embarked on a journey of exploration to the United States. They travelled from New York to New Orleans and back, by boat, by mule, or on foot. Constable kept a detailed record and made watercolour studies which are important early topographical documents. He was engaged to plan a new town in Big Beaver Creek, Pennsylvania, which he called New Brighton. 
On his return to England in 1808 Constable rebuilt and operated the family watermill at Horley and pursued a career as an engineer. He was appointed surveyor to the turnpike trustees of the London to Brighton roads (1818) and was responsible for the construction of a tunnel (1823) and suspension bridge in Reigate. In 1837 he was appointed engineer and surveyor of a proposed railway in Jamaica, but the project fell through. 
In 1841 Constable embarked on the most important phase of his career, as a pioneer photographer, opening a daguerreotype portrait studio at 57 Marine Parade, Brighton, on 8 November. He built 'a room... in front of the house... of which the roof and front consisted of plate glass' ('Photographic portraits', 'Brighton Gazette', 11 Nov 1841). He called this daylight studio 'the Photographic Institution' in promotional announcements, extolling the virtues of the exceptional light provided by his south-facing marine location. He exchanged ideas and information with other early practitioners and invested much thought in the technical and artistic refinement of his chosen medium. His correspondence reveals a close awareness of technical developments being pursued in London and elsewhere. He undertook a journey to Paris, for example, to visit 'two principal makers of lenses... Chevalier and Lerebours' (W. Constable to L. Glukman, 1 June 1846, priv. coll.) and enjoyed the visits to Marine Parade of several photographers, including Richard Dykes Alexander from Ipswich, Antoine Claudet from London, and Leone Glukman from Dublin. 
Constable was the first to photograph Prince Albert, in March 1842 (Royal Archives, Windsor Castle), and by 1848 was able to boast of 'many sitters from the ranks that are called noble' (W. Constable to L. Glukman, 13 Feb 1848, priv. coll.), with a client list which included William Cavendish, sixth duke of Devonshire, Ferdinand, duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, the earl of Belfast, the earl of Morton, the marquess of Lorne, the marchioness of Donegal, and the grand duchess of Parma. His daguerreotypes are among the finest relics of photography's first decade. Rejecting the easy convention of the stiff and formal head and shoulders, he made fine full-length portraits, setting his subjects against a simple draped curtain or broadly painted landscape backdrop on a carpeted dais which could be revolved to find the optimum fall of light. His more overtly artistic endeavours included posed allegorical subjects or such set pieces as a chess game or a conversation over a lunch table. His business declined through the 1850s in the face of increasing competition, though his scientific interests continued undiminished. He was a founder member of the Brighton and Sussex Natural History Society in 1855. 
Surviving daguerreotype self-portraits reveal a slim figure with strongly chiselled features. Constable's letters confirm a highly inquisitive mind regarding natural and scientific phenomena and suggest a phlegmatic temperament and a dry humour. He displayed an exceptional breadth of curiosity and his career was marked by an evident spirit of adventure and an impressive range of achievements. He had married Jemima Mott (1780-1829) on 11 January 1816 but lived as a childless widower after her death in 1829. He died on 22 December 1861 at his home, 16 Egremont Place, Brighton, and was buried in Horley churchyard. His correspondence, watercolours, and some daguerreotypes are in private collections; other daguerreotypes are in the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC. 


@@@@@


doc= 37312


Cooke, Mordecai Cubitt (1825-1914), naturalist and mycologist, was born on 12 July 1825 at the post office in Horning, Norfolk, the eldest in the family of five sons and three daughters of Mordecai Cooke (1799-1869), village shopkeeper, and his wife, Mary (1803-1885), postmistress and village herbalist, daughter of William Cubitt, schoolmaster, of Neatishead, Norfolk. Cooke was educated at the village dame-school until he was ten, and then to the age of thirteen by his uncle, James Cubitt, a Baptist minister, first in Ilford and later in Stratford upon Avon. He then spent a year at a commercial school at Neatishead before being apprenticed for five years to a wholesale draper in Norwich. 
In 1844 Cooke moved to London, where he obtained employment as a clerk. Then, influenced by his aunt Naomi Treen ('nee' Cubitt), a teacher at a Pestalozzian elementary school, he obtained in 1851 the post of master at Holy Trinity national school, Lambeth, where he was allowed to pioneer revolutionary teaching methods in natural history and to set up a school museum. He published influential articles in the 'School and the Teacher' and helped to found a museum for London teachers. In 1859 he passed first class in botany in the first examination for teachers organized by the Department of Science and Art, his sole academic qualification. The same year he resigned from teaching, undertook a variety of part-time jobs, and published his first books; in 1862 he joined the civil service on the staff of the India Museum, where he remained until 1880. 
Cooke was slight in build with grey eyes, red hair, and luxuriant red moustache and beard. On 4 January 1846 he married Sophia Elizabeth (1823-1897), daughter of Abraham Biggs, tobacconist, who brought with her her two-year-old illegitimate daughter, Annie Elizabeth Thornton Biggs (1844-1920). Cooke had no children with his wife, but from the age of seventeen Annie bore him three sons and a daughter. In 1871 Annie left Cooke to marry his step-second cousin, John Quincey Cubitt, but by 1875 had left Cubitt and returned to Cooke, bringing with her her young daughter by Cubitt. She then had two more sons and a daughter by Cooke before finally leaving him about 1890, taking with her Cubitt's daughter and Cooke's two youngest sons. Cooke gave her an allowance and she remained in touch with the family. Sophia apparently never left Cooke and died in 1897. 
Cooke's lifelong passion for natural history began in childhood, and he made it his prime duty to popularize the subject, writing fourteen books for the layman. In 1862 he founded the Society of Amateur Botanists; in 1865 he was co-founder, with his publisher Robert Hardwicke, and editor, of the immensely popular magazine 'Science Gossip', and soon afterwards founded the Quekett Microscopical Club. He regarded fieldwork as of fundamental importance in the study of natural history. 
Cooke's interest in fungi began while he was teaching, and in 1862 he published the first popular book on toadstools, 'A Plain and Easy Account of British Fungi'. This was followed by 'Rust, Smut, Mildew and Mould' (1865), on plant pathogenic fungi, which was used in teaching in America. He was now in close touch with the Revd M. J. Berkeley, the 'father of British mycology', whom he eventually succeeded as Britain's leading mycologist. As Cooke's name became known through his huge output of taxonomic works, especially the two-volume 'Handbook of British Fungi' (1871) and the journal 'Grevillea', which he founded in 1875 and edited himself, he entered into a vast correspondence with distinguished mycologists worldwide. In 1880 he was seconded to the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, as its first cryptogamic botanist, and redoubled his mycological studies, publishing, among much else, his monumental eight-volume 'Illustrations of British Fungi' (1881-91). In all he published about 350 books and papers. 
In 1892, with an international reputation, Cooke retired, having sold his herbarium to Kew, but he continued to write, his 'Fungoid Pests of Cultivated Plants' (1906) being very well received. He became a scientific adviser to the Royal Horticultural Society and travelled the country attending the fungus forays of natural history societies and popularizing fungi among the public. 
Cooke could never forget his humble origins. He lived in an unfashionable part of London (from 1870 until 1898 at 146 Junction Road, Kentish Town), and had no financial reserves. He was ill at ease with the gentleman scientists of his day and was treated as a mere technician by many, and consequently never achieved any position of responsibility. Scientifically, however, he was no respecter of persons, and entered vigorously into the polemics of the day. He was happiest at the field meetings of natural history societies and the subsequent festivities, where he could give free rein to his talents as a ballad singer and after-dinner speaker. He was a considerable artist, illustrating many of his own books. Though a strict Baptist, teetotaller, and political progressive in his youth, he later left organized religion, enjoyed alcoholic refreshment, and joined the Primrose League. The modest honours he received were mainly from natural history societies, but in 1873 he was awarded the honorary degree of MA by Yale University, in 1902 the Victoria medal of honour by the Royal Horticultural Society, and in 1903 the gold medal of the Linnean Society. He was an honorary member of American, French, and Italian scientific societies. 
Having become progressively weaker and almost blind, Cooke died on 12 November 1914 at his daughter's home at Dunluce, 38 Lindley Avenue, Southsea, Hampshire, and was buried in the same grave as his wife, Sophia, in Islington cemetery. A clump of toadstools is carved on his headstone. 


@@@@@


doc= 37313


Cornford, (Rupert) John (1915-1936), poet and political activist, was born in Cambridge on 27 December 1915, the eldest son and second of the five children (three sons and two daughters) of Francis Macdonald Cornford (1874-1943), professor of ancient philosophy at Cambridge University, and his wife, Frances Crofts Cornford (1886-1960), the poet, daughter of Sir Francis Darwin. Through his mother he was a great-grandson of Charles Darwin. One of his brothers was the artist Christopher Cornford. It was ironic that John Cornford should be named Rupert in memory of the poet Rupert Brooke, who had died in April 1915, for Cornford came to despise the school of Georgian poets, of whom Brooke was the supreme exemplar and his mother a loyal adherent. His father described him as 'a large, placid baby with very dark eyes and skin and thick black hair... good-tempered and easy to amuse, even when unwell', and he showed few indications, as a small boy, of the vigorous intellect and independence of mind that were to flourish so strikingly in adolescence. Initially Cornford was taught as a day boy in Cambridge, but at nine he was sent as a boarder to Copthorne Preparatory School in Sussex. Already he had developed an interest in military history, particularly in the campaigns of Napoleon. At fourteen he obtained a scholarship to Stowe School, which had existed for only six years. The first headmaster, J. F. Roxburgh, had been a pupil of Professor Cornford's at Trinity College, Cambridge. 
Cornford's individualism caused him to refuse to join the Officers' Training Corps. At fifteen he was writing poetry under the avant-garde influence of Robert Graves, T. S. Eliot, and particularly W. H. Auden, from whom he solicited a letter of encouragement. His political theories were being shaped by reading 'Das Kapital' and the 'Communist Manifesto', and at sixteen he won an exhibition to Trinity College, Cambridge. But, having outgrown Stowe and with time to kill before going up to Cambridge, he gravitated almost inevitably to the London School of Economics, where his active interest in politics began to overshadow his desire to be a poet. He joined the Young Communist League, and although he did attend lectures, he used his time in London to deepen his commitment to abolishing poverty by establishing communism in England. At this period Cornford had so separated politics from poetry that he even published a poem in 'The Listener' under a pseudonym. 
Cornford was still only seventeen when he entered Trinity in October 1933. During his three years at Cambridge he wrote only nine poems, for he was spending fourteen hours a day on political activities, and in March 1935 he became a full member of the Communist Party of Great Britain. Despite his insistence on Marxian analysis and his exhausting programme of extra-curricular activities, he achieved first classes in both parts of the history tripos (1935 and 1936). He found time too to father an illegitimate child, shortly afterwards abandoning both the child and its mother, Ray Peters, for the woman he might well eventually have married, Margot Heinemann (d. 1992). In 1936 Trinity gave him a scholarship, and he planned to study the Elizabethans, but when the Spanish Civil War broke out on 18 July 1936, on a sudden impulse and without even saying goodbye to his family, he left for Dieppe. By 8 August he was in Barcelona, unable to speak a word of Spanish but armed with a press card. 
Cornford is said to have been the first Englishman to enlist in the International Brigades to fight against Franco. Some of his finest poetry was written on the Aragon front, in August and September 1936, including his most famous poem, 'Heart of the Heartless World'. During his first period in Spain he fell seriously and mysteriously ill, and spent some time in hospital. During three weeks' leave in England, in late September and early October 1936, he resigned his Trinity scholarship and made a conscious decision to return to Spain for the duration of the war. He took part in the battle for Madrid, which began on 7 November 1936, and received a severe head wound. The battle near Lopera in which he was killed was a shambles, and the precise circumstances and date of his death are not known. He may have died on 27 December 1936, his twenty-first birthday, or the day after. His body was never recovered. 
John Cornford's poems appeared in 'New Writing', the 'Cambridge Review', and the 'Student Vanguard', and they were collected in 1938 in 'John Cornford: a Memoir', edited by Pat Sloan. His best work has a direct simplicity, benefits from its autobiographical inspiration, and stands as a worthy memorial to all who died in the Spanish Civil War. Cornford himself came to be regarded as much as a typically doomed and respected idealist of his generation as a poet. 
Michael De-la-Noy', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37314


Couchman, Sir Harold John (1882-1956), army officer and surveyor, was born on 29 July 1882 in Haileybury, Hertfordshire, the youngest child of the two sons and two daughters of the Revd Henry Couchman (1839-1922), assistant master of Haileybury College, and his wife, Mary Jane Pooley (1843-1933). He was educated at Haileybury College and the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich. 
Couchman was commissioned in the Royal Engineers in August 1900. He was transferred to India in 1902 and appointed to the geodetic branch of the survey of India in 1906. His initial duties were to assist with fieldwork for the magnetic survey of India and by the 1908-9 field season he was in charge of operations in south-west India. He subsequently took part in the regional gravity surveys of Burma (1910-11) and southern and central India (1912-14). By 1914 he had been appointed deputy superintendent at Dehra Dun. He took the principal part in the synthesis and interpretation of all the gravity observations made in India over the period 1908-13, making an excellent attempt to interpret these data in the light of evidence recently reported by the American geodesist J. F. Hayford, drawing upon similar surveys in the United States. In both cases, regional gravity anomalies were found to occur, associated with the depression of dense rocks forming the earth's mantle by the less dense roots of major mountain chains. 
In spring 1914 Couchman was transferred to the headquarters office of the survey in Calcutta. He was recalled to active military duty in October 1914. Couchman was promoted lieutenant in 1903, captain in 1910, and major in 1916, and was acting lieutenant-colonel (1917-19). Between September 1915 and November 1918 he served in the 21st, 39th, and 47th divisions of the Royal Engineers in France and Belgium, and fought in the battle of Pilckem Ridge in 1917. Wounded in action, he was twice mentioned in dispatches, was awarded the MC (June 1916), and was appointed to the DSO (June 1918). In 1925 he married Evelyn Beatrice (1883-1977), the divorced wife of Brigadier Robert Henry Thomas and youngest daughter of Colonel William Lewis Clinton Baddeley, a retired military officer. They had no children other than his stepson, the diplomat Antony Clinton-Thomas (1913-1981). 
Couchman had returned to the survey of India in 1919 and, with the exception of a period as deputy master, security printing (1926-9), he spent the rest of his career with the survey. He was director in Shillong, Simla, and Calcutta; then in 1933 he was appointed surveyor-general, a position he held until his retirement in 1937. He was promoted lieutenant-colonel in 1930 and brigadier in 1933, and he was knighted in 1937. He was a keen tennis player and won the doubles in the 1923 army lawn tennis championships. Couchman died on 30 November 1956 in St George's Hospital, Westminster, London, and was survived by his wife. 
Richard J. Howarth', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37315


Couper, Archibald Scott (1831-1892), chemist, was born on 31 March 1831 in the Townhead of Kirkintilloch, Dunbartonshire, the only surviving child of Archibald Couper, cotton manufacturer, and his wife, Helen Dollar. Because of poor health he was educated at home before enrolling at Glasgow University to study humanities and classical languages. He spent the summer of 1851 in Halle to acquire fluency in German and the following summer again went to Germany and spent some time at the University of Berlin in desultory study. After returning to Edinburgh he studied logic and metaphysics under Sir William Hamilton, who was well versed in German philosophy, then largely ignored in British universities. After yet another continental tour Couper returned to Berlin in 1855, now determined to study chemistry for reasons which are not clear. He studied with K. F. Rammelsberg, professor of inorganic chemistry, and attended F. L. Sonnenschein's lectures on chemical analysis. In August 1856 he moved to Paris where he engaged in independent research in the laboratory of Charles-Adolphe Wurtz, then one of the few first-rate chemical laboratories outside Germany. 
There, in less than eight months, Couper wrote the three papers which are his main claim to fame. The first, 'Some derivatives of benzene', was a straightforward account of the preparation of two new bromine derivatives of benzene. The second was more theoretical, dealing with the constitution of salicylic acid. This was of interest to the eminent German chemist F. A. Kekule, but he failed to repeat Couper's experiment: many years later Couper was proved perfectly correct. In the third paper, 'On a new chemical theory', Couper clearly enunciated a new theory of the linking of carbon atoms which marked a transition from the prevailing type theory to the modern structure theory. He deduced that carbon had a combining power (valency) of four or two and a unique capacity for joining itself to other atoms of its own kind -- the secret of the existence of millions of organic (carbon) compounds. All three papers were published in 'Comptes rendus de l'Academie des Sciences'. 
Early in 1858 Couper asked C.-A. Wurtz to have this third paper presented to the Academie des Sciences but there was delay because Wurtz was not then an academician: J. B. A. Dumas eventually presented it on 14 June 1858. Meanwhile Kekule published a virtually identical theory in the 19 May issue of 'Liebig's Annalen'. Kekule stated that his work was more significant and claimed priority. Bitterly disappointed, Couper complained to Wurtz and was told to leave the laboratory immediately. He returned to Edinburgh and became laboratory assistant to Lyon Playfair, professor of chemistry at Edinburgh University. He expounded his theory in two further papers but suffered a severe mental breakdown in May 1859. He was twice confined to an asylum and finally discharged in 1862. He never recovered, and for the rest of his life was incapable of intellectual work. He was cared for by his mother, who survived him, and for the remaining thirty years of his life roamed the neighbourhood aimlessly, he and his theory totally forgotten. He died, unmarried, on 11 March 1892 in Kirkintilloch. 
Kekule died in 1896, loaded with honours, and Richard Anschutz, his successor as professor of chemistry at the University of Bonn, undertook a comprehensive biography. He came across Couper's papers and immediately recognized his genius; he devoted much effort over many years to restoring Couper to his rightful place in the chemical hierarchy. A memorial plaque was unveiled on Couper's old home in Kirkintilloch on the centenary of his birth. 
Trevor I. Williams', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37316


Courtney, Dame Kathleen D'Olier (1878-1974), suffragist and peace campaigner, was born on 11 March 1878 at 1 York Terrace, Gillingham, Kent, the youngest of five daughters and fifth of seven children of Lieutenant (later Major) David Charles Courtney (1845-1909) of the Royal Engineers, and his wife, Alice Margaret Mann. Her parents were Anglo-Irish gentry with military connections on both sides. She attended the Anglo-French College in Kensington and the Manse boarding-school in Malvern before spending seven months in Dresden studying German. She went to Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford, in January 1897 to read modern languages (French and German). She was awarded second-class honours in the university examination for women in 1900. While at Oxford, she formed a lifelong friendship with Maude Royden, suffragist and campaigner for the ordination of women. 
Independent means gave Kathleen Courtney the opportunity to devote her life to social causes and world peace. After a short period working with the Lambeth Constitutional Girls' Club (a Lady Margaret Hall settlement), she became involved in the non-militant suffrage movement. A constitutionalist, she believed in education, argument, and reason. After a spell in Manchester (1908-11) as secretary of the North of England Society for Women's Suffrage, she moved to London and was honorary secretary (1911-15) of the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies (NUWSS), led by Millicent Fawcett. 
Suffrage agitation was suspended with the outbreak of the First World War. The executive of the NUWSS split with half, led by Mrs Fawcett, supporting the government's war effort, and the other half, including Kathleen Courtney, resigning in the belief that the most vital task was to promote permanent international peace. In 1915 Kathleen Courtney was one of only three British delegates to attend the international peace conference at The Hague, which she had helped to organize. She was active in the British Women's Peace Crusade, launched in 1916, and was honorary secretary in the 1920s and chairman in the 1930s. She was one of the founders of the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom, and for ten years was chairman of the British section. She resigned in 1933 partly because she believed that the league's pacifism, calling for complete disarmament, was unrealistic. 
During and after the First World War, Kathleen Courtney became associated with the Friends' War Victims Relief Committee, although not a Quaker herself. She worked for the Serbian Relief Fund in Salonika, took charge of a temporary Serbian refugee colony in Bastia, Corsica, and was decorated by the Serbian government. Those who knew her during this period described her as full of life and fun and an exceptional administrator. She went on to work for the Friends' committee in France, Austria, Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Greece. She was in Vienna for three years where she was horrified by the post-war scenes of starvation, particularly among refugees. 
Kathleen Courtney had not forgotten the importance of extending the vote, however, and was an active officer of the National Council for Adult Suffrage in 1917, lobbying MPs for extension of the franchise until the act was passed in 1918. She was vice-president of the National Union of Societies for Equal Citizenship (as the NUWSS was renamed in 1919) and became involved in the work of the family endowment committee introducing, with Eleanor Rathbone, the idea of family allowances. 
Kathleen Courtney attended the fourth women's international congress, held in Zurich in 1919 at the same time as the Paris peace conference. Active involvement in the League of Nations Union followed and she became a member of its executive in 1928 and vice-chairman in 1939. She was adamant that women must know more about international affairs. An excellent speaker, she spoke at conferences on its behalf all over the UK, and wrote regularly for the press on international affairs as well as travelling extensively in the USA, Canada, New Zealand, and Australia during the 1930s to lecture. She spent much time in Geneva, working as first vice-president of the Peace and Disarmament Committee of Women's International Organizations which was preparing a petition for disarmament (8 million signatures were collected) prior to the Geneva disarmament conference of 1932. She was an observer on behalf of women's organizations for the duration of that conference. When Abyssinia was invaded by Italy, she mobilized British and European women's organizations in the vain hope of preventing civilian bombing. 
Kathleen Courtney's knowledge of the USA was of great service to the Ministry of Information during the Second World War. She made two hazardous voyages to the USA to plead for a permanent international organization for collective security, disarmament, and positive relief measures. She was an observer at the San Francisco conference in 1945 and her speeches were influential in persuading Americans of the value of the United Nations. 
In 1945 Kathleen Courtney became deputy chairman of the United Nations Association, a voluntary non-governmental organization formed to support and publicize the UN charter ideals by educating and campaigning. In 1949 she became chairman of its executive committee and joint president (with Gilbert Murray). She retired from the chairmanship in 1951 but remained active in the association into her nineties. She was appointed CBE in 1946 and DBE in 1952. In 1968 she made a speech in Westminster at the fiftieth anniversary celebrations of the granting of votes to women. 
Dame Kathleen Courtney was a forceful personality who did not suffer fools gladly, but her sternness was accompanied by grace and Victorian courtesy. She made an admirable chairman, able to cut through confusion and muddle. Her unemotional manner could make her seem cold but she believed that the head must rule the heart. She was determined to do the best for her causes and was a tireless, thorough organizer. Strikingly beautiful in her youth, she remained handsome and well dressed in her old age. In 1972 she was awarded the UN peace medal. She died at her home, 3 Elm Tree Court, Elm Tree Road, London, on 7 December 1974. A memorial service was held on 11 April 1975 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 37317


Cowper, Edward Alfred (1819-1893), mechanical engineer, was born in London on 10 December 1819, the son of Ann Applegath and her husband, Professor Edward Shickle Cowper (1790-1852), head of the department of engineering at King's College, London, who, with his brother-in-law Augustus Applegath, developed an improved newspaper printing press. At the age of fourteen in 1833, Cowper was apprenticed for seven years to John Braithwaite, an eminent locomotive and railway engineer in London, and while in Braithwaite's service he invented, in 1837, the detonating railway fog signal, first tried on the Croydon line and widely used thereafter as an emergency safety measure. In 1841 Cowper joined Fox and Henderson, structural and railway engineers, in Smethwick, near Birmingham, where, as chief draughtsman and designer, he devised an ingenious method of casting railway chairs, and also designed the wrought-iron roof of the New Street Station in Birmingham, which, with a span of 211 feet, was the largest iron roof at the time of its completion. In 1846-7 he took a leading part in the foundation of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers; in 1848 he was elected a member of its council, and in 1880-81 served as president. He was elected a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1860, and was a member of council in 1879. 
At the end of 1851, after supervising preparation of the contract drawings for the Great Exhibition building (the Crystal Palace), Cowper left Fox and Henderson to practise on his own account in London as a consulting engineer. One of his first commissions was to undertake the necessary redesign of the Crystal Palace prior to its re-erection in Sydenham in 1852-4. Developing the ideas of his friend C. W. Siemens, in 1857 he invented the regenerative hot blast stove known as the Cowper stove, which greatly improved the economy of the hot blast process (patented in 1828 by James B. Neilson) in the making of steel. The first of these stoves was constructed in 1859, and various improvements were effected in the design up to 1887 both by Cowper and by his son, Charles Edward Cowper, whom he took into partnership shortly before his death. The principle of the regenerative stove is still in widespread use in the iron and steel, glass, and other industries. 
Cowper was also greatly interested in the economy of the steam engine, becoming an ardent advocate of compounding and steam-jacketing. About the year 1858 he introduced the steam-jacketed receiver which was subsequently known in the navy as 'Cowper's hot-pot'. Among his many other inventions were a wire spoke suspension wheel with a rubber tyre (practically the modern bicycle wheel) and the writing telegraph, which was an electromechanical precursor of modern facsimile equipment. He published several papers in the 'Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers', including 'An inverted arch suspension bridge' (1847), 'Blast engines for the East Indian Iron Company' (1855), and 'Regenerative hot-blast stoves working at a temperature of 1,300 degree F' (1860). Cowper died of pneumonia at his home, Rastricke, Pine Grove, Weybridge, Surrey, on 9 May 1893, leaving a widow, Juliana. Their date of marriage is unknown; they had at least one son. 


@@@@@


doc= 37318


Cox, Richard (c.1776-1845), gardener, is a figure about whose early life little is known. His first career as a brewer in Bermondsey came to an end when he retired about 1820 to a house then called Lawn Cottage (later Colnbrook Lawn), in Colnbrook, near Slough, Buckinghamshire. A 2 acre garden surrounded the house, and here Cox devoted his time to horticultural experiments, among them the one that produced the apple bearing his name, Cox's orange pippin. Two pips of a Ribston pippin, sown in a pot about 1830, grew into seedlings of two new and promising varieties, Cox's pomona and Cox's orange pippin, though the second soon eclipsed the first to become the most popular English dessert apple. The original tree survived until 1911, when it was blown down in a storm. 
In 1836 grafts of both of Cox's new apple trees were given to E. Small & Son, nurserymen of Colnbrook, who began to sell young trees locally four years later. About 1850 trees of the orange pippin were given a wider distribution by Charles Turner, of the Royal Nurseries, Slough, and the fruit soon began to attract attention. Thomas Ingram, Queen Victoria's head gardener at Frogmore and Windsor, showed the apple to a meeting of the British Pomological Society in December 1856, when it was acclaimed as one of the best kinds for the table, 'sweet, aromatic and very tender, a fair sized and handsome fruit'. At the Grand Fruit Exhibition of the Horticultural Society on 24 October 1857, 'Cox's Orange Pippin, a medium-sized, warm-looking, brownish-red variety with a yellow crisp flesh of most exquisite flavour', won first prize (Simmonds, 'A Horticultural Who Was Who', 14). After that its popularity spread so rapidly that by 1883, the year of the National Apple Congress held at the society's garden in Chiswick, 183 out of 231 exhibitors included it among the varieties they showed. In spite of its brilliant career, the society's delay in giving it an award of merit and a first-class certificate indicates unusual prudence, for 'the Chateau Yquem of apples', as E. A. Bunyard described it in 1929, did not receive these confirmations of its quality until 1962. Bunyard's accolade referred to a perfectly ripe Cox, left on its tree until October and not snatched off before it is anywhere near maturity, as so many commercially grown apples were later treated. The tree bearing Cox's orange pippin is vigorous enough to be a favourite for orchards in Britain and several other countries with a similar climate, and it has also been used as a parent in breeding a number of other varieties which share some of its desirable characteristics. 
Richard Cox did not live long enough to see the triumph of his apple, for he died in Colnbrook on 20 May 1845, eight years after his wife, Ann. Both were buried in the churchyard of St Mary's, Harmondsworth. There was no mention of any children in his will. 
Sandra Raphael', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37319


Coxe, Daniel (1640-1730), physician, natural philosopher, and colonial adventurer, was the son of Daniel Coxe (died 1686), gentleman, of Stoke Newington, Middlesex. He matriculated at Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1659, becoming a scholar in 1661. Coxe first came to the fore in the mid-1660s as an associate of Robert Boyle: an important series of letters from Coxe to Boyle, dating from between 1665 and 1667, survives among the Boyle letters at the Royal Society, in which Helmontian and other themes are discussed; twenty-five years later, in 1692, Coxe was one of three doctors appointed to examine Boyle's chemical papers after his death. 
On 22 March 1665 Coxe was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, in which he played an active role for the rest of the 1660s and a slightly less active one in the 1670s. His interest was particularly in chemical investigations; he devoted special attention to the chemical analysis of vegetable substances, his findings on which were published in three articles in 'Philosophical Transactions' in 1674. These studies were evidently intended to form part of a grandiose history of vegetables, of which he presented a prospectus to the society in 1668; this was a sequel to the 'Enquiries concerning vegetables' that he had presented in 1665. The history as a whole never materialized. His articles, however, were not without influence, being attacked by the Scottish apothecary, Matthew MacKaile, in a book published in 1683, and continuing to be cited after that date. 
In the 1660s and 1670s Coxe established a successful medical practice in London. He was awarded the degree of MD 'per literas regias' at Cambridge in 1669, and became an honorary fellow of the College of Physicians, London, in 1680. He also acted as physician-in-ordinary to Charles II. In 1669 he participated in the pamphlet war between physicians and apothecaries by publishing 'A discourse, wherein the interest of the patient in reference to physick and physicians is soberly debated'; this combined an attack on the apothecaries with a vindication of the role of an experimentally active physician, which he exemplified. In 1671 Coxe married Rebecca, daughter of John Coldman, a London alderman. Their son Daniel Coxe ('bap'. 1673) emigrated to America at the age of twenty-eight and thereafter took a prominent role in the affairs of West New Jersey, the province in which his father had played so important a role a generation earlier. 
Coxe's chief claim to retrospective fame was his activity as a colonial adventurer: indeed, Daniel Defoe in his 'Essay on Projects' (1697) singled out Coxe, along with William Penn and Anthony Ashley Cooper, first earl of Shaftesbury, in this connection. In the mid-1680s Coxe began to acquire property in West New Jersey, and in 1687 he purchased the proprietary rights of the province from the heirs of Edward Byllynge. He later bought more land, his holding in the area ultimately totalling 1 million acres; he also invested large sums in developing local fisheries and industries; he was among those who promoted a company for naval stores to be produced in New England; and he also encouraged the exploration and exploitation of the hinterland towards the Great Lakes. In 1692, however, he sold the bulk of his holdings and the right of proprietorship to a syndicate of forty-eight London merchants, the West New Jersey Society, for $9800. 
By this time Coxe had shifted his interests further south to the province of 'Carolana' -- covering the present North and South Carolina, Georgia, Florida, and Louisiana -- which had been granted by Charles I to Sir Robert Heath, attorney-general, in 1629. Coxe acquired the title in the 1690s, and at the end of that decade he attempted to orchestrate settlement in the area in opposition to the parallel activities of the French. In 1698 he equipped two ships to explore the Mississippi; he also tried to encourage a Huguenot settlement on the Gulf of Mexico, and to float a joint-stock company to exploit Florida. These various schemes proved problematic, however, and little came of Coxe's ambitions, though they were briefly the subject of government interest in 1719, when the question arose of the English title to this part of America. 
Coxe has been described as a pioneer of the idea that 'the destiny of the English in America embraced more than the settlement and exploitation of the Atlantic seaboard' (Crane, 50). His role in exploiting this area was recounted -- together with a topographical account of somewhat questionable reliability -- in 'A Description of the English Province of Carolana', published in 1722 by his son. Coxe died on 19 January 1730 in possession of the title to Carolana, which his descendants surrendered to the British government in 1769, in return for land in the colony of New York. 


@@@@@


doc= 37320


Creevey, Thomas (1768-1838), politician, was born in School Lane, Liverpool, on 5 March 1768, the second child and only son of William Creevey, captain of a slave ship, and his wife, Phoebe Prescott. His father died soon after Thomas was born. Mrs Creevey married again; she died as Mrs Lowe in 1812. The evidence that Creevey was the natural son of Lord Molyneux, later first earl of Sefton, is suggested but not conclusively proven. His rise in the exclusive society of the whig party was rapid, and he called the Molyneux his 'real' family. Creevey was educated at Newcome's school, Hackney, which favoured 'the sons of noblemen and gentlemen', from about 1780 to 1787, when he was admitted to Queens' College, Cambridge. He graduated in 1789 as seventh wrangler. In November 1789 he was admitted as a student of the Inner Temple, transferring to Gray's Inn in 1791. 
While practising at the chancery bar, he kept up an interest in Liverpool through Dr James Currie, whose circle included many local Liberals like William Roscoe, as well as rising whig politicians such as Samuel Romilly and James Scarlett (later first Baron Abinger). His political career was helped by an old school friend, Charles Western, who introduced him to Eleanor Ord, widow of William Ord, and a distant cousin of Charles Grey, the future prime minister. She had five children and an independent income, and Creevey married her in 1802. In the same year he used his interest with the tenth Baron Petre to secure the parliamentary seat of Thetford (thirty-one electors) with the approval of Petre's guardian, Charles Howard, eleventh duke of Norfolk. 
Creevey described his political creed as 'devotion to Fox'. During Pitt's second administration he was an outspoken critic, especially of its Indian policy. He was one of the managers who drew up the articles of impeachment of Henry Dundas, first Viscount Melville. In the 'ministry of all the talents' his reward was to be made secretary to the Board of Control, 1806-7. On the death of Fox in 1806, Creevey became dissatisfied with the party's leaders, and his attacks on the Grenvilles helped weaken whig unity. In 1812 he accepted an invitation to stand for Liverpool with his friend Henry Brougham. The candidature of two whigs in tandem lost both the election. In 1813 Creevey was found guilty of a libel on a Liverpool inspector of taxes and fined $100. Heavily in debt, following the failure of his appeal to the king's bench, he had to be rescued by his friends Western and Samuel Whitbread, the latter paying him an annuity of $1000. 
From 1814 to 1819 the Creeveys lived in Brussels. Creevey left a vivid account of his experiences before and during the battle of Waterloo, which ended Napoleon's 'hundred days'. He also came to know and admire Arthur Wellesley, first duke of Wellington. Mrs Creevey died in May 1818. In the same year the duke of Norfolk gave Creevey notice to quit Thetford, receiving a long but futile rebuke in return. Creevey returned with his stepdaughters to England in the autumn of 1819. 
Creevey was returned to parliament in 1820 as MP for Appleby, through his friend Brougham's good offices with Sackville Tufton, ninth earl of Thanet; he held the seat until 1826. He was thus a witness of the political crisis engendered by the 'trial' of Queen Caroline in that year. But his speeches in parliament were now less frequent and more restrained. In 1825 Thanet died, and with him went Creevey's political ambitions. Thereafter he lived for society and gossip, projecting the writing of a history of his times, the materials for which were to be his long, delightfully observant letters to his favourite stepdaughter, Elizabeth Ord. The book was never written and his only publications were two pamphlets, 'A Guide to the Electors of Great Britain, upon the Accession of a New King' (1820), and 'Letters of Lord John Russell, upon the Original Formation of the House of Commons' (1826), in which he declared for a thorough reform of the closed boroughs he had always represented. His term as MP for Appleby ended in 1826. 
When Grey became prime minister in 1830, Creevey got the post of treasurer of the ordnance at $1200 a year. He was MP for Downton from 1831 to 1832, but the borough was destined for abolition in the 'Reform Act' of 1832. When his post at the ordnance was abolished in 1834, Creevey's luck held, with the auditorship of Greenwich Hospital, which he retained until his death. He died on 5 February 1838; he had no children of his own. 
Creevey's charm and good humour made him both popular and a delightful guest; his fame derives from the amusing letters preserved by the Ord family. His importance as a historical source is considerable. No one described more graphically the appearance, or recorded more faithfully the looks and the talk, of the royal personages and major politicians of the time. His nicknames for leading characters have often stuck. But he was, after 1819, an observer more than a participant. While he was politically active, his judgement was vehement and unsteady, oscillating between adulation and disillusionment, but not equipped for the small gains and reverses of political routine. As his political prospects faded, his assets as a gossip grew. His rootless life did, however, colour the descriptions he left. He had an acute eye for absurdity, and some power of describing the surface of events and places, but he is incurious about the underlying processes shaping them. It is a cartoonist's talent, sharp, but not deep or lasting. He had not, as a source, the shrewdness of his friend Charles Greville, nor the sharp asperity of his contemporary J. W. Croker; but he had a greater sense of humour than either. 
William Thomas', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37321


Cregeen, Archibald (bap. 1774, d. 1841), lexicographer, was born in the village of Colby, Isle of Man, and baptized in the parish church of Arbory on 20 November 1774, the third of four sons of William Cregeen, a cooper and small farmer, and his wife, Mary Fairclough (Faircliff in the marriage register of the adjoining parish of Malew, 13 November 1764), who is reported to have come from Ireland. Of his education nothing is known. He was apprenticed as a monumental mason and so must have added literacy in English to his native Manx. After his marriage to Jane Crellin (1775/6-1844) in the parish church of German on 8 March 1798, he built in Colby a house for himself and his family (six daughters and two sons), later called Ravenstone. In alternate years from 1813 he held the office of coroner for the sheading of Rushen in addition to his ordinary occupation. 
Cregeen began work about 1814 on what was to be the first published Manx dictionary, collecting words from the Manx 'Bible' (1770-75), for which he often gave references, from the 'Book of Common Prayer', and from other printed sources, but also gathering material, words, phrases, scraps of traditional verse, and proverbs, from current usage. He marked stress, the gender and plural of nouns, the stems of verbs, and included old case-forms and all the pronominal prepositions. To this catalogue of inflectional variations he added a generous number of illustrations of the initial mutations. The dictionary is preceded by a sketch of grammar, again concentrating on morphology. In this work of at least twenty years' duration Cregeen was encouraged and assisted by the Revd John Edward Harrison (1784-1858), vicar of Jurby, whose hand has been detected in the preface and the opening paragraphs of the grammar. The dictionary, published in 1835, though not the most copious, is the most serviceable, the most reliable and soundly based, ever produced. It has been reprinted several times, beginning in 1910. 
Cregeen died on Good Friday, 9 April 1841, and was buried on 13 April in Arbory churchyard, where his elegant box-tomb is still to be seen south-east of the church. 
R. L. Thomson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37322


Stuart, John Crichton-, second marquess of Bute (1793-1848), landowner and industrialist, was born on 10 August 1793 at Dumfries House, Ayrshire, the eldest son (there were no daughters) of John Stuart, Viscount Mountstuart (1767-1794), of Mountstuart House, Isle of Bute, and his wife, Elizabeth Penelope (1767-1797), the younger daughter of Patrick Macdowal Crichton, sixth earl of Dumfries. Lord Mountstuart, who predeceased his father, was the eldest of the eleven children of John Stuart, first marquess of Bute. The youngest John Stuart inherited the titles and the estates of his maternal grandfather on the death of the sixth earl of Dumfries in 1803 and those of his paternal grandfather on the death of the first marquess of Bute in 1814. On 26 August 1805 he took the arms and the name of Crichton. 
Following the death of his mother in 1797, John Stuart (styled Viscount Mountstuart from his father's death) spent his boyhood in the various houses of his paternal grandfather. He was educated at Eton College and at Christ's College, Cambridge (MA, 1812), where he was strongly influenced by his tutor, John Kaye, later the bishop of Lincoln. Between 1809 and 1814 he travelled extensively, making the acquaintance of Madame de Stael, Louis Philippe, and Napoleon. On 29 July 1818, at St George, Hanover Square, London, he married Maria, daughter and coheir of George Augustus North, third earl of Guilford ['see under 'North, Frederick, second earl of Guilford]. Maria died childless on 11 September 1841. On 10 April 1845, at Loudoun Castle, Ayrshire, he married Sophia Frederica Christina (1809-1859), daughter of Francis Rawdon Hastings, first marquess of Hastings, and his wife, Flora, 'suo jure' countess of Loudoun. They had one son. 
Bute's fame rests upon his achievements as a landowner. He owned over 100,000 acres; most of his property was situated in the counties of Bute, Ayr, and Wigtown, but he was also a major proprietor in Glamorgan, where the Cardiff Castle estate, originally granted in the sixteenth century to William Herbert, earl of Pembroke, had passed to his grandfather through marriage. He spent his adult life in a circuit of his estates, staying in turn at Mountstuart House, Dumfries House, Newcastle upon Tyne, Luton Hoo in Bedfordshire, and Cardiff Castle. (During the lifetime of his first wife he had also had estate responsibilities at Banbury in Oxfordshire and Kirtling in Cambridgeshire.) A passionate improver, his vast correspondence chronicles his attempts to develop his estates and to improve the lot of their inhabitants. 
Bute's most significant contribution to estate development came in Glamorgan, where the Cardiff Castle estate included almost all the land of the ancient borough together with manorial rights over the valleys of the central part of the south Wales coalfield. He was the landlord of the Dowlais ironworks, in the 1840s the largest ironworks in the world, and his paltry returns from the Dowlais lease caused him to drive a hard bargain with those seeking the coal of his estate. As a result his son, John, third marquess of Bute, was by the late nineteenth century the largest individual receiver of mineral royalties in Britain. In order to prove the commercial value of his coal reserves in the Rhondda valley, the second marquess initiated steps to show that the steam coal of the valley lay at exploitable depths, an act which led to the astounding growth of the Rhondda. 
Bute's main contribution to the development of the south Wales coalfield was his construction of a masonry dock at Cardiff; opened in 1839, it was the first of the five Bute docks, docks which would in the late nineteenth century be handling more coal than any other port in the world. Cardiff, which in 1801 was twenty-fifth in size among the towns of Wales, expanded rapidly in the wake of the dock development, and the marquess paid assiduous attention to the layout of new streets and the design of frontages. By the 1870s Cardiff had become the largest town in Wales and the marquess was being hailed as its 'creator'. 
An intensely dutiful, rather dour man, Bute was plagued by eye troubles and as a result he shunned fashionable society. He was a friend of Arthur Wellesley, first duke of Wellington, and his views on issues such as Catholic emancipation, parliamentary reform, and the corn laws closely mirrored those of the duke. An ardent champion of the established church, both English and Scottish, he was nevertheless a tireless advocate of the relief of the disabilities of the Jews. 
Bute served as lord lieutenant of the counties of Glamorgan and Bute from 1815 until his death. He was also colonel of the Glamorgan militia and high steward of Banbury. His honours included FRS (1818), DCL (Oxford, 1834), LLD (Cambridge, 1835), FSA (1838), and KT (1843). He was high commissioner to the general assembly of the Church of Scotland in 1842-6, a period which coincided with the disruption crisis. 
Bute died at Cardiff Castle on 18 March 1848 and was buried alongside his first wife at Kirtling in Cambridgeshire. He was succeeded as third marquess by his son, John Patrick Crichton-Stuart (1847-1900). 
John Davies', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37323


Cristall, Ann Batten (bap. 1769, d. 1848), poet, was born in Penzance and baptized there on 7 December 1769, the elder daughter and second of the four children of Alexander Cristall (1718/19-1802) of Monifieth, near Dundee, in Scotland, a mariner and later maker of sails, masts, and blocks with yards at Fowey and Penzance in Cornwall and later at Rotherhithe, and his second wife, Elizabeth (1745-1801), the daughter of John Batten, a Penzance merchant. Alexander Cristall already had two sons by the time of his second marriage. When Ann was young, the family moved to London and later to Blackheath. Alexander Cristall apparently had a jealous disposition and family life was unpleasant when he was ashore. He also had a 'dread of the arts', but his wife was a 'woman of education and taste' (Roget, 179); she paid school fees from a small independent income of her own and appears to have had a significant influence on the artistic development of her children. Much of what is known about Ann Cristall's life is due to the modest fame enjoyed by her brother Joshua Cristall (bap. 1768, d. 1847), who became a founder member of the Society of Painters in Water Colours in 1804, although he seems to have suffered financial difficulties all his life. Ann and Joshua were very close. They 'studied together as children, and hand in hand did they daily walk to London and back for their schooling when the family lived at Rotherhithe' (ibid., 179). 
Ann Cristall evidently became a schoolteacher but seems, to some extent, to have been financially dependent on Joshua. By the late 1780s she had become a friend of Mary Wollstonecraft and her sister Everina, and there are several references to her in Wollstonecraft's correspondence. In March 1790, Wollstonecraft wrote to Joshua: 'I know that you earnestly wish to be the friend and protector of your amiable sister and hope no inconsiderate act or thoughtless mode of conduct will add to her cares -- for her comfort very much depends on you' ('Collected Letters', 188). Elsewhere, Wollstonecraft refers to Ann's 'tender affectionate heart' (ibid., 196), and in a letter to Joshua dated 9 December 1790 wrote: 'I fear her situation is very uncomfortable. I wish she could obtain a little more strength of mind. I am afraid she gives way to her feelings more than she ought to' (Roget, 184). 
In 1795 Ann Cristall's 'Poetical Sketches', published by Joseph Johnson, appeared. Subscribers included both Wollstonecrafts, Anna Letitia Barbauld, John Aikin, Amelia Alderson (later Opie), Samuel Rogers, Mary Hays, and George Dyer, suggesting a fairly distinguished circle of intellectual acquaintances. The poems were often melancholic pieces and mostly concerned with nature. Contemporary reviewers criticized her technical imperfections but praised her 'genius, and Warmth of imagination' (P. Feldman, ed., 'British Women Poets of the Romantic Era: an Anthology', 1997, 214). The poet George Dyer became a close friend, and in a letter to Mary Hays suggested a collaborative effort -- a ''poetical novel'' -- between the two female writers. He praised Ann Cristall's 'very fine talent for poetry: one or two of her songs are, I think, as beautiful as any I know' (Wedd, 238-9). In 1797 she was introduced to Robert Southey, who declared in a letter to Joseph Cottle, dated 13 March 1797: 'the literary circles say she has no genius; but she has genius, Joseph, or there is no truth in physiognomy' ('Life and Correspondence', 1.306). In May 1799 Southey wrote that Dyer had promised him a piece by Ann Cristall for his 'Annual Anthology' (1799-1800), but she appears not to have contributed. 
Very little is known about Ann Cristall's later life, and she appears to have dropped out of intellectual circles after the 1790s. She seems not to have married and is listed under her own name in 'A Biographical Dictionary of the Living Authors of Great Britain and Ireland' (1816). In 1841 Joshua Cristall returned to London, where his household consisted of 'two lady wards, between whom and himself there existed a strong attachment' (Finch, 67), these being Mary Cox and Sarah Woore, former students of his wife. Towards the end of her life Ann may have lived with her younger sister, Elizabeth, as an assistant at Lewisham Hill grammar school, Kent. Ann's death, which came less than four months after that of her brother, occurred on 9 February 1848, and is recorded by a memorial inscription at St Mary's Church, Lewisham, Kent; where she was buried in 15 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 37324


Crockford, John (1824/5-1865), publisher of Crockford's Clerical Directory, was perhaps born in Taunton, though his origins and parentage are obscure. No baptism has been traced, but his marriage certificate records him as the son of John Crockford, schoolmaster. By his early twenties he was in business as a printer and publisher at 29 Essex Street, Strand, and it was from that address that 'Crockford's Directory' was first published in 1858. 
Crockford's long association with Edward William Cox had begun by 1843, when the 'Law Times' first appeared. The two men shared the same business address in Essex Street, and were joint founders of a number of periodicals, including 'The Critic' and 'The Field'. Cox, as the elder, more established, and richer man, was the financial backer and often the named publisher. When the 'Clerical Directory' came to be planned, Cox's professional ethics (he was then recorder of Helston and Falmouth) forbade the use of his name in the title. However, the legend that he therefore picked, almost at random, the name of one of his office clerks, is far from the truth. Crockford was manager of the joint enterprises, 'a splendid man of business'. It was he who bought the embryonic 'Field' 'for a trifling sum', and within a short time achieved profits amounting to $20,000 a year. 
The 'Clerical Directory' was first published in weekly parts from 1855 to 1857, initially as a supplement to the 'Clerical Journal'. The first full edition seems to have been assembled in a very haphazard fashion, with names added as fast as they could be obtained, out of alphabetical order, and with an unreliable index. The 1858 volume stated that the 1859 edition would be in a more orderly sequence; in fact the 1860 volume was the first to be entitled 'Crockford's Clerical Directory', and in its new format was a very much more useful work of reference, with excellent bibliographical as well as career information. By 1917, with the absorption of its only serious rival, the 'Clergy List', 'Crockford's Clerical Directory' reigned supreme. The famous 'prefaces', with sometimes sharp comments on the condition of the Church of England, began in 1869, after Crockford's death. From 1921 'Crockford', as it had become known, was published by Oxford University Press. 
No more than glimpses survive of Crockford's personality. John C. Francis (of 'The Athenaeum') recorded that, 'I had occasion to call on him a short time before his death, when we joined in a hearty laugh over his former furious attacks upon 'The Athenaeum'. 'Dilke's Drag' he used to call it' ('The Athenaeum', 29 Nov 1879, 695). 
Crockford married Annie Ellam on 24 December 1847 at St Pancras Old Church. No children are recorded. His sudden death occurred at his home, 10 Park Road, Haverstock Hill, London, on 13 January 1865, when he was aged forty. His will, proved on 6 February 1865, left everything to his widow. His personal effects were valued at less than $1000, but the family must have lived in some style, since one of the witnesses to the will was the resident coachman. 


@@@@@


doc= 37325


Crosfield, John (1832-1901), chemical manufacturer, was born in Warrington, Lancashire, on 11 February 1832, the youngest in the family of five sons and three daughters of Joseph Crosfield and his wife, Elizabeth Goad. He received a Quaker education in Penkelt, Cheshire, and at Bootham School, York, before going on to Glasgow high school. In 1847 he followed his elder brothers, George and Morland, into the family soap business, Joseph Crosfield & Son, founded by their late father at Bank Quay, Warrington. In 1853 he became a partner, and after the death of Morland and George's move to London in 1875, he became solely responsible for the firm. The abolition of excise duty in 1853 heralded a period of growth and prosperity for the soap industry. Many improvements were made to the Bank Quay works, and Crosfields' products were marketed throughout the world. In 1883 Crosfields was one of the first factories to install electric light. 
In 1874 John Brunner and Ludwig Mond began the production of soda at Winnington, Cheshire, by a new and cheaper process (ammonia-soda) than the traditional Leblanc method. Crosfield became their largest buyer of soda. In 1881, when Brunner, Mond & Co. became a public company, he invested in it, became its first chairman, and remained a director until his death. In 1896 Joseph Crosfield & Son became a public company, with Crosfield as chairman, and his two sons, Arthur and Joseph, and Dr Karl Markel (transferred from Brunner, Mond & Co.) as directors. Markel was a German-educated chemist, who was responsible for significant technical improvements. 
Crosfield was an enlightened employer in the paternalistic tradition, deeply influenced by his Quaker upbringing. Works outings to Llangollen and Blackpool, bowls competitions, and social evenings indicated an industrial harmony far from common at the time. Crosfield campaigned against intemperance, improvidence, and vice. He contributed time and money generously to Warrington: he was mayor in 1882, alderman in 1885, and freeman in 1891; he built a working men's mission, and supported schools, the library, the infirmary, and other institutions. He was a dedicated Liberal, helping to start the local club and association, and the Liberal newspaper, the 'Warrington Examiner'. In the general election of July 1886 he was narrowly beaten by the tory Sir Gilbert Greenhall, head of the local brewing family -- a bitter disappointment to a temperance advocate. 
Crosfield married Eliza Dickson, from an Ulster protestant family in the cotton trade, in Belfast in 1864; they had five sons and four daughters. She died in 1882, and in 1890 he married her sister Gertrude, in Jersey; they had no children. He relinquished control of the company to his three surviving sons, but remained chairman until his death, on 26 December 1901, at his home near Warrington, Walton Lea, Cheshire. 
N. J. Travis', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37326


Crosse, Sir Robert (c.1547-1611), naval commander, was born at Charlinch, near Bridgwater, Somerset, the second of seven sons of William Crosse, gentleman, and Elizabeth, his wife, who also bore five surviving daughters. His earliest known employment was as a soldier with the regency army during the siege of Edinburgh Castle in 1573; he was wounded, 'and shall carry the mark to my dying day' as he claimed much later ('Naval Tracts of Sir William Monson', 1.213; 'Salisbury MSS', 18.297). His first recorded command at sea was of the bark 'Bond' in Sir Francis Drake's West Indies raid of 1585. In the fleet list he was identified as Sir Christopher Hatton's man: one 'who long sense hathe medled at Sea but not of late, very lyke to do well' (Keeler, 49). On 2 October Crosse volunteered as a hostage during negotiations with the governor of Bayona to allow the English fleet to revictual there; and on 10 February 1586, at Cartagena on the Spanish main, he commanded part of a force, led by the expedition's vice-admiral Martin Frobisher, in a diversionary assault upon a harbour chain, while English troops took the city from the landward side. 
In 1587 Crosse sailed in Drake's Cadiz expedition as a land captain. On 27 April he was sent back to England with dispatches announcing the success of the assault, and subsequently gave testimony during the investigation of William Borough's 'mutiny' against Drake. In a list dated 22 December 1587 Crosse was one of fourteen men appointed to have charge of the queen's ships. He commanded the ship 'Hope' as rear-admiral of Drake's squadron during the Armada campaign, and was mentioned in the unofficial 'Relation of proceedings' as having done good service in the fight off Gravelines. During the early part of the campaign the 'Hope' and Thomas Fenner's 'Nonpareil' patrolled the coast of northern France, seeking intelligence of the approaching Armada. In May 1589 Crosse was appointed admiral of a fleet of seventeen sail to resupply the expedition of Drake and Sir John Norris off the coast of Spain. Separated from the expedition by storms he took several of his ships to the island of Porto Santo, which he captured, sacked, and ransomed back to its governor before returning directly to England. 
In 1591 Crosse commanded the 'Elizabeth Bonaventure' in Lord Thomas Howard's Azores squadron, a voyage notable only for the last fight of the 'Revenge' and death of Richard Grenville. In the following year, now enjoying the patronage of Sir Walter Ralegh, he commanded the queen's ship 'Foresight' in the memorable capture of the carrack 'Madre de Dios'. The 'Foresight' played a leading role in the fight, lashing herself to the Portuguese vessel's bow to prevent her crew from grounding her, until the remainder of the English squadron could come up to assist. Following the carrack's capture Crosse and his crew joined, or led, a general plundering of her cargoes, though his subsequent report of the episode to Lord Burghley (BL, Lansdowne MS 70, fol. 86) tactfully omitted this detail. Several days later he met with the ship of his admiral, Sir Martin Frobisher, who accused him of having boasted of taking some $10,000 worth of plunder (of which Crosse later admitted to only $2000). Departing the fleet against orders Crosse returned to England to dispose of his booty. At Dartmouth, the Isle of Wight, and Gosport he sold some of his spoils (scenes during the latter occasion were compared to those at Bartholomew fair), but much was subsequently confiscated at Chatham by customs officials. In some grief Crosse wrote to his brother John a few days later: 'All my things are stayed and seized, and so tell Sir Walter Raleigh if he be not good to me, I shall be the worse by this voyage' ('Salisbury MSS', 4.226). However, he appears to have retained sufficient prize-money to have acquired a ship, the 'Exchange' of Southampton, later that year. She was outfitted as a privateer under the command of John Crosse, whose subsequent seizure of a Bayonne ship was deemed unlawful in the admiralty court. 
In 1595 Crosse commanded the ship 'Swiftsure', which was sent with the 'Crane' to rendezvous with Drake and Hawkins off the Portuguese coast -- again, with the intention of intercepting a plate fleet. However, the main English fleet had already moved out into the Atlantic before Crosse arrived in October, and he returned to England soon after without significant prizes. In a long letter to 'my master', Robert Cecil (the first reference to his new patron), he begged not to be judged by his ill success. In the following year, in the 'Swiftsure' once more, Crosse served in the Cadiz expedition of Essex and Howard, and, with most of his fellow officers, was knighted by the lord admiral following the town's capture. In 1597 he was patrolling the narrow seas in the 'Vanguard', gathering intelligences from Dieppe and elsewhere and acting as courier for letters between Essex and Cecil. From January to March 1598 Crosse served as admiral of a channel squadron of sixteen ships without notable incident. As captain of the 'Nonpareil' he was in 1599 part of the fleet under the lord admiral that was hurriedly assembled at the rumour of an impending Spanish invasion attempt. 
Crosse appears to have retired from the sea soon afterwards on the grounds of ill health. In 1600 he was awarded some $2700 from exchequer forfeits in recognition of his services, but this was largely consumed by his purchase of property at Marten Abbey in Wiltshire. He spent much time at court thereafter, particularly outside Cecil's chambers, attempting to obtain preferment. In 1601, following the arrest of the earl of Essex, a Captain Lee attempted to involve Crosse in a plot to imprison the queen in her privy chamber until she agreed to release her former favourite from the Tower. Crosse promptly betrayed the plot, and testified at Lee's trial. In July 1603 Sir Walter Ralegh asked Crosse to ride with him to Windsor to visit the new king, James I. This fateful occasion marked the start of Ralegh's long imprisonment; prudently, perhaps, Crosse confined himself to bed for a month thereafter with an unspecified illness. 
In 1604 Crosse married Dorothy, the twice widowed daughter of Mitchell Green, a yeoman of the stirrup. By his own admission, he took this drastic step solely to 'have meat to eat the remainder of my years' ('Salisbury MSS', 19.45-6); however, on 11 February 1606 he was petitioning Salisbury to halt the confiscation of Dorothy's estate by reason of her recusancy. His subsequent attempts to turn her from her fiscally irresponsible convictions by filling his house with protestant divines was wholly unsuccessful, as he admitted. It is not known how Crosse's petition was answered, but his later years appear to have been relatively penurious, despite further pleas to Salisbury to obtain for him a safe parliamentary seat. Crosse's last known entreaty to his old mentor, in 1610, was for the arrest of a man said to have owed him $335 for more than five years. The plea was probably unanswered; in July of that year he petitioned the king, somewhat disingenuously, to allow him relief from his debts or otherwise to permit him to live abroad to avoid the shame of his poverty. 
Crosse died on 18 October 1611 at Moulsham, Essex, where he was also buried, without known heirs. His wife probably predeceased him, as the sole benefactor named in his will was Gregory Fenner, of the Sussex seafaring family with whom he appears to have had long-standing associations. Crosse's career exemplified the vacillating fortunes that Elizabethan and Jacobean patronage conferred. Physically courageous and a talented sea commander, but indifferently honest and morbidly fearful of poverty, he appears to have been regarded as good company, both personable and likeable -- qualities that kept him at the door of powerful men when less endearing supplicants would have been dismissed as nuisances. 


@@@@@


doc= 37327


Crowe, Sir Sackville, first baronet (c.1600-1683), entrepreneur and diplomat, was the son of William Crowe of Socketts in Kent and his wife, Anne, daughter of John Sackville of Sussex. He owed the rise of his fortunes in the 1620s to the patronage of George Villiers, first duke of Buckingham, of whose accounts he was treasurer from 1624 to 1628. Buckingham's influence was responsible for Crowe's being entrusted with the delicate mission of pawning some of the duke's and king's jewels at Amsterdam in 1626, his being created baronet in 1627, and his appointment as treasurer of the navy in March 1627. He proved incapable of meeting the financial demands of this last office, and his predecessor Sir William Russell had to step into the breach and ultimately replaced him in 1630. Crowe's long-standing ambition to secure the lease of the royal ironworks in the Forest of Dean was finally rewarded in 1635 when he and his partners obtained the lease after the existing lessees had fallen foul of the royal forest jurisdiction. 
In November 1633 Crowe was appointed ambassador at Constantinople, though he was unable to take up the appointment for five years. In the meantime he engaged in a fierce dispute, both with the Levant Company, which financed the embassy but no longer nominated its occupant, and with the retiring ambassador, Sir Peter Wyche. The issue was the right to 'strangers' consulage', the duties payable by foreigners shipping goods under the protection of the English flag. The Levant Company claimed the right to these dues, but both Wyche and Crowe claimed them for the crown. Charles I provided further occasion for dispute among all three parties by formally alienating the right to Crowe in 1636, though the latter, in return for compensating payments by the company, waived it until his arrival in Constantinople in October 1638. Thereafter the dispute grew fiercer and was to be further exacerbated by Crowe's royalist and the company's parliamentarian sympathies. Believing that the merchants were responsible for his sequestration in 1644, following the interception of a letter of his to Charles I, Crowe retaliated in 1646 by bribing the grand vizier to arrest all the company's factory at Constantinople and some of its merchants at Smyrna. However, the company's far greater resources of baksheesh soon restored them to liberty. 
In January 1647 a new ambassador, Sir Thomas Bendysh, was appointed and, following his arrival in Constantinople, Crowe and his wife were forcibly deported in November. On reaching London in April 1648, Crowe was sent to the Tower, where he remained until 1656. While there he submitted to an unsympathetic government in 1652 and 1653 projects for the improvement of the manufacture of iron ordnance and for general economic improvement, similar to his later and, in the former case, more successful, schemes after the Restoration. 
In other respects the Restoration did not bring the looked-for revival of Crowe's fortunes. In 1662 the royal grant of control of the tapestry manufactory at Mortlake founded by Charles I brought disaster, even though it was coupled with an annual subsidy of $1000. Writing to the countess of Rutland in 1670 from his 'uncouth cell' in the Fleet prison, where he had been committed for debt, Crowe was scathing about the quality of the tapestries produced by William, earl of Craven, and his associates, who had taken over from him at Mortlake in 1667. After his release the fairly lucrative office of secretary and clerk of the signet in Wales and the marches was bestowed upon him in October 1671. He had acquired an estate in Carmarthenshire and became a deputy lieutenant of that county in July 1674. But insolvency again intervened and he died in the Fleet prison in 1683. 
One product of Crowe's connection with Buckingham in the 1620s was his spectacular marriage in 1634 into the duchess's family -- to Mary, daughter of Sir George Manners and sister of John Manners, later eighth earl of Rutland. The bride's mother bitterly deplored 'my daughter's offence to God and disobedience to me' in marrying so far beneath her, but Lady Crowe seems loyally to have shared her husband's sharp vicissitudes of fortune. Crowe was succeeded by his only child, Sir Sackville Crowe, on whose death the baronetcy became extinct. 
Robert Ashton', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37328


Crowley, Sir Ambrose (1658-1713), ironmaster, was born in Stourbridge, Worcestershire, on 1 February 1658, the only son of Ambrose Crowley ('bap'. 1635, died 1720) and his first wife, Mary Hall (died in or after 1658), the daughter of Thomas Hall of Bromsgrove, Worcestershire. His father, a Quaker, started out at Stourbridge as a semi-literate nailer, but through thrift, application, and considerable business acumen, became a manufacturer of nails on the putting-out system, an ironmonger, and an owner of iron forges. His interests extended to south Wales, where he was a part owner of an ironworks with Major John Hanbury of Pontypool, the inventor of the iron-rolling process used in the manufacture of tin plate. 
The younger Ambrose, after serving an apprenticeship with a London ironmonger, became free of the Drapers' Company on 9 July 1684. He immediately became active in London as an independent wholesale ironmonger serving both home and export markets from his warehouses and residence in Thames Street, near the river. When his business outgrew these premises he acquired property in 1704 on the Thames at Greenwich, where he built a wharf, warehouses, and a spacious residence. 
At the very start of his business activity Crowley recognized that there was an enormous demand for nails on the south and east coasts, particularly from shipyards, both royal and private. With land transport slow and costly, this market was inconveniently and expensively served by west midland nail makers such as his own father in Worcestershire. However, he saw his opportunity and integrated backwards, acquiring manufacturing premises in co. Durham which had readier access to the shipbuilding market: first at Sunderland (by 1685) and subsequently at Winlaton, near Newcastle upon Tyne. These proving profitable, he strengthened his market position by buying out competing works at nearby Swalwell. During the period 1707-9 his undertakings in co. Durham contained two slitting-mills, two forges, four steel furnaces, many warehouses, and innumerable smithies producing a very wide variety of ironmongery. His naval contracts alone mentioned 108 varieties of nails, plus anchors, screws, bolts, hinges, latches, files, pots, and the like, as well as hemp and pitch presumably obtained in trade. 
Crowley supervised operations from his Greenwich warehouse whence he supplied the metropolitan and export markets in particular. For inland distribution he had other warehouses in London and at Blaydon-on-Tyne, Ware in Hertfordshire, Wolverhampton, Walsall, and Stourbridge. The last was also used to buy bar iron for the Durham works, while Blaydon supplied other manufacturers in the north-east with semi-manufactured iron products including steel and iron rods. The firm prospered markedly during the wars of 1689-1713, when it became a major vendor of ironmongery to the Royal Navy. 
The sheer size of Crowley's ironworks and his decision to control operations from London caused serious managerial problems. The solution, laid out in the 'Law Book of the Crowley Ironworks', was a written constitution for the works, enumerating the duties of the principal officials and clerks. The regulatory framework, built up in the fifteen or so years after 1690, was unique for its time and embodied not only penalties for infringement but also insurance and welfare provisions for the employees. 
As a large supplier to the royal dockyards, Crowley was inevitably drawn towards politics. He was a tory, and his associations helped his contracting in the 1680s when he was favoured by the duke of York, lord high admiral, with permission to bring skilled workers from Liege. Crowley was in due course elected member of the London common council (1697-1711), sheriff (1706-7), the office that brought him his knighthood on 1 January 1707, and alderman for Dowgate ward (1711-13). His status was also acknowledged by his selection as master of the important Drapers' Company (1708-9), while his political weight was enhanced by his election in 1713 as MP for Andover. As a major government contractor, he had accumulated over $50,000 in navy bills during the last stages of the War of the Spanish Succession and was one of the key figures in the City consulted by Robert Harley, earl of Oxford, on ways to relieve the government of the burden of such floating debt. Out of these consultations came the plan for the South Sea Company. With its launching in 1711, Crowley's holdings of naval bills and the like could be converted into shares in the new undertaking, of which he became one of the largest shareholders, a director (1711-13), and ultimately deputy governor (1712-13). 
To support his activity as wholesale ironmonger and manufacturer, Crowley was necessarily also a merchant in foreign trade. To supply his customers and his own smithies in the north-east, he became a very large importer of Swedish bar iron at Newcastle upon Tyne -- possibly the largest in the kingdom. A substantial portion of his ironmongery sales went to exporters, while he himself appears in the London customs records in the late 1690s as an exporter of nails and hardware to New England. During the tory ministerial ascendancy after 1710, the Board of Trade consulted him about both the Baltic iron trade and ways of encouraging exports of English ironwares to the American colonies. 
Two of Crowley's half-sisters remained within the Society of Friends on marrying fellow Quakers of the Lloyd family: Sarah to Charles Lloyd of Dolobran; and Mary to Sampson Lloyd, a Birmingham iron-dealer. Mary's son, also Sampson Lloyd, was one of the founders of Lloyds Bank. By contrast, Crowley broke with his father's strong Quaker commitments and had become an Anglican by the time of his marriage, in March 1682, to Mary, daughter of Charles Owen, a Londoner from a Shropshire gentry family. In 1712 Sir Ambrose was named one of the commissioners for building fifty new churches and persuaded that board to give priority to rebuilding the parish church near his property at Greenwich. He died at Greenwich on 7 October 1713 and was buried at the parish church of Mitcham, Surrey. He left portions of $10,000 each to the four of his five daughters still unmarried; John Crowley (1689-1728), his only son and residuary legatee, inherited the business. 
Sir Ambrose's children continued their father's tory associations. John, a suspected Jacobite, sat in the House of Commons from 1722 to 1728. Lettice (1692-1718), the second of Sir Ambrose's five daughters to reach marriageable age, married Sir John Hynde Cotton, third baronet, a prominent tory politician; the third, Sarah (1697-1759), married Humphry Parsons, a wealthy brewer and extreme tory lord mayor of London; the fourth, Anne ('b'. 1699), married Richard Fleming ('c'.1682-1740), a Hampshire country gentleman and tory MP; and the fifth, Elizabeth (1702-1769), married another tory, the eleventh Baron St John of Bletso. 
The firm which Crowley founded was continued by his son John and by his grandsons and lasted well into the reign of Queen Victoria, prospering from all the wars in the century following his death. As a major supplier to the Atlantic export trades, it also gained from the great growth of population, housebuilding, and shipbuilding in the American colonies during the period from 1700 to 1775, engendering orders to the firm for nails and other building hardware. At its height in the second quarter of the eighteenth century, the firm, then worth over $100,000 and employing over one thousand workers, was reputed to be the largest iron-manufacturing concern in Europe. Its exceptional integration and scale made it, in the words of its historian, 'a giant in an age of pigmies' (Flinn, 'Men of Iron', 252). 


@@@@@


doc= 37329


Crowley, Aleister (1875-1947), author and occultist, was born on 12 October 1875 at 30 Clarendon Square, Leamington Spa, Warwickshire, the elder child of Emily Bertha ('nee' Bishop) and Edward Crowley (died 1887). A daughter died in infancy. Edward Crowley's family had owned Crowley's Ales, and he retired on his inheritance; his wife was from a family in Somerset and Devon. The elder Crowley was an evangelist for a fundamentalist Christian sect, the Plymouth Brethren, which his wife also joined. Their son was spoiled by material comfort and a belief in his spiritual superiority. His mother called him the Great Beast, the unholy monster of the 'Apocalypse' (Therion, 666). At his father's death, the boy became truly hostile to Christianity, for he was then transferred to the care of his uncle, Tom Bond Bishop, who was publicly philanthropic but surreptitiously cruel. Crowley briefly attended Malvern College, in 1891-2, and Tonbridge School, in 1892, both of which he found uncongenial. 
At the age of twenty Crowley went up to Trinity College, Cambridge, to study for the natural sciences tripos, and in his leisure time excelled at chess and at mountaineering. In October 1897 a fevered vision convinced him that all human endeavours are ephemeral, with one exception -- the magical tradition. He dedicated himself to esoteric studies and sought initiation by genuine magi. Poetry greatly attracted him, and it was probably Shelley's 'Alastor, or, The Spirit of Solitude' that inspired Crowley to call himself Aleister, a deliberate repudiation of his given name. The spelling reflects a Gaelic form in keeping with the Celtic revival then popular. Crowley came into his inheritance, which he spent extravagantly. He issued deluxe volumes of his own poetry, beginning with 'Aceldama' (1898), which sparked the admiration of Gerald Festus Kelly, also at Trinity but destined for knighthood and the presidency of the Royal Academy. In 'White Stains', Crowley exhibited homosexual sentiments. He was intimate with Herbert Charles Jerome Pollitt, a young stage performer who came to mistrust Crowley's 'spiritual' ambition; they separated in 1898. Crowley left Cambridge without having earned a degree. 
Crowley met members of the London temple of the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, a quasi-secret society which had been founded in 1888 and claimed to transmit a species of ancient cabalism. Crowley joined in November 1898 and assumed the magical name of Perdurabo (I will endure). He soon impressed Samuel Liddell Mathers, one of the order's founders, which disappointed another young initiate, William Butler Yeats, who judged Crowley to be insane. Mathers had revived obscure techniques for evoking one's guardian angel. Crowley, eager to test these operations, secluded himself at Boleskine House, on the shore of Loch Ness, but was distracted by dissension in the Golden Dawn. Superior officials heard rumours of his sexual immorality and, defying Mathers, opposed Crowley's advancement. As Mathers's power declined, Crowley lost interest in the order. 
For several years Crowley wandered restlessly. In Mexico in 1900 he was joined by Oscar Eckenstein, an older and more experienced mountain climber, and they explored the local terrain. Eckenstein instructed Crowley in concentration and visualization. Crowley also undertook magical evocations in the style of John Dee, the Elizabethan magus, and his scryer, Edward Kelley, and Crowley now felt that he was the incarnation of Kelley. He resolved to advance independently through the grades of magical attainment prescribed by the Golden Dawn and travelled in Asia and practised hatha yoga. In 1902 he and Eckenstein undertook the first attempt to scale Chogo Ri (K-2), the world's second-highest peak. Crowley's sporting inclinations also included big-game hunting. 
In 1903 Crowley married Rose Edith Skerrett, the widowed sister of Gerald Kelly. In Cairo in April 1904 Rose entered involuntary trances and urged her husband to prepare for supernatural communications. Subsequent sessions produced 'Liber legis' ('Book of the law'), which was supposedly dictated to Crowley through the voice of a certain Aiwaz or Aiwass, perhaps the guardian angel whom Crowley had sought. The transmission was inexplicably signed by a pharaonic priest named Ankh-f-n-khonsu. (Crowley later decided that he himself was the reincarnation of this priest.) The document, while laden with enigmas, is clear in announcing the New Aeon: Christianity will yield to another spiritual movement. Crowley was charged with promoting its basic principle, the law of Thelema: 'Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law'. This pronouncement was purportedly relayed from an Egyptian goddess, Nuit. In fact, the injunction had already been given in the famous story by Rabelais (died 1553), whose monstrous Gargantua founded the abbey of Theleme. 
At Boleskine Rose gave birth to a daughter, but in May 1905 Crowley resumed his wanderings. He conducted a Himalayan expedition that proved disastrous for his colleagues, whom he preferred to vilify rather than to help or to mourn. He summoned his wife and daughter to India, then fled the country with them as authorities were inquiring into his fatal shooting of two assailants. He dragged his family across south China but dispatched them homeward, on account of his desire to locate a former mistress. When he returned to Britain, he learned that his daughter had been taken ill and died in Burma, a death he attributed to his wife's negligence. Rose bore two more daughters but finally filed for divorce. Her charge of adultery was uncontested. 
Crowley renewed his occult activities in 1909. He published 'Liber 777', which revealed the attributes of the tarot as interpreted in the Golden Dawn, and began recruiting for his own esoteric order, the Argenteum Astrum (Silver Star). This incorporated Golden Dawn rituals, some of which appeared in summary in Crowley's new journal, 'The Equinox'. Mathers charged Crowley with plagiarism and petitioned the courts to prevent further publication of his secret teachings, but Crowley prevailed. He and the Golden Dawn were widely parodied, even in the 'Occult Review', while his Argenteum Astrum continued in secret. One member, before he rose to fame as a military strategist, was Captain John Frederick Charles Fuller, who encouraged occult studies by Charles Stansfeld Jones and by Victor Neuburg, a young poet (later poetry editor of the 'Sunday Referee'). Neuburg and Crowley combined their magical and homosexual pursuits, producing a form of sex magic. Neuburg was a dancer in Crowley's theatrical production of 'The Rites of Eleusis', which received acclaim from critics. Crowley attracted the attention of Theodor Reuss, frater superior of the Ordo Templi Orientis (OTO), a German society that sometimes engaged in sex magic. Reuss visited Crowley and was sufficiently impressed to install him as chief of the English branch of the OTO. 
During the First World War Crowley lived in America. His inheritance had long been exhausted -- his travel funds probably came from the OTO. He practised sexual rituals involving a varied list of partners and in New York found employment in writing propaganda for pro-German periodicals. This deeply alienated his countrymen, who did not forgive him, even after the war. 
In 1920 Crowley moved to Cefalu, in Sicily. There he rented a farmhouse, which he called the abbey of Thelema, and accepted disciples hopeful of advancing the New Aeon. The Sicilian project halted in 1923 when a young Englishman mysteriously died at the abbey. His widow accused Crowley of various crimes and sins, and the British periodical 'John Bull' called him the 'wickedest man in the world'. The Italian government expelled Crowley and his Thelemites, but Crowley continued to attract students. Theodor Reuss had resigned as head of the OTO and Crowley subsequently occupied the office. His associates in this period included Karl Germer, Gerald Yorke, and Israel Regardie, all of whom became influential in occult circles. In Berlin in 1929, Crowley married Maria Teresa Ferrari de Miramar, a Nicaraguan. They soon separated. 
In England during the depression, Crowley gleaned money through litigation. He sued both a bookseller who erroneously advertised the suppression of Crowley's novel, 'The Diary of a Drug Fiend', when in fact it had only gone out of print, and the publisher of Nina Hamnett's 'Laughing Torso', in which she presumed that Crowley had fostered black magic at the abbey of Thelema. Former friends refused to testify in Crowley's behalf. In the latter case, the judge was repelled by reports of Crowley's erotic literature and rituals, and Crowley lost and incurred the court costs. He was penniless. A sympathetic woman offered to have his child, and he accepted. He is said to have fathered other illegitimate children, but far from nurturing his offspring, he imposed on his paramours for his own support. 
One of the circle around Crowley in the 1930s was 
A friend of Greta Valentine's was Frieda Harris, the wife of Sir Percy Harris (Liberal MP for Bethnal Green). She was devoted to Crowley, who named her as an executor of his will. In 1942 she completed watercolours for use in publishing a pack of tarot cards conforming to Crowley's concept. In his tarot, as elsewhere, he merged Western magic with exotic mysticism (such as gnosticism and tantric Buddhism) and with modern science (such as chemistry and Freudian psychology). He thereby extended the work of Eliphas Levi, a notable French magus, who had died in 1875, the year of Crowley's birth; Crowley claimed to be Levi's reincarnation. 'The Book of Thoth' (1944) is Crowley's commentary on his tarot. He did not acknowledge the fact that his tarot's basic structure depended on Golden Dawn teachings. 
In his waning years Crowley befriended John Symonds and acceded to the young writer's request that Crowley supply notes for a biography. He designated Symonds and Kenneth Grant, the youngest of his last students, as literary executors, empowered to publish his papers. On 1 December 1947, at Netherwood, a residential hotel in The Ridge, Hastings, Crowley, by this time a chronic heroin addict, died of bronchitis and heart congestion. His remains were cremated at Brighton and reportedly have been lost. 
Interest in Crowley has reflected waves of curiosity in the occult. The Crowley-Harris tarot is popular, and several occult groups adhere to his law of Thelema. His most readable books on occultism are 'Book Four' (1912), 'The Book of Lies' (1913), and 'Magick in Theory and Practice' (1929). Among sympathizers he is revered for his peculiar gifts, but others remember his reputation as a social outcast on account of his flagrant nonconformity. 


@@@@@


doc= 37330


Culpeper, Edmund (c.1670-1737), scientific instrument maker, was born in Tarrant Gunville, Dorset, the son of Edward Culpeper, rector of that parish, a former servitor at Merton College, Oxford, who took his BA from Merton in 1658. Edmund Culpeper and the herbalist and astrologer Nicholas Culpeper were probably related, being descended from junior branches of the Culpeper (or Colepeper) family, a large, wealthy, landed family in Kent and Sussex. 
In 1684 Culpeper was apprenticed in the Grocers' Company to Walter Hayes, engraver and mathematical instrument maker of Moorfields, London. By 1700 he had taken over his master's shop at the Cross Daggers, Middle Moorfields, and this was given as his address in various advertisements from 1707 to 1731, an address emblematically represented on his trade card. In 1710 he was visited by the noted German traveller Conrad von Uffenbach, who sought out the most eminent instrument makers in London. Rather curiously Culpeper did not become a freeman until 1714; he must have decided to do so because he took on an apprentice the day after he was freed. Culpeper was famous for his optical instruments, especially microscopes, but was also known for a wide variety of mathematical instruments in silver, brass, ivory, and wood, although it is difficult to determine at what point he moved from being a maker to a retailer. 
Culpeper was a skilled engraver and there is a memorial brass by him, dated 1694, for Dorothy Williams in Pimperne church, Dorset. Other early examples of his work are a woodblock engraving of a trencher design dated 1687, when he was still an apprentice, and a fine gilt-brass horizontal sundial signed 'E. C.', probably made for his sweetheart, as it has engraved underneath an interlaced geometrical pattern inscribed 'Ann Porteman. This is a True Loves Knot for Thou Cans Part it not 1687'. 
Culpeper married by licence on 10 January 1705 Judith Gunn, who survived him. Their son Edmund became free, by patrimony, of the Grocers' Company in 1758. Indeed three generations of Culpepers joined this guild, as the younger Edmund's son John Chandler Culpeper in turn became his father's apprentice in the following year. Both Edmunds may also have been members of the Spectaclemakers' Company. 
Culpeper achieved fame by giving his name to a certain type of tripod microscope made in the early eighteenth century, but it is not at all clear that he was its inventor. He was making the screw-barrel microscope invented by James Wilson from at least 1700. In 1710 he advertised 'several sorts of new contrived Microscopes... I may boldly say, no one but my self in the Kingdom has the like variety of 'em', but his characteristic works are his engravings of scales, dials, and sectors. By the time of his death, on 14 May 1737 at his house in Moorfields, he was trading 'Near the Royal Exchange'. He was buried in St Paul's Churchyard, as recorded in the parish register of St Faith's under St Paul. 


@@@@@


doc= 37331


Cumming, Sir Mansfield George Smith (1859-1923), intelligence officer, was born Mansfield George Smith on 1 April 1859 in India, the youngest in the family of five sons and eight daughters of Colonel John Thomas Smith (1805-1882) of the Royal Engineers, of Foellalt House, Kent, and his wife, Maria Sarah Tyser. After entering the training ship 'Britannia' at the age of thirteen, he began his career afloat as acting sub-lieutenant on HMS 'Bellerophon'. He served in operations against Malay pirates during 1875-6 and in Egypt in 1883. He suffered, however, from severe seasickness and in 1885 he was placed on the retired list. 
Cumming (he changed his name in 1889 after marriage) spent the early 1890s largely as a country gentleman on his second wife's Moray estate. In 1898, while still on the Royal Navy retired list, he was posted to Nelson's old flagship 'Victory' 'for special service at Southampton'. The 'special service' included occasional intelligence work abroad, but his main work for the next decade was the construction and command of the Southampton boom defences. 
In 1909 Cumming was appointed head of what became the foreign section of the Secret Service Bureau (the forerunner of the Secret Intelligence Service, better known as SIS or MI6). He described pre-1914 espionage as 'capital sport', but was given few resources with which to pursue it. His early operations were directed almost entirely against Germany. Between 1909 and 1914 he recruited part-time 'casual agents' in the shipping and arms business to keep track of naval construction in German shipyards and acquire other technical intelligence. He also had agents collecting German intelligence in Brussels, Rotterdam, and St Petersburg. 
With the outbreak of the First World War, Cumming's control of strategic intelligence gathering as head of the wartime MI1c was challenged by two rival networks run by general headquarters. Cumming eventually out-performed his rivals. His most important wartime network, 'La Dame Blanche', had by January 1918 over 400 agents reporting on German troop movements from occupied Belgium and northern France. Cumming was less successful in post-revolutionary Russia. Despite a series of colourful exploits, his agents obtained little Russian intelligence of value. 
Like the rest of the British intelligence community, the post-war SIS was drastically cut back. Cumming succeeded, however, in gaining a monopoly of espionage and counter-intelligence outside Britain and the empire. He also established a network of SIS station commanders operating overseas under diplomatic cover. To the end of his life Cumming retained an infectious, if sometimes eccentric, enthusiasm for the tradecraft and mystification of espionage, experimenting personally with disguises, mechanical gadgets, and secret inks in his own laboratory. His practice of writing exclusively in a distinctive green ink was continued by his successors. He was appointed CB in 1914 and KCMG in 1919. 
Cumming had a fascination with most forms of transport, driving his Rolls at high speed around the streets of London. In his early fifties he took up flying, gaining both French aviators' and Royal Aero Club certificates. But his main passion was boating in Southampton Water and other waters calmer than those which had ended his active service career. In addition to owning 'any number' of yachts, Cumming acquired six motor boats. In 1905 he became one of the founders and first rear-commodore of the Royal Motor Yacht Club. 
In 1885 Cumming married Dora, daughter of Henry Cloete of Great Constantia, Cape Colony. After her death he married, on 13 March 1889, a Scottish heiress, Leslie Marian (May), daughter of Captain Lockhart Muir Valiant (afterwards Cumming), of the 1st Bombay lancers and Logie, Moray. As part of the marriage settlement he changed his surname to Smith-Cumming, later becoming known as Cumming. Their only son, Alastair, a dangerous driver like his father, was killed in October 1914, driving Cumming's Rolls in France. Cumming himself lost the lower part of his right leg in the same accident. He died suddenly at his home, 1 Melbury Road, Kensington, London, on 14 June 1923, shortly before he was due to retire. 
Christopher Andrew', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37332


Cunliffe, Walter, first Baron Cunliffe (1855-1920), merchant banker and governor of the Bank of England, was born on 3 December 1855 at 29 Kensington Gate, London, the eldest of the four sons and second of the six children of Roger Cunliffe (died 1895), of Tyrrell's Wood, Leatherhead, merchant banker, and his wife, Anne Edge. He was educated at Harrow School, where he was in the shooting eleven, and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he won the inter-university mile race in 1877 -- he earned a half-blue for running -- and took a second-class ordinary degree in 1878. He then spent two years travelling widely and working as a stockman in Queensland, Australia, before returning to England and taking up a career in the City. In 1890 he and his two brothers Arthur and Leonard founded the merchant bank Cunliffe Brothers, with offices in Cornhill. On his father's death in 1895 he came into a substantial fortune and his estate in Surrey; indeed, the City believed him to be a millionaire. This fortune should have increased both his ability to do business and the stature of his house. Nevertheless, Cunliffe Bros. was never a front-rank firm, and on 1 January 1920 -- five days before his death -- it was absorbed by the merchant bank Fruhling and Goschen, which became the new house of Goschen and Cunliffe (which failed in December 1939). 
Cunliffe's enduring reputation rests on his activities as governor of the Bank of England, on his chairmanship of the eponymous Cunliffe committee of 1918, and on his membership of the reparations commission of the British delegation to the Versailles peace conference in 1919. He became a director of the bank in 1895, deputy governor in 1911, and succeeded as governor in 1913. There were two decisive occasions during his period in office, one of which made his reputation and authority, the other of which badly damaged both. The first was after the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914, when the clearing banks refused or rationed gold sovereigns to their customers; the stock exchange was in turmoil, and bankruptcy threatened the merchant banks because their acceptance credits could not be repaid. Cunliffe successfully argued against the suspension of gold payments; he agreed that the bank would discount all outstanding bills of exchange (with the government standing the financial risk), which calmed the money market; and he placed guards at the doors of enemy banks to prevent removal of foreign securities. Cunliffe thereby gained great authority as governor of the bank, and he was asked to stay on beyond the normal two-year term, to retire only in March 1918. 
But this authority increased the autocratic and aggressive, even bullying, tendencies of Cunliffe's character, and hubris brought nemesis. The bank traditionally controlled policy on exchange rates, but the Treasury's greatly increased spending overseas had encouraged an increasing interest in maintaining the rate of the pound. The bank and the Treasury were agreed on this, but Cunliffe, who had great contempt for Treasury officials, grew suspicious of the means by which the Treasury was financing its overseas purchases. In July 1917, during a period of turmoil in British financing abroad, he cabled the Bank of Canada in Ottawa, where some of the British reserves were held, ignoring the instructions of the Treasury. The chancellor, Andrew Bonar Law, was incandescent, and Cunliffe's friendship with the prime minister, David Lloyd George, did not prevent his being forced to put his resignation into the chancellor's hands. His imminent retirement was announced in November 1917. 
In 1918 Cunliffe nevertheless chaired the commission on currency and foreign exchanges, the first report of which dealt with the means whereby the gold standard could be maintained. His influence on the commission on the reparation of damage at the Versailles conference was irresponsible: he spoke of German payments of $120 billion, while J. M. Keynes of the Treasury put the German capacity to pay at $10 billion. Cunliffe knew little of Germany and admitted that his figure 'was little more than a shot in the dark as he had been pressed to arrive at it between a Saturday and a Monday' ('DNB'). He ultimately insisted on a lower but still astronomical figure (leading him and his British colleague on the commission, Lord Sumner, to be dubbed 'the heavenly twins'). This was his final public service. 
Cunliffe was twice married: first in 1890 to Mary Agnes (died 1893), younger daughter of Robert Henderson, a merchant, of Randalls Park, Leatherhead; and second in 1896, to Edith Cunningham, fifth daughter of Colonel Robert Tod Boothby of St Andrews. There were three sons and three daughters of the second marriage. Cunliffe was created baron in 1914 and GBE in 1917, and he received several foreign orders. 
'Over six feet tall, of broad physique and rolling gait, with imposing features and a walrus moustache' ('DNB'), Cunliffe could appear a rock when reassurance of strength was needed, as in July-August 1914. His pleasures were traditional: he hunted and fished, shot game large and small, and farmed as a gentleman should; he was also a connoisseur of silver and antiques. No one called him clever: he frequently reacted by emotion and intuition rather than after thought and 'had the advantage of knowing his own mind, perhaps not a very difficult one to know' (Sayers, 66). Usually laconic, gruff with most, he could be jovial with friends. He was a director of the North-Eastern Railway from 1905 and of the P. & O. Line from November 1919. Cunliffe died of septicaemia after ten days' illness at his home, Headley Court, Epsom, Surrey, on 6 January 1920. He was succeeded, as second baron, by his son Rolf (1899-1963). 


@@@@@


doc= 37333


Curran, Sir Charles John (1921-1980), broadcasting administrator, was born in Dublin on 13 October 1921, the only son and eldest of the four children of Felix Curran, an army schoolmaster, and his wife, Alicia Isabella Bruce, from Aberdeen. Curran referred later to his 'Irish birth without an Irish upbringing', because after three weeks he left Dublin for Aberdeen, his mother's native home. He had no Scots upbringing either, since in 1924 his family moved to the West Riding of Yorkshire, where he studied at the local elementary school and at Wath-on-Dearne grammar school before entering Magdalene College, Cambridge, in 1939. He obtained a first class in part 1 of the history tripos in 1941. 
Familiar with army ways, Curran served in the Indian army in India, Cyprus, and Italy from 1941 to 1945 before completing his degree in history in 1946 with a first class in part 2 and joining the British Broadcasting Corporation as a talks producer in 1947. In 1949 he married Silvia, daughter of John Meyer, restaurateur. They had one daughter. After only three years with the BBC Curran left the corporation and the country to become for one year assistant director (1950-51) of the Canadian commercial journal 'Fishing News'. His father's mother had been born in Nova Scotia, and he himself retained an active interest in Canada. He had also shown a gift for learning languages, first in India, and when in August 1951 he returned to the BBC it was to join its monitoring service at Caversham as a report writer. 
In September 1953 Curran became the BBC's first internally selected administrative trainee, visiting or working for a time in different departments of the BBC in and out of London and assisting in the preparation of the BBC's first personnel manual. His subsequent progress inside the corporation was rapid and distinctive -- from the external services in Bush House to Canada again, this time as BBC representative from 1956 to 1959; back to Bush House as head of external broadcasting administration; on to Broadcasting House as the BBC's secretary (1963-6), a post of varying status and influence at different times in the history of the BBC, but during the regime of the director-general Sir Hugh Greene, who had personally selected Curran for the job, a key post drawing him into discussions of policy, often highly controversial policy, as well as of administration; back again to Bush House as director of external services (1967-9), which brought him into close touch with government; and on Greene's retirement becoming, to his considerable surprise, director-general himself in April 1969. He was knighted in 1974 and had honorary degrees from the City University (DLitt, 1977) and the Open University (DUniv, 1978). 
In his autobiographical study, 'The Seamless Robe', Curran's only book, published in 1979, he made much of the complementarity and underlying unity of his experiences before 1969. The title (and contents) reflected even more strongly, however, his deep, but never flaunted, religious conviction. He was the first Roman Catholic director-general of the BBC, taking over at a difficult time, when the Ulster issue was posing serious dilemmas for broadcasters as well as for politicians. His religion did not prove a handicap, although his scrupulous conscience never made life easy for him, and his philosophy of broadcasting, set out neatly in thoughtful lectures, was very different from that of Greene or of Baron Hill of Luton, his first chairman. Curran, never immune from criticism, thought of himself as 'a broadcasting manager'. Yet he was not content with management. He insisted on quality of output, stressing its dependence not on committees but on individual producers operating in freedom. 
Under Curran's regime the BBC survived intact as an institution, although the Annan committee on broadcasting, which reported in 1977, the year of Curran's departure from the BBC, revealed most of the stresses, financial as well as political and social, which Curran had experienced personally but had never been able to eliminate institutionally. He remained until 1978 president of the European Broadcasting Union, a post to which he had been elected in 1973 and which he greatly treasured. He was also from 1978 managing director of the television news agency Visnews. Curran died on 9 January 1980 at Barnet General Hospital following a heart attack. 


@@@@@


doc= 37334


Curwen, John Christian (1756-1828), agriculturist and politician, was born on 12 July 1756 at Ewanrigg, Dearham, Cumberland, the eldest to survive infancy of the sons of John Christian of Ewanrigg, and his wife, Jane, eldest daughter of Eldred Curwen of Workington Hall, Cumberland. He was educated at Peterhouse, Cambridge; he left the university without a degree about 1774. On 10 September 1775 he married Margaret, daughter of John Taubman of Castletown, Isle of Man. She died in 1778, leaving a son, also John Christian. He remarried on 5 October 1782 at Edinburgh; his second wife was his cousin Isabella, daughter of his uncle and guardian, Henry Curwen of Workington. She brought him $5000 p.a. and her family's support in the career in Cumberland politics which he subsequently began. They had five sons and three daughters. He took on the surname Curwen in 1790 ['see 'Curwen family (per. c.1500-c.1725)]. 
A whig in politics, Curwen was returned to the House of Commons for Carlisle in 1786, was defeated for that constituency in 1790, regained it in 1791, held it until 1812, and held it again from 1816 to 1820. He then represented Cumberland from 1820 until his death. He was an active parliamentarian who supported Catholic emancipation, parliamentary reform, and the repeal of the corn laws. To emphasize his concern for his constituents he once appeared in the House of Commons dressed like a Cumberland labourer and carrying a loaf and a cheese under his arms. In 1796 he made an ineffectual bid to reform and virtually abolish the game laws. Politically, he is best known for 'Curwen's Act', which was passed in 1809. The act was one of the very few significant reforms of the pre-1832 system; it attempted to reduce the sale of seats and the number of government placemen in the Commons, but was less successful than contemporaries initially feared. 
Curwen's interest in agriculture probably dated from a long journey through Europe following the death of his first wife in 1778. He was a friend of Arthur Young and knew the leaders of progressive agricultural opinion in Scotland. In Cumberland he embarked on an improvement programme on his estates at Workington Hall. In 1805 he inaugurated the Workington Agricultural Society, which had a profound impact on local agriculture in the first half of the nineteenth century. In 1807 he received the gold medal of the Society of Arts, Commerce, and Manufactures, for his agricultural innovations. Many of his ideas were published in 'Hints on Agricultural Subjects' (1809), and his views on Ireland, where he spent time between 1813 and 1816, appeared in 'Observations on the state of Ireland, principally directed to its agriculture and rural population' (1818). Part, at least, of his motive in studying agriculture was to improve the lot of the labouring poor. To the latter end he was also responsible for establishing a savings bank at Workington, and for various friendly societies. 
Curwen's estates lay on the west Cumberland coalfield, and he took a particular interest in the collieries inherited from his father and his second wife, as well as in others which he purchased and leased in the area. However, he was hit by the trade depression after the Napoleonic wars, and by the 1820s Workington colliery was in decline. Increasing costs and declining profits forced him to borrow, and from 1819 until 1827 Curwen owed more than $120,000. Consequently he was not able to invest in improved mining techniques in the later years of his life. 
Curwen was sheriff of Cumberland in 1784-5 and was active in the militia. He died at Workington Hall on 11 December 1828. 
J. V. Beckett', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37335


Curzon, Nathaniel, first Baron Scarsdale (1726-1804), art collector, was born on 23 December 1726 at Queen Square, Bloomsbury, London, the elder of the two surviving sons of Sir Nathaniel Curzon, fourth baronet (1675-1758), MP and barrister of the Inner Temple, and his wife, Mary (died 1776), the daughter of Sir Ralph Assheton, second baronet. He was educated at Westminster School, and while there, in 1742, led three other friends into carving their names on the back of the coronation chair. In 1745 he went up to Christ Church, Oxford, and in 1749 he was made DCL. He served as MP for Clitheroe from 1748 to 1754, when he replaced his father as MP for Derbyshire, a seat he retained until 1761. Following Oxford he made a brief tour through northern France and the Low Countries, but he does not seem to have visited Italy. In 1750 he married Lady Caroline (died 1812), the eldest daughter of Charles Colyear, second earl of Portmore. They had five sons, three of whom predeceased their father, and two daughters. At Newmarket in 1751 Curzon and Lord March (William Douglas, later the notorious fourth duke of Queensberry) rode their horses, Silver Leg and Chance, against wagers of $50 and $100, of which Curzon won the second encounter. 
It is for the splendid house and the surrounding park at Kedleston in Derbyshire, where there had been Curzons since the reign of Henry I, that Curzon will be especially remembered. When he succeeded as fifth baronet in 1758 he was already planning to demolish the existing Queen Anne house and build a great Palladian mansion, in which he brought together important features of a number of great buildings he had seen and admired. He wanted to follow the basic plan of Holkham Hall in Norfolk, which was based on Palladio's unbuilt Villa Mocenigo, illustrated in 'Quattro libri', and in December 1758 he invited Matthew Brettingham, the builder of Holkham, to make drawings. Work began in 1759, but in 1761 Robert Adam was appointed surveyor of the building, and it was he who designed the south front in 1765. The magnificent hall, lined with Corinthian columns, and the saloon, with a dome and central skylight imitating the Pantheon in Rome, which housed his sculpture collection, were the inspiration of Curzon himself. Adam did much of the interior decoration, including the mosaic ceiling in the library. Curzon built up a large art collection: some paintings he inherited, others he acquired -- among them twenty-nine pictures bought for him in Italy -- and he also commissioned new works from artists such as Nathaniel Hone. In the park he removed the formal rides, canals, and ponds of the 1720s and created a natural landscape. For the pleasure grounds Adam designed a magnificent bridge and several buildings, notably a gothic temple. 
Curzon was elevated to the peerage as first Baron Scarsdale on 9 April 1761. Through John Leveson-Gower, first Earl Gower, he was appointed chairman of committees in the House of Lords, which took up much time between 1775 and 1789 but provided a regular income to help in completing the house. 
Curzon died at Kedleston on 6 December 1804 and was succeeded in the barony by his eldest son, Nathaniel. 


@@@@@


doc= 37336


Cuthbertson, John (bap. 1743, d. 1821), instrument maker, was baptized at Dearham, Cumberland, on 1 July 1743. He was the second of four children (the eldest of whom predeceased him) and elder son of Jonathan Cuthbertson, an innkeeper and yeoman, and his second wife, Mary Fisher. He has been confused with his younger brother, Jonathan, also born in Dearham, and baptized on 11 September 1744, who followed the same profession; their publications have been listed in several prominent works under John's name alone. Jonathan died in 1806. 
Nothing is known about the brothers' formal education or early apprenticeships. In 1761 John Cuthbertson was apprenticed to the instrument maker James Champneys and moved with him to Amsterdam in 1768. Champneys was one of a number of prominent London instrument makers who brought a petition against Peter Dollond in 1764 to annul (unsuccessfully, as it turned out) the achromatic lens patent which had been granted to Dollond's father in 1758. In 1766 Champneys had to pay a heavy fine for infringing Dollond's patent, and he was made bankrupt in that year. This may have been one of the reasons for his move to the Netherlands with his apprentice. Cuthbertson followed the fairly common practice of marrying his master's daughter; he and Jane Champneys were married on 1 September 1768, and it must have been shortly afterwards that the move to the Netherlands took place, as Cuthbertson appears in the Amsterdam 'poorterboek' on 29 December 1768. Only John took the poorter's oath necessary for those who wanted to establish a business; from this we may surmise that James Champneys lived with the newly married couple, and that the business was solely in Cuthbertson's name. Cuthbertson and his wife had four children in Amsterdam, but only their sole daughter, Jane, survived. 
Cuthbertson became noted for his glass-plate frictional electrical machines, a technology which he took with him from London but which he developed to a high state of perfection in the Netherlands. Some of the improvements may have originated from his brother, Jonathan, who had set up a flourishing instrument-making business in Rotterdam. Cuthbertson also advanced the subject of electricity, writing books, giving public lectures, and assisting some of the foremost Dutch scientists with their experiments. In 1783 he constructed a very large twin-plate electrical machine for one of these scientists, Martinus van Marum, the director of the experimental cabinet of the Teyler's Foundation in Haarlem. This frictional generator, the largest of its type, produced 24 inch discharges, equivalent to about 300,000 volts. 
Cuthbertson returned to London some time between 1793 and 1796, perhaps because of the worsening political situation in the Dutch republic. His brother decided to remain behind and died in Rotterdam. John settled at Poland Street in London. It cannot have been easy for a man in his fifties to start afresh as an instrument maker there. In 1799 he invented an electrometer named after him and produced a simplified version of his plate electrical machine, which became the most popular type in England. He also designed several air-pumps. In 1810 he wrote his last scientific papers. He was buried on 18 July 1821 in his parish church, St James's, Piccadilly. He probably died intestate. 
W. D. Hackmann', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37337


Dadd, Richard (1817-1886), painter, was born on 1 August 1817 at 293 High Street, Chatham, Kent, the fourth of the seven children of Robert Dadd (1788/9-1843), chemist, and his wife, Mary Ann (1790-1824), the eldest daughter of Richard Martin, shipwright, and his wife, Sarah. He was the third of the four sons of this marriage, and had two half-brothers by his father's second marriage, to Sophia Oakes Munk (died 1830). 
Dadd attended the cathedral grammar school at Rochester from 1827 to 1831, receiving a thorough grounding in Latin. He began to draw seriously when he was about thirteen. The Kent countryside, the River Medway, and the royal naval dockyard (where many of his family worked), inspired a lifelong love of landscape and shipping subjects. It is unclear whether he received formal teaching at this stage, but his earliest surviving watercolours demonstrate a familiarity with techniques used in miniature painting, and the scale and meticulous detail of his later work suggest that he was truly a miniaturist at heart. 
In 1834 the family moved to London, living at 15 Suffolk Street, Charing Cross, where Robert Dadd ran a gilding and ormolu manufacturing business which he had acquired from Andre Picnot, his first wife's brother-in-law. Richard Dadd entered the Royal Academy Schools in 1837, after a period spent drawing at the British Museum. He won medals for drawing and painting, and was considered an outstanding student in a group which included a number of the future most celebrated painters of the Victorian era -- William Powell Frith, Augustus Egg, and John 'Spanish' Phillip (his future brother-in-law). He was a charming and lively companion, noted for his good humour and kindness as well as his diligence. The author of a somewhat premature obituary ('Art Union', 5/58) wrote that 'all who knew him speak of the exceeding gentleness and sweetness of his nature, which, though sensitive, was anything but irritable; he was satisfied with small praise for himself, but ready and lavish of his praise of others'. 
Dadd's first exhibited works, 'Portrait of a Dog' and 'Head of a Soldier of the 17th Century', were displayed at the Suffolk Street Galleries of the Society of British Artists in 1837. He continued to exhibit regularly, there and at the British Institution, and from 1839 at the Royal Academy. His output soon included scenes from history and literature, subjects that were almost essential for a young artist wishing to make his way. A watercolour of 'Don Quixote Resolving to Sally out as a Knight-Errant' (exh. Society of British Artists, 1839) was the first painting Dadd sold. Other early works include 'Alfred the Great in Disguise of a Peasant, reflecting on the Misfortunes of his Country' (exh. RA, 1840) and 'Elgiva the Queen of Edwy in Banishment' (exh. Royal Manchester Institution, 1840). In the late 1830s he also painted many small informal watercolour portraits of family and friends, typified by the 'Portraits of Thomas and Elizabeth Carter' (Bethlem Royal Hospital Museum). 
In 1841 Dadd established his reputation as a fairy painter with two scenes from Shakespeare's 'A Midsummer Night's Dream', 'Titania Sleeping' (exh. RA; Louvre, Paris) and 'Puck' (exh. Society of British Artists, 1841; priv. coll.), attracting critical acclaim for his poetic imagination and his accomplished portrayal of the nude figure. These were followed by other fairy subjects including 'Fairies Assembling at Sunset to Hold their Revels' (exh. Royal Manchester Institution, 1841), which won the opinion that 'Mr Dadd is emphatically the poet among painters' ('Art Union', 3, Oct 1841, 171) and 'Come unto these Yellow Sands' (exh. RA, 1842; priv. coll.), which approached 'more nearly to the essence of the poet [presumably Shakespeare] than any other illustrations we have seen' ('Art Union', 4, July 1842, 161). Dadd's fairy paintings from this period can be seen as lyrical evocations of the world of nature, though they were essentially theatrical in concept, with brilliant dramatic lighting and carefully choreographed figures. His principal work at this time, however, was a series of paintings, said to number more than a hundred, to decorate 26 Grosvenor Square (now dem.), the London house of Henry, sixth Baron Foley. The subjects, chosen by Dadd himself, were scenes from Byron's dramatic and demon-haunted poem 'Manfred', and from 'Jerusalem Delivered', a romance of the crusades by the sixteenth-century Italian poet Torquato Tasso. His skill as an illustrator appears in another commissioned work, the wood-engravings for 'Robin Goodfellow' in 'The Book of British Ballads', ed. S. C. Hall, 1842, for which he drew directly onto the wood blocks. 
In 1842, on the recommendation of David Roberts, Dadd was employed to accompany Sir Thomas Phillips, the Welsh lawyer and former mayor of Newport, as artist and travelling companion on a tour of Europe and the Near and Middle East. He left England with Phillips on 16 July 1842 on a journey which was to last ten months and take them through Switzerland, north Italy, Greece, Turkey, Syria, Palestine, Egypt, Malta, and back through Italy from the south. In the course of it Dadd was to experience the beginnings of a catastrophic mental breakdown, from which he never fully recovered. Most of the drawings which he made during the journey were pencil sketches, the incessant travelling leaving little time for more finished work. A surviving sketchbook, now in the Victoria and Albert Museum, crammed with tiny figures, heads, trees, buildings, boats, camels, scraps of landscape, fragments of sculpture, and architectural details, shows the quality of his meticulous draughtsmanship which, despite the difficulties, was always sharp, precise, and vivid. Two more substantial watercolours also survive, a small full-length 'Portrait of Sir Thomas Phillips in Arab Dress' (Bethlem Royal Hospital Museum, Kent) which was probably made during the relative leisure of a trip on the Nile, and a companion portrait of Phillips in Turkish costume. 
During the latter part of the journey Dadd started to show signs of mental disturbance. In Rome, in April 1843, he was beginning to grow irrationally excited and quarrelsome on religious subjects, causing some concern to Phillips, but then seemed to recover his self-control. In fact he was already experiencing outright delusions, believing that he was persecuted by the devil who appeared in different disguises including that of Phillips himself. He later confessed to having felt an impulse to attack the pope in a public place, an impulse which he resisted because the pope was too well protected. After a stay in Rome the journey continued, but his mental state deteriorated again and he left Phillips in France at the end of May and alone hurried home to England, where word soon spread that he had returned insane. 
To those who knew him, Dadd's character appeared to have changed. He had become watchful, suspicious, and unpredictable, concealing the fact that he was receiving messages and instructions from unknown sources (probably in the form of voices), but occasionally dropping hints that he was pursued by evil spirits, and was himself searching for the devil. Eventually he came to believe that the Egyptian god Osiris was the supreme being controlling all his actions, and the source of his 'secret admonitions'. However, for much of the time Dadd still behaved normally. He had resumed work immediately on his return, submitting a hastily drawn cartoon of 'St George and the Dragon' to the competition to decorate the new Palace of Westminster. He also completed one major painting based on his travels in Syria, a carefully composed and tranquil 'Caravan Halted by the Sea Shore' (exh. Liverpool Academy, 1843; priv. coll.). 
After a period of apparent recovery Dadd's condition worsened again, and on 28 August 1843 he persuaded his father to accompany him to Cobham Park in Kent, near to his childhood home of Chatham, where he stabbed him to death with a knife bought specifically for the purpose. Dadd later explained that he had killed the devil in disguise, and seems to have retained this belief throughout his life, talking objectively about the murder as an event for which he held no personal responsibility. He made his way to France, but was arrested after trying to cut the throat of a stranger who was travelling with him in a carriage. Dadd was confined in a French asylum for ten months, and extradited in July 1844 to appear before the magistrates at Rochester. Though formally committed for trial, he was certified insane and was admitted on 22 August to the state criminal lunatic asylum attached to Bethlem Hospital at St George's Fields in Southwark, south London. He was never to know freedom again. 
The 'government wing', where Dadd was first confined, had been built in 1816 to house patients sent by the courts and later through other legal channels. It was a prison-like block with heavily barred windows at the back of the main building, largely untouched by reforms which were taking place in the rest of the hospital. The internal environment was dark, cramped, and dismal, the outer world restricted to a bleak, high-walled exercise yard, and many of his companions were hardened criminals who had become insane while in prison. Dadd's living conditions were much improved in 1857, when he and some of the 'better class' of criminal patients were moved to a specially converted ward in the main hospital, but far greater improvements occurred in 1864, when all the criminal patients were transferred from Bethlem to the new state asylum of Broadmoor in Berkshire. Built like a small village at the top of a hill, its terraced gardens had views over the surrounding countryside, and there were many more facilities for recreation and employment. 
For some years Dadd was considered a dangerous patient, being unpredictable and sometimes violent, his conversation being rambling and incoherent when touching on the subject of his delusions. However, he soon began to work again in Bethlem, and effectively maintained his career as a painter for the rest of his life, though his pictures were rarely seen outside the asylums. A visitor in 1845 wrote of some recent drawings that they 'exhibit all the power, fancy, and judgment for which his works were eminent previous to his insanity. They are absolutely wonderful in delicate finish. They consist principally of landscapes -- memories of eastern scenes, or wrought from a small sketchbook in his possession. ('Art Union', 7)' These drawings almost certainly included the spectacular moonlight scene 'Artist's Halt in the Desert' (exh. 'Art Treasures of the United Kingdom', Manchester, 1857; British Museum, London), recalling an episode in the Holy Land when he and his party had paused at night by the shore of the Dead Sea. Another was probably 'View in the Island of Rhodes' (V&A), a bare rocky landscape depicted with almost photographic exactitude. He continued to paint landscapes and seascapes throughout his years of confinement, working both from sketches and from his remarkable visual memory, and never losing the sense of space and immediacy. 
Of Dadd's watercolours from the 1850s many were imaginative figure compositions, comprising scenes from literature, history, the 'Bible', and everyday life, and included a series of over thirty 'Sketches to Illustrate the Passions': examples are held by Bethlem Royal Hospital Museum, Kent, and the Victoria and Albert Museum and the British Museum, London. For these he used washes of low-key colour and strongly drawn outline, but in his most characteristic and personal style he developed a highly refined version of the miniaturist's technique of stippling with the point of the brush, achieving extreme delicacy of texture and colour and a haunting, dreamlike quality. This technique was used in 'Port Stragglin' (1861; British Museum, London), an almost hallucinatory view of an imaginary seaport; two eastern scenes, 'Fantasie egyptienne' (1865; Bethlem Royal Hospital Museum, Kent) and 'Fantasie de l'hareme egyptienne' (1865; Ashmolean Museum, Oxford); 'A Wayside Inn' (1871; Bethlem Royal Hospital Museum, Kent); and 'Tlos in Lycia' (1883; Leeds City Art Galleries, Leeds), a landscape painted three years before his death, but still recalling his travels of forty years earlier. 
The same subject matter inspired Dadd's oil paintings, which include 'The Flight out of Egypt' (1849-50; Tate collection); 'Mercy: David Spareth Saul's Life' (1854; J. Paul Getty Museum, Malibu); 'Mother and Child' (1860; priv. coll.); two seascapes, 'The Diadonus' (1861; priv. coll.) and 'Sailing Ships' (1861; priv. coll.); 'Atalanta's Race' ('c'.1877; priv. coll.); and 'Italian Wandering Musicians' ('c'.1878; priv. coll.; also replicated in watercolour). He also painted two highly original portraits, 'Portrait of Sir Alexander Morison' (1852; Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh), one of the Bethlem physicians, and 'Portrait of a Young Man' (1853; Tate collection), and a more conventional 'Portrait of Dr William Orange' (1875; Broadmoor Hospital, Berkshire). His two acknowledged masterpieces mark his only return to fairy painting. Small paintings, each of which took many years to complete, they are prodigious feats both of imagination and of design, filled with microscopic detail and teeming with myriads of tiny figures amid tapestries of natural plant forms. 'Contradiction: Oberon and Titania' (1854-8; priv. coll.) was painted for the Bethlem physician superintendent Dr Charles Hood, and 'The Fairy Feller's Master-Stroke' ('quasi 1855-64'; Tate collection) for the steward George Henry Haydon (it was later owned by the poet Siegfried Sassoon). 
In Broadmoor Dadd's talents found additional outlets, in painting scenery and a drop curtain for the theatre (now des.), as well as murals, furniture, and other decorative items, and in more ephemeral activities such as the production of comic cartoon figures at Christmas, and diagrams and illustrations for lectures and entertainments. Interviewed at the age of sixty, he appeared by this time to have accepted his fate, but still considered it unjust, feeling that society did not understand him. Dark and handsome in his youth, with expressive features, in later years he gave the impression of a scholarly recluse, with a snow-white beard and mild blue eyes gazing benignly from behind spectacles. Throughout the desolate circumstances of his later life he had clung to his identity as an artist, and although his personality was radically changed, insanity had not destroyed his intellect. He retained the delusion that he was subject to the will of Osiris, but after three decades in an asylum he still talked with intelligent interest about painting and the art world, read the 'Satires' of Juvenal, and played the violin. He died in Broadmoor from consumption on 8 January 1886, and was buried in the cemetery within the hospital grounds. 
Dadd's work, most of which had been given away in his lifetime and remained in private hands, was largely forgotten until the 1960s. 'The Fairy Feller's Master-Stroke' was his first painting to become widely known, but the full range of his work did not begin to be appreciated until a retrospective exhibition, 'The Late Richard Dadd', was shown at the Tate Gallery, London, in 1974, and subsequently in Hull, Wolverhampton, and Bristol. A substantial number of his works are in the Bethlem Royal Hospital Museum, Kent, the Tate collection, the Victoria and Albert Museum and British Museum, London, and the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 37338


Damory, Sir Roger (d. 1322), baron and courtier, was the younger son of Sir Robert Damory, of Bucknell and Woodperry, Oxfordshire, Thornborough, Buckinghamshire, and Ubley in Somerset, who died in or before 1285. Although his family was one of well-established county gentry, Damory's position as a younger son probably justified the description of him in the 'Vita Edwardi secundi' as by origin 'a poor and needy knight' (p. 123). It was initially his elder brother, Sir Richard Damory, who was more prominent. As sheriff of Oxford and Buckingham from 1308 to 1310, forester of Whittlewood Forest in Buckinghamshire from 1308, constable of Oxford Castle from 1311 to 1321, and steward of the royal household from 1311 to 1325, Richard Damory moved from local administration to the centre of power and may have been responsible for introducing Roger to royal service. 
Roger Damory first appears in 1309 as the retainer of Gilbert de Clare, eighth earl of Gloucester. It was perhaps as a member of Gloucester's retinue that he fought at Bannockburn in June 1314, where Gloucester was killed; and his performance in the battle, for which he was later rewarded with land worth 100 marks a year, may have brought him to Edward II's notice. From then on his rise was rapid and within three years he had become the supreme influence at Edward's court. The royal grant of the castle and honour of Knaresborough, Yorkshire, in December 1314 was the first favour to come his way. By January 1315 he was a knight of the royal household and in the next two years he received various grants of lands, wardships, and money. Damory's progress was crowned in April 1317 by his marriage to Elizabeth de Clare (1294/5-1360), one of the three sisters and coheirs of the former earl of Gloucester, for which again he had Edward to thank. His wife's share in the partition of the vast Gloucester estates made him one of the leading territorial magnates and led to his being summoned to parliament from November 1317. 
From the later months of 1316 Damory became the leading member of a group of royal favourites, two of whom, Hugh Despenser the younger and Hugh Audley, were also married to Gloucester's sisters. The royal patronage lavished on them, at a time of general distress caused by famine and Scottish attacks, brought them the enmity of Thomas, earl of Lancaster, the greatest of the magnates, who was determined to purge the court and to overturn Edward's indulgent grants. From 1316 to 1319 Lancaster's feud with the courtiers dominated English politics. In October 1317 the earl seized the royal castles of Knaresborough and Alton, Staffordshire, then in Damory's custody, and he was later to accuse Damory of plotting against his life. As the most avaricious of the courtiers Damory was put under restraint in November 1317 by Aymer de Valence, earl of Pembroke, and Bartholomew Badlesmere, both of them moderates among Edward's associates, who imposed on Damory a written undertaking not to profit excessively from the king's generosity nor to permit others to do so. After long negotiations a fragile settlement between Lancaster and the king's friends was reached in August 1318 by the treaty of Leake, where Lancaster and Damory were temporarily reconciled. Damory's promise to pay Lancaster just over $600 may help to account for both this reconciliation and a subsequent review of royal grants which allowed Damory to keep virtually all that he had gained. 
Within a few months Damory's position came under threat from a new direction. In 1318-19 the rise of Hugh Despenser the younger gradually displaced Damory from his standing at the centre of the court. Although Edward apparently promised him the captaincy of Berwick in September 1319, during the English siege of the town, and grants continued to come his way during 1320, his allegiance was soon to be severed by the ambitions of Despenser, whose attempts in 1320-21 to enlarge his share of the Gloucester inheritance in south Wales raised the whole march against him. Damory and Audley, the husbands of the other two coheiresses, were vulnerable to Despenser's expansionism and in the early months of 1321 they and the other marchers turned to Lancaster for help. Damory was present at Lancaster's assembly at Sherburn, Yorkshire, in June 1321, when the earl tried to put together a coalition against Despenser and his father. In the brief civil war that followed he took Worcester for the rebels in January 1322, but was captured by the king's forces at Tutbury, Staffordshire, on 11 March. He was tried and condemned to death, but spared because of Edward's former affection for him and because of his marriage to the king's niece. Sick or mortally wounded, he died in Tutbury on 13 or 14 March 1322 and was buried in Ware, Hertfordshire. He left a daughter, Elizabeth, born in May 1318. He had been at the head of the factional politics of Edward II's middle years, and his rapid rise and precipitate fall typified the fate of others who had had the misfortune to enjoy Edward's patronage. 


@@@@@


doc= 37339


Dancer, John Benjamin (1812-1887), maker of scientific instruments, was born on 12 October 1812 at 52 Great Sutton Street, London, the son of Josiah and Anna Maria Dancer. Josiah Dancer (1779-1835) had worked for some time for the instrument maker Edward Troughton, but at this date had his own instrument business in partnership with his father, Michael. In 1816 both Josiah Dancer's wife and his father died, and by 1817 he had moved his business to Liverpool. It was here that John received some basic education at a dame-school and was then tutored in mathematics, French, Latin, and Greek. He later attended lectures at the Liverpool Mechanics' Institute. From an early age he assisted in his father's workshop, and also with the latter's lecture demonstrations. Josiah died in 1835, leaving the business to his son. On 22 March 1836 Dancer married Elizabeth Barrow (died 1889), and the first of their eight children was born in the same year. 
In Liverpool, Dancer made important contributions to the development of the Daniel electric cell, is thought to have prompted the initial development of electrotyping, and demonstrated the application of limelight to the magic lantern. In later years he developed a double lantern, which, combined with a gas tap of his own devising, enabled the projection of sophisticated 'dissolving views'. In 1841 he moved to Manchester where he first worked in partnership as Abraham and Dancer. This arrangement lasted until 1845, by which date Dancer was well established in the local community: in 1842 he joined the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, and later he was a founder member of the Manchester Photographic Society. Through these societies he maintained close contact with the city's scientists and industrialists, supplying many of them with instruments. 
Dancer was one of the first provincial opticians to offer relatively inexpensive achromatic microscopes: an early example went to John Dalton, while another was used by James Prescott Joule in his determination of the mechanical equivalent of heat. Later Dancer devised a novel binocular microscope, an achievement which ensured continued demand for his instruments. His practical competence as a microscopist enabled him to provide support to the sanitary expert Robert Angus Smith. Dancer pioneered photography in Manchester, and developed what is now considered to have been the first effective stereoscopic camera. For Joseph Whitworth he made a bore-sight device for the accurate alignment of firearms. At its peak Dancer's workshop is reputed to have provided employment for twelve persons. 
In 1852 Scott Archer developed the wet collodion process and this, combined with Dancer's great skill as a microscopist and photographer, enabled the latter to prepare the first 'microscopic photographs' in 1852 or 1853. This involved the capture of a large object as a small photographic image. Significantly, an early Dancer microphotograph (as they were soon known) recorded the lettering on a memorial tablet, thus demonstrating the potential for data storage at reduced dimensions. Dancer mounted the microphotographs on slides for microscopical examination, and public interest in them as curiosities thereafter created an important market for his business. Their first significant application was during the siege of Paris, in 1870, when carrier pigeons were used to carry microphotographed messages. 
In 1870 Dancer's sight began to fail, and he had to give up his business in 1878, though the production of microphotographs was carried on for some years by his daughters, Eleanor, Elizabeth, and Catherine. He died in near poverty in Manchester on 24 November 1887, and was buried in Brooklands cemetery in Sale. 
Dancer was the most important provincial instrument maker of his time, yet throughout his life he was seldom able to exploit fully his numerous scientific and technological innovations. Indeed, his seminal contribution to the development of microphotography and the microfilm gained full recognition only during the twentieth century. His surviving instruments and microphotographs are now greatly prized. 


@@@@@


doc= 37340


Dansey, Sir Claude Edward Marjoribanks (1876-1947), intelligence officer, was born at 14 Cromwell Place, South Kensington, London, on 10 September 1876, the second child and eldest son in the family of four sons and five daughters of Edward Mashiter Dansey, captain and later lieutenant-colonel in the 1st Life Guards, and his wife, Eleanore, daughter of Robert Francis Gifford, second Baron Gifford. His parents removed him from Wellington College in 1891, following a diphtheria epidemic, to a school in Bruges, whence too he was removed after a homosexual scandal. In childhood he acquired fluent French, a language he often pretended hardly to speak. 
In 1895 Dansey went to the new colony of Rhodesia and became a trooper in the Matabeleland regiment of the British South Africa police. He helped suppress the Matabele (Ndebele) uprising in 1896, and learned the elements of scouting and intelligence gathering. In 1898 he returned to England and secured a militia commission in the Lancashire Fusiliers. 
Dansey spent ten weeks in the winter of 1899-1900 with the British North Borneo Company police force as a sub-commandant, in operations against Muhammad Salleh, before rejoining his regiment in South Africa in 1900. He took part in the relief of Mafeking, was briefly a fellow-subaltern with Winston Churchill in the South African light horse, and spent the rest of the war in the field intelligence department. In 1900 he received a regular commission as lieutenant in the 6th battalion of the Lancashire Fusiliers. He stayed in South Africa, on intelligence duties, until 1904, and then spent five years in British Somaliland as a political officer, trying to counter Muhammad bin Abdullah, known as the Mad Mullah. 
While in England on sick leave Dansey was recruited into the security branch of the secret service. He spent three years in New York state as resident secretary of the Sleepy Hollow Country Club, a rich men's recreation park on the Hudson River, whence he could keep an eye on wealthy Irish-Americans. 
In August 1914 Dansey was recalled to England, and placed in charge of port security. He revisited the USA in 1917 to play a decisive part in helping to set up the first official American military intelligence service. He was promoted lieutenant-colonel and transferred to the Secret Intelligence Service (SIS) to unravel a disastrous muddle in the Netherlands. He next took over SIS's organization in Switzerland. 
In 1919 the service's staff was cut back; Dansey spent most of the 1920s in private business ventures on both sides of the Atlantic. From 1929 to 1936 he was re-employed, under the cover of passport control officer, in Rome. His chief, 'C' (Sir Hugh Sinclair), then realized that German secret police had penetrated several SIS stations. Dansey left Rome in 1936; word seeped out that he had been caught with his hand in the till and sacked. He settled into an export-import office in Bush House in the Strand, and set up parallel networks of secret intelligence agents to cover the penetrated areas, using the codename Z and avoiding the use of wireless. 
In September 1939 Z's networks amalgamated with C's, and Dansey went back to Bern. In November C died; Dansey returned to London, and became assistant chief to his friend Stewart Menzies, the new C. He was in charge of all active espionage until 1945. All the arrangements for stay-behind agents in north-west Europe collapsed, but Dansey was able to charm most of the governments in exile in London into recruiting spies. 
Dansey was closely involved with the Special Operations Executive in its early stages -- Frank Nelson, its first executive head, had been a Z agent. Dansey did not seek to influence its policy, so long as it kept out of his agents' way. He often used to display there his sharp tongue, as notorious as his charm. He also kept a keen eye on MI9, the secret escape service. At the end of the war he was persuaded to retire, to Bathampton Manor, near Bath. 
Dansey was appointed CMG in 1918 and KCMG in 1943. In 1915 he married Mrs Pauline Monroe Cory Ulman, daughter of David Cory, doctor of medicine, of New York. She separated from him in 1929 and later divorced him. His second wife, whom he married in 1945, was Mrs Frances Gurney Rylander, daughter of Dr D. F. K. Wilson. There were no children of either marriage but he had a stepdaughter from each. He died in the Lansdown Grove Hospital, Bath, on 11 June 1947. 
M. R. D. Foot', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37341


D'Arcy, William Knox (1849-1917), financier, was born on 11 October 1849 at Highweek, Newton Abbot, Devon, the only son among the seven children of William Francis D'Arcy, solicitor, of Newton Abbot, and his wife, Elizabeth Baker, daughter of the Revd Robert Bradford of Wolborough, Devon. He was educated at Westminster School and in 1866 emigrated with his parents to Australia, where they settled in Rockhampton on the Queensland coast. 
D'Arcy qualified as a solicitor in March 1872, initially working with his father, but in 1882 formed a syndicate to exploit a vein of gold that had been discovered close to Rockhampton. With seven other shareholders, D'Arcy formed the Mount Morgan Mining Company. Holding 125,000 shares in his own name, plus 233,000 in trust, D'Arcy became a very rich man. He disposed of his legal practice in 1886, and three years later he returned to England, where he enjoyed high society and sporting pursuits: there were shooting parties on his Norfolk estate, and he held his own private stand at Epsom. 
On 23 October 1872 D'Arcy married Elena, daughter of Samuel Bradford Birkbeck, a mining engineer, of Glenmore, Queensland; they had two sons and three daughters. Elena died in 1897, and in 1899 D'Arcy married Ernestine Eliza Nutting, a divorcee, who was the daughter of the Australian journalist Arthur Leslie Boucicault. 
Although still a director of Mount Morgan, and chairman of its London board, D'Arcy remained interested in new financial ventures. Towards the end of 1900 he was approached about funding exploration in Persia, where oil seepages had long been known about. D'Arcy himself never went to Persia, but on 28 May 1901 his representative obtained a concession valid for sixty years. This entitled him to search for and sell 'natural gas, petroleum, asphalt and ozokerite' throughout all of Persia except in the five northern provinces adjoining Russia. Drilling operations began towards the end of 1902 in Chiah Surkh, a likely oil-bearing area near the border with Iraq. D'Arcy's engineer, George Bernard Reynolds (1852/3-1925), was a man of great experience and tenacity, but the difficulties proved formidable. 
After three years without success D'Arcy feared that the venture would fail. 'Every purse has its limits', he wrote, 'and I am beginning to see the bottom of my own.' D'Arcy had invested some $250,000 of his own money in the enterprise, and felt that it was 'money that I shall never see again'. Other financial help was needed, and in 1905 it came in the form of a deal with the Burmah Oil Company -- to whom D'Arcy ultimately surrendered his interest in the whole venture, in return for 170,000 Burmah shares and the reimbursement of all his expenses. 
Drilling operations had meanwhile been shifted to the south, and oil was finally struck in Masjid-i-Suleiman on 26 May 1908, just as D'Arcy and Burmah were on the point of giving up. The discovery of oil in significant quantities ensured D'Arcy's successful formation of the Anglo-Persian Oil Company on 14 April 1909, and marked the birth of the oil industry of the Middle East. Although D'Arcy sat on the board of the new company he was not disposed to play any further significant role. D'Arcy died on 1 May 1917 at his home, Stanmore Hall, Middlesex, and was buried four days later at Stanmore parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 37342


David, Sir Percival Victor David Ezekiel, second baronet (1892-1964), financier and collector of Chinese art, was born in Bombay on 21 July 1892, the fifth and youngest child in the family of three sons (the elder two of whom died at the age of two) and two daughters of Sir Sassoon Jacob David, first baronet (1849-1926), cotton and yarn merchant, mill owner, and later founder and chairman of the Bank of India, and his wife, Hannah (died 1921), daughter of Elias David Sassoon ['see under 'Sassoon family] of Bombay. He was educated at Elphinstone College and Bombay University (BA, 1909), and succeeded his father as baronet in 1926. He married his cousin, Vere Mozelle, daughter of Abraham (Aubrey) David, financier, on 26 January 1913. They had two daughters, the younger of whom died in infancy. 
David was always reticent about his personal history, but his public renown grew with his status as collector of Chinese art and promoter of art study as a key to the understanding of the Chinese intellect. Active in his family's business, he visited China in 1927 and there resolved to devote his life to Chinese connoisseurship. His frequent presence in Peking (Beijing) afforded him unprecedented opportunities of acquisition among the art objects released on the market as the old social order of China broke down. 
After joining in 1930 the Oriental Ceramic Society, founded in London a decade earlier, David began a career of scholarship with papers read to that body, distinguishing himself by identifying the imperial 'ru' ware made between AD 1107 and 1127. In 1930 he funded a lectureship in Chinese art and archaeology at the then School of Oriental Studies at the University of London. In 1931 central funding was made available by the university for a chair; however, in 1932 this was moved to the newly established Courtauld Institute of Art. David was the chief instigator and director of the international exhibition of Chinese art held in London at Burlington House in 1935-6. It fulfilled his ambition of showing items from the Chinese imperial collection together with the best of Western collections. For the safety of transport from China the request of protection by the British navy was not thought inappropriate. The exhibition may be said to have motivated the adoption of Chinese art studies in Western universities. 
The porcelains, stonewares, and books David had collected in China provided the contents of the Percival David Foundation of Chinese Art which he gave to the University of London in 1950 and which was attached as his exclusive benefaction to the School of Oriental and African Studies in 1952, housed in a building, also his gift, at Gordon Square, Bloomsbury. A condition of the donation was that the university chair in Chinese art and archaeology should again be filled. The David collection has no rival outside China for post-Tang ceramics. 
Captured by the Japanese in 1941, David was interned in Shanghai for nine months, and contracted the sclerosis which caused him difficult last years and finally ended his life. 
David was made a DLitt by London University in 1950, became a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, and was an officer of the Legion d'honneur. Following a divorce in 1953, David married on 15 October of the same year Sheila Jane Yorke, daughter of Arthur Yorke Hardy, mining engineer, of Harrow. They had no children and the baronetcy became extinct when David died on 9 October 1964 at 53 Gordon Square, London, of the sclerosis he had contracted in Shanghai. His last work, 'Chinese Connoisseurship: the Ko Ku Yao Lun', was published posthumously in 1971, and saw the first translation of the fourteenth-century album of connoisseurship 'Gegu yaolun'. 
William Watson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37343


Davies, David (1818-1890), industrialist and politician, was born at Drain-Tewion, Llandinam, Montgomeryshire, on 18 December 1818, the eldest of the nine children of David Davies (died 1846), farmer and timber sawyer, and his wife, Elizabeth (probably 'nee' Felix). He left the village school at the age of eleven, and helped his father in farming and sawing timber; in later life he sometimes boasted that he was always 'top sawyer'. When his father died in 1846 he had to support the family, but his career took a dramatic new turn when he was asked to undertake a contract to build a bridge over the River Severn near his home. He showed talent as both engineer and entrepreneur, and other bridges and roads followed. He then turned to building railways. In 1855 he built the first section of the Llanidloes-Newtown line, and later extended his operations all over Wales. By the early 1860s he had supplied much of mid-Wales with a network of railway lines, many of which he built in partnership with Thomas Savin, with whom he later fell out. In 1862 he travelled to the island of Sardinia to advise on developing the railway system there. 
He embarked on a new career in 1864 when he took a lease of mineral property between Tonpentre and Treorci in the upper Rhondda valley, not hitherto a coal-producing area. After two years of anxiety for Davies, one of the finest seams of steam coal in the world was struck in the Maendy pit, Cwmparc, and the Ocean Collieries Company was set up in 1867 with an authorized capital of $240,000; new pits were later sunk at Dare (1870) and Bwllfa (1877). By 1900 the Ocean company had four collieries producing more than 1.5 million tons of coal annually, and many other pits had also been profitably established. In 1887 Davies set up a limited liability company, the Ocean Coal Company, with a nominal capital of $536,000. The Rhondda valleys were now a booming industrial area, Davies was a millionaire, and Ocean stood second only to Powell Duffryn as a mass producer of quality Welsh steam coal. 
Davies's rivalry with the Bute estate, which controlled Cardiff docks and the Taff Vale railway that served it, led him into another dramatic new venture -- the building of new docks at Barry, 10 miles to the west of Cardiff -- as a rival entrepot for Rhondda coal. After a fierce struggle, a private act of parliament was passed in 1884, and the Barry docks came into being a year later. They grew rapidly and by 1913 Barry had outstripped even Cardiff as the major coal-exporting port in the world. 
A devout Calvinistic Methodist and a strict advocate of temperance, Davies became a patron of nonconformist and other charitable and educational causes. He backed the movement for Welsh higher education and became a governor of the newly formed University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, founded in 1872. In 1875 Davies became treasurer of the college and fulfilled this role until 1886. He also took a close interest in Liberal politics. He stood unsuccessfully for Cardigan district against a local whiggish landowner, Sir Thomas Lloyd, in 1865, but in 1874 won the seat and was returned unopposed in 1880. He was elected for Cardiganshire in 1885, but he opposed the first 'Irish Home Rule Bill' introduced by W. E. Gladstone in June 1886. At the resulting general election he was defeated by nine votes by a fellow Liberal, Bowen Rowlands, who backed Irish home rule. He was elected to the first Montgomeryshire county council in 1889. 
Davies was a rugged, frugal, self-made capitalist, a relentless business competitor, who remained close to his chapel roots. Severely puritanical and sabbatarian in outlook, he also had a great fund of homely anecdotes about village mores, in both Welsh and English. He was a public-spirited philanthropist, and was perhaps the most influential Welshman of his time. 
In 1851 Davies married Margaret Jones of Llanfair Caereinion, the daughter of Edward Jones, a local farmer. They had one son, Edward, who was to die in 1898. David Davies died on 20 July 1890 in Llandinam, and was buried there on 24 July. His grandson, David Davies, became first Baron Davies. 
Kenneth O. Morgan', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37344


Davies, Howell (1717?-1770), Methodist leader, was of unknown origins, though historians usually refer to him as a Monmouthshire man. His family connections and his early employment as a schoolteacher at Talgarth suggest that he could have been brought up in Brecknockshire, where, in 1737, he was converted by Howel Harris. On Harris's advice, in 1738 Davies went to Llanddowror to study under Griffith Jones. After his ordination in 1740 he served as curate at Llandeilo Abercywyn, but he could not resist the urge to preach in the Methodist way far outside his curacy, a practice Jones severely criticized: 'it is the cry of the crowd that he will be governed by, which grieves me very much for his own sake' (D. Jones, 'Life and Times of Griffith Jones of Llanddowror', 1902, 252). In 1741 he became curate of Llys-y-fran, near Haverfordwest. The parish soon became the chief meeting-place for Pembrokeshire Methodists. 
From 1743 until his death, Davies was the undisputed leader of the Pembrokeshire Methodists: his power as a preacher (a power not discernible in his only printed sermon, 'Llais y priodfab', 1768), his standing as an ordained clergyman, and his financial independence gave him a rare combination of spiritual and social advantages. Ill health was his main disadvantage. He worked in both the English and Welsh parts of the county; in 1755 he opened, at Woodstock, the first chapel built especially for a Welsh Methodist society. His staunch Calvinism allied him to George Whitefield, whose pulpits in London and the west country he sometimes filled, and made him 'violent against John Wesley' (T. Benyon, 'Howell Harris, Reformer and Soldier (1714-1773)', 1985, 161). Through Selina Hastings, countess of Huntingdon, he became one of the countess of Walsingham's chaplains. 
Davies married, first, in 1744, Katherine (daughter of John Poyer) of Parke, Henllan Amgoed, Carmarthenshire, 'a wife with a thousand dracmas', as Lewis Morris sarcastically noted (H. Owen, 'The Morrises of Anglesey and the Methodists of the 18th century', 'Transactions of the Anglesey Antiquarian and Field Society', 1943, 55). She died in childbirth a year later. The daughter who was born died before the age of two. Then, some time before the summer of 1747, he married Elizabeth, daughter and only surviving child of Philip and Luce White ('nee' Phillips) of Prendergast, near Haverfordwest. A son born to them died in infancy; their daughter Margaret (Peggy) survived both, and in 1776 married Nathaniel, son of Daniel Rowland. 
Several of his contemporaries describe Davies as tender and gentle, modest, shy even. No doubt he was, in private. The public man who earned for himself the title Apostle of Pembrokeshire must have been tenacious and fearless, like most of the Methodist revivalists. On the title-page of Williams Pantycelyn's elegy to Davies, the poet notes that he died on 13 January 1770, 'in the fifty-third year of his age' (W. Williams, 'Marwnad ar y parchedig Mr H. Davies', 1770). He died in Parke and was buried in Prendergast cemetery. 
Derec Llwyd Morgan', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37345


Davis, George Edward (1850-1907), chemical engineer, was born at Eton on 27 July 1850, the eldest son in the family of three sons and two daughters of George Davis, bookseller, and his wife, Lucy ('nee' Smith). Little is known of his early education and at the age of fourteen he was apprenticed to a local bookbinder. However, after two years he abandoned this trade to pursue his interest in chemistry. He went to work at the local gasworks and studied part time -- initially at the Slough Mechanics' Institute and later (for one year) at the Royal School of Mines. He was a great believer in practical experience and to this end, at the age of nineteen, went to Manchester, then one of the main centres of the British chemical industry. He worked as a chemist at Brearley & Sons where he stayed for three years. In early 1872 he was engaged as manager at the Lichfield Chemical Company in Staffordshire, where his initiative and inventiveness were given full rein by an indulgent proprietor. Davis planned and built a number of new chemical plants, designing both the equipment and the buildings in which it was installed. Thus he became a largely self-taught engineer; his works included the (then) tallest chimney in the UK, with a height of more than 200 ft. He also appreciated the value of economics applied to industry and, in his early writings, was clearly concerned with the costs of materials and products. This concern was reflected at a personal level when, in his letters to his parents, he remarked that he was considering getting married in order to save money and live comfortably. 
Davis's years in Lichfield appear to have been a fruitful period professionally. He was contributing papers to scientific journals and also engaged in debate with other industrial scientists, whose work on certain engineering projects he regarded as sadly inadequate. His only complaint (in nearly every letter he wrote) was of the dullness of his existence outside work. He obviously missed the opportunities provided by a big city and journeyed to Manchester as frequently as he was able on business trips. Ultimately his increasing frustration at Lichfield led him about 1875 to return to the north-west, to work at the St Helens factory of J. G. Gamble, pioneers in the Weldon chlorine process. 
On 10 December 1878 Davis married Laura Frances Miller ('b'. 1846/7), daughter of Charles Miller, tailor; they had at least one son. Earlier in the same year he had entered private practice, but by the time of his marriage had been recruited into the new chemical inspectorate by its first director, Angus Smith. Davis visited many chemical works, and inspected their arrangements for pollution control. The visits led him to realize that any chemical process could be considered as a sequence of particular operations, the fundamental concept behind the modern field of chemical engineering. Although he did not coin the term 'unit operations' his writings show an awareness of the concept. He argued that all processes could be broken down into a relatively small number of operations which, when studied in the abstract, revealed certain general principles which were applicable to any process. 
In 1884 Davis returned to private practice, this time in partnership with his brother Alfred. Although their business as bleach manufacturers was not successful, the consulting business flourished. In addition, Davis continued to develop his ideas on chemical engineering. In 1887 he founded the 'Chemical Trade Journal' which, in addition to encouraging and spreading commercial and technical information, also served to publicize Davis's own ideas on chemical engineering. He developed these ideas sufficiently to present a series of lectures at Manchester Technical College in 1887. These were published in the 'Chemical Trade Journal' and became the basis of the 'Handbook of Chemical Engineering', published in 1901. In his introduction to the latter, Davis outlines his philosophy, that 'Chemical Engineering deals with the construction of plants... for the utilization of chemical reactions on the large scale without in any way specifying the industry in which such plants are to be used'. This was a revolutionary idea, and it was not widely accepted in the UK until after the Second World War. However, in America it was exploited with great commercial success in the early 1900s. 
Davis was for some years the leader of a group of chemists and engineers who met together under the title of the Faraday Club. From this little group sprang the Society of Chemical Industry in 1881; Davis was a founder member and its first honorary secretary (1881-3). He subsequently set up a Manchester section of the society and was its chairman from 1895 to 1898. 
Davis was a short, stout, bearded man with a dry sense of humour. He once said: 'Never be in too much of a hurry to give answers to a client. If you are too quick he will think the problem easy and worth little. If you make a mistake he will not be pleased. In any case, you will make plenty of mistakes without being overhasty. (Swindin, 'Engineering', 30)' His many interests included microscopy and, feeling the lack of any journal on the subject, he founded the 'Northern Microscopist' in 1881. He also wrote a book, 'Practical Microscopy', published the same year. He had sixty-seven patents granted, and in addition to his books published numerous scientific papers and prosecuted a successful consultancy business. He was widely considered the father of chemical engineering. He died at his home, 151 Croxted Road, West Dulwich, on 20 April 1907. 


@@@@@


doc= 37346


Davison, Emily Wilding (1872-1913), suffragette, was born on 11 October 1872 at Roxburgh House, Vanbrugh Park Road, Greenwich, the second of the three children of Charles Edward Davison (1822-1893), retired merchant and 'gentleman', and his second wife, Margaret Caisley (1848-1918). Her mother ran a shop in Longhorsley, Northumberland, after the death of her husband left the family in straitened circumstances. 
Emily Davison was educated by a resident governess at her family home, Gaston House, near Sawbridgeworth, Hertfordshire, and at Kensington high school (1885-91) and Royal Holloway College (1891-3). After the death of her father she worked as a governess in order to complete her studies, spent a term (April-June 1895) at St Hugh's Hall, Oxford, and in the summer of 1895 achieved first-class honours in English in the Oxford University examination for women, though, as Oxford degrees were closed to women, this did not enable her to graduate. She subsequently taught at the Church of England College for Girls at Edgbaston (1895-6), the Seabury School, West Worthing (1896-8), and privately thereafter until 1908 or 1909. In the meantime she obtained a London University degree, having matriculated as an external student in 1902, and graduated with third-class honours in modern languages in 1908. 
In 1906 Emily Davison joined the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU) and in June 1908 acted as chief steward at Marylebone Station for the union's first major procession to Hyde Park. By April 1910 she was working for the WSPU and contributed articles and reviews to their newspaper, 'Votes for Women', until December 1911. However, in keeping with her consistent rejection of authority, she soon fell out of favour with the WSPU leadership over her independent and unauthorized programme of militant actions. 
Davison notably hid in the House of Commons three times, including in April 1911 when she spent the night in a cupboard near the crypt chapel in order to avoid participating in the census. She was imprisoned eight times, for offences including obstruction, assault, stone-throwing, breaking windows, and setting fire to pillar boxes, during which she went on hunger strikes, suffered solitary confinement and force feeding, barricaded herself in her cell, had a hosepipe turned on her, and attempted suicide as a protest against the mistreatment of her fellow suffragette prisoners. 
Emily Davison's writings consist mainly of letters to the press and accounts of her militant activities, although she also wrote speeches, articles, and scenes for plays. Most remain unpublished, although her essay 'The price of liberty', in which she reveals her Christian feminist faith, was published posthumously in 'The Suffragette'. She was 'an active and involved' member of the Workers' Educational Association and the Central Labour College (Morley and Stanley, 170), and her socialist sympathies are evident in the tone of the memorial leaflet produced on her death, as well as in the significant socialist and Labour presence at her funeral procession. 
Among Emily Davison's close friends were Rose Lamartine Yates, Elinor Penn-Gaskell, Edith Mansell-Moullin, and Mary Leigh -- all prominent and active members of the suffrage movement. Sylvia Pankhurst, in 'The Suffragette Movement' (1931), describes her as 'tall and slender, with unusually long arms, a small narrow head and red hair. Her illusive, whimsical green eyes and thin, half-smiling mouth, bore often the mocking expression of the Mona Lisa' (Crawford, 160). She never married and had no children. 
On 22 June 1912, after throwing herself onto a staircase at Holloway prison, Emily Davison told the medical officer that she had done so because she felt 'that a tragedy was wanted' ('Hansard 5C', 25 June 1912, 216). She is usually remembered as the 'suffragette martyr' for her last protest at the Epsom Derby in June 1913. As the horses rounded Tattenham Corner she ducked under the railing and ran out onto the course in front of the king's horse, Anmer, which struck her with its chest and knocked her down. Among the articles found in her possession were two WSPU flags, a racecard, and a return train ticket to Victoria. She remained unconscious for four days and died on 8 June 1913 at Epsom Cottage Hospital as a result of a fracture to the base of the skull. The coroner recorded a verdict of death 'due to misadventure'. It is not known whether she intended to commit suicide. Queen Mary's first thought was for 'poor Jones', the jockey, and she referred to Davison as 'the horrid woman' (Pope-Hennessy, 467). 
A public funeral was held in London on 14 June 1913. Emily Davison's body was taken from Epsom and escorted, by a large and spectacular procession, from Victoria to St George's Church, Bloomsbury, where a memorial service was held, and afterwards to King's Cross where the body was entrained for Northumberland for burial at the parish church of St Mary's, Morpeth, on 15 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 37347


Dawson, Charles (1864-1916), palaeontologist and antiquary, was born on 11 July 1864 at Fulkeith Hall, Lancashire, the second of the four children (he had two brothers and a sister) of Hugh Dawson, barrister, and his wife, Mary Anne Chaffer. By 1873 his father had moved to St Leonards, Sussex. He completed his formal education at the Royal Academy, Gosport, in 1880, and then followed his father into the legal profession, though his real interest always lay in archaeology, historical and industrial. From 1890 until his death he practised as a solicitor in Uckfield, Sussex, where he held several public appointments, and established his own law firm, entering into partnership with Ernest Hart in 1905. 
Tall, moustachioed, and prematurely bald, Dawson appeared older than his years and as a long-serving clerk to the magistrates he was an important figure in the life of the town. In 1903 he bought Castle Lodge from the marquess of Abergavenny, a prestigious house under the shadow of Lewes Castle. Until the final stages of the sale the marquess was under the misapprehension that Dawson was purchasing the lodge on behalf of the Sussex Archaeological Society, which had for twenty years rented it to store its collections and records. The purchase soured Dawson's relations with the society, which he had joined in 1892, and they were never properly repaired. On 21 January 1905 he married, at Christ Church, Mayfair, London, Helene Leonie Elizabeth Postlethwaite (1859-1917), daughter of Barnaby Gaffney of Curzon Street, London, and a widow with two grown children. There were no children from this marriage. 
In his time Dawson was viewed as an exemplar of 'that great class of men' who provided 'the driving power to British science -- the thinking, observant amateur'. His primary avocation was palaeontology, an interest he had lovingly nurtured since childhood. Indeed, it was a precocious interest in Wealden fossils that led to the assembly of a large and valuable collection that was donated in 1884 to the newly opened Natural History Museum in South Kensington, and which gained him not only the title of honorary collector for the museum but also brought him the coveted fellowship of the London Geological Society at the age of twenty-one. During his lifetime he was responsible for finding several new species of iguanodon, as well as a new species of the Mesozoic mammal 'Plagiaulax'. 
Dawson also won a reputation in Sussex geology and archaeology, the latter indicated by his election as a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1895. He was a recognized authority on the Sussex iron industry, and his two-volume 'History of Hastings Castle' (1909) became a standard work. He wrote many articles about his discoveries which appeared in learned journals such as 'The Antiquary', 'Sussex Archaeological Collections', and the 'Geological Magazine'. He was also a highly competent photographer, adept in the preparation and development of glass plates. Although all this assured him a footnote in the history of British science, it was his intimate association with one of the most celebrated scientific forgeries that rescued him from relative obscurity. 
Between 1908 and 1912 Dawson recovered the remains of a human skull from a reputedly ancient gravel bed located at Barkham Manor (where he was steward), near Piltdown in Sussex ['see 'Piltdown Man]. On 18 December 1912 a reconstruction of these remains was presented to the Geological Society of London by Arthur Smith Woodward, keeper of geology at the Natural History Museum, who was convinced they represented an early human form which he had dubbed 'Eoanthropus' ('dawn man') 'dawsoni'. In the discussion that followed Professor Arthur Keith hailed the discovery as 'by far the most important ever made in England, and of equal, if not of greater consequence than any other discovery yet made, either at home or abroad' ('Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society of London', March 1913, 148). During the next forty years, however, it became increasingly difficult to reconcile this hominid with the burgeoning human fossil record from Asia and Africa. In 1953 a detailed examination of the Piltdown remains demonstrated conclusively that they were faked and had been planted as part of an elaborate hoax, evidently aimed at manipulating scientific views on human evolution. Though Dawson may not have masterminded this sophisticated and influential forgery, his complicity in the affair was strongly suspected. But the glory he gained for his 'discoveries' at Piltdown was short-lived. Late in 1915, in a letter to Woodward, Dawson reported that he was ailing from an 'anaemic condition'. He was given serum injections to counteract this, but developed septicaemia and died on 10 August 1916 at his home, Castle Lodge, Lewes. 


@@@@@


doc= 37348


Dawson, (Henry) Christopher (1889-1970), cultural historian, was born on 12 October 1889 at Hay, Brecknockshire, the only son and younger child of Colonel Henry Philip Dawson (1850-1933), a Yorkshire landowner, and his wife, Mary Louisa, the eldest daughter of Archdeacon William Latham Bevan of Hay Castle. He was educated at Winchester College and at Trinity College, Oxford, where he obtained a second class in modern history in 1911. His health prevented active service in the First World War but from 1916 he worked in the war trade intelligence department and in Admiralty research. In that year he married Valery Mary, youngest daughter of Walter Edward Mills, architect, of Oxford. She was the ideal partner for such an unworldly and impractical scholar and thinker, taking all the burdens of daily living off his shoulders. They had two daughters and one son. 
Dawson had sufficient private means to be able to follow his own highly original path of historical research and reflection, so that his first book, 'The Age of the Gods' (1928), was the result of fourteen years of research. But it was his second, 'Progress and Religion' (1929), that first displayed fully the depth of his thought and the astonishing range of his learning. In this, he articulated the theme of all his subsequent writings, that religion is the dynamic of all social culture. 'The Making of Europe' (1932) discussed a specific case of this, showing that the 'dark ages' were in fact the most creative period in the culture of the Western world. He developed both these topics further in his Gifford lectures for Edinburgh University, 'Religion and Culture' (1948) and 'Religion and the Rise of Western Culture' (1950). 
Dawson, who had become a Roman Catholic shortly after going down from Oxford, was an influential member of the group of writers which formed around the new Catholic publishing house of Sheed and Ward from the 1930s. For them he edited and contributed to a series of books entitled 'Essays in Order'. In 1933 he produced 'Enquiries into Religion and Culture', in 1934 'Medieval Religion', and in 1943 a very personal socio-political testament, 'The Judgment of the Nations'. The admiration which churchmen such as Cardinal Arthur Hinsley and Bishop G. K. A. Bell of Chichester had for Dawson involved him actively as vice-president in the Sword of the Spirit, a proto-ecumenical movement which, to his disappointment, proved to be too visionary for the Roman authorities of the time. 
After the Second World War, Dawson's output of books and articles increasingly stressed the twin themes of Europe and education. He campaigned for an integrated study of Christian philosophy, history, literature, and art in the same way as 'literae humaniores' had studied every aspect of classical culture. Only this, he believed, could overcome the schism between religion and culture in the West. 
Dawson's achievement owed virtually nothing to the academic world, apart from a short part-time lectureship in the history of culture at the University College in Exeter (1925-33). When he was eventually offered a chair, at the age of sixty-eight, it was not in Britain but in the USA at Harvard. He was professor of Roman Catholic studies there from 1958 to 1962. He was sensitive to this lack of recognition, but at the same time fully understood how much he owed to having been saved from the academic treadmill. In any event, he was physically frail and temperamentally extremely shy and gentle, so that he was unable to do his thought and learning full justice before even small audiences. In contrast, in a one-to-one relationship he was an incomparable teacher. He was elected fellow of the British Academy in 1943. 
When his father died in 1933 Dawson inherited the family property in Yorkshire and went to live at Hartlington Hall, but stayed there only a few years because of his frail health. The family then moved to Boars Hill, near Oxford. When his failing health caused his Harvard stay to be cut short, Dawson retired to Fountain Hill House, Budleigh Salterton, Devon; he died in Budleigh Salterton on 25 May 1970 and was buried in St Wilfrid's Church, Burnsall, near Skipton in Yorkshire. 
William Kingston', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37349


Deacon, Henry (1822-1876), chemist and manufacturer, was born on 30 July 1822 in London, the elder son of Henry Deacon, merchant, and his wife and cousin, Esther Deacon. The Deacons belonged to the Sandemanian church, whose most famous member, Michael Faraday, took an interest in their son. When he was fourteen Deacon was apprenticed to Galloway & Sons, a London engineering firm: when it failed, Faraday arranged for him to join Nasmyth and Gaskell at Patricroft, near Manchester. They supplied machinery to Pilkingtons of St Helens, where Deacon moved after completing his apprenticeship in the early 1840s. He became manager of the glass-polishing department and their highest-paid employee, but left in 1851 to work for John Hutchinson, a Widnes alkali manufacturer. 
In 1853 Deacon filed his first patent (for an improved sulphuric acid manufacturing process) and established an alkali works in Widnes with William Pilkington. This unhappy partnership was dissolved in 1855, and Deacon, with his former employer Holbrook Gaskell, founded Gaskell, Deacon & Co. He experimented unsuccessfully with the ammonia-soda process (later perfected by others), but for mass production of alkali he relied on the proven method invented by N. Leblanc, which generated quantities of hydrochloric acid. C. Dunlop and Walter Weldon had devised methods for converting this noxious waste to chlorine (which could be profitably combined with lime to make bleaching powder) but they were both expensive and wasteful. About 1867 Deacon, assisted by Ferdinand Hurter, began seeking a better way: in 1870 they claimed success. The Deacon process used a cheaper catalyst (copper chloride) and recovered more chlorine; it remained industrially important for five decades, though its adoption was initially delayed owing to its complexity. 
Deacon married Emma Wade of Basford, Nottinghamshire, on 4 December 1851. They had two sons and a daughter. After his first wife's death, Deacon married Caroline Rutt of Islington, London, on 27 November 1866. Deacon accumulated a fortune in excess of $100,000, but his health was weakened by overwork and he died of typhoid on 23 July 1876 at his home, Appleton House, Widnes. He was survived by his widow and seven sons and five daughters, some of whom may have been from his previous marriage. 
Michael A. Sutton', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37350


Deane, Richard (fl. 1647-1661), government official and Baptist preacher, came from a Gloucestershire family and was a cousin of Richard Deane (bap. 1610, d. 1653), regicide and general-at-sea, but his parentage is unknown. Deane served as a captain of foot in Robert Lilburne's regiment, and he was elected to represent his regiment in the general council of the army in 1647. He became secretary or chief clerk to the army committee of the Rump from 1649 to 1653. His colonel from the winter of 1647 until 1650 was Sir Arthur Hesilrige, one of the most influential politicians of the Commonwealth. 
In 1653 Deane followed the more militarily inclined republicans, becoming co-treasurer at war and co-receiver of the assessments with John Blackwell the younger when the army tightened its grip on the fiscal machinery of government. He held this position until the fall of the protectorate in 1659, when he took the republican side. Perhaps thanks to Hesilrige's patronage, he became clerk of the council under the restored Commonwealth of May to October 1659, and again to the committee of safety from October to December 1659. On the latter occasion he chose to serve not Hesilrige, the leading figure in the restored Rump, but the generals, notably Charles Fleetwood and John Lambert. Possibly his religious stance, as a strict Baptist, explains this. He was sent to Scotland on a confidential mission in November 1659, ostensibly to negotiate with General George Monck on behalf of the generals of England, but allegedly to attempt to undermine the loyalty of Monck's army to its commander. He failed to stop the Scottish army's march south in support of a civilian government and, ultimately, of a free parliament. After the return of the secluded members in February 1660, Deane lost his military commissions and other offices. 
Following the Restoration, Deane was considered sufficiently dangerous to be listed as one of the twenty-one non-regicides whose property was to be forfeited, and who were excluded from office in perpetuity. He was arrested on 4 January 1661 and placed in the Marshalsea, Canterbury; his wife, Ann, petitioned for his release stating that Deane had sued out a pardon, retired to Lady Scot's house in Kent, and was living quietly. He was released on 16 January 1661 on bond for his good behaviour. 
Deane's later career is uncertain. His identification with the Baptist preacher active in and around Bristol from the 1670s to the 1690s is probable, but there were several contemporaneous Richard Deanes with west-country connections. A Richard Deane was credited with the authorship of 'A copy of a brief treatise of the proper subject and administration of baptism some years since sent by the author to Thomas late lord bishop of Lincoln', published in 1693 but written about seven years earlier, possibly in response to James II's policy of religious toleration. In it the writer alludes to having known 'most persons and actions of note' in the years 1649-59. Deane may well have spent his last days in poverty in Foster's almshouses in Michael's parish, Bristol. He may have been the Richard Deane of Bristol whose widow, Hester, was granted administration of his estate on 8 April 1697. 


@@@@@


doc= 37351


Lamerie, Paul Jacques de (1688-1751), goldsmith, was born on 9 April 1688 in 's-Hertogenbosch, Netherlands, the only child of Paul Souchay de la Merie and his wife, Constance le Roux. His father, an officer in William III's army, moved to London in 1689 and Paul was apprenticed to his fellow Huguenot, the goldsmith Pierre Platel, in August 1703. In February 1713 de Lamerie set up his own workshop in Windmill Street, where he rapidly established his prominence as both manufacturer and retailer. Early customers included Sir William Trumbull, Baron Foley, and the jewel house of George I. 
Between 1723 and 1728 de Lamerie was in partnership with Ellis Gamble, the latter apparently running the retail side of the business. Gamble had been the master of William Hogarth, who trained as an engraver on silver before turning to copperplate-engraving and painting. The Gamble-de Lamerie partnership (discovered in the late twentieth century) supports the long-standing attribution to Hogarth of the engraving on the famous exchequer seal salver made for Sir Robert Walpole. 
In 1738 de Lamerie moved to Gerrard Street and served as captain and later major in the Westminster volunteer association. In 1737-8 he served on a committee of the Goldsmiths' Company, promoting the 'Plate Offences Act', and moved up through the hierarchy of the court, only failing to serve as prime warden. He supplied a magnificent ewer and rose water basin to the company's order in 1741, richly chased with rococo ornament. Characteristically, he charged considerably more than had been agreed for the work; the ewer and basin weighed 570 ounces, substantially more than the requested maximum. 
De Lamerie was always ready to flout the company's regulations, failing to register two alternative versions of his new sterling (Britannia) mark, and was criticized by the company for failing to submit plate for assay and hallmarking in 1717. He evaded the duty payable from 1719 on newly wrought plate by inserting already hallmarked discs into newly made wares. His wares made up the largest individual parcel in a massive consignment of plate exported to the Tsarina Anna in 1726, much of which again had paid no duty. 
Since no ledgers survive, the size of de Lamerie's business and the names of his suppliers can only be suggested. His was for thirty-five years the pre-eminent retail business at the upper end of the market, supplying tableware and massive buffet plate to the jewel house and the Russian court (tsarinas Anna and Catherine, and Count Bobrinsky). His long-standing clients included Sir Robert Walpole, the earl of Ilchester, the earl of Thanet, Viscount Tyrconnel, the duke of Bedford, Baron Anson, and a cross-section of the English nobility and gentry. 
The diversity and volume of silver bearing de Lamerie's mark is far greater than can have emerged from a single workshop and it came to be generally acknowledged, after a century dominated by the concept of the maker's mark, that de Lamerie, in common with many other goldsmiths registering marks at Goldsmiths' Hall, not only fulfilled orders with other goldsmiths' wares but also subcontracted orders to a range of London workshops, although striking the finished wares with his own punch. His choice of modellers, chasers, and other specialists was the key to his commercial success. His marks appear overstruck by that of Paul Crespin on ambassadorial plate issued to the earl of Chesterfield in 1727; although George Wickes supplied the Bath presentation cup to Frederick Louis, prince of Wales, in 1739, it has much in common with a contemporary series of cups with de Lamerie's mark. 
For twenty years de Lamerie's silver shows a strong dependence on French 'regence' designs, and techniques such as heavy formal cast and applied ornament, but from the late 1720s his work demonstrates asymmetry, with rich figurative chasing and a revival of the auricular and 'massive' motifs of a century earlier. The distinctive style of the modeller James Shruder, who was in his employment in 1751 and sorted out his estate, can be recognized in de Lamerie's output from the 1730s, as can that of Charles Frederick Kandler I. 
By the late twentieth century de Lamerie's silver was to be found dispersed across the world: a pair of chandeliers in the Kremlin Armoury, Moscow; a massive fountain and cistern in St Petersburg; a large collection in the Los Angeles County Museum; and in Great Britain important silver bearing his mark at the Victoria and Albert Museum, the Ashmolean Museum, and the Mansion House. 
On 11 February 1717 de Lamerie married Louisa Juliott. They had two sons and four daughters. De Lamerie died in London on 1 August 1751 and was buried at St Anne's, Soho. Obituaries stressed his standing as master silversmith, 'very instrumental in bringing that Branch of Trade to the Perfection it is now in'. 
Philippa Glanville', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37352


Delamotte, Philip Henry (1821-1889), photographer and illustrator, was born in Sandhurst, Surrey, on 21 April 1821, the fifth son in the family of five sons and four daughters of William Delamotte (1775-1863), a drawing-master and watercolour painter, and his wife, Mary Anne Gage. His family was of Huguenot ancestry. Tutored by his father, who served as drawing-master at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, Delamotte became skilful at drawing and engraving. Among his earliest recorded works were the illustrations to the catalogue of the objects shown at the 1850 exhibition of ancient and medieval art at the Society of Arts. On 4 August 1846, at Paddington, where he was then resident, he had married Ellen Maria, the daughter of Thomas George, a farmer. They had five daughters and a son. 
Perhaps Delamotte's greatest contribution to the arts was as a pioneer photographer and photographic instructor, and he established himself as one of the most accomplished artists turned photographers of his generation. He was a main contributor to the photographic exhibition held in the great room of the Society of Arts in London in 1852, which was the first of its kind. In 1853 his manual 'The Practice of Photography' was published by his sometime photographic collaborator Joseph Cundall, at whose Bond Street premises Delamotte held some of the first ever commercial photographic exhibitions and gave photographic instruction. The next year he displayed photographs of Ireland at the Society of Antiquaries. Delamotte was made a fellow of that society (6 May 1852) and also belonged to the Society of Arts and the Society of Artists, having exhibited a number of architectural drawings at the Royal Academy. 
Among Delamotte's best-known commissions was the photography (undertaken weekly from 1851 to 1854) of the reconstruction of the Crystal Palace at Sydenham, where he displayed his skills of composition and perspective, applying the objectivity of the camera to produce masterly photographs that were artistically sound. The results were published in 'Photographic Views of the Progress of the Crystal Palace, Sydenham' (2 vols., 1855). His landscape and portrait studies were equally successful. However, in 1855 he took up the post of professor of drawing at King's College, London, the duties of which he combined with book illustration. Over the next thirty years he wrote or illustrated more than seventy books. He also continued to give drawing lessons, and the grandchildren of Queen Victoria were among his pupils. In 1873 he published 'The Art of Sketching from Nature', a manual where he described the watercolour sketching technique, which he illustrated with his own lithographs; 1874 saw the publication of the 'History of Holland House', which was illustrated by his own carbon photographic prints. His versatility was shown in 1876 with the publication of the Buckland edition of 'Natural History and Antiquities of Selborne' by Gilbert White, to which he contributed a charming series of bird and animal illustrations. 
Delamotte was appointed to the chair of fine art at King's College, London, in 1879 and is remembered for introducing the admission of women to the art lectures. He continued to practise photography as a hobby until 1887, taking an 'unalloyed enjoyment of the art', much as he had done with his drawing and engraving. 
Delamotte died of heart disease at the home of his son-in-law, Bromley Park School, Bromley, Kent, on 24 February 1889; he was recorded as having been latterly resident at Headley, Liphook, Hampshire. 
A. J. Stirling', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37353


William Denny (1847-1887), who became a partner in 1868. Born on 25 May 1847, he was educated at St Helier's School in Jersey and the Royal High School in Edinburgh before serving an apprenticeship in the family firm. He continued his general education by reading widely, particularly on theological subjects, coming to dislike the repressive Calvinism of the Free Church of Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 37354


Dering, Sir Edward, second baronet (1625-1684), politician, was born on 12 November 1625 at Surrenden Dering, Kent, and baptized on 8 December at Pluckley in the same county, the only son of Sir Edward Dering, first baronet (1598-1644), antiquary and religious controversialist, of Surrenden Dering, and his second wife, Anne (1604/5-1628), daughter of Sir John Ashburnham. He was educated at schools in Kent and London, and at Sidney Sussex College and Emmanuel College, Cambridge; he entered the Middle Temple in 1641. Dering joined his father with the king at the raising of the royal standard in Nottingham, but returned to Cambridge, from where he graduated BA in 1643. He planned to continue his studies at Leiden, where he learned of the death of his father and thus succeeded to his title in 1644, but after two more years' travelling in France and the Netherlands he returned to England and an estate encumbered by debts and a dispute with his stepmother, Unton. 
On 5 April 1648 Dering married Mary ('bap'. 1629, died 1704) ['see 'Dering, Mary, Lady Dering], daughter of Daniel Harvey, a wealthy Turkey merchant; another of Harvey's daughters married Heneage Finch, the lawyer, and for a time all four seem to have lived together at the mother-in-law's home in Lambeth. During the 1650s Dering seems deliberately to have sought obscurity while pursuing literary interests, in part as a member of the circle of Katherine Philips. But having, in his own words, 'most carefully and resolutely refused during all the time of the usurped powers all manner of public employments' ('Diaries', 110), on the eve of the Restoration he became a militia commissioner in Kent and secured election as knight for the shire to the Convention Parliament. 
At the Restoration, Heneage Finch became solicitor-general, and Dering profited from the connection. In July 1662 he was appointed as one of seven commissioners to execute the 'Act for the Settlement of Ireland'. He was returned to the Irish House of Commons that year for Lismore. The activities of the commission in sorting out land rights after the various forfeitures of the previous two decades brought opportunities both to please the powerful and for personal gain. Dering was regarded as one of the commissioners closest to the English court; in 1667 he was sworn of the Irish privy council. His work under the commission, and under a second court of claims appointed under the 1665 'Act of Explanation', occupied him until 1669, when the court's work was complete. Soon after his return to England he was made one of the three commissioners of the privy seal and in 1670 he was returned to parliament for East Retford in Nottinghamshire. The appointment of Arthur Annesley, first earl of Anglesey, as lord privy seal in 1673 superseded the commission and was a setback for Dering's finances. Yet the appointment of Sir Thomas Osborne (later earl of Danby) as lord treasurer, and Heneage Finch as lord keeper the same year helped to draw him into the inner circle of the court's system of parliamentary management, and to secure for him (eventually) a pension to compensate for his loss of office. By 1675 Dering was acting regularly in the Commons as a court spokesman, particularly in the debates on supply in October-November 1675 and in Danby's bill of 1677 for bringing up the children of the duke of York as protestants. In December 1675 he was appointed one of the commissioners of the customs: two years later he was also made a commissioner to inquire into abuses in the Royal Mint. His parliamentary role continued to grow: in early 1678 he chaired committees of the whole house on supply and on ways and means. 
Following the emergence of the Popish Plot allegations and the dissolution of the Cavalier Parliament at the end of 1678 Dering found his court role more difficult. He was elected in 1679 and 1681 for the local Kentish borough of Hythe, and shortly after the beginning of the 1679 parliament, in March, was appointed one of the five commissioners who replaced Danby at the Treasury. Dering sought awkwardly to articulate a middle position: he urged the unity of protestants in the face of the popish threat and promoted measures for the removal of penalties from protestant nonconformists, but he voted against the exclusion of the duke of York from the throne. Towards the end of the parliament of 1680-81, perhaps shaken by an absurd accusation of popery from Israel Tonge, he signalled his acceptance of exclusion. He suffered little royal displeasure for it. An uncomfortable interview with the king in August 1681 concerning the activities and whiggish opinions of his eldest son may have been an oblique indication of disapproval, but Dering retained his office in the Treasury and was encouraged by the king to work up proposals for a new form of the Irish revenue, although these were ultimately abandoned after Dering expended enormous effort on them. 
Dering died in London, probably in his house in Gerard Street, on 24 June 1684. He was buried at Pluckley four days later. He had inherited from his antiquary father not only an interest in religious controversy, but also an inveterate habit of note taking: he compiled detailed notes and diaries of proceedings at the court of claims, in parliament, and before the Treasury commission. He was survived by his wife, with whom he had eight sons (of whom four died in infancy) and nine daughters (three of whom did not survive childhood). 


@@@@@


doc= 37355


Desch, Cecil Henry (1874-1958), metallurgist, was born at 99 Hemingford Road, Islington, London, on 7 September 1874, the eldest child in the family of two sons and one daughter of Henry Thomas Desch, surveyor, and his wife, Harriet Ingerson, of Pilton, Devon. Desch was educated at Birkbeck School, Kingsland, Middlesex, and at the age of fifteen entered Finsbury Technical College, London, where Silvanus Thompson was principal. He spent two years studying organic chemistry and a further year as a research student in the laboratory of Raphael Meldola. He then joined F. Kendall & Son, a firm of industrial chemists, in Stratford upon Avon, as assistant chemist, and took an external London BSc degree. He obtained a PhD at Wurzburg University in 1902, and then studied under Sir William Ramsay at University College, London, and was awarded a DSc. 
Desch's first academic appointment in 1902 was to the metallurgy department of King's College, London. While there, Sir Flinders Petrie asked him to work on metal implements found during the excavations at Ur. From 1908 until 1918 he was lecturer in metallurgy at Glasgow University, and became professor of metallurgy at the Royal Technical College, Glasgow, in 1918. In 1909 Desch married Elison Ann, the daughter of Professor Ivison Macadam, professor of chemistry at the Royal College of Surgeons, Edinburgh. They had two daughters. 
From 1920 to 1932 Desch was professor of metallurgy at Sheffield University. In 1932 he became superintendent of the department of metallurgy at the National Physical Laboratory at Teddington, Middlesex. He retired in 1939, but with the outbreak of the Second World War he became scientific adviser to the Iron and Steel Research Council and then entered the steel industry, becoming, in 1943, director of research of Richard Thomas & Co. Ltd and, following reorganization, a director of the Whitehead Iron and Steel Company. 
In 1923 Desch was elected FRS. He was president of the Faraday Society in 1926-8. President of the Institute of Metals in 1938-40, he was awarded their platinum medal in 1941. He was president of the Iron and Steel Institute (1946-8), having received the Bessemer gold medal in 1938. He thus achieved distinction in both ferrous and non-ferrous metallurgy. 
As the author of many papers and books on metallurgical topics, Desch's most notable contribution was his book 'Metallography', which ran to six editions between 1910 and 1942. It was read with awe by generations of students who wondered how he succeeded in making such an interesting topic so boring. He was the forerunner of the modern professor of materials in that he wrote, with F. M. Lea, 'The Chemistry of Cement and Concrete' (1956). He also published papers on social topics and had a great interest in historical metallurgy. Desch was a lithe man of military bearing whose presence commanded immediate respect. He died on 19 June 1958 in the General Hospital, Amersham, Buckinghamshire. He was survived by his wife. 
J. Nutting', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37356


Despard, Charlotte (1844-1939), feminist and socialist reformer, was born on the family estate at Ripple Vale in Kent on 15 June 1844, the third child and third daughter of the family of five daughters and one son of Captain John Tracey William French (died 1854), retired naval officer, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Eccles (died 'c'.1865). Her brother was John French, later field marshal and first earl of Ypres. Charlotte French had a conventional Victorian young lady's upbringing, and frequently lamented her lack of a thorough education. 'There were moments in my hot youth, when I would rail against Heaven for having made me a woman. What might I not have been; what might I not have done had I the freedom and intellectual advantages so largely accorded to men? (Despard, 'Suffragette')' Her father died in 1854 and within a few years her fragile mother was confined to a mental home. In 1863 the family moved to London, where Charlotte French attended a finishing school. For several years she toured the continent with her unmarried sisters. Then, on 20 December 1870, she married Maximilian Carden Despard (1839-1890), an Anglo-Irish businessman who had made a fortune in the Far East. They had no children, probably because of Maximilian's poor health, on account of which they spent every winter cruising in the Mediterranean or visiting India and North America. With her husband's encouragement, Mrs Despard occupied herself by writing romantic novels (including 'Chaste as Ice, Pure as Snow', 1874) with high-minded heroines, exotic settings, and happy endings. 
In 1890 Max Despard died, and after months of seclusion Charlotte Despard emerged as an unusually engaged philanthropic widow. Her chosen slum was the Nine Elms district of Battersea in south London, one of Victorian England's 'little Irelands'. There she funded and staffed a health clinic, as well as organizing youth and working men's clubs, and a soup kitchen for the local unemployed. During the week she lived above one of her welfare 'shops' and her identification with the local community was sealed by her conversion to Catholicism. At the end of 1894 she was elected as a guardian for the Vauxhall board of the Lambeth poor-law union. She proved herself a brilliant committee woman, bringing a rare combination of informed compassion, practical experience, and military efficiency to the board's deliberations. She was especially committed to the welfare of the most vulnerable 'paupers': children, mothers, and old people. She supported campaigns for free school meals and medical inspections for poor children, and in 1902 she toured Canada to see what had become of the Lambeth union's boy emigrants. 
Mrs Despard's charitable efforts were paralleled by her political commitments. She was an active and vocal supporter of the Social Democratic Federation and the Independent Labour Party. By 1906, the year in which the suffragette organization, the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU), moved from Manchester to London, she was a familiar figure on progressive platforms. Mrs Despard wore a simple black chiffon mantilla instead of the large hat of a conventional Edwardian lady, and open sandals instead of tight boots. Although she never lost the bearing of a Victorian 'grande dame' and was, by all accounts, a generous hostess, her own lifestyle was famously austere: 'In her settlement in Nine Elms she 'lived' the life of a socialist' ('Mrs Despard's birthday party', 'The Vote', 15 July 1932). The suffragette activists Annie Kenney and Tessa Billington-Greig who went to Battersea to woo her for 'the cause' knew that the venerable and incorruptible Mrs Despard could not be dismissed as a hysterical self-seeker. 
Charlotte Despard was more than happy to become the WSPU's honorary secretary: 'I had sought and found comradeship of some sort with men. I had marched with great processions of the unemployed. I had stood on the platforms of Labour men and Socialists. I had tried to stir up the people to a sense of shame about the misery of their homes, and the degradation of their women and children. I had listened with sympathy to fiery denunciations of Governments and the Capitalist systems to which they belong. Amongst all these experiences, I had not found what I met on the threshold of this young, vigorous Union of Hearts. (Despard, 'Suffragette')' With those two other great widows, Millicent Fawcett and Emmeline Pankhurst, Charlotte Despard was soon recognized as one of the leaders of the struggle for votes for women. In 1907 she was imprisoned twice in Holloway gaol, where her courage and good humour were an inspiration to other suffragette prisoners. However, later in that year the suffragette movement split, and Mrs Despard left the WSPU, eventually to become president of the Women's Freedom League (WFL). 
Women's Freedom Leaguers were self-styled 'constitutional militants'. Unlike the WSPU, which was run like an army, the WFL was democratically organized. It concentrated on 'moral' tactics, rather than campaigns against property or individual politicians. The sensational grille protest, in which women chained themselves to the metal grating (now in the Museum of London) that fenced off the Ladies' Gallery in the House of Commons, was a WFL initiative. Mrs Despard, whose household furniture was repeatedly seized in lieu of taxes refused on grounds of 'no taxation without representation', was closely identified with such passive resistance strategies. 
After the outbreak of the First World War, Charlotte Despard's immediate concern was distress on the 'home front'. Since her beloved only brother, Sir John French, was commander-in-chief of the British expeditionary force, she might have been expected to take a jingoistic line on that conflict. Instead, to her brother's mortification, she joined Sylvia Pankhurst in the socialist pacifist movement. After the Bolshevik revolution of 1917, her commitment to international socialism intensified. In the spring of 1918, soon after the vote was granted to women over thirty, she resigned from the WFL presidency in order to concentrate on a variety of other issues, including Save the Children, the Indian independence movement, theosophy, the Labour Party and the early British Communist Party, the London Vegetarian Society, and the Irish Self Determination League. 
In the general election of 1918 Charlotte Despard stood, unsuccessfully, as a pacifist Labour parliamentary candidate for Battersea. However, she was delighted by Sinn Fein's victory in the same election. Among the suffragette leaders she had stood out as a supporter of Irish home rule, and when that movement gave way to the struggle for complete independence she became an active supporter of the British solidarity organization the Irish Self Determination League. Her sympathy for the Irish republican movement brought her into direct conflict with her brother, who in 1918 had been sworn in as lord lieutenant of Ireland. While he set about crushing the 'rebels', his sister was supporting them. 
Soon after the Anglo-Irish treaty was signed in 1921, Charlotte Despard wound up her London life and moved to Ireland. Her ancestors on her father's side had been Irish, and she was fond of her Despard in-laws as well as her Irish friends in Battersea. Now she hoped to play a part in the setting up of a brave new state, but, as Ireland collapsed into a bitter civil war, she found herself back at work as a campaigner for civil rights and the relief of distress. In Dublin she became the president of the Women's Prisoners' Defence League. The house she shared with Maud Gonne was at the centre of radical Irish campaigns in the 1920s. Like other republican women, who found the English 'Mrs' odious, but baulked at the Irish equivalent, 'Bean Ui', which translates as 'woman of', she took Madame as her Dublin title and was nicknamed Madame Desperate. In spite of that nickname, and her great age, she was active enough to be classified as a dangerous subversive under the terms of the Irish Free State's 1927 'Public Safety Act'. When Maud Gonne was imprisoned she kept a constant vigil, for twenty days and nights, outside Kilmainham gaol. 
Charlotte Despard continued to visit London for her summer birthday parties, around which the WFL organized its annual gatherings. At the celebrations to mark the 'Equal Franchise Act' of 1928 she was feted as an honoured veteran of the struggle for female suffrage. By then, however, communism was her main cause. In 1930, at the age of eighty-six, she toured Soviet Russia, taking a particular interest in schools, nurseries, and the general status of women. 
In 1933, soon after her house in central Dublin had been attacked by an anti-communist mob, Charlotte Despard moved north. In Belfast she hoped to involve herself in a campaign that, briefly, had united unemployed protestant and Catholic workers. Then, as the international fascist menace grew, she supported anti-appeasement campaigns. She was too infirm to go to Spain for a show of solidarity with the republicans fighting against Franco, but in 1937 she did journey to London for the WFL's celebration of her ninety-third birthday. Two years later, on 10 November 1939, she died after a fall in her new house, NeadnaGaoithe, Whitehead, near Belfast. Madame Charlotte Despard was buried on 13 November, with republican honours, at Glasnevin cemetery in Dublin, near the grave of her good friend Constance Markievicz. 


@@@@@


doc= 37357


Diaper, William (1685-1717), poet, was born in Bridgwater, Somerset, the son of Joseph Diaper. Nothing else is known of his family or early life. In his poetry he describes himself as 'one bred up in homely Cott'. He matriculated on 3 April 1699 at Oxford, where he studied at Balliol College as 'pauper puer'. He graduated BA in 1702, and remained as a scholar until 1705. His name reappears in the college books in 1710 as a BA commoner. 
Diaper was ordained deacon in Wells on 19 June 1709, and served subsequently as curate in Brent in the same diocese. This appointment may not have been entirely happy. His stark but also amusing topographical poem 'Brent' describes the place as 'nature's gaol', where winter flooding leaves its inhabitants isolated with scant food and 'unwholesome ale'. Diaper may have taken another cure in Crick, Northamptonshire, and by March 1714 was serving in Dean, near Basingstoke. 
As a poet Diaper made his mark first in 1712 with the publication of 'Nereides, or, Sea-Eclogues', 'Callipaedia', and 'Dryades'. He came to the attention of Jonathan Swift, who wrote: 'I have contrivd to make a Parson of him; for he is half a one already, being in Deacon's Orders, and serves a small Cure in the Country, but has a sword at his A[rse] here in Town. Tis a poor little short Wretch, but will do best in a Gown. (Swift, 'Journal', 586)' Swift introduced Diaper to his circle where he was taken up by Henry St John, first Viscount Bolingbroke, and Sir William Wyndham. On 13 February 1713 Swift speaks of him 'in a nasty Garret, very sick'. On this occasion Swift brought him a gift of $20 from Bolingbroke. Swift was soon appointed dean of St Patrick's in Dublin, though he assured Diaper: 'I will move Heaven and Earth that something may be done for you'. In the same letter he advised Diaper to control his extravagant similes, and write more like a mortal man ('Correspondence of Jonathan Swift', 346). Swift could do little, however, to relieve Diaper's poverty, and following the death of Queen Anne his other patrons were deprived of influence. 
Diaper published 'An Imitation of the Seventeenth Epistle of the First Book of Horace' in 1714, and addressed the poem to Swift. His last literary project, 'Halieuticks', was a verse translation of Oppian, of which he completed two books, published posthumously (1722). Diaper's best poetry is contained in 'Nereides' and the translation of Oppian, where his descriptions of the ocean and of aquatic life are startling and individual. 
There is an unconfirmed suggestion that Diaper was ordained priest in 1715. By May 1716, however, he was again ill. He died some time in 1717, though neither the date nor location is recorded. 
Richard Greene', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37358


Dillwyn, (Elizabeth) Amy (1845-1935), novelist and businesswoman, was born at Parc Wern, Sketty, Swansea, on 16 May 1845, the second daughter and third child in the family of three daughters and one son of Lewis Llewelyn Dillwyn (1814-1892), an industrialist and Liberal MP for Swansea (1855-92), and his wife, Elizabeth (Bessie) De la Beche (1819-1866), the only legitimate daughter of the geologist Sir Henry Thomas De la Beche. She was the granddaughter of Lewis Weston Dillwyn, owner of the famous Cambrian pottery, and great-granddaughter of William Dillwyn, the American Quaker abolitionist. Educated privately at home by tutors and governesses, first at Parc Wern and later at Hendrefoilan, her father's new mansion at Sketty, she inherited a long family tradition of unorthodox and innovative ideas. Shortly after her debut in London society in 1863 she became engaged to Llewellyn Thomas of Llwynmadog, the heir to a large coal fortune, but his early death from smallpox in 1864 on the eve of their wedding left her to face a lifetime of spinsterhood and good works, divided between Swansea and her London home in fashionable Knightsbridge. 
Bored with the formalities of mid-Victorian high society, scornfully documented in her private diaries, Amy Dillwyn sought refuge in a form of neurasthenia and turned her hand to writing popular fiction, producing half a dozen still very readable novels which reflected her rebellious discontent with women's role as second-class citizens in a world often dominated by relatively untalented men. 'Chloe Arguelle' (1881) and 'Jill and Jack' (1887) are typical examples of her ability to combine trenchant social criticism with a positive affirmation of women's rights. Having thus resigned herself to the passive lifestyle of a semi-invalid literary lady, she became a regular contributor to 'The Spectator', then edited by her father's close friend Richard Holt Hutton, and between 1880 and 1893 published over fifty articles in it. But when her father, the widely respected leader of the Welsh radicals in parliament, died suddenly in 1892 she found to her horror that he had left a crippling burden of debt and that his principal business enterprise, the Dillwyn spelterworks at Llansamlet, Swansea, was on the verge of financial ruin and was now her personal responsibility as his residuary legatee. 
Determined to honour the family tradition of social concern, Amy Dillwyn forgot her various ailments, put aside her unfinished literary manuscripts, and took on the onerous commitment of managing one of the most important zinc factories in the United Kingdom at a time when women were virtually excluded from the board-rooms of industry and commerce. After several years of sheer hard work and dedicated self-sacrifice, which involved giving up her fine home, Hendrefoilan House, and living in cheap lodgings, she finally turned the ailing enterprise around and by 1904 was able to sell her shares in Dillwyn & Co. at a very substantial profit to Metallgesellschaft of Frankfurt, the German industrial giant then striving to create an international monopoly of zinc manufacture. 
By 1902 Amy Dillwyn's fame as a hard-headed businesswoman, capable of holding her own with the shrewdest of her male rivals in the intensely competitive world of industry, had already won her recognition (from the 'Pall Mall Gazette') as 'one of the most remarkable women in Great Britain', famous enough to be caricatured by the 'Punch' cartoonist Bert Thomas in the comic journal 'Ally Sloper' in 1904. For a brief period she became a national celebrity, often portrayed by her contemporaries as a spare, bespectacled woman wearing the plainest of short serge skirts with a pocket on each side in which she buried her hands when talking, a short, rather mannish jacket, a trilby hat, and a simple bunch of violets at her throat, and carrying a stick or umbrella and striding out in a thoroughly businesslike manner. Staunchly Liberal like her father and an ardent but always non-violent feminist, she campaigned vigorously for women's rights, fought hard to improve rudimentary state education and medical services, and was one of the first women to stand for election to a borough council after the passing of the 'Qualification of Women Act' in 1907. By this time she was consciously beginning to play the role that most appealed to her ironic sense of self-awareness: the rather eccentric and certainly unorthodox grand old lady of her native Swansea, whose celebrated love of a good cigar, smoked in public, masked a deep attachment to the humanitarian principles instilled into her by her Quaker family background. Yet for all her passionate dedication to public service she also knew how to enjoy herself, and as an elderly lady she was often seen at the gaming tables of Monte Carlo in the late 1920s, savouring to the full the social pleasures made possible by her unique commercial success. 
Amy Dillwyn died in her ninety-first year at her home, Ty-Glyn, West Cross, Swansea, on 13 December 1935, leaving a personal fortune of $114,500 -- striking testimony to her rare achievement as a businesswoman in a man's world. She was cremated without ceremony at Pontypridd, and her ashes were laid to rest in the Dillwyn family grave at St Paul's Church, Sketty, Swansea. 


@@@@@


doc= 37359


Dingley, Robert (bap. 1710, d. 1781), philanthropist, was baptized on 12 September 1710 at St Helen's, Bishopsgate, London, the eldest in the family of two surviving sons and four daughters (there were nineteen children in all) of Robert Dingley (1678-1741), a Bishopsgate jeweller and goldsmith, and his wife, Susanna, daughter of Henry Elkin. In August 1726 Robert Dingley senior, together with Sir Randolph Knipe, shipped exceptionally fine silver table services to Empress Catherine I of Russia and for her favourite, the statesman Prince Menshikov FRS. Made freemen of the Russia Company in August 1731, Robert and his brother Charles traded as partners, with an agency in St Petersburg, where, with other merchants, they financed two sugar refineries. Robert represented the company's interests at the Commons and the Admiralty, becoming its consul and auditor in 1759. He was a director of the Bank of England (1757-67) and of the Equitable Life Assurance Society, the earliest of its kind, when it was founded in 1762. A member of the Society of Dilettanti from its foundation ('c'.1736) he devised an influential plan in February 1749 for a public Academy of Arts, and was also an active fellow of the Society of Antiquaries (1734-48). Elected FRS in 1748, he contributed useful items to the 'Philosophical Transactions' on gemstones (44, 1747) -- though harshly criticized by John Hill in 1751 -- and irregular Thames tides (49, 1756). 
As a philanthropist, Dingley served on a committee of the Merchant Seamen's Corporation (established in 1747), and was a governor and an innovative inspector (1758-62) of the London Foundling Hospital. He pioneered the Magdalen Hospital for Penitent Prostitutes, the first English charity of its kind, founded at Prescot Street, Whitechapel, in 1758, and largely designed its second building, which opened at Southwark in 1772. Its treasurer and then, from 1768, vice-president, he is commemorated by Dingley Lane, SW16. Several of his talented architectural designs exist, including engravings of those for rebuilding the king's and queen's baths at Bath (published by I. and J. Taylor, 'c'.1787). His proposals of 1757 as a fellow of the Society of Arts resulted in premiums being awarded for modelling in various media. His exceptional collection of gemstones, engraved gems, drawings, prints, and natural-history specimens was auctioned by White's on 23 June 1785. His brother Charles Dingley (1711-1769), who projected London's New Road and New City Road (1756-61), received the Society of Arts gold medal in 1768 for building a large sawmill at Limehouse. 
Dingley owned a house at Little St Helen's, Bishopsgate. From 1753, when he sold two Sussex farms, until the death in 1759 of his wife, Elizabeth (daughter of Henry Thompson, of Kirby Hall, Yorkshire), whom he had married in 1744, his country home was in Charlton, Kent; he moved to Lamorbey, at Bexley, when he married Esther Spencer (died 1784) in March 1760. He had a son and two daughters (one of whom died very young) by his first marriage. Dingley died at Lamorbey on 8 August 1781, according to the monumental inscription in Charlton parish church, where he and his wives are buried. His portrait, painted and presented in 1762 by William Hoare to the Magdalen Hospital, was engraved in mezzotint by John Dixon and is in a private collection. 
John H. Appleby', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37360


Dixon, Jeremiah (1733-1779), surveyor and astronomer, was born in Bishop Auckland, co. Durham, on 27 July 1733, the fifth of the seven children of George Dixon, a well-to-do Quaker coalmine owner, and his wife, Mary Hunter of Newcastle. He was educated at John Kipling's school in Barnard Castle, where he acquired an interest in mathematics and astronomy. While still a young man in south Durham, he made the acquaintance of the mathematician William Emerson, the instrument maker John Bird, and the natural philosopher Thomas Wright. The Quaker minute book of Raby, co. Durham, has the following entry under 28 October 1760: 'Jery Dixon, son of George and Mary of Cockfield, disowned for drinking to excess'. This weakness was apparently inherited from his father, but there is no evidence that it affected his career. 
In 1760 the Royal Society chose Charles Mason to go to Sumatra to observe the 1761 transit of Venus, and, probably on Bird's recommendation, Mason suggested Dixon should go as his assistant. An encounter with a French frigate delayed their final sailing so that they could not reach Sumatra in time. They therefore landed at the Cape of Good Hope, where the transit was successfully observed on 6 June 1761. On the passage home they stopped at St Helena in October and, after discussion with Nevil Maskelyne, who had observed the transit there, Dixon returned temporarily to the Cape with Maskelyne's clock to carry out gravity experiments. Mason and Dixon eventually reached England early in 1762. 
In August 1763 Mason and Dixon signed an agreement with Thomas Penn and Frederick Calvert, seventh Baron Baltimore, the hereditary proprietors of the provinces of Pennsylvania and Maryland respectively, to go to North America to help local surveyors define the disputed boundary between the two provinces. After arriving in Philadelphia with their instruments in November, they began operations before Christmas 1763. When work for the proprietors on what was to become the famous Mason-Dixon line was complete late in 1766, they began on the Royal Society's behalf, at Dixon's suggestion, to measure a degree of the meridian on the Delmarva peninsula in Maryland and to make gravity measurements with a clock sent out by the society -- the same one that Maskelyne had had in St Helena and Dixon took to the Cape in 1761. They reported their task complete on 21 June 1768 and sailed for England on 11 September. Before leaving, they were both admitted as corresponding members of the American Society for Promoting Useful Knowledge. 
On 13 April 1769 Dixon sailed to Norway with William Bayly in HMS 'Emerald' to make observations of the transit of Venus on 3 June on the Royal Society's behalf. Dixon observed on Hammerfest Island, Bayly at Nordkapp, about 60 miles apart. However, Dixon's observation of the transit was frustrated by cloud. They reached England again on 30 July. 
Dixon returned to Durham and resumed his work as a surveyor. Among places he surveyed at this time were the park of Auckland Castle and Lanchester Common. He died unmarried in Cockfield, near Staindrop, co. Durham, on 22 January 1779. He should not be confused with a contemporary, Jeremiah Dixon FRS (1726-1782), of Gledhow, near Leeds, the son-in-law of John Smeaton. 


@@@@@


doc= 37361


Dixon, Sarah (1671/2-1765), poet, was born in Kent, the daughter of James Dixon, a barrister originally of Rochester, Kent, who was admitted to the Middle Temple as a clerk on 20 May 1663 and called to the bar on 13 May 1670, and his wife, Elizabeth Soulhouse. Her only known brother, James Dixon, matriculated at University College, Oxford, on 17 February 1694, aged seventeen, but seems to have died soon afterwards; he was not awarded a degree. Details of Dixon's life are sparse and sometimes contradictory. She may have been born in Newnham, though much of her life seems to have been spent in or near St Stephen's parish, near Canterbury. 
Dixon is known from her single volume of 'Poems on Several Occasions', published anonymously in Canterbury in 1740 but attributed to her in inscriptions in the Bodleian and British Library copies of the book. The 500 subscribers to this volume were chiefly local, but some members of the nobility, as well as better-known poets, including Elizabeth Carter and Alexander Pope, also appear on the list. Additional poems bearing individual dates were transcribed onto the endpapers of the British Library copy from a manuscript owned by Dixon's niece, a Mrs Eliza Bunce ('nee' De Langle), possibly the child of an unidentified sister. Eliza Bunce was the widow of the Revd John Bunce (died 1786), vicar of St Stephen's, who encouraged Dixon's writing and corrected it for publication. This volume also has appended a poem 'On the Ruins of St Austin's, Canterbury'; it was published in the 'Kentish Gazette' of 9 July 1774, and was said to have been written some time after Dixon was seventy-three years old. 
An inscription in the Bodleian copy of Dixon's 'Poems' describes her as a widow. However, a memorial stone in the chancel floor of St Stephen's identifies her as the daughter of James Dixon, barrister. Her writings contain references to members of her family: one, from 1739, is addressed to John and Eliza Bunce on the death of their young daughter; another, among those published in her 'Poems' in 1740, is entitled 'On the Death of my Dear Brother, Late of University College, Oxford'. There are, conspicuously, no references or dedications to a husband or child. 
Dixon's verse is chiefly pastoral; her preface suggests a source for her poetic impulse in the peaceful solitude of her youth in the country. Individual poems range from light but pointed satire on the follies and failings of women, through romantic, ballad-like lyrics, to earnest, mature, religious verse. She characteristically underplays her education, intellect, and talent as a 'weaker Woman', but her religious rationalization of women's intellectual and social position in relation to men has a rather bitter tone: '
Eve's Theft serv'd but to dignify Man's Soul, 

Her Sex denied the Knowledge which she stole. 

' The only other recorded detail of Sarah Dixon's life also comes from the memorial stone at St Stephen's. She died on 23 April 1765 at the age of ninety-three. 
Richard Greene', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37362


Dobbie, Sir William George Shedden (1879-1964), army officer and colonial governor, was born on 12 July 1879 in Madras, the younger child and only son of William Herbert Dobbie, of the Indian Civil Service, and his wife and first cousin, (Agatha) Margaret, only child of Colonel Robert Shedden Dobbie, of the Madras staff corps. He was a classical scholar at Charterhouse School, and was commissioned into the Royal Engineers in August 1899 from the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich. 
At Woolwich, Dobbie joined the Plymouth Brethren and devoted much of his time to Sunday school and soldiers' welfare work. In 1904 he married Sybil (died 1962), daughter of Captain Charles Orde-Browne of the Royal Artillery, a leading army evangelical. Her sister Mary was the mother of Major-General Orde Wingate. On marriage the Dobbies agreed to dedicate a tenth of their income to 'the Lord's work'. Christian faith was the mainspring of Dobbie's life, and he personified the ideal of the officer as missionary propagated by Charles Kingsley. Dobbie and his wife had two sons, one of whom died on active service in 1944, and one daughter. 
After training at the School of Military Engineering, Chatham, Dobbie served in the South African War (1901-2) and then in Chatham (1904), Bermuda (1904-7), Harwich (1907-9), and Ireland (1909-12), before passing top into the staff college at Camberley in 1912. At the outbreak of war in 1914 he went to France and took part in the campaigns of the Marne and Aisne. Thereafter his war service was entirely as a staff officer. Promoted lieutenant-colonel in 1916, he signed the order to the British expeditionary force ending hostilities on 11 November 1918. 
The war had proved Dobbie's exceptional ability as a staff officer, and for nine of the ten following years he served in staff appointments in the Rhine army, Aldershot, the War Office, and western command. Promoted to command the Cairo brigade in 1928, he put down disturbances between Arabs and Jews in Palestine in 1929. From 1933 to 1935, as major-general, he commanded the Chatham area and the School of Military Engineering and was inspector, Royal Engineers. His last appointment before retiring in August 1939 was as general officer commanding Malaya and Singapore. 
On the outbreak of the Second World War, Dobbie sought re-employment without success until in April 1940 he was asked by General W. E. Ironside to go to Malta as governor and commander-in-chief, in the rank of lieutenant-general. He arrived two months before the siege began in June. For two years the Italians and Germans launched air raids, blockaded the island to the verge of starvation, and kept it under constant threat of invasion. Dobbie shared the islanders' hardships and broadcast to and visited the people constantly. His belief in divine aid was evident to all. 
By May 1942 Dobbie was worn out and was relieved by Viscount Gort, who brought with him the George Cross awarded to Malta by George VI. Dobbie was colonel-commandant, Royal Engineers, from 1940 to 1947, but was not actively re-employed and dedicated the remainder of his life to missionary work, serving on a number of Christian committees. In 1945 he published 'A Very Present Help' and in 1948 'Active Service with Christ'. 
Dobbie was appointed to the DSO in 1916, and was appointed CMG (1919), CB (1930), KCB (1941), and GCMG (1942). He received an LLD from the Royal University of Malta in 1942 and from Leeds University in 1944. Sir William Dobbie died at his home, 89 Coleherne Court, Kensington, on 3 October 1964. 
John Keegan', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37363


Dod, Charlotte (1871-1960), sportswoman, was born on 24 September 1871 at Lower Bebington, Cheshire, the fourth and youngest child of the two sons and two daughters of Joseph Dod (died 1879), a Liverpool cotton broker and banker, and his wife, Margaret Aspinall (died 1901). By the time of Lottie's birth, her father was wealthy enough to retire from business, and on his death in November 1879 he left his family well provided for, so that Lottie enjoyed an independent income throughout her life. Like her brothers and sister, she was educated by governesses and private tutors at the family home, Edgeworth at Bebington. The Dods were an engaging band of enthusiasts for the types of sports which were gaining favour in late Victorian country houses: croquet, archery, golf, bowls, billiards, and skating. Her elder sister, Ann, an accomplished skater, was considered one of the best woman billiards players in England; her eldest brother, William Dod (1867-1954), won a gold medal for archery at the 1908 Olympic games in London; and her second brother, Anthony, was chess champion of Cheshire and Lancashire. 
At the age of nine Lottie Dod was introduced to the recently invented game of lawn tennis on the grass court at Edgeworth. In 1883 she won a consolation doubles competition with her sister, Ann, at the northern championships, held at Manchester Lawn Tennis Club, impressing many judges with the consistency of her ground strokes. When she was still only thirteen, in 1885, she won all three open events at the Waterloo tournament and gave the Wimbledon champion Maude Watson a close contest in the finals of the northern championships, exploits which gained her the title Little Wonder. She entered the United Kingdom championships at Wimbledon for the first time in July 1887, aged fifteen years and ten months. After beating two opponents in the opening rounds, she met Blanche Bingley in the challenge round. The match became a rout, as Lottie Dod took the title for the loss of only two games; the second set was completed in ten minutes. Easy victories in the Irish, north of England, and west of England championships in the same year confirmed her position as the unrivalled women's champion. 
Dod was less dominant in 1888 but again defeated Bingley at Wimbledon (6-3, 6-3) in a match which lasted under half an hour. Unwilling to disrupt a yachting holiday, she declined to defend her title in 1889 and played no championship tennis in 1890. But she returned to win Wimbledon in 1891 and 1892. By then her powerful volleying and overheads were untouchable. In the 1893 competition she was hard pushed by Bingley's tireless retrieving, and she lost the first set, but recovered to win her fifth Wimbledon title by exposing a weakness in her opponent's backhand. She retired from competition tennis in 1893 partly, it was said, through boredom and partly through a desire to try her hand at other sports. 
Lottie Dod hit the ball fiercely but with little spin. She was not particularly tall -- at 5 foot 61/2 inches, she was slightly above medium height -- nor obviously muscular, though she had powerful biceps, but her groundstrokes had the pace and authority of her male contemporaries. Her game was based on superb anticipation and footwork. To allow her greater mobility around the court, she wore shorter skirts than were fashionable. These, worn with black stockings and black shoes, and a white cricket cap, which emphasized her jet black hair and oval face, gave the initial impression of a tomboy, but off the court she dressed with elegance. Her main 'heresies' were adamant counselling that ground strokes should be taken just before the top of the bounce and that players should switch from a 'western' forehand grip to a pronounced backhand grip when switching wings. Six decades later her techniques became the norm. As a doubles player, she and her sister were among the first players to attack the net in tandem. In eleven years of tournament tennis she was defeated only five times in singles matches played on level terms. 
Lottie Dod's interests widened in the early 1890s and she received much press attention as a cyclist. She began playing golf and entered the 1894 British ladies' championship but was defeated in an early round. It was one of the few sports for which she did not possess prodigious talent; her swing was mechanical and often involved contortions to avoid a slice. In the winter of 1895-6 she participated in a variety of winter sports at St Moritz. She negotiated the Cresta run and showed ability as a mountaineer, making an ascent of Piz Zupo (13,130 ft) in February 1896 with Elizabeth Main and a Swiss guide. Extending her European tour to Italy, she and some friends covered considerable distances by bicycle in a trip which took in Genoa, Florence, and Rome. 
In 1898 Lottie Dod was defeated in the semi-final of the British ladies' golf championship at Great Yarmouth. While her play was immaculate from tee to green, erratic putting resulted in defeat by one hole. In the following year she lost again at the semi-final stage but recovered a few days later to defeat the leading Irish player, Jessie Magill, in an international match between England and Ireland. In 1904, at Troon, she won the ladies' championship, defeating May Hezlet on the final green before a raucous crowd of 5000, including hundreds of dock workers who had deserted the Clyde. She became an unofficial ambassador for British golf and competed in the American championship of the same year but lost in the first round. However, she succeeded in persuading many of the top American players, including the Curtis sisters, to visit Britain in 1905. In so doing she laid the foundations for what became the Curtis cup. 
At the turn of the century Lottie Dod had underlined her versatility by making two appearances for the England hockey team. In March 1899 she played at inside right against Ireland on the Richmond athletic ground, where her adroit dribbling contributed to a 3-1 victory for the home side. In March 1900 at Ballsbridge she scored twice and impressed many with her reverse stickwork during an England victory by two goals to one. 
In 1906 Dod began to concentrate on archery, and competed at the White City for the women's Olympic archery title in July 1908. She won a silver medal, losing narrowly to Sybil (Queenie) Newall. The event was debased by the absence of Alice Legh, and Lottie Dod can be counted as only the third strongest archer of her time. 
At the outbreak of the First World War, Dod gained nursing qualifications and made repeated applications to be stationed in France, but was rejected for such duties because of her sciatica. However, her work at a military hospital near Newbury resulted in a Red Cross gold medal. In 1921 she settled in London, where she was active in musical circles. As a contralto she sang for many years with the London Oriana Madrigal Society and became its honorary secretary. In the late 1920s she became a member of the Bach Cantata Club under the baton of her close friend Charles Kennedy Scott. 
In the mid-1930s Lottie Dod did much youth work. She taught piano and part singing to a group of Girl Guides in Whitechapel and assisted at many youth clubs in the East End. She was reluctant to leave London during the blitz but eventually settled at Westward Ho! with her unmarried brother William and served as lady president of the Royal North Devon Golf Club in 1949. She returned to live in Earls Court, London, in 1950. As her health declined she spent much time in nursing homes on the south coast of England. She died (unmarried), following a fall, at Birch Hill Nursing Home, Sway, Hampshire, on 27 June 1960. Her attendant reported that she was listening to radio commentary from Wimbledon at the time. She must be counted as one of the most remarkable female athletes of all time. 


@@@@@


doc= 37364


Doherty, John (1797/8-1854), trade unionist and political radical, was born in Ireland but his exact date of birth is not certain. He came from a labouring family and he himself began work in the local cotton industry at the age of ten. In 1816 he joined the increasing flow of Irish migrants to Britain, and worked as a cotton spinner in Manchester. From the early days he seems to have become involved in trade union activities, and for his part in the Manchester strike of 1818 he was sent to prison for two years in 1819. 
At this time Doherty was still a rank-and-file militant, but quickly, as the 1820s moved along, he came to be recognized as the outstanding trade union leader in Lancashire in the textile industry. He always remained a Catholic, with a remarkable capacity for organization, straightforward, provocative oratory, and a markedly shrewd political instinct. His mentor in the early years was William Cobbett, and although in his political radicalism Doherty went beyond Cobbett, the attack upon 'Old Corruption' always remained an essential part of his attack upon contemporary society. As with many of his contemporaries in the 1820s, Doherty came to accept a version of 'the right of the labourer to the whole produce of his labour' -- an analysis of bourgeois society that developed out of the writings of William Thompson (1775-1833) and his contemporaries. 
By 1829 Doherty had succeeded in bringing together most of the country's cotton spinners into the Grand General Union of Operative Cotton Spinners, and, although it had disappeared by 1831, it was an important stage in the heightening of class-consciousness among certain groups of working people. In the early months of 1830 he broadened his vision with the establishment of the National Association of United Trades for the Protection of Labour and during the next four years he was at the centre of the many radical and union initiatives that were such a notable feature of the period. He was especially important in the Society for National Regeneration, and he was a major influence in the coming together of Owenism and trade unionism which culminated in the Grand National Consolidated Trades Union of February 1834. 
Throughout his radical and union career Doherty produced a considerable number of journals and periodicals. They included 'The Conciliator', the 'Voice of the People', the 'United Trades' Cooperative Journal', the 'Poor Man's Advocate', and the 'Herald of the Rights of Industry'. This last, which was published weekly from early February 1834 until the end of May, has become the best-known of Doherty's publications and is the least personal of all of them. Much of the 'Herald' was a sustained defence of the campaign for factory reform led by John Fielden, as well as of Fielden's general ideas. None of Doherty's publications lasted very long, but they were an important part of the general ferment of radical ideas in the years leading up to the Chartist movement. 
Doherty married an English girl, Laura, a milliner, in 1821, and according to the 1841 census there were four children of the marriage, two sons and two daughters. Doherty had a quick temper, and in 1835 was involved in an incident that became quite well known and was used against him. On the night of 8 July he returned home just before midnight to find that his wife had locked him out. There was a physical confrontation and Doherty was charged at the New Bailey with assault. His wife was induced not to give evidence (she too had been guilty of assault) and Doherty was discharged. The incident continued to surface, much exaggerated, during the next few years. 
As a means of livelihood compatible with his politics, Doherty set up as a publisher, bookseller, and printer in Manchester from 1832, and he seems to have remained in this business until his death. His great days were over by the middle of the 1830s, although he was still active, on a much reduced scale, until at least the middle of the next decade. In 1838 he made an important statement of evidence before the select committee on workmen's combinations. He died aged fifty-six, almost forgotten, in New Bridge Street, Cheetham, Manchester, on 15 April 1854. 
John Saville', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37365


Dolben, Digby Augustus Stewart Mackworth (1848-1867), poet, was born on 8 February 1848 in Guernsey, the youngest in the family of one daughter and three sons of William Harcourt Isham Mackworth Dolben and his wife, Frances Dolben. Born William Mackworth, his father added his wife's surname to his own: they were distant cousins and she was joint heir of the manor of Finedon, Northamptonshire. Together they assumed their place in the foothills of county aristocracy. The literary interest of the family is indicated by their relationship to the poets Robert Bridges, Arthur Hugh Clough, and Winthrop Mackworth Praed. 
Both of Digby Dolben's parents were deeply religious and almost violently anti-Catholic. He was first sent to a strictly protestant preparatory school in Cheam, then entered Eton College in January 1862, where his house was chosen for the 'staunch Protestant bias' of the cleric in charge. He became fag to his cousin Robert Bridges, whom he had not previously met. Dolben early developed his twin interests in extreme high-church religion and poetry, both of which were marked with strong eroticism. He was sent down from Eton in 1863 for a few months for having made a forbidden visit to a Jesuit house. Early in 1864, before he was sixteen, he became a lay member of an irregular order of English Benedictines under the leadership of 'Father Ignatius' (Joseph Leycester Lyne), and loved to wear a monk's habit and cowl with bare feet. At the end of that year he left Eton finally, to study with private tutors before taking entrance examinations for Balliol College, Oxford. 
In February 1865 Dolben made a brief visit to Oxford, where he was introduced to Gerard Manley Hopkins, their only meeting in person. Hopkins was completely taken with Dolben, who was nearly four years his junior, and his private journal for confession the following year proves how absorbed he was in imperfectly suppressed erotic thoughts of him. Although Dolben was probably not emotionally interested in Hopkins, he admired him and his poetry, and the two young men deeply influenced each other in both their verse and their intentions of becoming Roman Catholic converts, an ambition Dolben had not fulfilled at his death. 
Dolben was an unusually charming and humorous young man, who loved to shock both contemporaries and elders by emotional and religious excess; his poetry reflects his flamboyant interests. He demonstrated enormous fluency and ease, often in high-church devotional poems in which the physical urgency of a boy in his teens spills over into sexual imagery in describing his love of Christ. Bridges, who edited his poetry in 1911, said drily that reading it 'makes one see why schoolmasters wish their boys to play games'. Bridges regarded his work as equal to 'anything that was ever written by any English poet at his age', and it was much admired by Henry James. As it stands, it is among the best of the poetry of the Oxford Movement, and probably a longer life would have produced the mastery foreseen by Bridges and James. 
After two years of preparing with tutors, Dolben fainted during his matriculation examinations for entrance into Balliol College on 2 May 1867, and failed. On 28 June 1867 he was drowned in the River Welland near Luffenham, probably having suffered a stroke, trying to save the life of his tutor's young son. He was nineteen years old, and it was the end of a life of exceptional poetic promise. 
Robert Bernard Martin', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37366


Donald III (b. in or before 1040, d. 1099?), king of Scots, was born before, probably not long before, August 1040, when his father, Duncan I, king of Scots, was killed in battle 'at an immature age' (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 1.581). His mother was a Suthen, of unknown origin, and he had an elder brother, Malcolm III. Another reputed brother, Mael Muire, is attested only by 'Orkneyinga Saga', and the relationship should be viewed with scepticism. Some physical characteristic presumably gave rise to the Gaelic name Domnall Ban, meaning Donald the Fair, by which he was commonly known. On his father's death and the succession of Macbeth (died 1057), Donald presumably fled, and nothing is known of him during the reigns of Macbeth and Malcolm III. 
On Malcolm's death, and that of Edward, the eldest son of his marriage to Margaret, daughter of Edward AEtheling (died 1057), at Alnwick on 13 November 1093, the Scots chose Donald to be their king. Duncan II, Malcolm's eldest son of his first marriage, had lived in Normandy and England for twenty years, and was associated with Anglo-Norman culture; there was almost certainly a reaction also against Margaret (who died within a week), her sons (whom Donald exiled), and English immigrants. 
Hence when Duncan II, with the help of William II, expelled Donald after six months in 1094, Duncan was unable to retain the throne, being forced to send his French knights packing, and then being killed when Donald returned, aided, it seems, by Edmund, second son of Malcolm III and Margaret. Edmund seems to have been given a share of the kingdom, and, if Donald had no son, may have been his intended successor. 
Although Donald made no known attack on northern England (the usual means by which a new king of Scots rewarded his followers), William II set about destabilizing his rule, first recognizing Edgar (d. 1107), the oldest surviving son of Malcolm III, as king in exile, then sending north Edgar AEtheling to put Edgar on the throne (1097). According to William of Malmesbury, Donald was killed by David, later David I ('r'. 1124-53). To be preferred is the Scottish king-list, which claims that Donald was captured and blinded by King Edgar, dying in Rescobie, in Angus; the annals of Tigernach confirm this by noting that he was blinded in 1099, probably the date of his death. The king-list also claims that he was first buried in Dunkeld but that 'Iona holds his bones' (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 2.100); if so, he was the last Scottish king buried there. But the reported burial of Scottish kings on Iona may reflect only unfounded pretensions by the monastery on the island. The claim that he strangled a son of David I in revenge for being blinded is late and improbable. His part in Shakespeare's 'Macbeth' derives from the fanciful tales in 'Scotorum historiae' (1527) by Hector Boece or Boethius (died 1536). 
The name of Donald's wife (if he married) is unknown, but he had a daughter, Bethoc, from whom John Comyn of Badenoch (died 1302) derived his claim to the throne in 1291. 
A. A. M. Duncan', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37367


Douglas, Sir James (1803-1877), governor in Canada, was born on either 5 June or 15 August 1803 in Demerara, British Guiana, the second of three children and the younger son of John Douglas, a merchant, of Glasgow, and an unknown, probably coloured, woman whom he never married, whose surname may have been Ritchie. After a childhood in Lanark, Scotland, where he attended preparatory school, Douglas went to Canada in 1819, employed by a firm soon absorbed by the Hudson's Bay Company. A hot-tempered individual, he early on fought a duel and beat to death a Native American accused of murder. In 1828 he married, 'according to the custom of the country', Amelia, the half Native American daughter of William Connolly, chief factor at Stuart Lake, a marriage which was religiously regularized in 1836. They had thirteen children, of whom one boy and five girls lived to maturity. 
After being transferred to Fort Vancouver as an accountant, Douglas rapidly improved its management and was given more responsibilities, including negotiating with the Russians to the north and the Mexicans in California. Having founded Fort Victoria in 1843, he was sent there as chief factor in 1849. Two years later he was appointed governor of Vancouver Island. Despite opposition to the duality of his role and criticism of his creating a judgeship for his brother-in-law, Douglas presided over the steady growth of both company and colony. During the gold rush of 1858 he moved boldly to close Fraser River to non-company trade, organized the policing of claims, assumed authority over the mainland, and sternly maintained law and order in the face of social upheaval. His effectiveness was admired as his arrogance and conflict of interest were deplored, and he was made governor of the new colony, formed when Vancouver Island was incorporated with British Columbia, on condition he leave the company. In 1859 he went to the brink of war with American troops over San Juan Island, despite his council's urging restraint. He seemed disappointed when the dispute was settled at higher levels. The project of a road connecting the Cariboo goldfields to the coast occupied him from 1862. He was appointed KCB when his governorship of Vancouver Island ended in 1863, and he retired from his British Columbia post in the following year, citing the state of his health as the cause. 
A physically vigorous, tall, and muscular man of dark complexion, moderate in personal habits, industrious but volatile, Douglas spoke fluent French and several Native American dialects. Stiff and cold in personal relations, he was pompous and excessively attached to the trappings of power. He died in Victoria, British Columbia, on 2 August 1877. 
J. M. McCarthy', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37368


Douglas, Keith Castellain (1920-1944), poet, was born on 24 January 1920 at the Garden Road Nursing Home, Tunbridge Wells, Kent, the only child of Captain Keith Sholto Douglas MC, soldier and chicken farmer, and his wife, (Marie) Josephine ('b'. 1887), daughter of Charles Castellain, a man of private means. His childhood was spent in Cranleigh, Surrey, and he was educated at Edgeborough School, Guildford, where he revealed precocious talents as artist, poet, and sportsman, and at Christ's Hospital, London. In 1927 his father left home and, in due course, remarried. Like Lord Byron, who suffered a similar deprivation and whom he would grow to resemble in other ways, Douglas hero-worshipped the absent captain, at twelve beginning an autobiographical essay: 'As a child he was a militarist, and like many of his warlike elders, built up heroic opinions upon little information -- some scrappy war stories of his father.' 
In 1938 Douglas won a scholarship to Merton College, Oxford, where his influential tutor was Edmund Blunden, soldier-poet of an earlier war than that for which Douglas enlisted in 1940. A year later, now a second lieutenant, he sailed to Palestine to join the Nottinghamshire Sherwood Rangers yeomanry, a cavalry regiment that had recently exchanged its horses for tanks. Moving with them to north Africa, he was initially held in enforced inactivity behind the lines, a problem which he solved in characteristic style: 'The Battle of Alamein began on the 23rd of October, 1942. Six days afterwards I set out in direct disobedience of orders to rejoin my regiment. My batman was delighted with this manoeuvre. 'I like you, sir,' he said, 'You're shit or bust, you are.' This praise gratified me a lot.' So ends the introduction to Douglas's prose memoir of that battle and its aftermath, 'Alamein to Zem Zem'. Published posthumously in 1946, with his own illustrations and an appendix of poems, this rendered the war in the western desert as graphically as Blunden's 'Undertones of War' (1928) had depicted life and death on the western front. 
Douglas had an artist's eye for the horrors -- and also the absurdities -- of battle. Technically, his war poems show the influence of those of Wilfred Owen, but their language is simpler, more direct, and they have nothing of his indignation. There was less cause for indignation in the desert than in the trenches, and Douglas never lost his insatiable appetite for experience. Where Owen's preface to his poems had declared 'This book is not about heroes', Douglas in both his poetry and prose celebrates the last stand of the chivalric hero, men such as his colonel, Piccadilly Jim. In his poem 'Aristocrats' he asks: '
How can I live among this gentle 

obsolescent breed of heroes, and not weep? 

' His language, finely responsive to his theme, fuses ancient and modern: his fellow officers are 'gentle', like the 'verray parfit gentil knight' of Geoffrey Chaucer, and at the same time 'obsolescent'. 
Douglas was wounded by a mine in January 1943, but survived the desert campaign. Back in England for Christmas, he wrote some of his best poems, collected and copied others, and by the end of March had completed manuscripts of 'Alamein to Zem Zem' and a volume of poems. 
Douglas commanded a tank troop in the main assault on the Normandy beaches, and his death outside the village of St Pierre, on 9 June 1944, robbed English literature -- as had Owen's death in 1918 -- of the most individual and accomplished poet of his generation. He was unmarried, and was buried in the war cemetery at Tilly-sur-Seulles, France. 


@@@@@


doc= 37369


Dowson, Ernest Christopher (1867-1900), poet, was born on 2 August 1867 at 11 The Grove, Lee, Kent, the elder son (there were no daughters) of Alfred Christopher Dowson (1843-1894), nephew of the colonial politician and poet Alfred Domett and friend of Robert Browning and Robert Louis Stevenson, and his wife, Annie Chalmers Swan (1848/9-1895), of Scottish descent, and daughter of Robert Dalgliesh Swan, East India Company officer. In August 1894 Ernest's father died (possibly intentionally) from an overdose of a sleeping draught; his mother committed suicide by hanging six months later. After irregular schooling he went up to Queen's College, Oxford, in 1886. He left in March 1888 after five terms, without completing the papers for honour moderations. 
After leaving Oxford, Dowson worked supervising the dry dock which his father had owned, Bridge Dock, on the Thames at Limehouse, which later featured as 'Rainham's Dock' in 'A Comedy of Masks'. His work there was not characterized by any great commitment; he preferred instead to be in the London literary society of Lionel Pigot Johnson, Richard Le Gallienne, Oscar Wilde, and Aubrey Beardsley. He contributed to the principal aesthetic magazines: the 'Century Guild Hobby Horse', the 'Yellow Book', and 'The Savoy'. He was a member of the Rhymers' Club and contributed poems to the two collections of their work (1892 and 1894). The club met at a pub in Fleet Street, as Yeats, its most famous member, remembers in 'The Grey Rock': '
Poets with whom I learned my trade, 

Companions of the Cheshire Cheese. 
(W. B. Yeats, 'Responsibilities', 1914)' In the same poem he particularly singles out Dowson and Johnson: '
Dowson and Johnson most I praise -- 

To troop with those the world's forgot. 
(ibid.)' In 'The tragic generation' (book 4 of 'The Trembling of the Veil', 1922) Yeats recalled the personalities of the 1890s, including Dowson, and helped to create the myth of the decadent 'poetes maudits'. The myth has been revised and modified slightly since Yeats, but the general picture of Dowson as a decadent, prizing artistic production above all else and living a life opposed to Victorian views of propriety and probity, remains. Dowson collaborated with Arthur Moore on the novel 'A Comedy of Masks' (1893). His principal published works were 'Dilemmas' (1895), 'Verses' (1896), 'The Pierrot of the Minute: a Dramatic Phantasy in one Act' (1897), 'Adrian Rome' (1899; with Moore), and 'Decorations' (1899). He was assistant editor on the short-lived magazine 'The Critic' in 1890, for which he wrote 'Between the acts', 'The cult of the child', and articles on music-halls. 
The principal love affair of Dowson's life was with Adelaide (Missie) Foltinowicz (1877/8-1903), who was eleven when he first met her serving in a restaurant, The Poland, in Sherwood Street, London, in November 1889. She was his Beatrice and the dedicatee of 'Verses'. She married the tailor August Noelte, causing Dowson great mental anguish. He regarded his unsatisfied love for her as something like Keats's for Fanny Brawne. Through the letters and poetry there runs a strong current of paedophilia, which has an erotic strain; but it is tempered by a humane and romantic appreciation of the freshness and generosity of children not yet tainted by the manners of society. In his letters this positive appreciation runs alongside outbreaks of striking misanthropy. 'Growth' is an important poem on the loss of childhood. Dowson's poetry is lyrical, mannered, literary, mellifluous, and in a diction operating on a narrow register. The principal modern influence is A. C. Swinburne, but one can also trace the influence of the French symbolists, especially Verlaine, as well as that of the classical Latin poets. T. S. Eliot felt Dowson to be the most gifted and technically perfect poet of his age. His most famous poem is 'Non sum qualis eram bonae sub regno cynarae', modelled on the first ode in book 4 of Horace and containing the well-known refrain 'I have been faithful to thee, Cynara! in my fashion'. 'Vitae summa brevis spem nos vetat incohare longam', with its reference to 'the days of wine and roses', is a quintessentially 1890s piece. 
About 1891-2 Dowson was received into the Roman Catholic church, and he produced certain religio-aesthetic poems, such as 'Nuns of Perpetual Adoration' and 'Carthusians'. The dry dock was relinquished to the foreman in 1894 and Dowson lived in Brittany, principally in Pont-Aven. Leonard Smithers paid him a salary for producing translations. His best work in this field included Emile Zola's 'La terre' (1894), Louis Couperus's 'Majeste' (1894), Honore de Balzac's 'La fille aux yeux d'or' (1896), Pierre Choderlos de Laclos's 'Les liaisons dangereuses' (1898), Guillaume Dubois's 'Memoires du Cardinal Dubois' (1899), Voltaire's 'La pucelle d'Orleans' (1899), and Edmond and Jules de Goncourt's 'Les maitresses de Louis XV' (as 'The Confidantes of a King: the Mistresses of Louis XV', 1907). Smithers was also editor of 'The Savoy' and encouraged Dowson to submit work. But Smithers's dissolute lifestyle had an adverse influence on Dowson. The combination of self-indulgence, drink, depression caused by the failure of the dry dock, his parents' deaths, the betrayal (as he saw it) of Missie, and the tuberculosis he contracted in 1894 weakened his resistance. Although owed money for the family business, he was now impoverished, and spent the last three weeks of his life being looked after by the author Robert Harborough Sherard and his wife. He died, unmarried, on 23 February 1900 at the Sherards' house, 26 Sandhurst Gardens, Catford, London, and was buried on 27 February in Ladywell cemetery, Lewisham, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 37370


Drake, Judith (fl. 1696-1723), writer and medical practitioner, was the wife of James Drake (bap. 1666, d. 1707), physician and political writer. Although no marriage is traceable the register of St Andrew's, Holborn, records the baptism of 'Ann daughter of James Drake and Judith'. It was probably from James Drake, a fellow of the Royal Society and of the College of Physicians, that she acquired her medical knowledge. In 1723, summoned to appear before Sir Hans Sloane, president of the Royal College of Physicians, she defended herself against accusations of medical malpractice made by 'a malicious informant'. Apparently she regularly dispensed medicines to 'those not in acute distempers' among her 'own sex and little children'. She little suspected that this would make her 'obnoxious to the censure of the College'. The complainant had made no objection 'against the price (which he all along knew) nor the success of the medicines, till they came to be pay'd for'. He had accused her of administering poisons, but, as she retorted, 'the only poison... administered was to his Ears -- in a demand for money'. Since he had made the accusation his mistress had three times sent for more medicines. As Drake commented, 'when a man permits that to be taken by his Friend which he calls poison, he must not wonder if we reflect upon him for want of sense or sincerity' (Sloane MS 4047, fol. 38). 
Drake is best known for her probable authorship of the anonymous pamphlet 'An Essay in Defence of the Female Sex' (1696), frequently ascribed to Mary Astell. It was included in a catalogue of second-hand books sold after 1741 by the publisher Edmund Curll, where it was described as written by 'Mrs. Drake, probably a sister of Dr. James Drake, who attended to the publication of the pamphlet' (F. M. Smith, appendix). The author's preface refers to 'the gentleman, who was so kind as to take care of the Publication of it, only to excuse me from appearing'. 'The same gentleman' persuaded her not to put her name to the pamphlet for fear of the malice of men who 'greedily... suck in anything to the prejudice of A Woman'. She wrote that there were 'some Men, (I hear) who will not allow this Piece to be written by a Woman'. The true author, they held, was James Drake. She saw no reason why her sex 'shou'd be robb'd of the Honour of it, since there have been Women in all Ages whose Writings might vie with those of the greatest Men' (Drake, 'Essay in Defence of the Female Sex'). James Drake in the preface wrote an elegant poem in praise of his wife's work. 
Written in a lively and witty style, Drake's pamphlet defends women against the accusations of vanity, impertinence, enviousness, dissimulation, and inconstancy which men make against them. In satirical sketches of the Scholar, the Country Squire, the Beau, the Virtuoso, the Poet, and the Coffee-house Politicians she revealed the weaknesses of men. While admitting to 'a very great Veneration' for the Royal Society in general, she thought there was 'a vast difference between the particular Members'. She attacked the ''Mushrome' and 'Cockel-shell' Hunters'. What 'noble Remedies, what serviceable Instruments' had they produced to equal 'so good a Med'cine as Stew'd 'Prunes', or so necessary an Instrument as a 'Flye-Flap''? She argued that women by nature were no less talented than men. 'Never design'd for Fatigue', they were 'chiefly intended for Thought and the Exercise of the Mind'. Men's physical strength made them more fitted 'for Action and Labour' (Drake, 'Essay', 18). Aware of women's potential to 'become their Superiours' men had denied them access to education (ibid., 21). She had sharp words for those men who believed time spent in women's company was 'mis'employ'd' (ibid., 6) but admitted that among the 'inferior sort', 'the Condition of the two Sexes' was 'more level' than among their social superiors (ibid., 15-16). 
Drake appears to have abandoned writing after 1696, but when her husband died on 2 March 1707, having just completed his second volume of 'Anthropologia Nova, or, A New System of Anatomy', Judith published it, edited the text, and was responsible for the dedication to Henry, duke of Beaufort. In it she described herself as a 'Retir'd Disconsolate Woman, whose Great Misfortune it is that it was not offer'd to Your Grace by a better Hand'. 


@@@@@


doc= 37371


Dresser, Christopher (1834-1904), designer and botanist, was born on 4 July 1834 in Glasgow, the second son and third of six children of Christopher Dresser, excise officer, of Yorkshire, and his wife, Mary Nettleton, of Norton, near Doncaster, Yorkshire. The family was posted to Sussex in 1847 and Dresser was educated at the Government School of Design at Somerset House in London from 1847 to 1854. He became arguably the first industrial designer, identified by name on his work, which included ceramic, glass, metal, furniture, wallpapers, and textiles. He was influential as a theorist in Britain and America and anticipated, especially in his metalwork, the functional style of the modern movement. 
The interests that provided a consistent source of inspiration throughout his career, botany and oriental art, developed while Dresser was still at the School of Design. He also came under the influence there of Henry Cole, Richard Redgrave, and Owen Jones, whose 'Grammar of Ornament' of 1856 included Dresser's first published illustration. 
Unlike William Morris, who was in some ways influenced by him, Dresser believed it necessary to co-operate with industry to bring well-made objects within reach of the widest possible public. He made a point of working with modern materials such as cast iron and linoleum. His design theory was based on the belief that natural forms should be abstracted and made geometric for use in ornamentation, and he likened the designer's mind to 'the vital force of the plant ever developing itself into forms of beauty'. His personal motto was 'truth, beauty, power'. His interest in natural sciences ran parallel with his design work at the beginning of his career, and his appointments included the chair of botany applied to the fine arts at the Department of Science and Art, South Kensington (1860), and the chair of ornamental art and botany at the Crystal Palace (1862). In 1854 he had married Thirza, daughter of William Perry, a lay missionary of Madeley, Shropshire. They had five sons and eight daughters, and Dresser's hectic career was driven in part by the need to support them all. 
Among Dresser's first important writings were 'On the relation of science to ornamental art', a paper given to the Royal Institution in 1857, and 'The Rudiments of Botany' and 'Unity and Variety', both of 1859. On the strength of the two latter he was awarded a doctorate by Jena University in 1860. He was always extremely proud of this and made a point of being known as Dr Dresser. He was disappointed in the same year when his application for the chair of botany at London University was unsuccessful. 
In 1862 Dresser published 'The Art of Decorative Design'. It shows the influence of A. W. N. Pugin and was important as the first popular book on design to show readers how to create designs themselves. In the battle of the styles, however, Dresser remained neutral, declaring that no style of ornament had yet arisen which had not possessed 'some beautiful feature'. In 1880 he set up the Art Furnishers' Alliance at Bond Street to sell 'artistic house furnishing material'. Gradually his scientific interests took less of Dresser's time. In 1876-7 he made his first visit to Japan and this confirmed his admiration for oriental design and inspired much of his best work, as well as a book, 'Japan: its Architecture, Art, and Art Manufactures' (1882). Dresser's unusually prominent role as a named designer and the 'rediscovery' of his work in the 1930s have perhaps caused him to be overrated as an innovator. His work forms a distinguished part of Victorian design, but is not 'sui generis'. Dresser died suddenly at the Hotel Central, Mulhouse, Alsace, Germany, of a heart attack while on a business trip, on 24 November 1904, and was buried at Mulhouse in an unmarked grave. His work was largely forgotten until 1936 when Nikolaus Pevsner acclaimed him as one of the pioneers of modern design. A sketchbook of his designs is at Ipswich Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 37372


Drummond, Dugald (1840-1912), railway engineer, was born on 1 January 1840 in Ardrossan, Ayrshire, the son of George Drummond, a permanent-way inspector on the Bowling to Balloch railway, and his wife, Christina Thomson. He had at least one brother, Peter Drummond. In 1856 he commenced an engineering apprenticeship with Forrest and Barr of Glasgow. After gaining experience with his father's railway and with Peto, Brassey, and Betts at Birkenhead, he worked under Samuel Waite Johnson at the Cowlairs (Glasgow) works of the Edinburgh and Glasgow (later North British) Railway. In 1865 he became foreman erector at the Inverness workshops of the Highland Railway, under William Stroudley, and works manager in the following year. In 1870 he followed Stroudley, with whom he had developed a close friendship, when the latter moved to the London, Brighton, and South Coast Railway as locomotive and carriage superintendent, and Drummond became locomotive and carriage works manager of that railway. 
In 1875 Drummond was appointed locomotive superintendent of the North British Railway, where he found the locomotive stock and workshops somewhat run down. He rapidly took steps to improve and re-equip the Cowlairs workshops and to introduce new passenger and freight locomotives of improved performance, initially closely following Stroudley's designs. He then introduced a new type of 4-4-0 express locomotive, with a leading bogie which gave a much smoother and safer ride over curved track at speed, and these ran for fifty years from their entry into service in 1876. This type of locomotive was repeated by him after he transferred to the Caledonian Railway in 1882 and was further developed by his successors on that railway for the next thirty years. Some of these locomotives took part in the railway 'race' from London to Aberdeen in 1895, when there was keen competition between the west and east coast routes for Anglo-Scottish passenger traffic, and averaged well over 60 m.p.h. from Carlisle to Aberdeen on severe gradients. Drummond also carried out extensive tests to improve the efficiency of his locomotives. 
In 1890 Drummond resigned from the Caledonian Railway to establish an engineering works in Queensland, Australia. This project was abortive and he returned to form the Glasgow railway engineering works, where industrial locomotives were built. In 1895 he was appointed to succeed William Adams as locomotive superintendent of the London and South Western Railway, where he had new and well-equipped locomotive workshops built in Eastleigh to replace the existing inadequate facilities in Nine Elms in London. He introduced new main-line and suburban passenger and freight locomotives developed from those he had designed in Scotland, which gave excellent results and had similarly elegant outlines, although his later and more powerful 4-6-0 type locomotives were less successful. He was a highly innovative engineer, introducing developments in boiler design and the use of locomotive exhaust steam for pre-heating the feed water. 
Drummond was a forceful personality and could be dour and difficult, although fair in dealings with his men, who appreciated his locomotives and respected him personally. He was a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers and the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, becoming a Telford medallist of the former for his outstanding paper in 1897 on locomotive efficiency trials on the Caledonian Railway. He was married and had one son and four daughters. Drummond died at his home, Morves, South Bank, Surbiton, Surrey, on 7 November 1912, while still in office. 
George W. Carpenter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37373


Drummond, Peter (1850-1918), locomotive engineer, was born on 13 August 1850 in Polmont, Stirlingshire, the son of George Drummond, who was then a permanent-way inspector on that section of the Edinburgh and Glasgow (later North British) Railway, and his wife, Christina Thomson. When Peter was young the family moved to Maryhill, Glasgow, where he served an apprenticeship with Forrest and Barr, general engineers and millwrights, with whom his elder brother Dugald Drummond, ten years his senior and a much more forceful character, had also been apprenticed. In 1871, after serving his time, Drummond moved to the locomotive works of the London, Brighton, and South Coast Railway in Brighton where Dugald was already working under William Stroudley. On 29 August 1876 Drummond married Mary McLay Phillips, a dressmaker, the daughter of John Phillips, a Maryhill joiner. They had at least one daughter. When Dugald returned to Glasgow in 1875 to become the locomotive superintendent of the North British Railway, Peter too came north, securing a position at that railway's Cowlairs works. In 1882 when Dugald 'crossed the tracks' to become the locomotive superintendent of the rival Caledonian Railway he took Peter with him, Peter being appointed assistant locomotive engineer -- a post reputed to have been created especially for him. Whether originally appointed on merit or not, Drummond possessed good organizational skills and is credited with reorganizing St Rollox works into a far more efficient unit. In 1890 the two brothers' paths diverged: Dugald left to set up a private concern while Peter stayed at St Rollox, supervising the production of many famous Caledonian locomotive classes and being appointed works manager in 1895. 
In 1897 Drummond moved to Inverness to become the locomotive, carriage, and wagon superintendent of the Highland Railway. As an astute engineer who was never afraid to copy, he built a 4-6-0 express passenger locomotive that his predecessor, David Jones, had on the drawing board when he was appointed, merely replacing the Jones style chimney and cab with designs similar to contemporary practice on the Caledonian. These engines proved so successful that fifty similar machines were purchased by the French Chemins de Fer de l'Est. He reorganized the locomotive works at Lochgorm along modern lines and designed a variety of successful snowploughs. When he turned his attentions to new locomotive designs he looked more to the Caledonian and to his elder brother's design than to any previous Highland tradition for inspiration -- indeed throughout his design career he was highly influenced by Dugald, borrowing many features both good and bad and producing engines which possessed a 'family likeness'. He perhaps only became his own man in terms of design after Dugald's death in 1912. Among the bad features borrowed were firebox cross water tubes and steam reversing, both of which were disliked by crews; otherwise his locomotives were simple and robust. In 1906 his status was elevated to chief mechanical engineer. 
Drummond moved to Kilmarnock in 1912 to become the locomotive, carriage, and wagon superintendent of the Glasgow and South Western Railway at a salary of $1100 per annum. Overbearing, and in open contempt of his predecessor, James Manson, he made sweeping changes to established practice, including the imposition of the 'Drummond Standard' left-hand drive, and built a series of huge engines -- his first three designs were the heaviest of their wheel arrangement in the UK at the time. Unfortunately these engines, encumbered with typical Drummond gadgetry of feed pumps and steam driers, were not very successful and were disliked by the crews and maintenance staff alike. After about three years at Kilmarnock an unexplained and total change took place in him. Previously rough and overbearing, not unlike his brother, he became a quiet man, fair in dealing with his men and building engines which were sound in design and even brilliant in performance. 
Drummond was elected a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1898. He took a keen interest in the education of his men and in their improvement societies. On 30 March 1918 he became ill and died of cancer on 30 June 1918 at Belmont, Grange Terrace, Kilmarnock, aged sixty-seven. 


@@@@@


doc= 37374


Duff, Edward Gordon (1863-1924), bibliographer, was born on 16 February 1863 in Liverpool, the youngest of four sons (there were no daughters) of Robert Duff, merchant, of Prince's Park, Liverpool, and his wife, Jane Gordon. He was educated at Cheltenham College, entered Wadham College, Oxford, in 1883, and took a pass degree in classics in 1887. While at Oxford he began to draw up a catalogue of the fifteenth-century books in the Bodleian Library. Neither the Bodleian nor the British Museum, however, would offer him a place, and in 1889 he began to read for the bar. 
Duff had to wait for more congenial work until 1893, when Mrs Rylands appointed him her librarian. He had the task of cataloguing her books (including the Spencer library) advising on new purchases, organizing the collection, and supervising its transfer to the new John Rylands Library in Manchester. The library opened in 1900, but Duff resigned shortly afterwards, having quarrelled with the trustees. He never took another permanent job, but supported himself with freelance work (he catalogued books for the London booksellers Pearson & Co.), with academic appointments (he was Sandars reader in bibliography at Cambridge in 1899, 1904, and 1911), and with the income from his books. 
Duff's first work, 'Early Printed Books', was published in 1893, followed by 'Early English Printing' in 1896. His works on early printing included two textbooks, 'The Printers, Stationers and Bookbinders of Westminster and London from 1476 to 1535' (1906) and 'The English Provincial Printers, Stationers and Bookbinders to 1557' (1912), a biographical dictionary, 'A Century of the English Book Trade, 1457-1557' (1905), and a bibliography, twenty-eight years in the making, of 'Fifteenth Century English Books' (1917). A work on armorial book-stamps remained unpublished. 
Duff regarded bibliography as a science: his work set new standards of accuracy. He was scathing in his criticism of colleagues whose work did not match these standards. A Liverpool friend remembered him as 'a tall spare man with alert eyes and a very beautiful voice, but with an ironic and often unkind humour about his contemporaries'. 
Duff never married. He lived in Liverpool until 1915, and thereafter in Oxford. He died at his home, 293 Woodstock Road, Oxford, on 28 September 1924. 
Arnold Hunt', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37375


Duncan, William Henry (1805-1863), physician and medical officer of health, was born in Liverpool on 27 January 1805, the third son and fifth of the seven children of George Duncan, merchant of Liverpool, and his wife, Christian, the youngest daughter of James Currie, minister of Middlebie and of Kirkpatrick Fleming, Dumfriesshire, and a sister of James Currie MD FRS of Liverpool. He was educated under the supervision of his uncle, the Revd Henry Duncan DD, at Ruthwell manse, his tutors including Robert Mitchell. From 1825 to 1829 he studied at Edinburgh University. He graduated MD in 1829; the dedicatees of his thesis, 'De ventris in reliquum corpus potestate' ('On the influence of the abdomen over the body in general'), included professors William P. Alison and James Home. 
By 1830 Duncan was in medical practice in Liverpool, also serving as a physician at the Central and North dispensaries. His published analysis of the cholera cases he attended during the 1832 epidemic drew attention to the correlations between disease and environment (in particular the habitations, principally in cellars and courts, of the poor). In 1804 Currie had also written on the relationship between health and environment in Liverpool. Duncan submitted evidence to the inquiry into the corporation of Liverpool (1833), the commission on the condition of the poor in Ireland (1836 report), and the House of Commons' select committee on the health of towns (1840), detailing the deplorable 'sanitary state of the labouring classes' in Liverpool, whose population was rapidly increasing, principally by migration from Ireland and elsewhere. His paper 'On the physical causes of the high rate of mortality in Liverpool' (1843) was particularly influential; Liverpool he declared to be 'the most unhealthy town in England'. He was a prominent member of the Liverpool branch of the Health of Towns Association, established in 1845. 
It was largely due to Duncan's efforts that the corporation of Liverpool promoted the 'Liverpool Sanitary Act' 1846, which established a public health service as an essential activity of local government. Under the act Duncan was appointed medical officer of health for the borough of Liverpool, from 1 January 1847. The first such appointment in England, initially part-time, the post became full-time in 1848 at an annual salary of $750. 
A most conscientious man, of generally a quiet and retiring disposition, Duncan, as a pioneer in sanitary reform, faced opposition but robustly defended his actions and publications against criticism. He enjoyed a good relationship with the corporation and particularly with its able engineer, James Newlands. However, he encountered difficulties with the select vestry (responsible for poor-law institutions), particularly during the years when epidemics of typhus (1847) and cholera (1849, 1854) ravaged the town. To his influence and actions may be attributed a significant reduction in the population living in cellars and other 'unhealthy dwellings', and a general improvement in environmental hygiene. He established methods of work, and initiated courses of improvement under which, by 1890, the average general death rate of Liverpool was declared by Sir John Simon to have been reduced by 'probably at least a fourth part' of the rate which prevailed when Duncan had become medical officer of health. 
Duncan was a physician at Liverpool's Northern Hospital from 1837 to 1838 and at Liverpool Infirmary from 1843 to 1848. He lectured at the Liverpool Royal Institution school of medicine and surgery (from 1844 the Liverpool Infirmary medical school) from 1835 to 1848, and was the school's secretary in 1844-5. He helped to establish the Liverpool Medical Society (of which he was secretary from 1833 and president from 1836 to 1838) and also the Liverpool Medical Institution (in 1840 he became its first secretary). He was an active member of the Literary and Philosophical Society of Liverpool from 1837 onwards and served as its treasurer. 
Duncan was twice married: in 1848 to Philadelphia (died 1850), eldest daughter of James Rickarby, merchant, of Liverpool; and secondly, in 1853, to Catherine (died 1909), daughter of William Duncan MacAndrew, merchant, of Liverpool. He and his second wife had a son and a daughter. Duncan, whose health had been failing for several years, died in West Park, Elgin, on 23 May 1863. 
Adrian R. Allan', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37376


Duncombe, Sir John (bap. 1622, d. 1687), politician and government official, was baptized on 20 July 1622 in Battlesden, Bedfordshire, the second but eldest surviving son of William Duncombe (died 1655) of Battlesden, landowner, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Sir John Poyntz of South Ockenden, Essex. Educated at Eton College, from about 1634 to 1638, he was briefly enrolled at Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1638, but between 1641 and 1646 was abroad, registering at Leiden University in 1643. On his return he faced a conflict of loyalties. His father actively supported the parliamentarian cause in the English civil war but John Duncombe's sympathies were royalist and his marriage, on 12 July 1646, to Elizabeth, daughter of a former chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, Sir Humphrey May, allied him to one of the Stuarts' most loyal families of servants. In 1648 a knighthood was conferred upon Duncombe and in 1655, upon his father's death, he succeeded to his Bedfordshire estates. 
Duncombe entered parliament in 1660 as member for Bury St Edmunds, which he represented until 1678. Active in committees and a frequent speaker he was given office as a commissioner of the Ordnance office in May 1664. The appointment, held until 1670, associated him with an energetic department and Duncombe here acquired a modest reputation for administrative skills. However, in May 1667 the political world was surprised by Duncombe's selection as member of a powerful Treasury commission and elevation to the privy council. Eclipsed by more dynamic colleagues, such as Anthony Ashley Cooper (first Baron Ashley and later first earl of Shaftesbury), Sir Thomas Clifford (later first Baron Clifford of Chudleigh), and Sir William Coventry, Duncombe was nevertheless recognized by Samuel Pepys as a painstaking, if pompous, public servant of the kind he could respect. His personal weaknesses and his deference to Sir William Coventry were satirized by George Villiers, second duke of Buckingham, in a play, 'The Country Gentleman' (1669), but unlike Coventry he survived the humiliation and continued to serve Charles II as a ministerial spokesman on financial legislation. 
In November 1672 Duncombe succeeded Lord Ashley as chancellor of the exchequer. This was still a minor office with little independent authority, and Duncombe continued to play second fiddle to the successive lords treasurer with whom he served. It was a role to which he seemed well suited, for he displayed little originality of mind and almost no strong convictions -- except in defence of the Church of England. On the key religious policies of this first age of half tolerated dissent Duncombe took a consistently conservative stance, sharing Anglican prejudices against nonconformists and Roman Catholics alike. He helped to frame much of the persecuting legislation of the reign, such as the 'Conventicle Acts' of 1664 and 1670. However, it was on financial policies that he chose to oppose his senior colleague, the lord treasurer, Thomas Osborne, first earl of Danby, and in May 1676 he was dismissed, losing his pension in 1678 and his place in the council in 1679. He died in Battlesden on 4 March 1687 and was succeeded in his estates by his son William ('c'.1647-1704) whose undistinguished career in parliament and administration was a paler shadow of his own. There were six other children. 
H. G. Roseveare', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37377


Dunlop, William (1792-1848), surgeon and pioneer in Canada, was born in Greenock, Renfrewshire, on 19 November 1792, the youngest of the three sons of Alexander Dunlop (1766-1840), banker, of Keppoch House, Dunbartonshire, and his wife, Janet Graham (1769-1795). The temperance pioneer John Dunlop was his elder brother, and the lawyer and politician Alexander Colquhoun-Stirling-Murray-Dunlop was a half-brother by his father's second marriage. He was educated in Greenock and from 1806 studied medicine at Glasgow University and then London University. He always styled himself MD, but appears not to have taken his degree. He passed his army medical examinations in 1812, and the following year was appointed assistant surgeon to the 89th regiment of foot, with whom he served in Upper Canada in the Anglo-American War. He enjoyed the war but not army life in peacetime, and retired on half pay in 1817 to go to Calcutta, where he edited a tory newspaper in opposition to James Silk Buckingham's 'Calcutta Journal'; later he went to the Bay of Bengal, where unsuccessful efforts to rid an island of tigers to turn it into a resort left him with the nickname Tiger. In 1820 he returned to Scotland to recover from fever, and contributed a series of sketches about India to 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine'. After turning his hand to lecturing on medical jurisprudence in Edinburgh, he went in 1824 to London to edit the 'British Press', and founded 'The Telescope', which survived for a year. 
In 1826 Dunlop was taken on by the Canada Company as warden of the woods and forests, to inspect the company's lands and to monitor settlement. He performed this task with considerable enjoyment, roaming round the countryside, devising often impractical and grandiose schemes for the company's advancement, attracting notice to himself, stirring up controversy in the press, and getting himself appointed commissioner of the peace. In 1832 he published a book under the pseudonym a Backwoodsman. Masquerading as 'Statistical Sketches of Upper Canada', this alleged guide for immigrants was in fact a collection of jolly anecdotes and aphorisms. While he could play the fool in print, he was also astute and able, as witnessed in his successful defence of the Canada Company before the house of assembly in 1835. 
In the disturbances of 1837 Dunlop enjoyed himself raising a militia (The Bloody Useless), but after equipping it from the company's stores, he fell out with its directors and resigned in 1838. The company and he had suited each other in the pioneering phase of settlement, but as it became more conventional, Dunlop proved too exuberant and idiosyncratic. He was elected for Huron to the house of assembly in the interest of the anti-company Colbornites in 1841 and 1844. He proved a moderate tory, whose speeches were 'frequently more notable for their humour than their grasp of the issues' ('DCB', 262). In 1846 he became superintendent of the Lachine Canal. The following year the 'Literary Garland' of Montreal published his humorous and colourful 'Recollections of the American War', which has come to be seen as his best work, although it attracted little attention at the time. He died, unmarried, on 29 June 1848 at Cote St Paul, near Montreal, where he lived, and was buried first in Hamilton and later in Goderich, Upper Canada, which he had helped to lay out in his Canada Company days. 
The success of Dunlop's writings depended on his conscious cultivation of himself as comic hero, and this also left a legacy of tales and legends of his feats, adventures, and practical jokes which long outlived him, and formed an important part of the backwoodsman myth. 


@@@@@


doc= 37378


Dunne, John William (1875-1949), writer on philosophy, was born in south Africa, the elder son among the three children of General Sir John Hart Dunne KCB of Cartron, co. Roscommon, and his wife, Julia Elizabeth, daughter of William R. Chapman of Whitby, Yorkshire. He was brought up in south Africa, and at the age of six had a serious accident which confined him to bed for three years. He read a great deal as a child and later said that he read Euclid as easily as an adult reads a novel. At seventeen he became a pupil on a farm. After serving with the imperial yeomanry in the South African War he became an aeronautical engineer, using his observation of seabirds in flight to design a revolutionary type of monoplane with swept-back wings. The War Office was sufficiently impressed to employ him, with a view to the production of a prototype, in 1906, but the model was not accepted. 
Dunne would have been forgotten -- except, perhaps, by fly-fishermen, for his first book was a beginners' guide to the art of the dry fly -- if 'An Experiment with Time' (1927) had not enjoyed an immediate and lasting success. In it he described a succession of his dreams over a period of thirty years which seemed to show glimpses of the future, and provided a theory of time to account for them. Among those who were impressed was H. G. Wells, who found the book 'fantastically interesting'. It was widely praised, even in 'Nature', which might have been sceptical. A suggestion that Dunne threw out caught many a reader's fancy: anybody, he argued, could obtain the same results as he had simply by having a pad and a pencil beside the bed and writing down remembered dreams immediately on waking up. 
'Dunne dreams' became common colloquial usage for dreams foreshadowing future experiences. His 'serialism', however, the theory he provided to account for them, failed to convince scientists that it fused with the new physics. Dunne himself went out of his way to insist that his theory was free from any occult taint, but 'An Experiment with Time', revised and expanded in 1934, was to remain in print for over half a century and, ironically, it won the reputation of doing more to convince the general public of the reality of clairvoyance, in the form of precognition, than all the labours of the psychical researchers whom Dunne so mistrusted. 
Dunne belonged to 'the military section of Britain's old upper class', as J. B. Priestley, who based 'Time and the Conways' (1937) on his interpretation of Dunne's theory, was to recall; 'he looked and behaved like the old regular officer type crossed with a mathematician and an engineer'. He was also 'as far removed from any suggestion of the seer as it was possible to imagine' (Priestley, 99, 244-61). 
In 1928 Dunne married Cicely Marion Violet Joan, daughter of Geoffrey Cecil Twistleton-Wykeham-Fiennes, eighteenth Baron Saye and Sele, of Broughton Castle, Banbury, Oxfordshire. They had one son and one daughter. Dunne died on 24 August 1949 in Tracey House Nursing Home, Banbury. 
Brian Inglis', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37379


Durham, (Mary) Edith (1863-1944), traveller and anthropologist, was born in London on 8 December 1863, the eldest of nine children (six girls and three boys) of Arthur Edward Durham (1834-1895), senior consulting surgeon of Guy's Hospital, and his wife, Mary, daughter of William Ellis, an economist colleague of John Stuart Mill. A brother, Herbert Edward Durham (1866-1945), worked with Ronald Ross on malaria research, and a sister, Frances Hermia Durham, was the first woman assistant secretary in the civil service. 
After attending Bedford College (1878-82) Edith Durham decided to become an artist, and trained at the Royal Academy Schools. She illustrated the reptiles volume of the 'Cambridge Natural History', and one of her London scenes is in the Guildhall Gallery. 
Following an illness, and dismayed at the prospect of remaining a home-bound spinster, Edith Durham began, when already nearly forty, to travel rough in the then hardly visited Balkans, and she described her experiences in a series of vivid and forthright books. While doing relief work after the Macedonian insurrection of 1903, she found that cash in transit was entrusted to Albanians. Intrigued, she made a series of forays on horseback into the trackless tribal areas of northern Albania, and quickly became the champion of the mountaineers, whose lands were coveted by neighbouring nations. As a woman she evoked in her hosts a protective courtesy, mingled with astonishment. Unable to imagine anyone travelling for pleasure, or out of curiosity, they assumed that the king of England must have sent her to discover and redress their grievances. Overarching local events was the terminal collapse of the Ottoman empire. Almost alone, she rightly interpreted the situation as a conflict less of religious faiths than of nationalities, with overlapping claims based on transitory periods of medieval greatness. The Albanians, as a predominantly Muslim people, were at a disadvantage compared with their Christian neighbours, despite their keen sense of nationality and their ethnic links with the indigenous Illyrians of pre-classical times. 
Edith Durham sought to redress the balance in dispatches for 'The Times' and the 'Manchester Guardian' and through indefatigable lobbying in Whitehall and elsewhere. Aubrey Herbert, with whom she founded an Anglo-Albanian association, said that 'she restored Albania to the memory of Europe'. In Albania she was known as the queen of the mountaineers, and streets there have remained named after her through all changes of regime. 
Edith Durham's studies of Balkan ethnography led to gifts of artefacts to the British Museum, the Pitt Rivers Museum in Oxford, and elsewhere, and she wrote a pioneering book on the subject 'Some Tribal Origins, Laws and Customs of the Balkans' (1928). She gave her collection of folk costume to the Bankfield Museum, Halifax, and her photographs and sketches to the Royal Anthropological Institute, of which she was a council member and the first woman vice-president. She died in London on 15 November 1944. She was unmarried. 
Harry Hodgkinson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37380


Dyson, Humfrey (d. 1633), book collector, was probably the son of Christopher Dyson (died 1609), wax chandler of the parish of St Alban, Wood Street, London, and his wife, Mary. He was practising as a notary public by 1609, when he witnessed Christopher's will, and continued to do so until shortly before his death, drawing up wills and other documents. He was a citizen of London, as a member of the Wax Chandlers' Company, from 1603, and married Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Speght (d. 1621), the editor of Geoffrey Chaucer and John Lydgate. 
Dyson is notable chiefly for the enormous library he amassed. No catalogue of the library is known, apart from six notebooks (All Souls College, Oxford, MS 117) listing in order of date of publication those books 'touching as well the State Ecclesiasticall as Temporall of the Realme of England': in 1631 these alone totalled nearly 1100. He also owned a large number of works of Elizabethan and Jacobean literature; in some instances his is now the unique surviving copy. Nearly all the extant printed proclamations of Queen Elizabeth I's reign belong to the seven sets, each of which he collected together, bound, and provided with its own specially printed title-page (1618). Dyson printed nothing else, but he collaborated in the 1633 revision of John Stow's 'Survey of London' -- an edition that included many copies of acts of parliament and of the common council of London. 
Dyson died between 7 January 1633, when he made his will, as a parishioner of St Olave Jewry, London, and 28 February 1633, when it was proved. In it he made monetary bequests to his four daughters and two sons, allowed the use of his professional papers to his apprentices, and gave a two-volume book of statutes to 'my noble friend Sir William Paddy... to be by him put and given to the library of St John's College in Oxford'. He directed simply that his other books be sold by William Jumper; a great many of them were acquired by Richard Smith (died 1675) and were dispersed when his library was sold in 1682. Thomas Baker wrote: 'There are Books (chiefly in old English) almost in every Library that have belong'd to H. Dyson, with his Name upon them' (Hearne, 7.369). 


@@@@@


doc= 37381


Eady, Eric Thomas (1915-1966), meteorologist, was born on 5 September 1915 at 51 Devonshire Road, Ealing, London, the elder child and only son of Thomas Christopher Eady, civil servant with the Post Office, and his wife, Charlotte Anderton. He was educated at Ealing county grammar school, where he was awarded a state scholarship and a minor open scholarship to Christ's College, Cambridge, where he graduated as a senior optime in part two of the mathematical tripos in 1935. After short periods as a lecturer in mathematics at King Alfred's Teacher Training College in Winchester and as a technical researcher in aircraft vibration for De Havilland, he joined the Meteorological Office as a technical officer in 1938, where he served as a weather forecaster in fighter and reconnaissance groups. Following commission as flight lieutenant in the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve he specialized in upper-air analysis and forecasting for bomber groups. His last posting was to Lagos, Nigeria, before he was demobilized in February 1946. 
Eady had spent much of his spare time working on a theory for the formation of atmospheric depressions and decided to devote all his time to it; he resigned from the Meteorological Office to become a graduate student at Imperial College. He was not accepted into the department of meteorology but registered as a student in the department of mathematics, where he wrote a doctoral thesis, 'The theory of development in dynamical meteorology'. 
The novelty and importance of his work were appreciated even before he was awarded the PhD degree in 1948. He proceeded rapidly from research student to lecturer and then to reader in dynamical climatology (in the department of meteorology) by 1949. In that year he married Marjorie, daughter of Edgar Currie, formerly a warehouse foreman for a removals firm, but incapacitated during the First World War. There were no children. 
Eady was invited to discuss his work at leading meteorological institutes round the world. Since then the 'Eady problem' has become a classical reference in the subject -- J. G. Charney, the leading American worker in the same field, acknowledged that Eady's treatment was exceptional, being more comprehensible and more physically realistic than his own seminal contribution. However, Eady published little of his work, even though he wrote, as he spoke, fluently and well (talking with him was one of the pleasures of life). He continually broadened his professional interests to include the ocean, the earth's core, motions in the atmospheres of planets, the theory of fluids, biophysics, and biochemistry. Eventually he became depressed by the sheer difficulty of his subject, by the realization that he was not, as he put it, going to be able to build a cathedral. He isolated himself more and more from his friends and colleagues; he died, after an overdose of painkillers, at the Royal County Hospital, Guildford, on 26 March 1966. 
H. Charnock', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37382


Ealdred (d. 1069), archbishop of York, may have come originally from the west country, although little is known of his background. Since his career progressed, both ecclesiastically and politically, in the footsteps of Lyfing, bishop of St Germans, of Crediton, and of Worcester, it is likely that they were kinsmen. If so, Ealdred would also have been related to Brihtwald, bishop of St Germans (died 'c'.1027). 
Like Lyfing, Ealdred began his career as a monk at Winchester and followed Lyfing as abbot of Tavistock in 1027 when the latter was elevated to the see of Worcester. Ealdred retained a lifelong interest in Tavistock, where Lyfing was buried, and is named as the previous holder of two estates held by the abbey in 1086. Lyfing had been a great benefactor to Tavistock and it is possible that Ealdred's estates were part of their family holding. By 1044 Ealdred was witnessing royal charters as bishop, probably as suffragan to Lyfing, whom Ealdred succeeded after his death on 23 March 1046. In July 1049 Ealdred, with the men of Herefordshire and Gloucestershire, was called upon to repel an invasion force of Irish and Welsh. However, they were taken by surprise in the early hours of 29 July and Ealdred narrowly escaped with his life. In April 1050 he and Bishop Hermann of Ramsbury visited Rome on an errand of Edward the Confessor, most probably to seek dispensation for the removal of the see of Crediton to Exeter; according to later and possibly unreliable sources it was to secure the king's release from a vow of pilgrimage made before his accession. The E version of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' says the two bishops were sent to a great synod, probably the Easter Synod which began on 29 April. Returning the same year, Ealdred reconciled Earl Swein Godwinsson with the king and brought him back from Flanders. In 1051 almost the entire Godwine family was exiled and Edward sent Ealdred with troops to intercept Earl Harold Godwinsson as he fled, but, according to the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', 'they could not or would not' (text D, s.a. 1052). Undoubtedly, the events of 1051 and Ealdred's known partisanship with the Godwines caused him to be passed over as the successor to AElfric Puttoc at York in favour of the king's chaplain, Cynesige. However, with the return of the Godwines the following year, it was not long before Ealdred's fortunes were restored. This was aided, perhaps, by his appointing Godric, son of Godman the king's chaplain, to the abbacy of Winchcombe in 1054. Ealdred consecrated Godric on 17 July, having held the abbey himself since the death of Abbot Godwin in 1053. Later in 1054, the king sent him to Germany to arrange the return from Hungary of Edward the Exile, son of Edmund Ironside. He was received with honour by Archbishop Hermann of Cologne and Emperor Henry III and remained there for a year, being presented, among other gifts, with a psalter and sacramentary sent there by Cnut. Ealdred later presented these books to his prior and successor at Worcester, Wulfstan. While he was in Germany, Ealdred gave permission to Bishop Leofwine of Lichfield to consecrate the rebuilt church of Evesham on 10 October in his stead. 
On his return in 1055, possibly as a reward for his diplomatic success in Germany, Ealdred was entrusted with the diocese of Ramsbury after Bishop Hermann's resignation and departure from England, until his return in 1058. 
On 12 April 1056, Ealdred dedicated a chapel built by Earl Odda at Deerhurst in memory of his brother, AElfric, who had died three years earlier. Two months later, on 16 June, Leofgar, bishop of Hereford, was killed fighting against the Welsh at the battle of Glasbury-on-Wye and Ealdred was called upon, with the earls Leofric and Harold, to negotiate peace terms with King Gruffudd of north Wales. The successful outcome of these talks resulted in Ealdred being rewarded with the vacant see of Hereford. 
In 1058 Ealdred consecrated the abbey church of St Peter in Gloucester, which he had rebuilt from its foundations. He maintained his influence over the abbey by installing a kinsman, Wilstan, a monk of Worcester, as abbot and retaining several estates belonging to the abbey under his control. These estates remained under the jurisdiction of the archbishop of York long after Ealdred's death. Following the consecration of St Peter's, Ealdred travelled by way of Hungary to Jerusalem 'in such state as none had done before him' ('ASC', text D, s.a. 1058). Ealdred's visit to Hungary may have been to arrange for Edward the Exile's family (which included his son Edgar AEtheling) to be brought to England, as Edward had died soon after his arrival in England in 1057. While Ealdred was in Jerusalem he gave a gold chalice worth 5 marks to the church of the Holy Sepulchre. He was elected archbishop of York on Christmas day 1060, and gave up the see of Hereford, while intending to hold York and Worcester in plurality like earlier archbishops, including St Oswald. In 1061, accompanied by Earl Tostig Godwinsson, he went to Rome to receive his pallium, but was denied it and deprived of episcopal rank by Pope Nicholas II because his transference from one see to another was against church law. However, he and Earl Tostig were robbed by brigands on their way home and forced to return to Rome, where Nicholas reinstated Ealdred and gave him the pallium, while insisting that he give up Worcester. Papal legates were with Ealdred in England in 1062 to see this implemented, and on 8 September at York he consecrated Wulfstan bishop of Worcester. 
Ealdred's known support of the Godwine family suggests that it was he who crowned Harold Godwinsson on 6 January 1066, contrary to the scene portrayed in the Bayeux tapestry. After Harold's death at Hastings, he joined with the earls Eadwine and Morcar in promoting the succession of Edgar AEtheling, but on the earls' withdrawal, Ealdred was among the English leaders who submitted to the Normans at Berkhamsted. He accompanied Duke William to London and crowned him king at Westminster on Christmas day 1066; but not, according to the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', before he exacted a promise 'that he would rule this people as well as any king before him best did' ('ASC', text D, s.a. 1066). On 11 May 1068 Ealdred also crowned William's queen, Matilda. 
The evidence for Ealdred's tenure of Worcester is overshadowed by the later veneration accorded to St Wulfstan. However, three out of the four leases issued by Ealdred survive in the original and he is said to have made several grants of land to the monks. After his elevation to York, it is clear that Ealdred was reluctant to release his hold over Worcester and intended Wulfstan to act as his suffragan. The life of Wulfstan suggests that this desire governed Ealdred's choice of the more malleable Wulfstan as his successor rather than the 'worldly' AEthelwig, abbot of Evesham. The life tells that, initially, Ealdred withheld all but seven of Worcester's estates from Wulfstan and that Wulfstan was able to regain all but twelve vills after lengthy negotiation. Indeed, Wulfstan was only able to obtain full control of his dioceses after litigation against Ealdred's successor at York, Thomas of Bayeux. In fact, Thomas, as Ealdred's heir, claimed jurisdiction over the whole diocese of Worcester. There is evidence in 'Domesday' to suggest that the division of Worcester's lands between the bishop and the cathedral clergy reflects, in part, the original alienation by Ealdred. It was Ealdred, rather than Wulfstan, who took out lawsuits, both before and after 1066, to reclaim Worcester estates from unlawful tenants, and when the building of the castle by the Norman sheriff, Urse d'Abetot, encroached upon the cathedral's cemetery, it was Ealdred who, it is said, uttered the famous words 'Hattest thu Urs, have thu Godes kurs' ('De gestis pontificum', 253). 
For two years Ealdred simultaneously held the dioceses of Worcester, Ramsbury, and Hereford without censure. No sources survive to illustrate his guardianship of Ramsbury. However, while bishop of Hereford, he was able to ensure the protection of the lands of the monks of St AEthelbriht, Hereford, by royal writ. 
As archbishop of York, Ealdred was active within his archdiocese, building refectories for the communities at York and Southwell, completing the building of a refectory and dormitory begun by his predecessor, and erecting a presbytery at Beverley. The church at Beverley was decorated with paintings and given a bronze, silver, and gold pulpit and crucifix in the German style. Ealdred also commissioned Folcard, a continental monk under his protection, to write a life of St John of Beverley. His building works were part of an attempt to introduce a more regular life to the chapters of these churches, apparently inspired by his observations in Cologne. He also gave lands to them and had those of Beverley protected by royal writs. Folcard recounts 'that during the time of Ealdred the church of York shed its former backwardness and, inspired by Ealdred's teaching, grew to handsome maturity' (Raine, 1.241). 
There is also evidence to suggest that Ealdred pursued the claims of his predecessors to jurisdiction over the see of Dorchester and the old diocese of Lindsey. A bull of Pope Nicholas dated 3 May 1061 states that Wulfsige of Dorchester is to hold his see free from the control of the archbishops of York, both past and future. Due to the paucity of northern sources, Ealdred's role in this dispute is shadowy. However, it would appear that he attempted to extend York's interests within Wulfsige's diocese through the purchase of estates, including several from Ulf son of Topi, who appears as a Lincolnshire tenant in 'Domesday'. Distrust of Ealdred's intentions towards the see of Dorchester may well have influenced the pope's refusal to accept readily Ealdred's candidature for York and it is clear that the bull issued in Wulfsige's favour was made while Ealdred was in Rome. Just as Thomas of Bayeux, at York, laid claim, as Ealdred's heir, to the bishopric of Worcester and his estates in Gloucester, so he was also to be more vociferous in his attempts to acquire control over the see of Dorchester. 
Much more is known about Ealdred than most Anglo-Saxon churchmen, partly because both the D version of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' and the chronicle of John of Worcester were written in his former dioceses not long after his death. He is, in fact, probably the most prominent non-royal individual in the entire D text. The particular interests of this version, in Scotland and the north, with the west midlands until 1061-2 but in the north alone thereafter, parallel Ealdred's career as bishop of Worcester and archbishop of York. The parallel is so close as to suggest that the D text was compiled largely from sources associated closely with Ealdred. It is no surprise, then, that the D text, as well as John of Worcester and Folcard, speaks well of him, and William of Poitiers thought him 'wise, good and eloquent' (Poitiers, 'Histoire', 221). The Worcester sources, including the hagiographical life of Wulfstan, have presented a picture of Ealdred as one whose major concerns were not with holy matters but with secular affairs, and as such his reputation is coloured by comparison with Wulfstan, whose canonization was sought as early as 1118. 
However, the anonymous chronicle of the archbishops of York tells how Ealdred, influenced by his travels, instigated liturgical reform 'which he subsequently caused to be observed in the churches of England' (Raine, 1.345). He is thought to have been responsible for the introduction of a copy of the 'Pontificale Romano-Germanicum' into England, on which the composition of the third coronation ordo is based. Ealdred is considered to have composed the ordo, or at the very least instigated its composition, for the coronations of Harold Godwinsson and William I. 
Ealdred was the most widely travelled bishop of the Anglo-Saxon age and appears to have been a skilled diplomat earning the respect of both Anglo-Saxon and Norman contemporaries. There is a York tradition that just before his death he admonished William the Conqueror for the imposition of harsh taxes, contrary to his coronation oath. It is said that the king sent messengers to appease the archbishop but they arrived three days too late. Ealdred died at York on 11 September 1069, and was buried there. 


