@@@@@


doc= 37383


Earbery, Matthias (1690-1740), writer and nonjuring Church of England clergyman, was born on 11 July 1690 in Hoveton St Peter, Norfolk, the son of the Revd Matthias Earbery (died 1735), vicar of Hoveton and Neatished. Matthias Earbery the elder had sworn allegiance to William and Mary only 'as a conquered person'. In 1695 he was presented by Charles Finch, fourth earl of Winchilsea, to the mastership of Wye grammar school in Kent, though retaining his livings. He published in 1697 an answer to Spinoza's 'Tractatus theologico politicus', entitled 'Deism Examin'd and Confuted'. He also published 'A review of the bishop of Bangor's '[Hoadly's]' sermon' from Neatished (1718). In 1730 he became rector of Barsham in Suffolk, where he died in 1735. 
Matthias Earbery the younger was educated by his father before entering St John's College, Cambridge, then noted for its nonjuring sympathies. He was ordained to a curacy in Kent, where he became a friend of Thomas Brett. On 18 November 1715 he was received by George Hickes into the nonjuring communion, and became minister to a congregation in Holborn. In June 1716 he signed the petition which began the 'usages' controversy; he soon changed his opinion, however, and fiercely attacked Brett and the 'usagers' in 'Reflections upon Modern Fanaticism' (1720). 
Earbery's views on the rights of hereditary monarchy and episcopacy were those of Charles Leslie, whom he admired, but Earbery had none of Leslie's wit or power of reasoning: his numerous works are largely made up of quantities of historical narrative, related with a strong ideological bias, often laced with personal abuse. In 1717 'The History of the Clemency of our English Monarchs', contrasting the treatment of the rebels after the battle of Preston with the leniency of previous reigns, was seized by the government. Earbery escaped to France, and published a second edition, complete with a portrait of himself, in 1720. He was arrested in London in 1723 for seditious libel, and again in 1732 for attacks on Sir Robert Walpole (later first earl of Orford) and King George II in the 'Royal Oak Journal'. His targets ranged from the 'filth of Bangorianism' to John Wyclif, Gilbert Burnet, and Sir John Oldcastle. 
Earbery lived apparently by his writing, which accounts perhaps for his translation of Thomas Burnet's notoriously heterodox 'State of the Dead' (1727). He died, apparently unmarried, at 'a gentleman's house in Yorkshire' on 3 October 1740, leaving no account of some $350 subscribed to a projected edition of his works. 
John Findon', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37384


Ecgfrith (645/6-685), king of Northumbria, was the elder son of Oswiu (611/12-670), king in Northumbria, and his wife, Eanflaed (b. 626, d. after 685), daughter of King Eadwine of Northumbria. Born in 645 or, less probably, in 646, he is first heard of in 655, at the time of the battle of the Winwaed between the Mercians and the Northumbrians, when he was a hostage with Queen Cynewise of Mercia. He became king after his father's death in February 670. 
Ecgfrith's reign was marked by his generous endowment of the Northumbrian church, by his bitter quarrel with its most flamboyant leader, Wilfrid, bishop of York, and by a militancy towards neighbouring peoples, the Mercians, the Picts, and the Irish, which eventually brought him disaster. His reputation as 'a venerable and most pious king' -- the words of Bede ('Historia abbatum', 364) -- rested chiefly on his friendship with Benedict Biscop, Oswiu's former thegn turned monk, and with the ascetic Cuthbert. His provision of 70 hides of land for Benedict's new foundation in Wearmouth in 674 and a further 40 hides for his parallel foundation in Jarrow in 681 associated him with the two houses, which were to become pre-eminent in Northumbrian monastic culture and scholarship. He was equally generous to Cuthbert, pressing him to accept the bishopric of Lindisfarne in 685 and granting him and his church land in Cartmel and Carlisle in the north-west and in Crayke in the Vale of York. 
With Wilfrid, who had a sharper sense of his own worth than either Benedict or Cuthbert, Ecgfrith's relations were more difficult. Initially his friend and patron, and present when Wilfrid's splendid new church in Ripon was consecrated between 671 and 678, he later fell out with him, for two main reasons. The first concerned Ecgfrith's wife. He had married, probably in 660, AEthelthryth, daughter of Anna, king of the East Angles, and widow of Tondbehrt, 'princeps' of the South Gyrwe. Despite her previous marriage, AEthelthryth had always lived as a virgin and was determined to remain one, retiring altogether to live as a nun in Coldingham about 672. Wilfrid seems to have been her spiritual adviser: she had endowed his new monastery in Hexham, he had veiled her on her entry to religion, and Ecgfrith had reportedly offered Wilfrid land and wealth in order to get him to persuade the queen to live as his wife. Frustrated dynastically as well as sexually, Ecgfrith is likely to have blamed Wilfrid for AEthelthryth's contumacy. Secondly, Wilfrid was excessively powerful. His huge diocese, covering not only Northumbria itself but also the tributary territories of the Picts and the Irish colonies in western Scotland, his riches, and the numbers of his monasteries and his followers, made him very much a prince bishop. In 678 Ecgfrith, urged on by his second wife, Iurminburg, expelled Wilfrid from his see and divided it in two, with a new bishop in Hexham as well as York. Archbishop Theodore of Canterbury confirmed these changes, which fell in neatly with his own plans to break up unmanageably large tribal dioceses. Wilfrid appealed to Rome and secured a papal judgment in his favour; but vainly. On his return in 680 he was deprived of his relics by Iurminburg, imprisoned for nine months by Ecgfrith, and then expelled for a second time from the kingdom. 
It gave Stephen of Ripon, Wilfrid's biographer, some satisfaction to point out that Ecgfrith's partnership with Wilfrid coincided with the king's years of military success and that his failures followed from their differences. Before 675 he had defeated Wulfhere of Mercia, bringing the kingdom of Lindsey (the north of modern Lincolnshire) and possibly a larger part of Mercia under his direct rule: his presence at the Synod of Hertford in 672 may be a mark of this temporary overlordship. About the same time he defeated the Picts in battle. But in 679 he himself was defeated by AEthelred of Mercia at the battle of the Trent, where Ecgfrith's brother AElfwine was killed. Lindsey was lost and the Humber restored as Northumbria's southern frontier. The main threat now came from the north and west: from the Picts and their allies the Irish, with whom Aldfrith, Ecgfrith's half-brother, may also have been in alliance. Aldfrith's exile in Irish territory, and his relationship through his mother with the Ui Neill, the most powerful of the Irish tribes, partly explains the successful attack by Ecgfrith on the Ui Neill lands in Ireland in 684. In the following year he invaded Pictish territory, where he was defeated and killed at Nechtansmere (now identified as Dunnichen Moss, near Forfar) on 20 May 685. The battle was a turning point in Northumbrian fortunes. The Picts and the Irish of western Scotland recovered their independence, the Forth was probably re-established as Northumbria's northern frontier, and the bishopric at Abercorn on its southern shore, established by Ecgfrith for the Picts, was abandoned. 
Ecgfrith has suffered historically by comparison with Eadwine, Oswald, and Oswiu, his great Northumbrian predecessors, and by reason of his final failure in the north. Like his predecessors, he was both a barbarian warlord and (as Stephen of Ripon admitted) 'a most Christian king' ('Life of Bishop Wilfrid', 37). Although he lacked the control over the southern kingdoms which might have put him on Bede's famous list of kings holding 'imperium' in the south, he remained a formidable ruler, with the resources to endow the church lavishly and to raise the navy which must have been necessary for his invasion of Ireland. Deprived after Nechtansmere of the land and tribute from the Picts and Irish which probably underlay such power, Northumbria is likely to have been a poorer as well as a less dominant kingdom. 


@@@@@


doc= 37385


Eckersley, Peter Pendleton (1892-1963), broadcasting engineer, was born on 6 January 1892 in Puebla, Mexico, the third son, and the third and youngest child, of (William) Alfred Eckersley, a railway engineer, and his wife, Rachel, daughter of Thomas Henry Huxley, physiologist. Eckersley's elder brother was the physicist and engineer Thomas Lydwell Eckersley. Educated at Bedales School, he was apprenticed with the Manchester firm of Mather and Platt before entering Manchester Municipal College of Technology in 1912. He graduated with a certificate of electrical engineering in 1915, and on 17 March 1917 married Stella ('b'. 1894/5), daughter of Julian Charles Grove, tea merchant, son of Sir George Grove, writer on music; they had two sons and one daughter. 
Peter had become interested in wireless and the work of Marconi while at Bedales, and he served with the Royal Flying Corps as a wireless equipment officer from 1915 to 1918, mainly in Egypt and at Salonika, and was then sent to the Wireless Experimental Station at Biggin Hill. In 1919 he joined Marconi's Wireless Telegraph Company as head of the experimental section of its designs department. He worked at Writtle, near Chelmsford, where he was the leader of an able, if unconventional, team that provided regular transmissions of programmes for radio amateurs at the request of the Radio Society of Great Britain. 
A lively and energetic character, enjoying publicity and recognized by his contemporaries as a 'personality', Eckersley did more than any other person to lay the technical foundation of broadcasting in Britain. In 1923 he was hired personally by John Reith as chief engineer of the recently formed British Broadcasting Company, staying in the post until 1929, by which time it had become a public corporation. Eckersley was fully in charge of the 'spreading of the service', and of converting his own idea of a regional plan for radio transmission into a reality. He was highly successful, both in negotiating behind the scenes with the Post Office and in informing and interesting listeners in the implications for them -- such as a choice of programmes -- of developing communications technology. He also played a prominent part in the first international meetings on wavelength allocation and in the preparations for empire broadcasting. 
The high point of Eckersley's BBC career was the opening in 1929 of the first dual transmitter high-power station in Brookman's Park, north of London. It had been conceived of in 1927, but by the time of its delayed opening, Eckersley had been compelled to leave the corporation, after a painful divorce earlier in 1929. The parting with Reith, who was temperamentally completely different from him and who had been a friend as well as a colleague, was difficult for both men. On resigning from the BBC Eckersley received a gratuity, and stayed on as a consultant until the beginning of October 1929. He also had lucrative consultancies with the Marconi Company and His Master's Voice, part of the Radio Corporation of America. Despite these political and financial difficulties, Eckersley continued throughout the 1930s to develop his often original ideas on communications technology, regarding himself as 'an inventor of mechanisms to serve ideas'. Although never attracted by television, he was fascinated by the possibilities of cable broadcasting. In 1931 he was one of the founders of Rediffusion; the company name was suggested by him. In 1932 Eckersley went briefly to Australia to advise on the setting up of a national broadcasting organization. He was also interested in radio advertising. Some of his ideas were set out in his only book, 'The Power behind the Microphone' (1941), which also charted, albeit selectively, his own experience. 
Eckersley's second wife, whom he married on 25 October 1930, was Frances Dorothy ('b'. 1894), divorced wife of Edward Thomas Clark and daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Arthur James Stephen, a member of the distinguished Stephen family. The new marriage had political, and later ideological, overtones. Eckersley joined Oswald Mosley's new party in 1931, and from 1935 they spent each summer holiday in Germany where they admired the progress that Germany was making under national socialism. When war was declared in 1939 Dorothy and the son of her first marriage remained in Germany, where they earned a living broadcasting in English on German radio the bulletins prepared for them. Eckersley himself blamed Britain for declaring war in 1939 and for opposing Hitler, and British intelligence kept a sizeable dossier on him. He had declared himself bankrupt in 1939. 
Eckersley's war-time years were frustrating -- he called them 'shabby' -- even when his security problems became less serious, and on one occasion he attempted suicide. Yet he remained innovatory in his attitudes to radio and set out to exploit his 'talking telephone'. In 1943 he joined with Belgian and Polish colleagues in exile to devise a long-wave public service European radio network. 'Electromagnetic waves know no frontiers', they explained. 'Broadcasting symbolises through the ether the unity of nations.' 
His last bachelor years after 1945 were more tranquil. He protected Dorothy when, having been arrested by the British army, she was brought back to London in 1945 to face trial and imprisonment in Holloway, but the marriage had long been dead. By 1961 the BBC was beginning to acknowledge the major contribution he had made to its early history; Eckersley was photographed with Reith and Hugh Greene, then BBC director-general, at the Institution of Electrical Engineers, on the occasion of the publication of the first volume of the corporation's history. His last journey was to try to market his talking telephone in the Cameroons. He died at the West London Hospital, Hammersmith, on 18 March 1963, leaving just enough money to pay his outstanding debts. 
Asa Briggs', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37386


Westminster, Edward of (d. 1265), administrator, was the son of Odo the Goldsmith, whom he succeeded in 1240 as keeper of the king's works at Westminster, which then chiefly concerned the palace. In the following year he was made responsible for the new shrine that Henry III was beginning for Edward the Confessor. In 1245, when the king began to rebuild the abbey itself, Edward became keeper of the works, along with the master mason and a representative of the abbot and convent. While colleagues came and went, he retained this position until his retirement in 1263/4, thus overseeing the building of the eastern chapels, chancel, transepts, chapter house, and a large part of the choir, virtually the whole of King Henry's achievement. 
Westminster's first responsibility was for the receipt and expenditure of the money assigned for the operations, a responsibility discharged through a special exchequer set up in 1246, over which he presided. He was far more, however, than a mere passive conduit for funds. He was actively involved both in obtaining money and materials and in ensuring that work was actually carried out. In November 1252, for example, the king told him both to seek timber for the new roof of the abbey and to see that a great new bell was hung before the feast of St Edward: he was not to leave London until it was done. In June 1259 it was to Westminster and two colleagues that the writ was addressed that ordered the pulling down of 'the old fabric of the church of Westminster... as far as the vestry which is by the king's seat... and to have the same church rebuilt... in such a manner as the new fabric there requires' ('CClR, 1256-1259', 390), an order that marked the beginning of work on the choir. In securing money for the abbey Westminster was helped by his position as a baron of the exchequer and keeper from 1248 of the exchequer seal; he is one of the earliest known chancellors of the exchequer. 
Aside from his work on the abbey Edward of Westminster was constantly involved in procuring vestments, jewels, and a range of other precious objects for the king. He interpreted Henry's wishes to the craftsmen and saw that tight deadlines were met. That he satisfied so impatient and fastidious a monarch for so long says much for his efficiency and sensitivity. It is clear, moreover, that his counsel was valued on artistic matters. In 1245 the king accepted his advice that it would be more splendid to have the leopards, which were planned to go beside the throne at Westminster, made of bronze rather than of marble. It is not impossible, therefore, that Edward influenced features of the abbey's design. Certainly his skill as an administrator was a vital factor in ensuring that so much was built so quickly and magnificently. 
Westminster was presumably a clerk in minor orders, since his rewards for his services included the livings of Benenden, Kent, and Ickworth, Suffolk. He was also able to add substantially to his inherited estate, and in 1258 settled lands in Westminster, Surrey, Middlesex, and Hertfordshire on his mistress, Katherine of Ely, with successive remainders to their three sons, Odo, Nicholas, and Thomas. He died in 1265. 
D. A. Carpenter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37387


Edward AEtheling (d. 1057), prince, was the son of Edmund Ironside, king of England (d. 1016), presumably from his union in 1015 with Ealdgyth, widow of the Danelaw thegn Sigeferth. The sources on his life are thoroughly unsatisfactory. The D text of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' says under 1057 that Cnut banished him to Hungary to betray him, that he prospered there, married Agatha, a relative of the emperor, and begot a noble family; under 1067, the same text says that Agatha was related through her mother to an Emperor Henry. Twelfth-century chroniclers are more detailed. John of Worcester says Cnut sent Edward and his brother Edmund to the Swedish king to be killed, but that he passed them to Hungary, where Edmund died and Edward married Agatha, daughter of the brother of an Emperor Henry. William of Malmesbury describes Agatha as sister of the Hungarian queen, and Ailred of Rievaulx calls her the daughter of the Hungarian king's brother, the emperor Henry, while Orderic Vitalis says Edward married the Hungarian king's daughter. The twelfth-century 'Leges Edwardi Confessoris' ('Laws of Edward the Confessor'), however, has him fleeing to and marrying in Russia, which was also his destination according to Adam of Bremen, writing 'c'.1070. In the 1130s the Anglo-Norman poet Gaimar was misnaming him Edgar and telling a rousing tale of his adventures, complete with dialogue. 
Modern historians have had scant success with this material, which inspires little trust. Agatha was arguably the daughter of King Stephen of Hungary, or of Bruno, brother of the German Emperor Henry II, or of a half-brother of the emperor Henry III, or of none of them. Probably Edward the Exile, as he is also known, was respected in Hungary, which may say much for interest in the English monarchy; but the only certainty is his return thence to England, at his countrymen's request, in 1057, presumably because some hoped he would succeed the childless Edward the Confessor who in 1051 or 1052 had probably promised the throne to William, duke of Normandy. Whether the Confessor really considered changing his mind in the AEtheling's favour will never be known, for the latter died on 19 April 1057, before seeing the king, and was buried at St Paul's Cathedral, leaving his wife and three children -- Edgar AEtheling, Margaret (later queen of Scotland), and Christina (later a nun of Romsey). 


@@@@@


doc= 37389


Edwards, William (bap. 1723, d. 1808), bookbinder, was baptized on 6 January 1723 at St James's Church, Halifax, Yorkshire, the second of three sons of Richard Edwards, a schoolmaster. 
Edwards was very successful in collecting rare books and his Halifax bookshop and bindery, facing up Old Market, which he founded about 1750, became a mecca for discerning bibliophiles. He refined the old technique of foredge painting by creating exquisite miniatures on the foredges of the pages while the books were carefully supported in a clamp, gilding them afterwards so as to conceal the painting until the pages were gently fanned. He also produced Etruscan calf bindings which usually employed a central 'tree pattern' bordered by palmettes, taken from Greek and Etruscan vases, which were lightly burned onto the leather with acid, giving a terracotta effect. He frequently completed this work with an outer border of gold tooling showing either the Greek 'key pattern' or his own distinctive marking which consisted of five short vertical bars followed by concentric circles. 
Edwards married Jane Green on 4 February 1753. They raised eight children: William (1753-1786), Mary (who became Mrs Alexander), James ('b'. 1756), John ('b'. 1758), Sarah ('bap'. 1761), later Mrs Macauly, Thomas ('bap'. 1762, died 1834), Joseph ('bap'. 1765, died 1771), and Richard ('b'. 1768). Jane Edwards died on 24 July 1772. 
His growing stock of valuable books prompted Edwards to open a large shop at 102 Pall Mall in 1784 to gain the benefit of the London market. This was run by James and John, who, with Thomas, became famous as binders and dealers in fine books. On 28 January 1785 James took out a patent for a new treatment of vellum, devised by his father, which rendered it transparent by scraping it, soaking it in a solution of pearl ash, and heavily pressing it so that a painting executed on the reverse showed through. James spent much of his time on profitable journeys in Holland and Italy buying valuable libraries, while John concentrated on Paris, where he met his death about 1791. Although there is no evidence, the supposition is that he was seen to be in possession of valuable books and guillotined as an aristocrat. 
Thomas continued to work in the Halifax shop which he took over after his father, a devout member of Northgate End Chapel, died, at the shop, 2 Old Market, Halifax, on 10 January 1808, aged eighty-five. William Edwards was buried at Halifax parish church on 17 January 1808. 


@@@@@


doc= 37390


Egerton, Sarah (1670-1723), poet, was born in London, one of the six daughters of Thomas Fyge (died 1706), physician and city councilman who was descended from a landowning family of Winslow, Buckinghamshire, and his wife, Mary Beacham (died 1704), of Seaton, Rutland. 
Little is known of Sarah Fyge's education; however, she was certainly precocious. She claimed to have been 'scarce fourteen years' when she wrote 'The Female Advocate', her most important work, which was published in 1686. The poem, a long verse satire, was one of many responses to Robert Gould's popular verse satire, 'Love Given O're' (1682). Her father objected to her poetry and sent her to live with relatives in Shenley, Buckinghamshire, about 1687. Following this banishment she was married, apparently against her will, to an attorney named Edward Field. During this marriage they lived in or near London. Edward Field was dead by the mid-1690s. In 1700 she contributed an ode on the death of John Dryden: 'Luctus Britannici, or, The Tears of the British Muses', and she also contributed to 'The Nine Muses' (1700), a volume of poems by women in memory of Dryden edited by Mary Delarivier Manley, with whom she had an intense but short-lived friendship. 
Some time between 1700 and 1703 Sarah married the Revd Thomas Egerton (died 1720), rector of Adstock, Buckinghamshire, a second cousin about twenty years her senior, and a widower. At the time of her second marriage she was in love with Henry Pierce, an attorney's clerk and associate of her first husband. By 1703 Sarah and Thomas Egerton were embroiled in an apparently unsuccessful suit for divorce. Their marriage was notoriously unhappy. Delarivier Manley records somewhat maliciously a 'comical Combat' between the Egertons, in which Sarah throws a pie at her husband's face, and dumps butter and drink over his head while he grapples with her topknot. 
In 1703 Egerton published, against her husband's wishes, 'Poems on Several Occasions'. Apart from angry descriptions of the narrowness of a woman's lot, the poems also describe the poet's feelings for Pierce, whom she calls Alexis. This volume was reissued in 1706, the same year that 'The Female Advocate' was reprinted bearing the date 1707. After this time information about Egerton is sparse. Her husband died in 1720, leaving her a childless widow in comfortable circumstances. She died in Winslow on 13 February 1723. 
Richard Greene', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37391


Dereham, Elias of (d. 1245), ecclesiastical administrator, was a native of West Dereham, Norfolk. His earliest patron was Hubert Walter (died 1205), later archbishop of Canterbury, a fellow native of West Dereham and founder there of a Premonstratensian abbey whose charters are witnessed by Master Elias, perhaps as early as 1188. Between 1193 and 1201 it is possible that he is to be identified with a Master Elias, steward to Gilbert de Glanville, bishop of Rochester (died 1214), a close friend and kinsman of Hubert Walter. Less likely, but by no means impossible, is the suggestion that he is to be identified with a man named Master Elias the Engineer, or Elias of Oxford, who before 1201 had charge of the king's houses in Oxford and of various castle-building operations across southern England. The only certainty is that by 1201 Dereham was attached to the household of Hubert Walter at Canterbury, being credited at least once with the title of archbishop's steward. At about this time he acquired the churches of Brightwalton, Berkshire, and Melton Mowbray, Leicestershire, gifts from the monks of Battle and Lewes. 
Hubert Walter's death in 1205 forced Dereham to transfer to the household of Bishop Jocelin of Wells (died 1242), again as steward. With the imposition of the papal interdict in 1208 Jocelin and Elias went into exile in France, together with Jocelin's brother, Bishop Hugh of Lincoln (died 1235). Hugh promoted Elias to the Lincoln prebend of Lafford and in November 1212 appointed him executor of his will. The most important of Dereham's contacts made in exile was with Archbishop Stephen Langton (died 1228). He was twice employed as Langton's envoy to England, and in 1213, at the end of the interdict, returned to Canterbury as Langton's steward. In the next year he had custody of Rochester Castle. Following the award of 'Magna Carta' in 1215 Dereham helped distribute the charter around the shires, becoming an enthusiastic adherent of the rebel barons and preaching their cause at Paul's Cross in London. As a result he was despoiled of his various churches and exiled to France when the royalist party triumphed in 1217. By 1220 he was pardoned and allowed to return to Langton's household; he assisted in the construction of a new shrine to Thomas Becket in Canterbury, in which context he is described by the chronicler Matthew Paris as an 'incomparable artificer'. 
Before 1222 Dereham had acquired the prebend of Potterne in Salisbury under Langton's pupil, Bishop Richard Poor (died 1235). For the remainder of his life he was to be closely associated with the building of Salisbury's new cathedral. He is said to have served for twenty-five years as rector of the cathedral fabric fund, and is undoubtedly found in association with the cathedral's masons and workshops. Before 1234 he had supervised the construction of a model dwelling place for himself within the cathedral close, the profits from whose sale he later put towards Salisbury's fabric fund. Elsewhere he renewed his contacts with Bishop Jocelin of Wells, then in the process of rebuilding the cathedral church in Wells. He served three successive archbishops of Canterbury -- Langton, Richard Grant (died 1231), and Edmund of Abingdon (died 1240) -- either as steward or executor. In 1228 Bishop Richard Poor was translated from Salisbury to Durham, whereafter Dereham is found witnessing deeds relating to both these sees. He was later to serve as Poor's executor and, perhaps as proxy for Poor, as the executor of William (I) Marshal, earl of Pembroke (died 1219). He also found service with Peter des Roches, bishop of Winchester (died 1238), a leading political rival of Langton and Poor, whom Elias none the less assisted with the foundation of monastic houses in Selborne and Titchfield, both in Hampshire, and for whom he subsequently acted as executor. Probably under Archbishop Edmund he was promoted to the Canterbury peculiar of Harrow, Middlesex, the chancel of whose church he was repairing in 1242. 
Throughout these years Dereham's services were much in demand at court. Between 1233 and 1238 he had charge of royal building work at the great hall of Winchester Castle, besides supervising the installation of windows and pavements at Clarendon Palace, Wiltshire, helping to construct a tomb used for the burial of Joan, queen of Scots (who died in 1238, and was buried at Tarrant in Dorset), and being sent to direct the enclosure of an anchoress in Britford, Wiltshire. 
Inevitably, given his association with building projects, his work on Becket's shrine, the fact that Matthew Paris preserved Dereham's drawing of a wind-rose, and since most of his employers were renowned as patrons of cathedral or monastic architecture, Elias of Dereham has been canvassed as one of the principal influences in the development of early thirteenth-century English Gothic. Specifically, an attempt has been made to present him as the architect of Salisbury Cathedral. The attempt has failed, through scepticism that one man could have supervised such a major project while still discharging Dereham's functions as steward and administrator elsewhere. The best that can be said is that to appeal to such a wide diversity of patrons he clearly possessed some very rare talent indeed. It is more likely that such a talent lay in site administration and the guidance of taste rather than in any practical work as craftsman, architect, or mason. Dereham died shortly after April 1245, whereupon his benefices were seized for the use of a papal nuncio. 
Nicholas Vincent', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37392


Ellerton, John (1826-1893), hymn writer and editor of hymnals, was born on 16 December 1826 in Clerkenwell, London, the elder son of George Ellerton (1776-1844), of private means, who came from an evangelical Yorkshire family, and his wife, Jemima Frances, 'nee' Brown (1794/5-1866), who wrote short stories with religious themes for children. His early schooling in London was private. In 1838 his father inherited a small property in Ulverston in the Furness peninsula, Lancashire, and from there John attended King William's College, Isle of Man. In 1844 his father and younger brother died; his mother devoted her life thereafter to John, and shared his home for twenty years. After a year's study with the Revd C. Hodgson at Brathay vicarage, Ambleside, he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1845, where he began a lifelong friendship with Henry Bradshaw and Dr Fenton Hort, and was influenced by the writings of F. D. Maurice. In 1848 he came second in the chancellor's medal competition with a poem 'The Death of Baldur'. Illness prevented him from sitting the honours examinations and he received an 'aegrotat' in 1849, after which he spent a year in Scotland reading for holy orders. 
Ellerton was ordained deacon in Chichester in 1850 and served his first curacy in Easebourne, Sussex, where he studied the writings of the Christian socialist movement, in particular those of Charles Kingsley. He was ordained priest in 1851. In 1852 Ellerton moved to become senior curate at Brighton parish church and to hold the evening lectureship at the chapel of ease, St Peter's. In 1859 he compiled 'Hymns for Schools and Bible Classes', in which a number of his own hymn texts were published. 
In 1860 Ellerton became incumbent of the newly built church of St Michael and All Angels, Crewe Green, and domestic chaplain to Lord Crewe. He pursued his social concerns through his work at the London and North Western Railway Company's mechanics' institution in Crewe (of which he was vice-president). He reorganized its educational programme, and conducted classes in English and scripture history. He also organized one of the first choral associations in the midland area, which met at Nantwich. He wrote many hymns and hymn translations in these years, and in 1863 the headmaster of Shrewsbury School consulted him when compiling 'Hymnologia Christiana'. In 1871 he joined the group working on 'Church Hymns' with W. Walsham How. 
In 1872 Ellerton was appointed rector of Hinstock, Shropshire, where he began the research for 'Notes and Illustrations of Church Hymns' (1881) and to compile with W. Walsham How 'Children's Hymns and School Prayers' (1874). In 1876 he was appointed rector of the large parish of Barnes, Surrey, where he participated actively in the work of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK). 
An attack of pleurisy in 1884 forced Ellerton's resignation from Barnes. After convalescence in Switzerland and Italy, in 1885 he became incumbent of the small parish of White Roding, Essex, and was invited to serve as consultant on a supplement to 'Hymns Ancient and Modern' (1889), which contained twenty-six of his hymns. In 1888 he published a definitive edition of his own texts in 'Hymns Original and Translated'. 
Ellerton married in 1860 Charlotte Alicia (died 1896), daughter of William Hart of Brighton. They had seven sons and four daughters. Following a second stroke in 1892 he retired. While lying disabled by his last illness he was nominated to a prebendal stall in St Albans Cathedral, and for the final year of his life received the honorary address of Canon Ellerton, but he was never installed. He died on 15 June 1893 at Rosemont, Torquay, while on a visit there. 
While Ellerton wrote a total of eighty-six hymns his greatest contribution to hymnody was as an editor and critical assessor. In compiling 'Church Hymns' for the SPCK he pleaded for the inclusion of hymns from a variety of traditions. He was also keen to provide notes and illustrations to the hymns for a general readership, believing that accessibility should be a prime feature of congregational singing. His work as an editor also taught him to appreciate the practical value of hymnals, and the diversity of local practice and theological opinion; this led him to oppose the introduction of authorized or official hymnals for particular communions. His own compositions were marked by a sensitive use of imagery and wide parish appeal; 'The day thou gavest, Lord, is ended' was chosen by Queen Victoria as one of the hymns for her diamond jubilee in 1897. 


@@@@@


doc= 37393


Elliot, Sir George, first baronet (1814-1893), industrialist and politician, was born in Gateshead on 18 March 1814, the son of Ralph Elliot, pitman, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Henry Braithwaite, of Newcastle upon Tyne. He began work as a pit boy in 1823 at the Pensher colliery owned by Charles Stewart, third marquess of Londonderry, and was a union leader there during the strike in 1831 over the length of the working day. Elliot later recalled that it was the most violent dispute that had taken place in the coal industry, 'for it caused bloodshed and death, and men were hung in chains on the Tyneside for it' ('The Gallery of Celebrities', 2). 
At the age of seventeen Elliot was apprenticed to Thomas Sopwith, a local land surveyor and mining engineer, and was involved with the latter's investigation of coal resources in the Forest of Dean. Elliot also helped to survey the line of the proposed railway between Darlington and York. Returning to Pensher in 1837 as overman, Elliot became under-manager (1841) and then manager (1844) at Monkwearmouth pit, the deepest in Britain. In the mid-1840s he became a managing partner in Washington colliery, and then opened the Unsworth mine on his own account. Elliot was appointed Lord Londonderry's coal viewer in 1848, and two years later bought from him the Pensher colliery where he had worked as a boy. 
During the next two decades Elliot became one of the most important industrialists in Britain. In the 1860s he acquired further mines in north Wales, north and south Staffordshire, and in Nova Scotia. One of his most significant investments was in the Powell Duffryn Steam Coal Company in south Wales, where he was general manager as well as the largest shareholder. Elliot's purchase of the wire-rope-making business of Kuper & Co. in 1849 was also noteworthy. He amalgamated it with the Gutta Percha Company to form the Telegraph Construction and Maintenance Company, and it was this concern that laid the first permanent transatlantic telegraph cable in 1866. 
Elliot was one of a new type of mining engineer, whose expertise extended to many parts of the industry. He helped to found the Institute of Mining Engineers in 1852, and was a member of its council (1852-7), vice-president (1865-8), and president (1868-9). He was in the forefront of experiments in mining technology, and an advocate of improved safety lamps, shaft detaching hooks, and coal-cutting machinery. Trials at his collieries of new ventilating methods, such as the fan and high-pressure steam jets, were widely discussed, and he made a major contribution to the most efficient method of mining coal simultaneously in adjacent seams. He argued that economy, efficiency, and safety were compatible and, unlike many of his colleagues, supported the establishment of the mines inspectorate in the 1850s. 
His attitude to labour changed from that of an early nineteenth-century tory paternalist, advocating model villages provided by employers and condemning trade unions, to that of a post-Disraelian Conservative, who believed in self-help and free collective bargaining. First elected to parliament on 26 November 1868, Elliot represented the mining constituency of North Durham for a number of years: he was its MP from November 1868 to January 1874, from June 1874 to March 1880, and again from September 1881 to November 1885. He failed to be elected in February 1874 and April 1880, and was also unsuccessful at South-east Durham in December 1885, but he was MP for Monmouth from July 1886 to July 1892. His achievements were suitably recognized in 1874 when a baronetcy was bestowed on him, the first such award to a coal-industry figure. Elliot was a prominent freemason, and held high office in the movement in south Wales. 
In his parliamentary work Elliot was mostly concerned with matters affecting the coal industry and the City, though he was also an early advocate of 'gas and water socialism'. He appeared as an expert witness before several government inquiries, and served on the royal commission on the coal industry (28 June 1866 to 27 July 1871). Shortly before his death he made an unsuccessful attempt to solve the coal industry's economic and labour difficulties by proposing the amalgamation of collieries into a massive semi-public enterprise monitored by the Board of Trade, which would control output, fix prices, pay fair wages, and establish a miners' welfare fund. Although the response was lukewarm, 'The Times' considered that it was one of the most interesting industrial schemes of the decade (20 Sept 1893). 
Elliot was a popular figure in the north-east of England. His Durham mining constituents warmly referred to him as 'Bonnie Geordie', and he never lost the unpolished manner of his lowly origins. He married Margaret Green of Rainton, Durham, in 1836, and they had two sons and four daughters. Elliot's wife died in 1880, and he never remarried, but he was involved in a well-publicized breach of promise case ten years later. He was sued by Emily Mary Hairs, a professional singer, for $5000 damages, but her claim was rejected by a jury on 18 April 1890. Elliot owned substantial estates in Monmouthshire and at Whitby, but he died at his house, 17 Portland Place, London, on 23 December 1893. His second son, George William Elliot, succeeded to the baronetcy. 
Colin Griffin', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37394


Ellis, Thomas Edward (1859-1899), politician and Welsh nationalist, was born at Cynlas Farm, Cefnddwysarn, near Bala, Merioneth, on 16 February 1859, the third of six surviving children and only son of Thomas Ellis, tenant farmer, and his wife, Elizabeth Williams. That same year one of Ellis's relatives was evicted from his holding by the local landlord for voting Liberal in the general election. A Calvinistic Methodist, Ellis was educated at the British School, Llandderfel, and then at the grammar school in Bala. In 1875 he entered the newly established University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, where his contemporaries included many other nationally minded young Welshmen. He left Aberystwyth in 1879 and spent a year in Oxford on a non-collegiate basis. Entering New College as an undergraduate in October 1880, he became deeply stirred by the social and imperialist ideas current in Oxford at the time. He graduated in 1884 with a second-class honours degree in modern history, taking his BA in 1885 and his MA in 1897. After a short period as a private tutor, he became private secretary to the Liberal industrialist MP Sir John Brunner. A political career was now inevitable and in the July 1886 general election he was elected MP for his native county of Merioneth. 
In the next six years, he emerged as an ardent champion of the nonconformist causes of Welsh church disestablishment and tithe reform, the Welsh tenant farmers' campaign for land reform, and Irish home rule. He was also much involved in the passage of the 'Welsh Intermediate Education Act' in 1889 and the movement for a national University of Wales. He became close to other young Welsh Liberal members, including David Lloyd George. In September 1890 Ellis's declaration at Bala on behalf of a Welsh legislative assembly made a strong, though transient, impression: he seemed the very embodiment of 'Young Wales'. However, he suffered from indifferent health, and a visit to Egypt led to his becoming seriously ill from typhoid. To help himself recover, he travelled to South Africa in the winter of 1890-91, where he met Cecil Rhodes, who greatly impressed him. 
When the Liberals returned to power in 1892, it was generally assumed that Ellis would receive government office. But it was a surprise when Gladstone offered him the post of deputy whip, an offer which he decided to accept. This was to drive something of a wedge between him and Lloyd George and other former Welsh allies. Ellis could still work on behalf of Wales, notably in the appointment of a Welsh land commission, and the foundation of a University of Wales, both in 1893; but he disapproved of Lloyd George's efforts to turn Welsh Liberalism into a nationalist movement somewhat on the lines of the Irish one. Ellis became chief whip in March 1894 when Lord Rosebery succeeded Gladstone as prime minister, and found life exceptionally difficult since the Liberals had only the narrowest of majorities. He was blamed for being too lax a disciplinarian, and indeed for the defeat on the snap 'cordite' vote on 21 June 1895, which saw the government resign. After his party's heavy defeat in the subsequent general election, Ellis stayed on as chief whip. In addition to his close involvement in Welsh affairs, he was active in trying to recruit more Labour candidates for the Liberals. He was broadly in the Liberal Imperialist camp, and played a somewhat curious role in the manoeuvres that followed the Jameson raid in South Africa. 
Tom Ellis was a deeply cultured man, of much personal charm, with a strong interest in Welsh art and literature: he edited the works of the seventeenth-century puritan mystic Morgan Llwyd. He was active in the movement for a national library and became warden of the University Guild of Graduates in 1896. His politics and cultural interests combined to make him a nationalist of an unusually rounded kind. Some saw him as a prophet, a Welsh Kossuth or Mazzini, a 'lost leader'. He would hardly have risen as high as his colleague Lloyd George but, had he lived, would surely have been a major figure in the Liberal government of 1905-15. 
In 1898 Ellis married Annie, the daughter of Robert Joseph Davies, freehold farmer and a leading Calvinistic Methodist, of Cwrt-Mawr, Llangeitho, Cardiganshire. They had one son, born after Ellis's death. His health continued to be uncertain and on 5 April 1899, aged only forty, he died at the Hotel Metropole, Cannes, during a brief holiday on the French riviera. 
Kenneth O. Morgan', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37395


Elsynge, Henry (bap. 1577, d. 1635), parliamentary official, belonged to a family that came originally from Duxworth in Cambridgeshire and was baptized on 21 August 1577 at St Dunstan-in-the-West, London. He was the eldest of the three sons and second of the four children of another Henry Elsynge (died 1582), merchant tailor of the same parish, and his wife, Frances, the daughter of Edmund Browne, also a merchant tailor of St Dunstan's. In 1584 Frances married Henry Knyvett (died 1601), an elder half-brother of Robert Bowyer, later clerk of the parliaments. 
Elsynge was educated at St Alban's School. He entered Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, as a pensioner on 14 October 1597 but did not graduate. He was admitted a student at the Middle Temple on 19 February 1597 and was called to the bar on 19 April 1605. In 1604 he was appointed, jointly with Robert Bowyer, keeper of the records in the Tower of London, an office that they held until 1612. On 27 November 1609 Bowyer succeeded to the office of clerk of the parliaments and shortly afterwards brought Elsynge to assist him in the House of Lords. On 1 September 1613 Elsynge was granted the reversion of the office of clerk of the parliaments, to which he succeeded on Bowyer's death on 15 March 1621. He held the office until his death, although he ceased to officiate in the House of Lords at the dissolution of parliament in March 1629. Thereafter he lived principally at his manor of Cornwell in Oxfordshire. 
Elsynge played an important part in the codification of the procedure of the House of Lords and in the development and preservation of its records. His principal claim to recognition is as a scholar and historian of parliament, using the original documents to which his official positions at the Tower and at Westminster gave him access. His studies formed the basis of his treatise on parliament entitled 'The Manner of Holding Parliaments in England, or, Modus tenendi parliamentum apud Anglos', which remained unfinished at his death. Subsequently various parts have been published. Book 1 first appeared in 1660. A chapter on judicature, formerly attributed in error to John Selden, appeared in an imperfect form in 1681 and in a corrected version in 1990. A further chapter, 'Expedicio billarum antiquitus', was published in 1954, edited by Catherine S. Sims. A tract entitled 'The Manner of Passing Bills in Parliament', published in 1685, may have formed part of the same work. Elsynge's notes of debates in the House of Lords between 1621 and 1628 were published in 1870, 1879, and 1929. 
Elsynge married on 12 July 1600 Blanche, or Alse (died 1612), daughter of Richard Hyett and niece of Robert Bowyer. They had two sons of whom the elder, Henry Elsynge (bap. 1606, d. 1656), was clerk of the House of Commons from 1639 to 1649. With his second wife, Jane, daughter of Richard Hardy of Dorset, Elsynge had a further four sons and one daughter. He died in 1635, probably in the month of November, as his will was dated 13 October 1635 and his successor was appointed on 1 December that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 37396


Emberton, Joseph (1889-1956), architect, was born on 23 December 1889 at Shraley House, Audley, Staffordshire, the eldest of the three sons and four children of Samuel Emberton, draper, and his wife, Annie Amelia, daughter of John Hodgkins, farmer and miller. He was educated at the Orme Boys' School, Newcastle under Lyme, then articled to the local architects Chapman and Snape. By studying in the evenings at Burslem Art School, Emberton won a scholarship to the Royal College of Art in 1911; he worked for the London architects Trehearne and Norman from 1913 to 1914. He served during the First World War in the Honourable Artillery Company, first as a gunner in Egypt and later as a trajectory officer in France, and was badly wounded in October 1918. 
On recovery, in 1918 Emberton joined Sir John Burnet and T. S. Tait, until he established a practice with P. J. Westwood, from 1922 to 1926. They designed kiosks for the British Empire Exhibition, Wembley (1924), using simple shapes with colourful decoration. Summit House, Holborn (1925), for Austin Reed Ltd, whose Regent Street shop interiors Westwood and Emberton designed in 1926, shows Burnet and Tait's influence. Emberton continued to design shops in the fashionable art deco style, for Lotus and Delta shoes and others. He was selected by Sir Lawrence Weaver to design the advertising exhibition, Olympia, West Kensington (1927), the first such exhibition with a unified style. 
Emberton showed the influence of Dutch modern architecture in the facade added to New Empire Hall, Olympia (1930). The Royal Corinthian yacht club, Burnham-on-Crouch, Essex (1931), established his modernist reputation, and was the only British building included in the exhibition 'The international style' at the Museum of Modern Art, New York, in 1932. The functionalist design owed much to Emberton's assistant George Fairweather (1906-1986). With Universal House, London (1933; dem.), Emberton enveloped a framed structure in glass curtain-walling, intended to rise higher than the original three storeys. Simpson's shop in Piccadilly, London (1936), was structurally innovative, although the welded plate girders designed by the consulting engineer, Felix Samuely, had to be modified to meet London county council regulations. The simple facade was enlivened at night by thin coloured neon lights and the interior had elegant shopfittings and modern furnishings. It demonstrated the maturity of English modernism and its commercial advantages. 
Apart from the HMV shop in Oxford Street, London (1939), and the temporary Soleil pavilion at the Paris 1937 exhibition, Emberton's other main work is the circular casino at the Blackpool pleasure beach, Lancashire (1939), where he had already designed the fun house and grand national (1935), showing the adaptability of modernism to popular entertainment. The casino, containing restaurants and a flat for the owners, was given holiday spirit with a viewing platform reached by a spiral stair adjoining the entrance. 
During the Second World War Emberton was housing officer to the Ministry of Aircraft Production, architectural adviser on hostels to the Ministry of Works, and consultant to the Ministry of Supply on the design of steel houses. After 1945 he designed mostly flats in London and developed planning ideas influenced by Le Corbusier. 
Emberton's approach was practical rather than theoretical, and enabled him to make elegant and workable buildings for commercial clients. He was fair-haired and blue-eyed, with great charm of manner. He loved horses, the birds in his outdoor aviary, and his 1934 Bentley. On 23 June 1926 he married Kathleen Marie ('b'. 1906/7), daughter of William Herbert Chantrey, a chartered accountant; they had two daughters. Emberton died at Charing Cross Hospital, London, on 20 November 1956. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 37397


Emden, Alfred Brotherston (1888-1979), historian, was born on 22 October 1888 in West Ealing, Middlesex, the elder son of Alfred Charles Emden (1849-1911), barrister and later county court judge, and his wife, Lizzie Whitfield (died 1955). He was a scholar at both the King's School, Canterbury (1903-7), and Lincoln College, Oxford (1907-11), though he obtained only a second class in modern history (1911). 
His future career then seemed uncertain: he qualified for the bar at the Inner Temple, ran a hostel in London for disadvantaged boys, Edghill House, Sydenham (1913-15), and then began schoolmastering at Strand School, Brixton, London. The war intervened, and from 1915 he was an able seaman (Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve) in a destroyer leader, HMS 'Parker'. In January 1919, while still an able seaman, he accepted an almost chance offer of a tutorship in modern history at St Edmund Hall, Oxford. He was appointed bursar in the same year and vice-principal in 1920. 
Emden now immersed himself in university life and history, and remained at St Edmund Hall for the next thirty years. In 1920 he published his first article, on the hall's history, in the first issue of its magazine, which he had launched, and in 1927 he produced a pioneering, scholarly study, 'An Oxford Hall in Medieval Times'. Two years later he was appointed principal of the hall. It was then a small society, unendowed but relatively inexpensive for undergraduates; its principal had virtually complete control over it, choosing both undergraduates and tutors. Emden entered his role with infectious enthusiasm, increasing the number of students and greatly enhancing the hall's prestige in the university. He successfully ran it as what he wished it to remain, the last of the medieval halls; he never wanted it to have full collegiate status. In 1937 the reorganization of the hall's constitution was in some respects amended by congregation before it was enacted by a statute of the university. Another statute made special trustee arrangements for the site and the buildings, the freehold of which had belonged to Queen's College since 1557. However, an uneasy relationship with the tutors (now called fellows) subsequently developed. An enlightened paternalist, he was happier in his relations with the students and shaped the careers of many of them. Until 1939 he continued to teach medieval history, giving tutorials that often lasted for a couple of hours. He was also responsible for the restoration of the hall's old buildings, the near-completion of the south side of its quadrangle in 1934, and the beginnings of an endowment. 
During the Second World War Emden remained in charge of St Edmund Hall, while also being lieutenant-commander in charge of the Oxford University naval division (1942-4): he had persuaded a reluctant Admiralty to raise such divisions in several universities. He was, besides, still very active in public school and Church of England affairs, being much consulted over appointments. The strain of all this told, especially when he did such things as going on a submarine foray to the Bay of Biscay while the French coast was still in German hands. His health broke down, and in 1951 he resigned the principalship, going to live with his mother in Headington. 
Emden was now sixty-two. He had already written one book, and revised another -- H. Rashdall's 'Universities of Europe in the Middle Ages', edited with F. M. Powicke, in 1936 -- but it is on the prosopographical works of his years of retirement that his scholarly reputation depends. Combing the collegiate and university records of Oxford, and going through all the medieval episcopal registers, as well as a vast range of other English sources, he compiled three substantial volumes of 'A Biographical Register of the University of Oxford to A.D.' 1500 (1957-9). He made such thorough notes that it was then no great labour to produce a similar 'Biographical Register' for Cambridge (1963) -- in 1958 he estimated that such a work could be completed within eighteen months -- and a more summary 'Survey of Dominicans in England, based on the ordination lists in episcopal registers (1268-1538)' (1967). He forestalled any criticism of the supplementary 'Biographical Register of the University of Oxford, A.D.' 1501 to 1540 (1974) by the comment that 'octogenarians, like young men, are apt to be in a hurry'. 
Emden was unconcerned that his chosen areas of research were not then fashionable. He had a gift for friendship, and a wide range of acquaintances, but his close friends were few and in his later years were drawn from a small circle who shared his interest in the lives and books of medieval scholars. His lifestyle was comfortable but simple; he had strong Christian convictions. His manner was normally gracious and unperturbed, although he was a man of powerful emotions and could on occasion explode violently. He delighted in the careful observation of birds, wild flowers and grasses, and medieval floor tiles. 
He was elected an honorary fellow of Lincoln College (1939) and of St Edmund Hall (1951), FBA (1959), FSA (1969), and corresponding fellow of the Medieval Academy of America (1968); he received honorary doctorates from both Oxford (1959) and Cambridge (1964). He was a trustee of the Oxford Preservation Trust (1932-67), and he served on the governing bodies of the King's School, Canterbury (1933-62), St Edward's School, Oxford (1933-57), and two other schools, while he was a member of Oxford University's hebdomadal council from 1935 to 1947. He died at his home, Dunstan Cottage, Old Headington, Oxford, on 8 January 1979, a bachelor. His ashes were buried in the ante-chapel at St Edmund Hall. The bulk of his estate, over $400,000, was left to St Edmund Hall. 
Nigel Ramsay', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37398


Emes, William (1729/30-1803), landscape designer and gardener, whose early life is obscure, took up the post of head gardener to Sir Nathaniel Curzon at Kedleston, Derbyshire, on 8 September 1756. He remained there until 1760, perhaps leaving his post because the appointment of Robert Adam with 'the intire manadgement of his Grounds' left Emes with little scope. While at Kedleston he had already started altering the earlier, formal landscape and had made the upper lake. On 17 December 1758 Emes, then twenty-eight, married his servant Mary (died 1789), the daughter of John Innocent, a tailor. They had five sons and three daughters. One son, John Emes (1762-1808), was an artist and engraver, but later became better known, with his wife, Rebecca, as a goldsmith. 
Emes moved to Bowbridge Fields, Mackworth, a farmhouse about 2 miles from Kedleston. He developed an extensive practice as a landscape designer (ninety commissions are known), largely in the north midlands and Wales. His style is similar to that of Lancelot 'Capability' Brown, although there is no evidence that he ever worked with Brown, and at Eaton Hall, Cheshire, in 1763, Lord Grosvenor called Emes in to replace Brown. The elegant plans, in Indian ink on vellum, which he presented to his clients showed his proposed alterations to the landscape -- often with serpentine lakes whose ends were concealed in woodland, with single trees and clumps set in parkland and with tree belts around the boundary, often with a 'ride round the Improvements' winding through them. It was said that 'Mr Eame excells in the laying out Water' and he was called in to introduce it into landscapes where it was lacking, as at Hawkstone Park, Shropshire, where in 1786 he made the River Hawk into a lake 11/2 miles long. He anticipated the work of Humphry Repton by creating flower gardens adjacent to the house, as at Sandon Hall, Staffordshire, in 1781, where he laid out a garden under the windows of the drawing-room, planted with flowers and flowering shrubs and with a central basin of water with goldfish. Some of his commissions continued for many years; at both Chirk Castle and Erddig, Denbighshire, he supervised the landscaping for twenty-four years. 
Although Emes designed a few minor buildings, such as a lodge at Attingham Hall, Shropshire, and a greenhouse at Penrice Castle, Glamorgan, his role as an architect is not significant. At a number of places his landscaping was contemporaneous with work on the house by Samuel or James Wyatt, a professional association that may have started at Kedleston. After his wife died in 1789, Emes moved to Hampshire and took a lease of Elvetham Park from Sir Henry Gough-Calthorpe. A number of commissions in the south of England date from this period, some of which were carried out in partnership with John Webb (1754-1828), who had earlier been his foreman and continued the practice after Emes's death. Emes moved to London and died on 13 March 1803 at Vicarage House, St Giles Cripplegate, the home of his daughter Sarah, wife of the Revd William Holmes. He was buried at the church of St Giles Cripplegate. 
Keith Goodway', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37399


Erle, Sir Walter (1586-1665), politician, was born on 22 November 1586, the eldest son of Thomas Erle, esquire (died 1597), of Charborough, Dorset, and his wife, Dorothy, daughter of William Pole of Shute, Devon. Walter was aged ten when his father died and his mother's second husband, Sir Walter Vaughan of Fallersden, Wiltshire, became his guardian. He was educated at Queen's College, Oxford, where he matriculated in 1602, and at the Middle Temple, London, where he was admitted in 1604, but he neither graduated nor completed his studies. He was knighted on 4 May 1616, three days before his marriage to Anne (died 1654), a wealthy heiress, daughter of Francis Dymoke of Erdington, Warwickshire. They had one son, Thomas, who died before them in 1650, and two daughters. Sir Walter sat as MP for Poole in 1614, 1621, 1624, and 1660; for Dorset in 1625, 1628, 1654, and 1659; for Lyme Regis in 1626 and the Short Parliament; and for Weymouth and Melcombe Regis in the Long Parliament. 
Up to the mid-1620s Erle made his mark chiefly in local affairs. His family came originally from Devon and had settled at Charborough in 1549 when his grandfather married the heir of Richard Wikes to acquire this and the neighbouring manors of East and West Morden. Charborough became Sir Walter's principal residence, though he also owned Bindon House and extensive landholdings in the area around Axmouth, Devon. He had taken charge of his estates by 1609 when he was reprimanded by Lord Ellesmere, the lord chancellor, for his 'hard conscience' in evicting one of his tenants at Axmouth ('DNB'). He became a JP for Dorset in 1615 and remained so for most of the period up to the outbreak of civil war. He also served as sheriff for the county in 1618-19 and as deputy lieutenant during the 1620s. 
Throughout his career Sir Walter Erle was renowned for his staunchly Calvinist religious views; these were probably formed, at least in part, while he was a student at Queen's College which was notably godly. He became a close ally of John White, the puritan patriarch of Dorchester, and between 1624 and 1627 he served as the governor of the Dorchester New England Company, set up by White as a puritan colonizing venture. Erle first came to public notoriety in the 1621 parliament when, after promoting a bill for sabbath observance, he was attacked as a puritan by the MP Thomas Shepherd. 
From 1625 onwards Erle emerged as an important spokesman in the Commons and a vociferous critic of crown policy. His principal concern was with defending the Calvinist religion against the threats from popery and Arminianism. In the 1624 parliament he had denounced the Arminian Richard Montagu as a promoter of the ancient heresy of Arianism; in 1625 he led complaints over a letter of pardon which Secretary Conway had issued to a Jesuit priest; and in 1628 he expressed alarm over the prospect of Irish Catholic troops billeted in Kent assisting an invasion from Flanders. 
If religion was Erle's priority, however, he was even more active in defending the liberties of the subject. In the 1625 parliament he proposed that the king should be granted tonnage and poundage for one year only instead of for life, ostensibly because he was failing to guard the seas against pirates, but also in the hope of getting it established that customs duties could only be levied with the consent of parliament. In 1626 his attacks on Buckingham and Richard Montagu during the parliament resulted in his removal from the commission of the peace, and when the king levied the forced loan in late 1626 and early 1627 he was one of the ringleaders of the resistance. His refusal to pay in Dorset led to imprisonment in London, where he and other opponents agitated to have their cause heard in the courts. This resulted in their trial -- the five knights' case -- which eventually led to the safeguards against the crown's imprisoning without showing cause enshrined in the petition of right. 
In an important speech in the 1629 parliament Erle made a characteristic connection between the defence of Calvinist doctrine and the liberties of the subject. Both were under threat from 'popery and Arminianism joining hand in hand... to bring in a Spanish tyranny amongst us'. He warned: 'Take away my religion and you take away my life, and not only mine but the life of the whole state and kingdom. For I may boldly say never was there a more near conjunction between matter of religion and matter of state in any kingdom in the world than there is in this kingdom at this day. (Notestein and Relf, 18-19)' This summed up his political priorities.During the 1630s Erle consolidated his links with the leaders of the opposition to Charles's regime. He had been identified as a close ally of Lord Saye and Sele when he was involved with the attempted impeachment of Buckingham in 1626, and the connection was reinforced in May 1639 when his son, Thomas, contracted to marry Saye's daughter, Susanna. In the aftermath of the Short Parliament Sir Walter was threatened with arrest for colluding with the Scots, and in November 1640 he was working closely with John Pym on preparations for the Long Parliament. Erle also continued his opposition to prerogative taxation, resisting payment of the 1636 levy of ship money in Dorset. In 1630 he travelled to the Netherlands and served briefly as a volunteer, under the command of Lord Vere. Thereafter he liked to present himself as an expert in military affairs, claiming in 1641 that he was a 'sword man rather than a gown man' (Keeler, 'Long Parliament', 166) and building scale models in his back garden of the sieges he had witnessed. 
During the Long Parliament Erle was regarded as something of an elder statesman among those opposed to the crown. He remained vigilant against the threat from popery and Arminianism, taking a prominent role on committees to prepare charges against the Laudian bishops and purge the royal army of Catholics. He was particularly concerned about the dangers posed by the Irish army and in the impeachment proceedings against Strafford took charge of the twenty-fourth article which accused him of intending to bring an army over from Ireland to deal with opposition in England. When the first army plot was discovered in May 1641 he took a prominent role in the investigations and was then sent down to Dorset to organize local defence. He returned to parliament in October, just as news of the Irish rising was breaking and immediately became involved in parliament's efforts to counter this. During November 1641 he helped to draft the grand remonstrance and the following January he urged his Dorset friend William Strode to go into hiding when the house learned of the king's attempt to arrest the five members. 
During the early stages of the civil war Erle divided his energies between Dorset and Westminster. In July 1642 he was sent down to the county to execute the militia ordinance. He raised his own troop of horse and supported the earl of Bedford's siege of Sherborne Castle in August. He returned to Westminster in January 1643 and during the negotiations over the treaty of Oxford allied himself with the more hawkish elements who opposed a lenient peace with the king. Back in Dorset in April he became commander of the county's parliamentarian forces. At Corfe Castle in June he organized an elaborate siege, trying out various experimental siege engines before being reduced to making a frontal assault which failed, with heavy casualties. Royalist accounts made much of the fact that, in spite of his boasting about his military prowess, he panicked at the first exposure to gunfire. The siege was abandoned in August, as a large royalist force entered the county, and Erle faced an inquest at Westminster which resulted in his being deprived of his command. 
Back in the Commons Erle aligned himself with Pym, St John, and what has become known as the middle group in opposition to the earl of Essex. In February 1644 he was entrusted with the office of lieutenant of the ordnance which gave him control over the provision of artillery and weapons for the parliamentarian forces. He used this, in part, to cut off supplies to Essex's army. He was also closely involved in the setting up of the New Model Army, but lost his lieutenancy in April 1645 under the terms of the self-denying ordinance. 
During 1645, while remaining on good terms with Saye personally, Erle drifted away from the Independent leadership and generally sided with the Presbyterians. The main reason for this appears to have been his alarm over the increase in sectaries in the New Model Army. He worked closely with the Scots, took an increasing interest in Presbyterian schemes for reform of the church, and voted with Denzil Holles and his allies. He co-operated with the Scots commissioners over the peace negotiations of 1646 and 1647, supporting a Presbyterian church settlement and acting as one of the four MPs chosen to present the propositions of Newcastle to Charles. He also backed Holles's efforts to disband the New Model Army in 1647, but avoided impeachment in the summer, probably because of his links with Saye. In August 1647, as part of an effort to conciliate moderate Presbyterians, he was restored to the office of lieutenant of the ordnance, and during early 1648 he was gradually drawn back into working with the army. By the start of the second civil war, however, he was once more siding with the Presbyterians over religious matters and became a vigorous supporter of continuing negotiations with the king. At the time of Pride's Purge he was secluded from the house, briefly imprisoned, and stripped of his lieutenancy. 
Erle was shut out from further involvement in politics until the first protectorate parliament when he served as MP for Dorset. He made little impact on proceedings, but soon after began to recover his local offices. He returned to the Dorset commission of the peace in 1657, remaining active until his death and becoming a strong opponent of the Quakers. He sat once more as knight of the shire in Richard Cromwell's parliament, but by this stage he was getting a reputation for being a parliamentary bore -- one observer noting that he 'took a liberty to stand up twenty times a day' (J. P. Ferris and P. Little, 'HoP', 'Commons, 1604-29, 1640-60'). At the age of seventy-three he represented Poole in the Convention Parliament of 1660. As father of the house, he argued vigorously for a moderate religious settlement and warned of the dangers of the 'Militia Bill', as well as sitting on fifty-eight committees. 
A staunch Calvinist, an unremitting opponent of popery, and a strong defender of the subject's liberties, Erle was in many respects the archetype of the 'patriots' and 'public men' who acted as spokesmen for 'the country' in the years up to and during the civil war. He died in 1665 and was buried on 1 September at Charborough; his grandson, Thomas Erle, succeeded to his estate. 


@@@@@


doc= 37400


Eustace the Monk (c.1170-1217), Benedictine monk, sea captain, and pirate, was the son of Baudoin Busket, a lord of the county of Boulogne. According to his biography, Eustace studied black magic in Toledo, returned home to become a monk at the abbey of St Samer near Calais, and then left the monastery to avenge the murder of his father. Other evidence suggests that his father died soon after 1190 and proves that by the early 1200s Eustace was the seneschal of the count of Boulogne, Renaud de Dammartin. About 1204, however, the two quarrelled and Eustace became a fugitive: it is with his adventures in the next year or so that the thirteenth-century romance biography, composed between 1223 and 1284 by an unknown poet from Picardy, is principally concerned. Hiding out in the forest, Eustace duped and humiliated Renaud in a series of daring escapades, appearing before him in numerous disguises, ambushing him and his men, and time and again making off with his horses. These adventures have obvious links both with the romance 'Fouke le Fitz Waryn' and the tales of Robin Hood. 
From 1205 onwards the main outlines of Eustace's career can be followed in the records of the English government as well as in the biography. He established himself in the Channel Islands and from there preyed upon shipping in the channel. Much of this was piracy on his own account, but from 1205 until 1212 Eustace was also employed intermittently by King John, whose conflict with Philip Augustus, king of France, was reaching its climax. Indeed, the biography asserts that when Eustace first offered his services to John (probably in 1205), he was given command of thirty ships. 
A decisive change of allegiance, however, took place in 1212, when Renaud Dammartin became John's ally and turned the king against Eustace, who consequently entered the service of King Philip. In 1216 it was Eustace who commanded the fleet that ferried Philip's son, Louis, across to England when the latter mounted his bid for the English throne. In August of the following year he commanded another fleet bringing Louis much needed reinforcements. This was met off Sandwich on 24 August 1217 by an English force under Hubert de Burgh. Eustace's flagship was surrounded and captured. Eustace himself, discovered hiding in the ship's bilges, offered huge sums for his life but, hated as he was by the men of the Cinque Ports, he was given only one choice: whether to have his head cut off on the ship's rail or on the side of the trebuchet that was being brought as deck cargo to England. Matthew Paris included the beheading in his dramatic account of the battle without revealing the preferred block. 
Under the treaty of Kingston-Lambeth, in the following month, Louis promised to ensure that Eustace's brothers vacated the Channel Islands. Eustace had played a significant part in the struggle between Angevin and Capetian royal houses, but, as with the case of his contemporary, Fulk Fitzwarine, it was his exploits as a fugitive on the run from authority that really appealed to his biographer. 
D. A. Carpenter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37401


Evelyn, Sir John (bap. 1591, d. 1663/4), politician, was baptized on 20 October 1591 in Kingston, Surrey, the second son of John Evelyn (died 1627), manufacturer, of Godstone in the same county, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter and heir of William Stephens of Kingston. The family fortune had been established by Evelyn's grandfather, who had acquired the monopoly of making gunpowder under the Tudors. 
Evelyn matriculated as a pensioner at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1606 and entered the Middle Temple in 1610. On 24 November 1618 he married Thomazine, daughter of William Heynes of Chessington, Surrey, and soon after built a large family house at Godstone at the alleged cost of $9000. He succeeded to his father's business in 1627, by which time the gunpowder monopoly was under attack and the business itself in financial difficulty. In an attempt to defend his position Evelyn secured election to parliament for Bletchingley, Surrey, the following year and immediately introduced a bill, which was lost in committee, for the easier supply of saltpetre. After finally losing the contract to supply gunpowder in 1636, he petitioned for compensation for losses but it was several years before he was cleared of all responsibility for the failure to maintain supplies. 
In 1640 Evelyn was re-elected to the Long Parliament in which his nephew, Sir John Evelyn (1601-1685) of Wiltshire, sat for Ludgershall; he was 'galled' at the attacks on the family's monopoly. He was knighted in June 1641, and as late as December he urged consultation with the king over suppression of the Irish rising. A reluctant supporter of parliament after the outbreak of civil war, Evelyn was only persuaded to subscribe the oath of loyalty to Robert Devereux, third earl of Essex, on threat of imprisonment. With the failure of peace moves Evelyn's allegiance to parliament faltered in August 1643: he retired to Godstone but came under suspicion following the interception of a letter which seemed to suggest that he and his nephew were preparing to make their peace with the king. When interrogated by a Commons committee he failed to answer questions 'clearly and ingenuously' (HoP, 'Commons, 1640-60') and was suspended from the house for over a year. 
Evelyn's subsequent political actions, unlike his nephew's, were commended by the diarist, Sir Simonds D'Ewes, as those of a 'gallant and honest man' (BL, Harley MS 165, fol. 157). He favoured accommodation with the king and in February 1648 acted as teller against upholding the vote of no addresses. He did not sit in parliament after Pride's Purge in December 1648 but took his seat after the readmission of the secluded members in February 1660, and was re-elected to the Convention Parliament (April 1660). 
Reconciled to death 'with patience and comfort' by 'seeing what befell my soverign lord and master King Charles I the best of men' Evelyn was buried in Godstone on 18 January 1664 (HoP, 'Commons, 1640-60'). Four of his seven children survived him. His elder son was created a baronet at the Restoration in 1660, and the younger entered parliament for Bletchingley as an exclusionist. 
E. A. Reid', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37402


Evesham, Epiphanius (fl. 1570-c.1623), sculptor, painter, and metal-engraver, was born in or before 1570, perhaps on the feast day of the Epiphany (6 January), the fourteenth and youngest son of William Evesham (1518/19-1584) and his wife, Jane (died 1570), daughter of Alexander Howarth (or Howorth) of Burghill. His childhood is obscure and there is no reliable evidence as to his training. His first recorded work is a sundial (Hereford City Museum and Art Gallery) which he made in 1589 for John Evesham, probably one of his brothers of that name. The family was in London when William died, on 12 June 1584, and during the 1590s Epiphanius appears to have had his workshop in the capital. Two signed memorial tablets at Mersham and Hythe in Kent bear dates of death in this decade. 
By 1600 Evesham had moved to Paris where he lived until at least 1615. He worked for a while with the sculptor Mathieu Jacquet before attempting to strike out on his own, but was called to account by the city's guild of painters and sculptors for claiming to practise their art while being in reality no more than a 'sawer and polisher of marble'. He finally became a master in the guild in 1604. His stay abroad is well documented -- far better than his life in England -- but his major works of that period all appear to be lost. They included a group of Neptune on three sea horses, perhaps intended for a fountain, which Evesham caused to be cast in metal under a subcontract of 1601, a tomb slab commemorating the archbishop of Sens in the cathedral of Notre Dame (1606-7), and a more elaborate memorial with a kneeling effigy, erected to Jacques de Poyanne in the church of the convent of the Grands Augustins (1611). In documents dating from between 1608 and 1614 Evesham is referred to both as a sculptor and as a painter, and he may well have begun three pictures that included votive portraits of himself and members of his family and which, in 1611, he commissioned another artist to complete. 
Evesham returned to England about 1617 and, so far as is known, confined himself to tomb sculpture thereafter. The signed monument to Sir Thomas Hawkins and his wife at Boughton under Blean, Kent, must date from about 1618: it shows a skill in pictorial relief carving which is rare in early seventeenth-century English sculpture. His mature manner is also exemplified by the tomb chest of Edmund West (died 1618) at Marsworth, Buckinghamshire, with its signed effigial brass and series of carved panels, some incised, others in relief. The subject matter of the panels is not entirely clear, but part of it is on the theme of death and resurrection, and he defied protestant convention by including a figure of Christ who is shown as the redeemer, risen from the grave. Another brass was destroyed in the great fire of London: it was the memorial in Old St Paul's to the poet John Owen (died 1622) and gave rise to John Penkethman's encomium on Evesham as 'that most exquisite artist' ('Epigrams of P. Virgilius Maro', sig. D3v). 
By the mid-1620s Evesham may have been in financial straits. His kinsman Richard, earl of Cork, noted in October 1628 that the sculptor had begun a monument to Cork's eldest son, the Hon. Roger Boyle, but had pawned the work. It had to be finished by another artist, James White of Long Acre, and was eventually erected in St Nicholas's, Deptford, London. The final phase of his career is best represented by the monument to Christopher Roper, Lord Teynham (died 1622), at Lynsted, Kent. The deceased is shown recumbent, mourned by his wife who kneels over him, and by his sons and daughters who are shown in relief on a pair of panels fixed to the tomb chest. The highly expressive panel of the grief-stricken daughters is a minor masterpiece and sufficient in itself to explain Penkethman's enthusiasm for the work of its creator. 
This small group of authenticated church monuments has formed the basis of some fifty attributions. Few of them, however, stand up to close scrutiny and they have had the effect of artificially extending Evesham's career into the 1630s. Figured panels of alabaster which closely resemble those on the Hawkins and Teynham monuments have been cited in support of two attributions which remain convincing. The memorial to Sir Adrian Scrope (died 1623) at South Cockerington, Lincolnshire, shows the subject's offspring kneeling against the tomb chest like the Teynham and Hawkins children, while the monument to Richard, Lord Rich ('c'.1620-21), at Felsted, Essex, is grandly embellished with scenes from the life of the deceased. There are also substantial reasons for attributing to Evesham the monuments to Cicile and Ellenor, the wives of Sir John Denham ('c'.1619), at Egham, Surrey, and to Sir Justinian Lewin (died 1620) at Otterden, Kent. 
It has been suggested that Evesham was a Catholic recusant. His connection with Paris, at that time a Catholic stronghold, combined with the fact that he had recusant patrons in England, and the exceptional range of religious images which occur in his work all seem to support this theory but his name has yet to be traced in the contemporary annals of the Catholic faith. He is known to have married; however, no further details of his family, nor the date and place of his death are known. 


@@@@@


doc= 37403


Ewing, Alexander (1814-1873), Scottish Episcopal bishop of Argyll and the Isles, was born in Aberdeen on 25 March 1814, the eldest of the two sons and one daughter of John Ewing, advocate in Aberdeen, from Loch Lomond, and his wife, Elspet Aitken. After their parents' early deaths, the children were cared for by an uncle. Alexander developed an early love of poetry and languages. He was educated at the Marischal College of Aberdeen and a private school in Chelsea, where he was deeply influenced by an evangelical schoolmaster. From 1831 until 1835 he attended classes at the University of Edinburgh. He was married in 1835 to Katherine Stewart (1816-1856), daughter of Major Ludovic Stewart of Pittyvaich, Banffshire: they had three sons and two daughters. Much of their early married life was spent in Italy because of Ewing's poor health. In 1838 he was ordained, returned to Italy, and then undertook charge of the Episcopal chapel in Forres for three years. 
After his consecration as bishop of Argyll and the Isles in 1847 Ewing lived in Lochgilphead and struggled with the problems of his diocese, Calvinism in Scotland, and factional struggles in the Episcopal church. Most of his flock had been lost to emigration, but there were still 1500 in Appin, usually with no priest, and remnants elsewhere. Ewing founded the Highland and Islands Episcopal Fund to provide houses and books for his clergy and schoolteachers. But he failed to learn Gaelic, and he never managed to train enough priests who did. Taken together with his absences for reasons of health, Ewing's work as a bishop was not successful. 
With regard to Italy, Ewing had hopes of providing espiscopacy to the Waldensians, but they did not want it, and his dream of a non-papal Catholicism in northern Italy came to nothing. With regard to Calvinism, Ewing had joined Thomas Erskine of Linlathen as early as 1836 in opposing predestination, and he later came close to a doctrine of universal salvation. It was thought that if Calvinism were undermined the presbyterian churches would give up their people to the Episcopal church; in fact the slow waning of Calvinism in the presbyterian fold took away the one advantage the Episcopalians possessed, and doomed them to irrelevance. 
Factionalism in the Episcopal church centred on doctrines of the eucharist. Ewing's own views tended almost to the receptionist interpretation; he had been abroad during the key years of the Catholic revival, was unmoved by their sacramental doctrine, and resented an incursion of Oxford Movement clergy from England. The latter did in Scotland what they could not do in England, causing protestant zealots, whom Ewing also disliked, to oppose them with constant litigation. In 1858 Ewing wrote an open letter complaining of these controversies without which, 'at the time of the great Presbyterian disruption... we should have absorbed within our pale the bulk of the sober-minded and educated of Scotland'. Describing himself as the only bishop born, ordained, and consecrated in Scotland, Ewing none the less found a solution to the troubles of the Episcopal church in its future alignment with, or incorporation into, the Church of England. There its tumult would be more easily contained, and the trouble-making English clergy would go home. Ewing furthered his scheme by his opposition to the use of the Scottish liturgy and his assistance, with the archbishop of Canterbury and the bishops of London and Oxford, in the celebration of a Eucharist service at Westminster Abbey. But, since incorporation would have required parliamentary approval, and alignment not much less, the scheme was impractical, but it was typical of the man -- a confirmed protestant whose love of the ancient Celtic church bred no interest in returning to its traditions. 
Ewing's first wife died in 1856; he married his second wife, Alice Louisa, daughter of George Sholto Douglas, seventeenth earl of Morton, in 1862. They had one son. In his last years Ewing wintered in the warmth of Pollok House in Glasgow, still working with Erskine on theological projects. He died at Westmill rectory in Hertfordshire on 22 May 1873. His widow survived him until 1913. Perhaps the most interesting Scottish bishop of his day, he was remembered for his scholarship and his good nature, rather than for any accomplishment. 
Gavin White', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37404


Eworth, Hans (d. 1574), painter, of Netherlandish origin, is first recorded as a freeman of the Antwerp guild of St Luke in 1540. He is listed there as Jan Eeuworts, and his name appears variously in other sources as Ewottes, Eywooddes, and even possibly Suete, among other forms. Probably attracted to England in the aftermath of the death of Hans Holbein, in 1543, he is first recorded in London in 1549. On 19 October 1550 he was granted letters of denization, and he is listed thereafter in various City parishes, the last being St Bride's, in the ward of Faringdon Without, where he was described in 1571 as 'Haunce Evance, pictorer, a denizen, borne in Anwarpe, came into the realm about xxviii yeres past, Douch' (Cust, 5). In 1572 he was brought in by the musician Alfonso Ferrabosco to design the tournament staged to greet the French embassy in June of that year. Payments indicate that he continued to be employed by the revels office for the next two years. 
It is known that Eworth can be associated with a long series of signed pictures bearing the monogram 'HE'. In the eighteenth century this was wrongly equated with Lucas de Heere and it was only in 1913 that Lionel Cust made the connection with Eworth, thanks to his listing as a painter in the inventory made in 1590 of the pictures belonging to John, first Baron Lumley. Some twenty-five paintings have so far emerged either signed or as pendants to signed ones. About a dozen more are firmly attributable. The earliest, 'A Turk on Horseback' (priv. coll.), is dated 1549 and the latest, 'Allegory of the Wise and Foolish Virgins' (Statens Museum for Kunst, Copenhagen), 1570. Among them are subject pictures but in the main they are portraits, including a major group of Mary I, to whom Eworth acted as court painter, albeit without any official status. The most important of these is dated 1554 (Society of Antiquaries, London). Many but by no means all of his sitters were adherents of the old faith, including Mary Neville, Baroness Dacre (painted twice, 1559 and undated; NPG and National Gallery of Canada, Ottawa), Nicholas Heath, archbishop of York (1566; NPG), Anthony Browne, first Viscount Montague (1569; NPG), Henry Stewart, Lord Darnley, and his brother Charles, earl of Lennox (1562 and 1563; both Royal Collection), and Thomas Howard, fourth duke of Norfolk, with his second wife (1562 and 1563; both priv. coll.). It is noticeable that the young Elizabeth I did not sit for him; there was a sharp decline in royal portraiture during the 1560s. 
Eworth was the most distinguished foreign painter to work in England in the Tudor period after Holbein. His portraiture, like Holbein's, is remarkable for its wide variation in scale and included miniatures; small-, two-thirds-, and life-scale; and embraced everything from head and shoulders to full-length. His style stemmed from that of Jan van Scorel, using a strong, three-dimensional rendering of the features, and modified by late Holbein with its concern for a dazzling and exact record of magnificent dress and jewels. His work has a high degree of finish and gloss. Although some of his portraits include backgrounds, particularly his early work, he gradually evolved a formula of placing the sitter against a plain ground upon which the shadow of the figure was cast and the age and date inserted in an idiosyncratic script. Fine examples of his work are in the National Portrait Gallery and the Tate Collection, London. Eworth died in 1574. 
Roy Strong', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37405


Eyre, Charles Petre (1817-1902), Roman Catholic archbishop of Glasgow, was born on 7 November 1817 at York, the fifth of nine children and third of five sons of John Lewis Eyre (1789-1880), later a director of the South Western Railway Company, and his wife, Sara Parker (1790/91-1825), daughter of William Parker of Kingston upon Thames. After his mother's death, Eyre's father married Augustine Cecile Pulcherie (died 1876), daughter of Armand Dumesniel, marquis de Sommery, in 1828. The Eyre family had been settled in Derbyshire since the thirteenth century, but had lost most of their lands by confiscation at the Reformation. They maintained their Catholic allegiance, however, and four of the five sons and one grandson of John Lewis Eyre were ordained priest. His two elder brothers having predeceased him, Charles Eyre succeeded to the papal title of count of the Lateran Hall on his father's death on 11 November 1880. 
On 28 March 1826 Eyre entered St Cuthbert's College, Ushaw, near Durham, where his great-uncle, Thomas Eyre, had been president. He was made deacon in May 1838, entered the English College, Rome, in December 1839, and was ordained at Rome on 19 March 1842. His working life was spent in almost equal parts between north-east England (twenty-six years), and Glasgow (thirty-three years). He was appointed to Newcastle in 1843; and to Wooler in 1849. Illness between May 1850 and July 1856 compelled him to undertake light work at Haggerstone Castle near Berwick upon Tweed, before returning to Newcastle. In 1868 he was appointed vicar-general of Hexham and Newcastle. 
Eyre had already been identified as a future bishop, having been proposed for Hexham, and as coadjutor-archbishop of Sydney, Australia, in 1866. He was not, however, the first candidate proposed for the western district of Scotland in 1869. Indeed, Michael O'Sullivan of Birmingham was all but appointed before Henry Manning, archbishop of Westminster, submitted Eyre's name to Rome. Other candidates included the Redemptorists Robert Coffin and Edward Bridgett, and Bernard O'Reilly (later bishop of Liverpool). Eyre was nominated as delegate-apostolic for Scotland on 29 November 1868, titular archbishop of Anazarbus on 11 December 1868, and consecrated in Rome on 31 January 1869. On 16 April 1869, his appointment as administrator-apostolic of the western district of Scotland was confirmed. 
Eyre arrived in Glasgow on 9 March 1869, with the twin task of preparing for the restoration of a diocesan hierarchy in Scotland, and to restore calm to the western district, which was deeply divided by tension between Scots and Irish Catholics. He attended the First Vatican Council in 1869-70, and he embarked on an extensive programme of school and church building. In 1874, he opened a local seminary, St Peter's College. Although his tenure of office as administrator-apostolic was not without an initially unsettled period, he was presented with an address in 1876, from Scots- and Irish-born clergy, commending the progress of the previous seven years. 
Eyre developed an ultramontane identity among his people. But he did not share the view of some northern district clergy, who remained unconvinced of the need for a diocesan hierarchy, viewing it as inserting an intermediary into hitherto direct links with Rome through the Congregatio de Propaganda Fide. With the ending in 1878 of the system of districts and vicariates-apostolic, he became archbishop of the restored archdiocese of Glasgow on 15 March of that year. His archdiocese included Motherwell and Paisley which later became dioceses (1948). Archdiocesan synods were held in 1881, 1888, and 1897, at which Eyre continued to promote schemes for the division of missions, which were almost dioceses in themselves. A cathedral chapter was erected in 1884. 
The archbishop wrote extensively on historical and religious matters, including his 'History of St Cuthbert', first published in 1849, which reached a revised third edition in 1887. He also wrote 'Children of the Bible', a collection of leaflet lives of Scottish saints, and papers on the medieval cathedral of Glasgow. Eyre sought to have the Catholic community accepted as an integral part of Scottish life, and his efforts were recognized when he was made LLD by the University of Glasgow in 1892. In quite another sphere Eyre (with Michael Davitt) was among the early patrons of Celtic Football Club, founded in 1888. Eyre died at his home, 6 Bowmont Gardens, Glasgow, aged eighty-four, on 27 March 1902; he was buried on 31 March at St Peter's College, Bearsden, but has since been re-buried at St Andrew's Cathedral, Glasgow. 


@@@@@


doc= 37406


Faden, William (1749-1836), engraver and cartographer, was born in London on 11 July 1749, the younger son and sixth of eight known children of William Faden (1711-1783), formerly Mackfaden, and his wife, Hannah. His father, a well-known printer, then of Salisbury Court, Fleet Street, had abbreviated the family name at the time of the Jacobite rising of 1745. 
Faden was apprenticed to the Fleet Street engraver James Wigley on 4 July 1764. At the expiry of his term he became free of the Clothworkers' Company on 7 August 1771. By 1773 he was in partnership with the family of the recently deceased map maker Thomas Jefferys, at Jefferys's premises on the corner of St Martin's Lane. The partnership with the younger Jefferys was dissolved in 1776, the same year in which Faden became an active member of the Society of Civil Engineers (later the Smeatonian Society of Civil Engineers), the influential dining club of John Smeaton and other leading practical men of the day founded in 1771. 
In the years of the American wars Faden came to prominence with maps and atlases of considerable historical note, some of the materials for which survive in the Library of Congress. He is glimpsed at this time as the 'very accurate, industrious young man' commended by Thomas Pownall. In 1783 his father's will enabled him to establish full control of the business. That same year he was appointed to 'the place and quality of Geographer in Ordinary to his Majesty'. 
Systematic in the acquisition of the best available maps, Faden developed the most competent cartographic service of the period. His was an international concern, in contact with map makers throughout Europe. He supplied government departments and commissioned fresh surveys. A gold medallist of the Society of Arts in 1796, his activities foreshadowed the emergence of national cartographic agencies. He brought out the first published Ordnance Survey map, 'An Entirely New & Accurate Survey of the County of Kent' (1801). Some of his plates were likewise adopted as official Admiralty charts. When he moved at this time to larger premises at no. 5 Charing Cross, his maps were reputed the finest being engraved anywhere in the world. 
Of Faden's personal life little is known. His sister Hannah married the painter and astronomer John Russell, and there is an excellent Russell pastel (British Library) of Faden, in an attentive and determined pose. The brothers-in-law collaborated on the earliest extant lunar globe. 
Faden retired in 1823, the business passing to his former apprentice, James Wyld the elder. He died in Shepperton, where his nephew William Russell was then rector, on 21 March 1836, leaving a considerable fortune. There is an elegant memorial to Faden and his sister Jane (1753-1833) in the parish church, where he was buried. 
Laurence Worms', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37407


Fairbank, Alfred John (1895-1982), calligrapher, was born on 12 July 1895 in Grimsby, Lincolnshire, the elder of the two sons of Alfred John Fairbank (1868-1953), engine fitter, and his wife, Emma Greetham (1863-1929), a Salvation Army officer. His parents moved to Gillingham, Kent, when his father became a chargeman of engine fitters in Chatham Dockyard. He was educated at the Wesleyan higher grade school, Gillingham, and at Chatham Dockyard school. 
When fifteen Fairbank joined the dockyard as a boy writer. It was a modest beginning to a career culminating in the rank of senior executive officer, but it was a family triumph in 1911. Competition for civil service entry was stiff: success depended on good handwriting. Thus Fairbank developed the interest and skill which led the first Baron Bridges to write of him when seventy 'No man of our time has done more for good handwriting, whether for the individual or the community, than Alfred Fairbank' (Osley, ix). On 2 April 1919 he married Elsie (1893-1987), daughter of George Kneeshaw, master bricklayer. They had one son, John, a chartered civil engineer, and one daughter, who died as an infant in 1922. 
A dockyard colleague introduced Fairbank to the arts and crafts movement and calligraphy. William Morris was especially influential through his manuscript books and his copies of italic writing manuals. Transfer to the Admiralty enabled him in 1920 to attend evening classes in writing and illuminating at the Central School of Arts and Crafts, London. He met Edward Johnston who came to regard him highly and whose seminal book, 'Writing and Illuminating and Lettering' (1906), stimulated his study of Renaissance handwriting and of palaeography -- the inspiration for the italic script and type associated with his name. 
In the inter-war years Fairbank established a reputation in both calligraphy and type design. Notable examples were his text in roman script of 'Ecclesiasticus' (1929) and his type design, narrow Bembo italic (1928). A founding member of the Society of Scribes and Illuminators (SSI), he became honorary secretary in 1931 and its first president twenty years later. After 1945 his fame as a calligrapher grew, marked by the success of 'A Book of Scripts', the Penguin book of the year in 1949. He was appointed CBE in 1951. During his twelve years as SSI president (1951-63) he completed the best-known of his many calligraphy projects, the design and direction of the RAF book of remembrance at St Clement Danes, London. 
Fairbank's contribution to handwriting made him known to a larger public. In 1932 the Dryad Press published 'A Handwriting Manual' and also his writing cards for schools. The 'Beacon Writing Books', a collaborative work with Charlotte Stone and Winifred Hooper, followed after the Second World War. The adoption of the italic script by many schools and a wider interest in the reform of handwriting encouraged him to initiate the founding of the Society for Italic Handwriting in 1952, with a director of education, Joseph Compton, as chairman; it soon had more than 500 members. Fairbank's later books included 'Renaissance Handwriting: an Anthology of Italic Scripts', with Berthold Wolpe (1960), 'A Roman Script for Schools' (1961), and 'The Story of Handwriting' (1970). 
Fairbank's personality reflected wide cultural interests and a gift for friendship. He was an influential figure in the field of calligraphy -- tall and spare, exacting and conservative in his craft, but with a sense of humour and a love of beauty which his colleagues and pupils relished. His fame may, however, rest primarily on his own writing and texts as a scholar penman. He described handwriting as a 'dance of the pen': so it was when he himself wrote. 
Fairbank retired from the Admiralty to Hove. He died on 14 March 1982 at 4 Preston Park Avenue, Brighton. His remains were cremated on the 18th at Woodvale, Brighton, and his ashes scattered on Ditchling Beacon, Sussex, on 10 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 37408


Fairburn, Charles Edward (1887-1945), railway engineer, was born in Bradford on 5 September 1887, the only son of Robert Fairburn and his wife, Elizabeth. He was educated at Bradford grammar school, where he gained an open scholarship in mathematics to Brasenose College, Oxford. Brasenose awarded him a senior Hulme exhibition and he obtained first classes in mathematical moderations (1906), mathematics (1908), and engineering science (1910). For the next two years he was a pupil under Henry Fowler, chief mechanical engineer of the Midland Railway at its Derby works. He studied engineering drawing at Derby Technical College and metallurgy at Sheffield University, gaining his MA in 1912. 
Fairburn then joined the railway engineering department of Siemens Dynamo Works Ltd in Stafford and from 1913 to 1916 was assistant to the resident engineer for the electrification of the first freight railway in Britain to be operated by electric traction, the Newport (Middlesbrough) to Shildon line of the former North Eastern Railway. In this he was responsible for the design and installation of the overhead contact system and for putting the locomotives into service. In 1914 he married Eleanor, daughter of Dr Cadman of Bradford. They had one son and one daughter. 
In 1916 Fairburn joined the Royal Flying Corps as an officer in an experimental squadron developing new flying formation and fighting techniques, and he attained the rank of major in 1918. 
Fairburn joined the English Electric Company Ltd in 1919. He established and developed their engineering department for railway electrification in Britain and overseas. In addition, in 1926 he became general manager of their Preston works and, in 1928, of the Stafford works also. In 1931 he became manager and chief engineer of the traction department, which carried out many important railway electrification schemes, including those of the Southern Railway, New Zealand government railways, Great Indian Peninsula Railway, Danish State Railways, and the Post Office electric railway in London. 
In 1934 Fairburn joined the London, Midland, and Scottish Railway (LMS) as chief electrical engineer and in 1937 became deputy chief mechanical engineer and electrical engineer under William Stanier. In 1942 the latter was seconded as scientific adviser to the Ministry of Production and Fairburn became acting chief mechanical engineer, an appointment confirmed in 1944. 
Fairburn's wide experience, combined with great technical and organizing abilities, enabled him to achieve improved efficiency in the railway workshops, which became all the more necessary when during the war tank, gun, and aircraft production and repair were added to their activities. From 1934 he was responsible for the introduction on the LMS of substantial numbers of diesel-electric locomotives for heavy-duty service in marshalling yards, where they showed great economies over steam and were the forerunners of more than 1400 of this type on British railways. He also had a keen grasp of steam locomotive matters and was responsible for introducing suburban passenger locomotives in 1945, in which year he also made proposals for the first LMS (and British) main-line diesel-electric locomotives, which were finally introduced under his successor, H. G. Ivatt, two years later. He was an outstanding engineer with quick perception of any issue and great powers of concentration. 
Fairburn was an active member of the institutions of Civil, Electrical, Mechanical, and Welding Engineers and a vice-president of the Institution of Locomotive Engineers, to which he gave two important papers on diesel-electric shunting locomotives. 
Fairburn died at the London Hospital, Whitechapel, London, on 12 October 1945 following a heart attack. He was survived by his wife. 
George W. Carpenter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37409


Faithfull, Emily (1835-1895), publisher and women's activist, was born on 27 May 1835 at Headley rectory, Surrey, the youngest of five daughters and the last of eight children of Ferdinand Faithfull, rector of Headley, and his wife, Elizabeth Mary Harrison, 'nee' Timberlake. Little is known of her early life, but she was educated at home and attended a school in Kensington. She was presented at court in 1857. 
During the 1850s a movement was growing in support of women's legal, economic, and educational rights. A group of women who had come together under the aegis of Barbara Leigh Smith (later Bodichon), formed the Langham Place circle (named after their meeting place) and produced in 1858 the first number of the 'English Woman's Journal' (later the 'Englishwoman's Review') which was to be the organ for the circle's ideas. The young Emily Faithfull joined this well-connected group, which included Bessie Rayner Parkes, Jessie Boucherett, Emily Davies, and Helen Blackburn. The group pressed for legal reform in women's status (including suffrage), explored new areas for women's employment, and campaigned for improved educational opportunities for girls and women. Emily Faithfull was at the heart of this multi-faceted campaign and identified with all three dimensions, although she is best known for her work in women's employment. Her public support of the enfranchisement of women developed later from her investigations and practical campaigns surrounding employment, but from the beginning she was actively involved in the successful movement led by Emily Davies to have the university local examinations opened to women, which began in 1858. 
Early on members of the group began to explore new openings for respectable employment for all classes of women, and in 1859 they formed the Society for Promoting the Employment of Women. One possibility considered was that of compositor, a skilled trade almost wholly confined to men, already effectively unionized and jealously guarded against both unskilled machine operators and any incursions by women. Bessie Parkes bought a small printing press, and she and Emily Faithfull employed a compositor, Austin Holyoake (brother of George Jacob Holyoake), to give instruction in composing. On the basis of this experience they concluded that composing could be a suitable occupation for women. To this end, on 25 March 1860, Emily Faithfull opened the Victoria Press at Great Coram Street, London. She invested her own capital in the press and had the financial backing of another committee member of the Society for Promoting the Employment of Women, G. W. Hastings. 
The press employed at the outset some semi-experienced female compositors, who existed despite the trade restrictions practised by men, but the venture was to remain an irritant to many compositors and others in the printing trade. It was nevertheless a commercial success, although the women compositors only composed and proof-read, unlike later women printers working for the Women's Printing Society (founded in 1876 by Emma Paterson's Women's Protective and Provident League, with which Emily Faithfull was also associated), who also carried out both imposition and 'making up' (making up the type into pages and placing them in the iron frame or chase for printing). Initially Emily Faithfull both printed and published, one of her earliest works being 'The Victoria Regia' (1861), edited by Adelaide Ann Procter. The work and the press attracted the approval of Queen Victoria, and in that same year Emily Faithfull was appointed by royal warrant 'Printer and Publisher in Ordinary to Her Majesty'. In 1863 she was the founder editor of the 'Victoria Magazine', a monthly periodical, to which she contributed until it ceased publication in 1880. The press published the 'Transactions' of the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science from 1860 to 1864. Emily Faithfull was connected with the association, and remained for the rest of her life actively engaged in promoting women's employment and their right to enjoy educational opportunity and legal status equivalent to that of men. In 1862 the press moved to Farringdon Street, London, where the printing was carried out with steam presses, and in 1867 she handed the management of the press to William Wilfred Head, who bought her out in 1869 and continued to run the press as a vehicle for the employment of women until 1882. 
In 1864 Emily Faithfull became caught up in a divorce case when Admiral Henry Codrington sought a divorce from his wife on grounds of adultery. Helen Codrington counter-claimed, as she was able to do under the 1857 'Marriage and Divorce Act', on grounds which included the accusation that in October 1856 he had attempted to rape Emily Faithfull while she was a guest in their house. At first Emily Faithfull agreed to give evidence on behalf of Mrs Codrington but later changed her mind. The reasons for this are not clear, but her own reputation, at risk by virtue of an association with a divorce case, would have been even more vulnerable had she agreed to take the stand. There is also a suggestion that she was threatened with further counter-claims by Admiral Codrington. She exercised discretion and withdrew. 
During her continuing association with the Victoria Press and the 'Victoria Magazine' Emily Faithfull became a writer as well as an editor. In 1868 she published her only novel, 'Change upon Change', a tragic romance with an underlying theme about the need for women to have access to education, training, and work if they were not to be at risk of being destroyed by their often frivolous and trivial schooling and their dependence upon men. The book was published in America as 'A Reed Shaken with the Wind' in 1873, at the time of her first visit to the United States. She became a prolific journalist and author, contributing articles to the 'Lady's Pictorial' and the 'Pall Mall Gazette', as well as the 'Victoria Magazine'. One of her obituarists described her as a very popular lecturer on both sides of the Atlantic, and her visits to America (the second and third taking place in 1882-3 and 1883-4) were to lecture as well as to investigate women's employment in the USA. She was also associated with educational developments in America and was invited to open a kindergarten in San Francisco which was named after her. Her second book, 'Three Visits to America' (1884), was a collection of her writings, lectures, and impressions, and in it she made known her views on employment, education, and women's legal status, including suffrage. Like other members of the Langham Place circle ['see 'Langham Place group] Faithfull did not feel it necessary to refrain from commenting upon votes for women because she was already engaged in promoting women's employment. The fear that suffrage supporters might taint other campaigns, because the issue was the least acceptable or popular, did cause activists to exercise caution but did not prevent them from expressing firm opinions. As early as 1870 Faithfull wrote to 'The Times' supporting the enfranchisement of women and in 'Three Visits' she called for 'political status' for women, arguing that there was 'an inseparable connection between political power and the redress of social grievances'. Women's suffrage was an 'urgent necessity' not an issue of 'abstract justice'. 
Faithfull benefited in her career as a lecturer from the gift of a 'singularly musical voice' (according to her obituarist in the 'Illustrated London News'), 'which she used to great effect on the platform, though it was heard to better advantage in private readings'. Emily Faithfull used her musical voice in a two-year period from 1872 in a series of dramatic readings. She had theatrical connections, and in 1881 she founded the International Musical, Dramatic and Literary Association, an organization to protect the rights of composers and artists. 
Emily Faithfull was a prolific author, and a dedicated propagandist and pioneer for women's rights in employment and other spheres. Her contributions were both practical and exhortatory, and she succeeded in carrying out her self-appointed tasks at the same time as appealing to popular audiences and retaining the patronage of Queen Victoria, who was no general supporter of women's rights. In 1886 she received $100 from the royal bounty, in 1888 she was presented with an inscribed engraved portrait of the queen in recognition of her dedicated work over thirty years in the interests of women, and in 1889 she was awarded a civil-list pension of $50. 
Faithfull's photograph in late middle age shows an ample woman with a benign expression, dressed in all the accoutrements of Victorian middle-class womanhood. This respectable daughter of an Anglican clergyman had an eclectic and varied career, which included challenging one of the most tightly regulated and jealously guarded of the older trades, and speaking publicly about acutely sensitive issues. She died, aged sixty, on 31 May 1895, at 10 Plymouth Grove, Manchester, lamented by her sister, Mrs John George Fleet of Chiswick. She herself was unmarried, but left a legacy of writings and activity in one of the most controversial issues of her age. 


@@@@@


doc= 37410


Farnes, Kenneth (1911-1941), cricketer and schoolmaster, was born on 8 July 1911 at home at 141 Wallwood Road, Leytonstone, Essex, the younger son of Sydney Heath Farnes, a brewer's clerk, and his wife, Florence Susanna Georgiana Shipston. He captained the eleven at Royal Liberty School, Romford, and on leaving school (1928) spent 'eighteen depressing months [as] a bank clerk' (Farnes, 27) before giving up his job impulsively in May 1930 to 'watch the Australians at Leyton' (ibid., 30). Seven weeks later, after successful performances for the Gidea Park club side, he made his first-class debut for Essex, and soon gained a reputation as a right-arm fast bowler. In his second match for Essex he took five for 36 against Kent. In nine seasons for his county he took 367 wickets, his best performance being in 1938 when he took fifteen for 113 against Glamorgan. Earlier, in 1934, his eleven for 131 had helped Essex to their first win against Yorkshire since 1911. 
Freed from banking Farnes went up to Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he won a blue each year (1931-3) and took 113 wickets (average 20.28) for the university. In his last year at Cambridge (1933) against Oxford he took seven for 71, employing the fast leg-theory tactics (employing four short legs) which Larwood had controversially used in the recently ended 'bodyline' tour of Australia. He also won an athletics blue for putting the weight. Having read geography and history in his triposes, he was appointed to the staff of Worksop College in Nottinghamshire by F. J. Shirley and made a housemaster after only one term. He proved an ideal schoolmaster, with a quickness of response and a mind well stocked with varied interests. He painted and sketched 'with much more than ordinary talent' ('The Worksopian'). He also coached several successful first elevens. Throughout his time at Worksop the school was generous in the frequency in which he was allowed off to play first-class cricket. 
Having proved to be the most effective amateur bowler in the 1933 season, Farnes was first selected for England against the 1934 Australians. He took ten for 179 in the first test and secured the wickets of seven out of the eight top batsmen (though the tactics of bodyline bowling were not employed throughout the test series). He never again produced similar figures but in fifteen tests (1934-9) he took sixty wickets (average 28.65), including six for 96 in an Australian total of 604 at Melbourne in 1937. 
Some of Farnes's best performances occurred at Lord's for the Gentlemen versus the Players. In 1936 he clean-bowled H. Gimblett, W. R. Hammond, and J. Hardstaff for single figures, bowling 'at a pace unequalled at Headquarters since the days of C. J. Kortright' ('Wisden', 1937, 477). With eleven for 103 he helped the Gentlemen in 1938 to a rare win, again bowling at a devastating pace, while in 1939, in his first match of the season, he secured three wickets in an over. 
Farnes was one of the fastest bowlers of his generation. Standing 6 feet 5 inches tall, he delivered the ball from a height of over 8 feet, off an eleven-pace run, and achieved considerable lift. His natural body action imparted swerve and he could make the ball break back from the off. In his career, ended by the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939, he took 690 wickets (average 21.45). Without great pretensions as a batsman, he nevertheless made 97 not out against Somerset in 1936, sharing in a last wicket partnership of 149. 
Farnes's 'Tours and Tests' (1940) provided a vivid and picturesque account of his three overseas trips, in a day when the MCC still went to the West Indies by banana boat. His epilogue to the book has poignancy in its anticipation of the contribution which Len Hutton and Denis Compton would make to cricket after the war. A few weeks before the book came out, he made a final appearance at Lord's, in August 1940, for an eleven raised by Sir Pelham Warner -- virtually an England side -- against a West Indies eleven. Farnes alone of those players (on both sides) would not survive the war. He had joined the Royal Air Force in 1940 and undergone training in Canada. After returning to Britain, Pilot Officer Farnes, who was unmarried, was killed when the Wellington bomber which he was flying crashed at Chipping Warden in Oxfordshire on the night of 20 October 1941. He was buried at the Brook military cemetery, Woking. England's post-war bowling attack was diminished and Worksop lost a housemaster with a 'love of life and an enjoyment of fun' ('The Worksopian'), immensely popular and respected by both colleagues and pupils. 


@@@@@


doc= 37411


Fenton, Henry John Horstman (1854-1929), chemist, was born on 18 February 1854 in Ealing, the son of John Fenton, gentleman. He was educated at Magdalen College School, Oxford, and then entered King's College, London, to study chemistry under C. L. Bloxam. In 1875 he was awarded an exhibition in physical science from the Clothworkers' Company, and the following year he was awarded an entrance scholarship at Christ's College, Cambridge. He took the natural sciences tripos in 1877 with first-class honours, and was appointed an assistant demonstrator and shortly afterwards university demonstrator in chemistry. In 1904 he was given the title and status of university lecturer. With his fellow demonstrator he was jointly responsible for teaching in the university chemical laboratory, with increasing responsibilities as the old college laboratories began to close. 
Although Fenton was active in research he made no great discoveries. He is remembered, however, in the context of Fenton's reagent -- hydrogen peroxide containing a trace of ferrous salt, used to convert greekLetteralpha-hydroxy acids to greekLetteralpha-keto acids. But it is as a superb teacher over some forty years that Fenton made his name. He took immense trouble in preparing his lectures and the experimental demonstrations that accompanied them. His striking appearance -- dark complexion, black hair, and athletic figure -- compelled attention and his air of languid weariness when lecturing was a pose which concealed an exceptionally acute mind. He avoided dogmatism and presented his subject as one open to debate. His mordant humour appealed to students, and it was by no means unusual for him to continue a lecture for half an hour in informal discussion with them. He paid equal attention to devising his courses of laboratory work, to which his 'Notes on Qualitative Analysis' (1883) was a valuable accompaniment. 
Although outspoken about others, Fenton was naturally shy and very sensitive to criticism of himself. He could be uncompromising in his opinions, persisting in his views even when in a minority of one. This trait sometimes created difficulties when he served on university bodies. At the same time he could be gentle with students; a thoughtless question would be sympathetically answered. 
Fenton was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1899, serving on its council in 1913-16, and he became an honorary fellow of Christ's College in 1911. On 6 December 1892 he married Edith Isabelle ('b'. 1870/71), daughter of George Ferguson of Richmond; they had no children. At seventy he retired to Hove, but his last years were greatly clouded by mental degeneration. He died on 13 January 1929 in Camberwell House, a London nursing home, survived by his wife. 
Trevor I. Williams', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37412


Fenton, Roger (1819-1869), photographer, was born on 28 March 1819 at Crimble Hall, near Bury, Lancashire, the third of four brothers and the fourth of the seven children of John Fenton (died 1863), banker and MP for Rochdale, and his first wife, Elizabeth Aipdaile (died 1829/30). He attended University College, London, graduating with a BA in 1840, and went on to study law intermittently throughout the 1840s before being called to the bar in 1851. But an inheritance from his wealthy grandfather gave Fenton the financial independence to pursue his ambition to become an artist, and in 1842 he went to Paris to become a pupil of the celebrated history painter Paul Delaroche. On 29 August 1843 he married Grace Elizabeth Maynard, of Harlsey Hall, North Riding of Yorkshire, and together they lived in Paris until 1848. They then returned to London and Fenton continued his studies with Charles Lucy. Little is known of Fenton's accomplishment as an artist other than the mention of three studies shown at the annual exhibition of the Royal Academy between 1848 and 1851. During this same period London's artistic milieu began to recognize the potential of photography as a means of artistic self-expression. Fenton took up the new art about 1852, and during a visit to Russia that year with the engineer Charles Blacker Vignoles he made an extensive series of photographs of Moscow, Kiev, and St Petersburg which first established his name when they were exhibited at venues throughout Britain. 
Pivotal to the future of photography was the first exhibition dedicated solely to it. After its opening to the public at the Society of Arts, London, in December 1852, the popular and critical success of this exhibition led a month later to the formation of the Photographic Society of London (later the Royal Photographic Society, 1894). The members' principal aim was to raise the artistic and scientific status of the medium through meetings, publications, and annual exhibitions. Fenton took an active part in organizing both the exhibition and the promotion of the society, becoming its first honorary secretary. 
Fenton was not the only artist to take up photography during this period, but his meteoric rise to eminence sets him apart from others. This owed as much to circumstance as to his skill as a photographer. At the first exhibition of the Photographic Society in January 1854 he showed Queen Victoria and Prince Albert round the gallery. The royal family subsequently became important patrons of photography, and by their example the medium was given a status that made it socially acceptable. Fenton was not alone in having portrait photographs commissioned by the royal family, but over the years his professional relationship with them undoubtedly enhanced his status. 
Following the outbreak of the Crimean War in March 1854, Fenton undertook the most important commission of his career for Thomas Agnew, a leading printseller and fine art publisher of Manchester and London. Armed with letters of introduction from Prince Albert, Fenton arrived in Balaklava in March 1855, thus becoming the first Briton to enter a seat of war to make an official photographic record. It proved to be the most demanding four months of his life as he struggled to overcome recalcitrant chemistry, difficult circumstances, intense heat, and the imminent threat of death from warfare and disease. Fenton's education as an artist led him to represent the war as a series of heroic portraits, tableaux, and expansive battlefields that implied a nobility of spirit and sense of moral purpose profoundly at odds with the reality of the Crimean campaign. The photographs were published as a series of portfolios by Agnew and exhibited widely throughout Britain during 1855 and 1856, but public interest did not convert into ready sales, so the enterprise failed commercially. 
Back in London, Fenton resumed work as the official photographer to the British Museum, an inaugural post which he had held since 1854, and devoted himself once more to the affairs of the Photographic Society. He was elected vice-president in 1857, a position he held until 1861, by which date the predominant culture of photography had shifted away from the original aims and high ideals that characterized the foundation of the society towards the more commercial world of the portrait studio. Despite these cultural shifts, Fenton remained true to his original belief that photography was a medium capable of artistic expression. Each summer he photographed many of the most celebrated beauty spots and noble buildings in Britain with a camera that gave a magisterial format of 14 by 18 inches, which was unusually large even for that period. The bold, imaginative compositions and technical mastery of the studies were regarded as models of perfection by critics, colleagues, and public alike when they were exhibited in cities as diverse as London, Paris, Manchester, Norwich, Edinburgh, and Glasgow. Fenton's policy of submitting new work for exhibition each season allowed him to show more work than any other photographer in Britain and ensured his name was kept before the public. 
In an attempt to capitalize on the well-established print market for engravings and lithographs, Fenton collaborated with Paul Pretsch during 1856 to print his work as photo-galvanographic engravings -- a complex and tricky process which sought to render the delicate tones of a photograph in printer's ink. Although technically innovative, the process compared unfavourably with the highly finished and sumptuous results possible with steel-engraving and the venture proved not to be commercially successful. However, it is notable as an early attempt to render photographs on a printed page. 
During the late 1850s Fenton made a series of studio photographs which were a marked departure from the landscape and topographic studies that had become his hallmark. In 1857 he began an ambitious suite of orientalist studies of exotically costumed pashas, odalisques, and dancing girls whose pose and gesture evoked the heavy sensuality of harem life, a subject matter then much in vogue. In 1860 he made studies of fruit and flowers piled high in superabundant heaps whose exquisitely rendered blooms and soft textured surfaces offered another sort of sensuality due as much to the skill of the horticulturist as to Fenton's skill as a photographer. These studies are quintessentially mid-Victorian, with their heavy opulence and suggestions of self-indulgence. They were among the last group of works Fenton ever exhibited and were rewarded with a prize medal when shown at the International Exhibition, held in London during the summer of 1862. Later that year, without explanation, Fenton gave up photography, selling his cameras and negatives at auction. Quite why he did so, and with such finality, remains the subject of speculation. Perhaps he felt that the future of photography offered little scope for further artistic challenge; the high ideals that had prompted him to take it up in 1852 had been slowly eroded and replaced a decade later by the polished artifice of commercial studio portraiture, and the influence and authority of the Photographic Society were in serious decline. Throughout his brief career as a photographer, Fenton was able fully to explore the potential of the medium as he moved from one genre to another: from portraitist to war photographer; from topographic artist to studio photographer. He was the pre-eminent photographer of the period, and his range and output have rarely been equalled since. 
In his later years Fenton resumed his career at the bar. He died at his home in Potters Bar, Middlesex, on 9 August 1869 from nervous exhaustion and pulmonary disorders. He was survived by his wife and by four daughters, a son and daughter having died in infancy. Fenton's work was the subject of a major exhibition at Tate Britain, London, in 2005. 


@@@@@


doc= 37413


Fenwick, Eliza (1766?-1840), writer, was probably born on 1 February 1766 to Thomas and Elizabeth Jago and baptized Elizabeth on 25 June at Pelynt, Cornwall. Little is known of her early life although she spoke of a sister and a brother who remained in Cornwall. Her various careers suggest that she received a typically limited girl's education with accomplishments, rather than depth of study, prominent. Her disastrous marriage to the feckless John Fenwick probably took place in the late 1780s and was to provide her with ample opportunity to develop her survival skills. His inability to 'persevere in sobriety' (Wedd, 57) caused her to leave him several times during the 1800s. In order to end 'this struggle, this perpetual warfare' (ibid., 1), to support herself, her daughter, Eliza, and her son, Orlando, and at the same time satisfy her restless nature, she threw herself into a series of short-lived projects which ranged from running a school, translating, print-colouring, and governessing. Her friends, who included Mary Hays, Thomas Holcroft, William Godwin, Mary Wollstonecraft, Charlotte Smith, and Charles and Mary Lamb, seldom resisted her pleas for assistance and in November 1807 she took over the running of William Godwin's newly established Juvenile Library in Skinner Street, Clerkenwell, London, until she escorted her actress daughter to Ireland soon after. John Fenwick was last known to be alive in 1817 but his wife referred to him as being 'morally dead' in 1821, suggesting he was still alive. 
In 1795 Eliza Fenwick's epistolary novel 'Secresy, or, The Ruin on the Rock' had been published 'By a Woman'. This was an important contribution to the late eighteenth-century radical novel. Using powerful images of confinement and escape, it tells of the romantic but misguided attachment of Sibella, whose defiance of her restrictive education leads to her sexual maturity and subsequent death. Ostensibly demonstrating 'the fatal end of an ungoverned passion -- virtuous in its object, but vicious in its excess', the novel's conflicting and more convincing emphasis is on the heroine's search for independence and her defiance towards the 'moats and walls [which] are feeble barriers to a determined will'. In hindsight, the novel may be seen as contributing to a new tradition of 'Jacobin' novels which add female issues, especially those arising out of inadequate female education, to the agenda. The novel was well received by the more liberal journals but, despite its critical success, and an announcement in the August 1800 number of the 'Monthly Magazine' that a second novel was in progress, Fenwick appears to have abandoned the genre, most of her subsequent publications being educative and for children, sometimes publishing under the pseudonym Revd David Blair. 
In 1814 Eliza Fenwick eagerly sought a new start by following her now married daughter to Barbados, where they opened an initially thriving school but were forced to move again, settling in America in 1822. Despite approaching each new situation with an indomitable optimism bordering on the manic, several events seemed to support her fatalistic pessimism: Orlando died of yellow fever in 1816; her daughter died in 1828; two of her grandsons drowned. She referred to not having 'trod the rosy paths of life' (Wedd, 3) and in her personal and published writings she extended this belief to argue that women are particularly 'born to suffer' (ibid., 50) because of their gendered circumstances. Her thirty-year correspondence with Mary Hays vividly recounts her search for independence, her indebtedness to friends, her financial insecurity, as well as her impetuosity and blind faith in her new ventures which quickly transform into 'slavery'. She believed herself to be 'pursued by a malign and inexorable fate' (ibid.), which, although aided by her hasty plans, does seem to have dogged her life. Despite this belief, she displayed a buoyant resilience in the face of misfortune, and a relentless instinct to survive. Charlotte Smith considered her to be 'not only a Woman of talents, but of great sweetness of temper, and an excellent heart' (Smith to Hays, 26 July 1800) and Mary Hays had never 'seen in woman more patient sweetness, fortitude, activity, ingenuity & resource' (Hays to Henry Crabb Robinson, 26 Nov 1807). Eliza Fenwick died at Providence, Rhode Island, USA, in December 1840. 
Annie F. Wedd's edition of Fenwick's letters to Mary Hays has helped to establish further the extent of her interest in feminism in the late eighteenth century and in the unfairness of women's inferior position in general. The letters show her to be an ebullient woman who, although very aware of life's injustices, refused to be overcome by them. 


@@@@@


doc= 37414


Fiennes, Celia (1662-1741), traveller, was born on 7 June 1662 in Newton Toney, near Salisbury, the daughter of Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes (1607/8-1669), second son of William Fiennes, first Viscount Saye and Sele, and his second wife, Frances (1621-1691), daughter of Colonel Richard Whitehead of West Tytherley, Hampshire. Her family were prominent and staunch parliamentarians and, after the Restoration, noted dissenters. Celia had two half-brothers from her father's first marriage, Nathaniel ('c'.1637- 'c'.1672) and William (1639-1698), the third viscount, and four sisters (three of whom died in infancy) by the second marriage. Her younger sister, Mary (1663-1737), married Sir Edmund Harrison, a London merchant who traded with Turkey. After the death of her mother in 1691 Celia moved to London to live either with or near her sister's family. 
Celia Fiennes began to travel in order 'to regain my health by variety and change of aire and exercise' ('Journeys', 1). Her early journeys were to various southern counties, Bath, London, and Oxford. In 1697 she made a tour of the north and of Kent and in the following year she made her 'Great Journey to Newcastle and to Cornwall'. During the first decade of the eighteenth century she made further journeys through some of the southern counties and about 1712 she visited Epsom, Hampton Court, and Windsor. On some journeys she was accompanied by relatives but on her 'Great Journey' in 1698 she travelled on horseback with only one or two servants, staying at inns or at private houses where she had family connections. 
The discovery of England by firsthand exploration was becoming fashionable, though Fiennes was exceptional as a woman traveller, and travel was becoming easier: an act of parliament of 1697 allowed JPs to order the erection of guide stoops in places where the traveller might go astray. Fiennes's comments on these new stoops in Lancashire provide some of the earliest information on this innovation: 'at all cross wayes there are Posts and Hands pointing to each road with the names of the great town or market towns that it leads to, which does make up for the length of the miles that strangers may not lose their road and have to goe back againe. ('Journeys', 188-9)' Celia Fiennes urged others to 'spend some of their tyme in Journeys to visit their native Land, and be curious to inform themselves and make observations of the pleasant prospects, good buildings, different produces and manufactures of each place' ('Journeys', 1). Like Defoe, she did not share the current enthusiasm for antiquarianism. Neither was she particularly interested in the natural world, except where, for example in mining districts, natural resources promised a commercial return. From a family of political and religious nonconformists and with firsthand knowledge of the concerns of urban merchants and tradesmen, she delighted in the new, the busy, the commercial, the prosperous, and had little time for antiquities, decaying towns, ancient customs and privileges, or unchanging rural ways. She preferred Nottingham to York, new country seats to ancient houses, and contemporary manufacturing, mining, and drainage projects to ruins. She was a keen observer of country houses but knew little of art and described their contents as curiosities and was interested in their domestic arrangements. The gardens and rooms at Chatsworth, for instance, were viewed as a series of curiosities: 'at the end of the dineing roome is a large door all of Looking-glass, its great panells all diamond cutt, this is just opposite to the doores that runs into the drawing roome and bed chamber and closet, so it shews the roomes to look all double. (ibid., 99)' Celia Fiennes was a connoisseur of spa waters; indeed, her descriptions of wells and the primitive accommodation that was provided are an important source of information about the early history of spas. At Harrogate, for example, she visited 'the Sulpher or Stincking spaw, not improperly term'd for the Smell being so very strong and offensive that I could not force my horse near the Well... it has an additionall offencivness like carrion or a jakes' ('Journeys', 80). She found that the drink was 'a quick purger and very good for all Scurbutick humours' (ibid., 80). 
Celia Fiennes died, unmarried, on 10 April 1741 in Hackney, probably in the home of one of her nieces, and was buried in Newton Toney. 
In 1702 Celia Fiennes reworked the notes she had taken during her travels into a journal. She made the standard disclaimer that she intended the work only for near relatives to read, but its style and presentation suggest that she always intended it for a larger audience. It remained wholly in manuscript until 1812 when Southey published unacknowledged excerpts in his 'Omniana' and at the end of the century it was transcribed and edited for publication by a family member, Emily Griffiths, appearing as 'Through England on a Side Saddle' (1888). The edition of 1947 with scholarly apparatus by Christopher Morris remains the standard. The sharpness of her observations on contemporary life, particularly its novel aspects, has made her journal a prime source for social and economic historians, ranking with that of her contemporary Daniel Defoe, and her sprightly and engaging style has won her an audience beyond the scholarly world. 


@@@@@


doc= 37415


Firbank, (Arthur Annesley) Ronald (1886-1926), novelist, was born on 17 January 1886 at 40 Clarges Street, Mayfair, London, the second of the three sons and the four children of Sir Joseph Thomas Firbank (1850-1910) of London, railway contractor and later Unionist MP for East Hull, and his wife, Harriette Jane Garrett (1851-1924), daughter of James Perkins Garrett, rector of Kellistown, co. Carlow, Ireland. His paternal grandfather was Joseph Firbank (1819-1886), a railway contractor. Firbank spent the first ten years of his life at his family's new home, The Coopers, Chislehurst, Kent -- a village whose connections with the exiled French empress Eugenie may have initiated his enduring fascination with both royalty and Catholicism. In May 1900 he was sent to Uppingham School in Rutland, where, suffering from ill health, he stayed only two terms. Subsequent private tuition was taken in England, France, and Spain in 1901-6. His first book, containing two stories, 'Odette d'Antrevernes' and 'A Study in Temperament', was published in 1905; it shows very clearly the influence of Oscar Wilde, and Wilde's presence, as stylist, aesthete, and homosexual martyr, can be felt in different ways throughout Firbank's writing life. The following summer he was at work on his first novel, 'The Artificial Princess' (published posthumously in 1934): in it he devised the techniques of elliptical narrative and baroque construction, and the manner, at once satirical and lyric, concentrated and fragmentary, that were to characterize his mature work. 
In October 1906 Firbank went to Trinity Hall, Cambridge, and left in March 1909, having taken no examinations; on 6 December 1907 he had been received into the Roman Catholic church by R. Hugh Benson. In October 1909 he went to Rome, where he hoped, but failed, to join the Guardia nobile, and he remained in Italy until October 1910, when his father died and he assumed control of the family's finances. Over the following four years he cultivated the nomadic way of life which, with the exception of the war years, was to be his until he died: he drifted restlessly in southern Europe and north Africa -- and when in London was seen at the theatre, the Ballets Russes, the Cafe Royal, and at the bohemian restaurant La Tour Eiffel. He was known for the refined dandyism of his appearance, the flutterings and oscillations of his bearing, his heavy drinking, and his extreme shyness. He was vain of his looks, as is attested by his use of portrait drawings by Augustus John, Wyndham Lewis, and Charles Shannon as frontispieces or on the jackets of his later books. The body of anecdote with which a generation recorded him emphasizes the eccentric refinement and oblique humour of someone too nervous and solitary to be knowable. 
With the appearance of his novel 'Vainglory' in 1915 he styled himself Ronald Firbank for the first time, signalling the emergence of the mature writer. Like all his books until 'Prancing Nigger' (1924), it was published at his own expense and to negligible acclaim. An unorthodox social comedy set in an English cathedral town, it was also the most experimental modernist novel yet published in England, and its abstruseness was found additionally baffling in the context of the war. Being unfit for service, and to escape the danger of bombing, he moved to rooms at 66 High Street, Oxford, in November 1915, and remained there until September 1919. This was a period of intense isolation, in which he sank into nervous apprehensiveness and paranoia. But it was also a period of remarkable creativity, in which he wrote his novels 'Inclinations' (1916), 'Caprice' (1917), and 'Valmouth' (1919). He showed an exceptional and sustaining dedication to his art in the face of personal loneliness and critical indifference; it was only after his death that he emerged as a vital influence on writers of the generation of Evelyn Waugh, W. H. Auden, and Anthony Powell, who admired the unprecedented economy, Carrollian fantasy, and absurdist comedy of manners which coexist in his work. 
Firbank had no close emotional attachments, save with his mother; but in 1919 he seems to have become infatuated with the Hon. Evan Morgan, who rebuffed him by refusing the dedication of his only play, 'The Princess Zoubaroff', days before its publication in 1920. After this Firbank resumed his nomadism, and the settings of his books, too, were henceforth to be fantastic versions of foreign places: Vienna, Havana, Seville. His north African tale 'Santal' appeared in 1921, and 'The Flower beneath the Foot', the first of the three major novels of his last years, in 1923. This book shows a new satirical vigour and contempt for British society, at a time when the American writer Carl Van Vechten had begun to promote Firbank's work in the United States. His next novel, 'Prancing Nigger' (1924), was published first with considerable success in New York and then in London under the author's preferred title of 'Sorrow in Sunlight'. American editions of 'The Flower beneath the Foot' and 'Vainglory' followed, but Brentano declined 'Concerning the Eccentricities of Cardinal Pirelli' (1926) on religious and moral grounds: Firbank's work after the death of his mother in March 1924 showed a new candour in its treatment of homosexuality. He was working on a novel set in New York, 'The New Rythum' (fragments published in 1962), when he died at the Hotel Quirinale in Rome on 21 May 1926. He was mistakenly buried in the protestant cemetery in Testaccio, Rome on 1 June, and reinterred in the campo Verano in that city in September. 


@@@@@


doc= 37416


Fitch, Sir Thomas, first baronet (bap. 1637, d. 1688), building contractor, was born in Barkway, Hertfordshire, the second son (the first died in infancy and there was also a daughter) of William Fitch and his wife, Alice, and baptized on 17 December 1637. Nothing is known of his early years, though he seems to have been occupied initially as a bricklayer. He is first recorded in April 1663, engaged on the brickwork of Sir Ralph Bankes's house at Kingston Lacy, Dorset, designed by Sir Roger Pratt. It was the great fire of London in 1666 which gave him his opening, however, and he became a prominent figure in the rebuilding of the city over the next decade. 
Fitch's most important contract (first with a carpenter, John Ball, and then on his own) was for the deepening and wharfing of the Fleet ditch, an enormous task which employed two hundred men, took two and a half years to finish (1672-4), and brought him a gift of plate worth $200 from the City on its efficient completion. His other London projects included the stairs of Blackfriars and Three Cranes, the laystalls at Dowgate and Puddle Dock, wharfing at Whitefriars, and the imposing great storehouse at the Tower. Outside London, his major contract was the execution (with his brother John Fitch) of the ambitious designs of Sir Bernard de Gomme for new fortifications in Portsmouth, where he also built the garrison hospital. He was employed on the reconstruction of the bishop of Winchester's palace at Wolvesey, and he acted from time to time as architect as well as builder. He probably designed the court house in Windsor which was completed by Sir Christopher Wren after his death. 
Fitch's prosperity is shown by the 'magnificent dwelling house' which he built for himself on the north Thames frontage immediately to the east of the Fleet Canal. At the time of his death he also owned the country seat of Mount Mascall, in North Cray, Kent. He was elected sheriff for Kent in 1679 and knighted in the same year. On 7 September 1688 he was created a baronet by James II, but died nine days later on 16 September. He was buried at St Anne Blackfriars. He was survived by his wife, Anne, daughter and heir of Richard Comport, of Eltham, and a son, Comport ('b'. 1676), who succeeded him in the baronetcy. 
Joyce Fitch Roy Stephens', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37418


Fitzsimmons, Robert (1863-1917), boxer, was born on 26 May 1863 in Wendron Street, Helston, Cornwall, the youngest child of the seven sons and five daughters of James Fitzsimmons, of Omagh, co. Tyrone, a police constable in the Helston borough police, and his wife, Jane Strongman of Truro, Cornwall. Fitzsimmons was educated at Helston national school until the family emigrated to New Zealand, probably in 1872, and settled in Timaru, South Island, where most of the settlers were of Cornish descent. James Fitzsimmons set up as a blacksmith, and Bob Fitzsimmons left school to become a butcher's delivery boy. After various jobs, including that of carriage painter, striker at an iron foundry, and house decorator, he joined his brother in the blacksmith's business. 
Fitzsimmons's boxing career began in 1880, when he won a tournament organized by the bare-knuckle champion Jem Mace, who was touring New Zealand, and later defeated Mace's protege the Maori Herbert Slade. He moved to Australia in 1883 and settled in Sydney, where he worked as a blacksmith. He won several contests, but in 1892 was defeated by Jim Hall in his attempt at the Australian middleweight title, in what may have been a rigged fight. Fitzsimmons sailed for San Francisco in 1890. His American career took off in 1891, when he beat Jack Dempsey, the Nonpareil, to win the world middleweight title. He also became a star of travelling variety shows, beginning with exhibition fights, but also appearing as an actor from 1893, when he played the lead in 'A Man's a Man'. Meanwhile he was preparing to challenge James J. (Gentleman Jim) Corbett for the world heavyweight title. He knocked Corbett out in the fourteenth round at Carson City, Nevada, in 1897: the first reference to the 'solar-plexus punch' came in a newspaper account of this contest. Fitzsimmons held the world heavyweight title until 1899; in 1903, when the light heavyweight division was created, he became the first to win world titles at three different weights when he became the world light heavyweight champion. He held this title until 1905, and continued to box until 1914. Fitzsimmons also published a book, 'Physical Culture and Self Defence', in 1902. 
Bob Fitzsimmons was the only world heavyweight champion born in England, although he never fought there, and became an American citizen in 1893. He had a huge upper frame, with powerful shoulders developed during his early years at the anvil. Daniel Chester French used him as a model for his statue 'Peace' for the Dewey Arch in New York. He was covered in freckles, hence his nickname Ruby Robert. 
Fitzsimmons was married four times. His first wife was Louisa Johns of Timaru, whom he married in Australia on 14 October 1885; they had one son, born in Australia. They were divorced in 1893, and later in the same year he married Rose Julian, an acrobat, and moved to New York; they had two sons and a daughter. Rose died in 1903, and later that year Fitzsimmons married Julia May Gifford, a music hall entertainer. After their divorce in 1915 he married in the same year Mrs Temo Slomonin (1883-1959), 'nee' Ziller, born in Russia, of Portland, Oregon, the divorced wife of Henry Slomonin. She became an evangelist and persuaded Fitzsimmons to abandon the stage and join her as a travelling preacher. Bob Fitzsimmons died of pneumonia on 22 October 1917 in Chicago, Illinois, USA, and was buried in Graceland cemetery, Chicago. 


@@@@@


doc= 37419


Fitzthomas, Thomas (d. in or before 1276), mayor of London, was a draper with considerable property in the city, whose family had been part of its aldermanic ruling class since at least the 1220s. That class, composed largely of drapers, pepperers, goldsmiths, mercers, and vintners, controlled the city through its hold over the offices of mayor, sheriff, and alderman. Fitzthomas was appointed alderman in the late 1240s, and in 1257-8 served as sheriff. During this period the city's rulers enjoyed mixed relations with Henry III. Some were closely linked to him through the goods and provisions that they supplied to the royal household. Others resented and resisted his attempts to tax the city and bestow market privileges on Westminster Abbey. Early in 1258, when the king attacked his enemies among the city's rulers, Fitzthomas escaped unscathed. 
Fitzthomas held the office of mayor for the first time in October 1261 and was reappointed in October 1262, the years in which the king dominated London, having thrown off the restrictions imposed on him by the provisions of Oxford in 1258. In June 1263, however, when Simon de Montfort (died 1265) resurrected the cause of the provisions and advanced on the capital, Fitzthomas placed himself at the head of 'the people' who had taken to the streets in Montfort's support. Thereafter, until the battle of Evesham in August 1265, he helped to make London a bulwark of the Montfortian regime. Fitzthomas based his power on a militia and a revived folkmoot, the traditional assembly of all the citizens, whose vitality had been sapped under the aldermanic regime. Now the aldermen and magnates of the city were ignored as the folkmoot elected Fitzthomas mayor in October 1263 and again in October 1264. It also ratified ordinances that allowed various crafts for the first time to organize their activities. It was these crafts -- cordwainers, girdlers, fishmongers, wool-packers, for example -- that formed the heart of the popular movement, having greatly expanded in numbers during the previous hundred years yet been excluded from political power and forbidden to organize by the aldermen. 
There was nothing lukewarm in Fitzthomas's role in the revolutionary regime. In March 1265, when he renewed his oath of fealty to the king (then in effect a captive in Montfort's power), he made clear 'before the people' that his loyalty was highly conditional: 'For as long as you will be a good lord and king to us', he told Henry III, 'we will be faithful and devoted to you' ('De antiquis legibus liber', 72-3). After the battle of Evesham, Fitzthomas and his leading colleagues were imprisoned by Prince Edward (later Edward I). The people of the city did not forget him, however. In April 1266, when the leading citizens were allowed to choose the staunch royalist and former mayor William Fitzrichard as custodian of London, the people called instead for Thomas Fitzthomas. He was finally released from prison two years later, on payment to Edward of a fine of $500. 
Just why Fitzthomas threw in his lot so completely with Montfort and the popular movement in the city is unclear. He had links with the rulers purged by the king in 1258, some of whom likewise emerged as Montfortians in 1263. On the other hand, he himself had escaped the purge; he was also a nephew of William Fitzrichard, and was clearly considered completely reliable by the king until 1263. Whatever the reasons, Fitzthomas played a central part in committing London to the cause of Simon de Montfort between 1263 and 1265. He died in or shortly before 1276, leaving one son heavily in debt and another living outside London. 
D. A. Carpenter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37420


Fleming, John (c.1822/3-1883), gardener, was born in Scotland and first came to public notice in 1850. His early life and antecedents have not been traced: the earliest detail offered in his obituaries was his residence with a Mr Aiton of Bardsea, Ulverston, Lancashire, about 1844. From there he went to the garden of the earl of Denbigh at Newnham Paddox, Warwickshire, and thence in 1850 to Harewood, Yorkshire, where the grounds were then in the course of transformation by Sir Charles Barry, whom Fleming assisted in the creation of the terrace garden. From 1853 to 1855 he was gardener to the earl of Southampton at Whittlebury Lodge, Towcester. 
From 1855 Fleming was head gardener at Cliveden, Buckinghamshire, initially to the second duke of Sutherland and then to H. L. Grosvenor, first duke of Westminster. At Cliveden he found himself working again with Barry, assisting him in the creation of a new terrace garden. By 1859 he could display the results of his experiments with the planting of bulbs in the parterre for a spring display. At this time there was much comment in the horticultural press about the excessive attention lavished on summer bedding at the expense of plants for the other seasons, and Fleming was the first gardener to become well known for 'spring gardening', though by the 1870s there was a coterie which pressed the claims to priority of William Ingram of Belvoir Castle. Fleming reported his experiments in the 'Journal of Horticulture', and published 'Spring and Winter Flower Gardening' in 1864 (2nd edn, 1870). 
In 1868, when a fashion for foliage came in, Fleming planted a bed of dwarf foliage plants and succulents, in the pattern of the countess of Sutherland's monogram. The 'Gardeners' Chronicle', reviewing the experiment, coined the name 'carpet bedding' for it, and recommended it for wider trial. Carpet bedding was to become a dominant fashion in England in the 1870s, and an international one in the 1880s. In 1870, with James Gray of Chelsea, Fleming erected new glasshouses at Cliveden, at the same time as he was engaged in landscaping a valley on the estate which was praised by William Robinson (1838-1935) as a fine example of wild gardening ('Garden', 235). 
From 1862 to 1864 Fleming served on the council of the Horticultural Society, and he was a member of the committee for the International Horticultural Exhibition of 1866. He died unmarried, of phthisis and abscess of the lungs, at Cliveden House on 26 November 1883, aged 'about 60' (d. cert.). The administration of his estate was granted to a Canadian relative. 
Brent Elliott', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37421


Richard [ii] Foley (1579/80-1657), baptized on 28 March 1580 at Dudley, Worcestershire. His father, Richard [i] Foley, was a nailer, an occupation which at this date provided a decent living and in which Richard [ii] continued. The name of Richard's first wife is unknown but on 31 October 1621 he married as his second wife Alice Brindley (1587/8-1663), of Hyde, near Kinver, Staffordshire. He had eleven children in all; six daughters and two sons from his first marriage and three sons from his second. He had land outside Dudley and a house in the town, where he was active in local government and was mayor in 1616. He was responsible for placing the town grammar school on a sound administrative and financial footing and he became by far the wealthiest property owner in Dudley. 
By 1624 Richard [ii] was taking leases of local iron mills, including Hyde mill, Kinver, which in 1627 was converted to use waterpower for the slitting of iron rod, the basic raw material of the nailmakers. Richard [ii] was at one time credited with having introduced the slitting mill from Sweden, but the process was not new; his real achievement was the successful organization and exploitation of water-powered charcoal iron furnaces, forges, and slitting mills, leasing them from landowners who, having built or converted them, found them difficult to manage. He established a business structure which combined centralized control with dispersed plant, thus spreading his risk. 
Between 1624 and 1633 Richard [ii] acquired leases of five furnaces, nine forges, and other ironworks, either on his own or in partnership with local ironmasters or gentlemen. His sons Richard [iii] (died 1678), 


@@@@@


doc= 37422


Forbes, George (1849-1936), electrical engineer and inventor, was born in Edinburgh on 5 April 1849, the younger son -- there were also three daughters -- of James David Forbes (1809-1868) and Alicia Wauchope (died 1885). His father was later principal of St Andrews University and was an expert in the field of glacier flow. Forbes was educated at Edinburgh Academy, the University of St Andrews, and at Christ's College and St Catharine's College, Cambridge. He graduated BA in 1871. In 1872 he succeeded Alexander Herschel as professor of natural philosophy at Anderson's University, Glasgow (later the Royal Technical College and then the University of Strathclyde). He retained this post until 1880. Significantly, in view of his later work, his lectures included the advocacy of electricity as a means of traction. His chief work at this time was research into the velocity of light with James Young; however, their results, published in 1882, showed a higher velocity than was later accepted. In 1880 he predicted the existence of a trans-Neptunian planet, fifty years before the discovery of Pluto. In 1874 Forbes led a British expedition to Hawaii to observe the transit of Venus. He then returned to Scotland via Peking (Beijing) and St Petersburg, crossing the Gobi Desert and Siberia in 1875. As a result of the contacts he made on this journey, Forbes was able to become the only British war correspondent with the Russian army in the Russo-Turkish War of 1877-8, reporting for 'The Times'. 
In 1880 Forbes resigned from Anderson's and moved to London; for the next two decades he worked extensively in the field of electrical power engineering. He was commissioned to report on how the City and South London Railway should be powered, and recommended electricity, a significant conclusion for the future of the London underground. In 1881 he served as a juror at the Paris Exposition Internationale d'Electricite. In the following year he became manager of the British Electric Light Company, manufacturers of carbon filaments and arc lamps, and at this time began to apply himself to improvements in products and processes. The growing use of electricity made some form of metering essential. Forbes was one of several who invented machines for metering alternating current, though his was never adopted. Of far greater significance was his idea that the brushes in electric motors should be made of carbon rather than the wire or gauze which was then employed. In 1885 he took out a patent for the 'improved means for establishing electric connection between surfaces in relative motion applicable to the collectors of dynamo machines' in which he advocated the use of carbon as a current collector for rotating electrical machines. His suggestion would prove outstandingly successful and the practice was still almost universal a century later. This invention could have made him a very rich man, but he sold his American patent rights to the Westinghouse Company for $2000 and there is no evidence that he received any British royalties. 
From 1891 to 1895 Forbes was consulting engineer on the Niagara Falls hydroelectric scheme, reporting to a panel chaired by Lord Kelvin. He initiated a number of design innovations, though this consultancy was not without some technical controversy with Ferranti and C. E. L. Brown, who were also employed on the project. He also advised on other schemes, in India (1893), southern Africa (1895), New Zealand (1896), and Upper Egypt (1897-8). He recommended to Lord Kitchener the use of electric locomotives on the railway then being built across the Nubian Desert, and he made similar proposals with respect to the Nile region. In southern Africa he consolidated his friendship with Sir David Gill, the astronomer. 
After the turn of the century, Forbes turned his attention to military work, studying techniques of gunnery and qualities of ballistics. He invented an infantry rangefinder which was used successfully in the South African War in 1902, and between 1903 and 1906 he worked with the Admiralty on rangefinders and related matters. The gunsight he developed was still in use by the navy at the outset of the Second World War. During the First World War he was involved in devising methods of signalling for submarines. 
In 1906 Forbes built a home near Pitlochry to house the books and memorabilia of his father. This house, which he liked to call 'The Shed', was a large wooden structure with an observatory on the upper storey overlooking Loch Faskally and the hydroelectric scheme which he had first proposed in the early 1900s. He now returned to an earlier interest, from 1906 to 1930 delivering the David Elder lectures on astronomy at the Royal Technical College in Glasgow. Forbes received many honours, including the Russian order of St George (for his services during the Russo-Turkish War) and the French Legion d'honneur. He was elected FRS in 1887. He was also FRSE, FRAS, and a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers, the Vienna Astronomiches Verein, the Franklin Institute of Philadelphia, and the American Philosophical Society. He was elected a member of the Institution of Electrical Engineers in 1881, served on its council 1885-9, and was its vice-president in 1894-5. He received an honorary LLD from St Andrews. 
Forbes did not marry and, in his last years, became something of a recluse. Though he was described in his obituaries as a man with a stern code of honour who thought much of his work and little of his reward, he seems to have been disillusioned that his obvious talents had earned him neither fame nor fortune (there is evidence that he had hoped at one point for a knighthood). He lived in increasing poverty, though in 1928 friends did successfully petition a variety of organizations for assistance on his behalf. His politics were Conservative and he is unlikely to have been comfortable with the developments of the Ramsay MacDonald era: indeed, in the 1920s he complained to a colleague that 'even the Tories are all damn socialists' (Duthie, 66). 
Forbes published extensively. Titles included 'The Transit of Venus' (1874), 'Lectures on Electricity' (1888), 'Alternating and Interrupted Electric Currents' (1895), 'History of Astronomy' (1909), 'Star Talks to Boy Scouts' (1911), 'David Gill, Man and Astronomer' (1916), and 'The Wonder and the Glory of the Stars' (1926), plus numerous contributions to the 'Transactions' and 'Proceedings' of the Royal Society, the Royal Astronomical Society, the Royal Society of Edinburgh, the Royal Society of Arts, the British Association, and various professional bodies. He died in an accident at his home, 13 New Parade, Worthing, on 22 October 1936. In 1987 the University of Strathclyde honoured his memory by naming a new student hall of residence after him. 


@@@@@


doc= 37423


Forbes, George Hay (1821-1875), Scottish Episcopal clergyman and liturgical scholar, was born on 4 August 1821 in York Place, Edinburgh, the ninth child in a family of four sons and six daughters of John Hay Forbes, later Lord Medwyn (1776-1854), judge of the court of session, and his wife, Louisa (1779-1845), daughter of Sir Alexander Cumming Gordon of Altyre. His brother was Alexander Penrose Forbes, the bishop of Brechin. In 1825 George became permanently disabled, probably due to poliomyelitis. With no formal schooling, he was tutored privately, spending some years in France under orthopaedic specialists. He read extensively in the classics and became an accomplished linguist. 
Forbes's family were leaders in the Scottish Episcopal church, and in 1846 he was a founder member of the Gaelic Tract Society in the church. He was ordained deacon in 1848 and priest in 1849. In 1848 he began his life's work -- the mission in Burntisland, Fife. There he opened a day school in 1849 and built a parsonage in 1854. He planned a very large church, but only the baptistery was completed (in 1856). In 1869 he was elected to the Burntisland town council and he was later chosen as provost. 
In 1852 Forbes began the Pitsligo Press as a vehicle for his own scholarship and for high-church theological views. He edited two series of periodicals aimed at Scottish Episcopalians, wrote a number of works on liturgical theology, contributed articles to the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (1874-5), and produced editions of several medieval missals. He translated and edited a number of works, including those of St Gregory of Nyssa and Bishop Thomas Rattray. A frequent traveller to Europe, he corresponded with leading European scholars, including Cardinal Jean-Baptiste Pitra (the Vatican librarian), Charles de Montalembert (a leading French liberal Catholic), and Jacques Migne (the editor and publisher of patristic literature). In 1853 he married Eleanor Maria Irby, daughter of James Wemyss of Cariston, a major in the Scots Greys. It was a happy but childless marriage. They lived simply, most of their income going towards the building of the Burntisland church or the support of the printing press. 
Forbes devoted much energy to championing the Scottish communion office, the eucharistic liturgy deriving from the 1637 Scottish 'Book of Common Prayer'; he was one of the instigators and revisers of the controversial edition of 1850, issued by Patrick Torry, bishop of St Andrews. The edition was repudiated by a majority of the Scottish bishops as lacking the authority of the Scottish Episcopal church. Forbes's advocacy of the 1850 prayer book derived from his support for the liturgical and theological standards of the eighteenth-century non-juring Scottish Episcopal church. These he regarded as superior to the English 'Book of Common Prayer', and to the Tractarianism of his brother Bishop Forbes. He believed that lack of knowledge and support for the native non-juring traditions of the Scottish Episcopal church by contemporary Episcopalian clergy exposed the church to Anglicization and Tractarianism. These views also caused Forbes to oppose his brother when the latter was tried for heresy in 1860 over the corporeal presence of Christ in the eucharist. When in 1862 the general synod of the Scottish Episcopal church removed the Scottish communion office from its primacy of authority over the English 'Book of Common Prayer', Forbes took the Episcopal bishops to court, appealing as far as the House of Lords; he defended his case himself, but lost the action in 1867. 
Forbes was the most knowledgeable liturgical scholar of his day in the Scottish Episcopal church, but his published work, and hence his influence, was reduced by an over-strained attention to detail and other scholarly opinion. A man of great personal charm, he was nevertheless stubborn and pugnacious towards those with whom he disagreed. He was one of the most important scholarly forces upholding Scottish traditions in the Scottish Episcopal church against the prevailing Anglicization of the nineteenth century. 
Forbes died at the parsonage, Burntisland, on 7 November 1875 and was buried in the Warriston cemetery, Edinburgh, alongside his parents. 


@@@@@


doc= 37424


Forsyth, Peter Taylor (1848-1921), Congregational minister, was born on 12 May 1848 at 100 Chapel Street, Aberdeen, the eldest child in the family of two sons and three daughters of Isaac Forsyth, from the Cabrach, a bookseller and later postman, and a deacon at the Blackfriars Street Congregational Church, Aberdeen, and his wife, Elspet McPherson, a crofter's daughter from Kingussie, Inverness-shire. Forsyth was educated from 1859 at Aberdeen grammar school, and entered Aberdeen University in 1864. After graduating MA with first-class honours in classical literature in 1869, he spent one year as a private tutor, and then from 1871 to 1872 was an assistant to Professor Black in the department of humanities at King's College, Aberdeen. 
Following a period of study in Gottingen in 1872 under Albrecht Ritschl, Forsyth started theological studies in September 1872 at Hackney Theological College, Hampstead, but did not complete the course, leaving in 1874. The writings of F. D. Maurice were an early influence on him. In London he became a member of the congregation of James Baldwin Brown, a liberal Congregational minister in Brixton, and in 1876 he was ordained minister at the Congregational church in Shipley, Yorkshire. On 4 April 1877 he married Maria Hester (Minna), 'nee' Magness (1850/51-1894). They had one daughter. After his wife's death, he married on 25 September 1897 Emily Bertha, 'nee' Ison ('b'. 1866/7), of Oxford. For twenty-five years Forsyth held a series of appointments as minister: St Thomas's Square, Hackney (1880-85); Cheetham Hill Congregational Church, Manchester (1885-8); Clarendon Park, Leicester (1888-94); and Emmanuel Church, Cambridge (1894-1901). 
During this period Forsyth began to publish, starting with 'Pulpit Parables for Young Hearers' in 1886. 'Religion in Recent Art' appeared in 1889, based on lectures on Pre-Raphaelite paintings and Richard Wagner's 'Parsifal'. His early leanings towards socialism were evident in articles he wrote under a pseudonym from 1885 to 1889 for the 'Manchester Examiner'. 
In 1899 Forsyth was one of the delegates to the International Congregational Council in Boston, and he made several further trips to North America, including one in 1907 to give the Lyman Beecher lectures at Yale University. In 1901 he became principal of Hackney College, Hampstead, and in 1905 he was elected chairman of the Congregational Union of England and Wales. In 1911 he was appointed dean of the faculty of theology at London University. Aberdeen University awarded him an honorary DD in 1895. Forsyth was very distressed at the outbreak of the First World War, for he loved Germany and German literature, and had been greatly influenced by German theologians such as Jakob Boehme; but he was not a pacifist, and in 'The Justification of God' (1916) he supported the war. 
Forsyth came to be regarded as the greatest Congregational theologian of his day. Reacting against his early liberalism, he adopted views that some have seen as anticipating those of Karl Barth and Emil Brunner. While he was an enthusiastic supporter of biblical criticism, he denounced much contemporary theology as no more than a shallow humanitarianism: 'The liberal theology finds Christ's centre of gravity in what he has in common with us; a positive theology in that wherein he differs'. This issue was what divided him from R. J. Campbell, then minister of the City Temple in London, during the sustained New Theology controversy of 1907-10. Deeply influenced by the philosophical idealism of the day, Campbell claimed that deity and humanity were fundamentally one. Forsyth contended that to reduce the power of the gospel to a merely 'human' Jesus, without the cross as the heart of the Christian message, would be fatal. The heart of Forsyth's theology was that the holiness of God needed to deal drastically with the sin of humanity; his sermon on the Holy Father (first published in the 'Christian World Pulpit' in 1896) marked a focal point in his life. In 'The Person and Place of Jesus Christ' (1909), a book often regarded as his best, he found the two-nature doctrine of Christ deficient, inclining to the kenotic theory, which he modified by thinking of a 'pleroma' following the resurrection and exaltation of Jesus. 
Forsyth's writing is that of a passionate preacher, but his epigrammatic style is not to everyone's taste. It is also true that to wrestle with his thought demands a rethinking of the gospel: that his students found him so witty and stimulating a teacher is understandable. Forsyth died on 11 November 1921 at his home at Hackney College, Finchley Road, Hampstead, survived by his wife. 
John Huxtable', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37425


Foulston, John (1772-1841), architect, was a pupil of Thomas Hardwick and set up practice in London in 1796. In 1811 he won the competition for a complex of buildings in Plymouth consisting of a hotel, assembly rooms, and theatre. His success with this important commission established his local reputation, and he moved to Plymouth, where he remained for twenty-five years the leading architect of the neighbourhood. So much of Foulston's work has been lost that it is difficult to appreciate its impact, but with the backing of the ambitious mayor Edmund Lockyer he extensively transformed both Plymouth itself and its satellite towns of Stonehouse and Devonport. He was active not only as an architect, designing a further series of public buildings, stucco-faced terraces in the London manner, and attractive suburban villas, but also as a town planner, responsible for the creation of Union Street, a bold stroke of planning which united the three towns. 
Most of Foulston's work was in the Greek revival style -- which it was his role almost single-handedly to propagate in the area -- but his best-known project was the extraordinary group of buildings erected at Ker Street, Devonport, in 1821-4, an extreme example of the picturesque stylistic eclecticism of the early nineteenth century. It consisted of a Greek Doric town hall and commemorative column, a terrace of houses in the Roman Corinthian order and a pair in the Greek Ionic, a 'Hindoo' nonconformist chapel, and an 'Egyptian' library. (The chapel and the houses have been demolished.) Foulston wrote of himself that, in designing this group: 'it occurred to him that if a series of edifices, exhibiting the various features of the architectural world, were erected in conjunction, and skilfully grouped, a happy result might be obtained. Under this impression, he was induced to try an experiment (not before attempted) for producing a picturesque effect. (J. Foulston, 'The Public Buildings, Erected in the West of England, as Designed by John Foulston, F.R.I.B.A.', 1838, 3)' In a number of his other works, notably the proprietary library (1812; des. 1941) and St Catherine's Church (1823; dem. 1958) in Plymouth and the ballroom in Torquay (1830; dem.), the influence of Sir John Soane was strongly apparent; while his few Gothic projects, although more conventional, included a restoration in 1829 of the medieval abbey gatehouse in Tavistock. His theatre in Plymouth (dem. 1939-41) was notable for its extensive early use of cast iron. 
Shortly before he retired Foulston took into partnership the architect George Wightwick, who succeeded to his practice. In his latter years he created an elaborate water garden at the 'cottage orne' he had built for himself on the outskirts of Plymouth, and was wont to drive round the streets of the town in a gig disguised as a Roman war chariot, looking, in Wightwick's words '(as far as his true English face and costume allowed) like Ictinus of the Parthenon, 'out for a lark'' (G. Wightwick, 'The life of an architect', 'Bentley's Miscellany', 42, 1857, 297). 
In his retirement Foulston made a set of nineteen watercolour drawings of his buildings which is now in the City Art Gallery at Plymouth. His pupils were Michael Angelo Nicholson, E. W. Gribble, C. E. Lang, and T. J. Ricauti. In 1838 he became a fellow of the Institute of British Architects. He died at his home in Plymouth on 30 December 1841 and was buried in St Andrew's new cemetery, Plymouth. 
Peter Leach', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37426


Fowler, Charles (1792-1867), architect, was born on 17 May 1792 in Cullompton, Devon, the son of John Fowler of Cullompton and his wife, Jane. At the age of fifteen he was apprenticed to John Powning, architect and builder, of Exeter. On the completion of his articles in 1814 he moved to London to work as an assistant in the office of David Laing, architect to the customs and excise, before setting up in independent practice there in 1818. In 1822 he won the competition for rebuilding London Bridge but the result was set aside in favour of the design by John Rennie, and the principal feature of his career, for which he gained notice on the continent as well as in Britain, was to be his speciality as a designer of large covered market buildings. One of his first commissions was the New market in Gravesend, Kent (1818-22; dem.), and three major examples followed: the Covent Garden market (1828-30) and Hungerford market (1831-3; dem.) in London, and the Lower market in Exeter (1835-7; dem.). 
In these works, together with the great conservatory at Syon House (1827-30), Fowler spanned the rapidly widening gap between architecture and civil engineering. A sophisticated functionalist economy of structure, embracing on occasion a highly innovative use of cast iron, was combined with an appropriately simplified neo-classical elevational style derived from French rationalist architects such as Jean-Nicolas-Louis Durand. This rationalist approach is overtly expressed in Fowler's statement that: 'The proper excellence of architecture is that which results from its suitableness to the occasion... and this principle rightly pursued leads to ORIGINALITY without the affection of NOVELTY; but... the present enlightened epoch in architecture is woefully distinguished as having no character of its own nor any pretensions beyond that of adopting the various styles that have prevailed in all ages and nations without regard to the difference of circumstances upon which they were founded. (Taylor, 'Centenary memoir', 60)' The critic John Claudius Loudon meanwhile described Fowler as 'one of the few modern architects who belong to the School of Reason and who design buildings on fundamental principles instead of antiquated rules and precedents' (ibid., 59). 
Alongside this and particularly following the Exeter commission, Fowler also maintained his connection with his native county, where he had a long-standing patron in William Courtenay, tenth earl of Devon: his works there included the Totnes Bridge (1826-8), a small group of churches, and alterations to the earl of Devon's Powderham Castle (1837-48). The churches are mainly in a conventional Gothic style but the most ambitious, that of St Paul in Honiton (1835-8), is in the neo-Norman manner. In 1835 he was one of the founder members of the Institute of British Architects, from 1836 to 1843 he was one of the institute's joint honorary secretaries, and in 1850-51 he was elected a vice-president. He also contributed a number of papers to the institute's 'Transactions' and to Loudon's 'Architectural Magazine' and published posthumously 'A description of the plan for the revival of Hungerford market, with some particulars of the buildings proposed to be erected' (1929). Many of his designs were exhibited at the Royal Academy. James Mountford Allen and Henry Roberts were his pupils. 
Fowler retired from practice in 1852 because of ill health, and moved first to Kent and then to Buckinghamshire, where he died at his home, Wester House, Great Marlow, on 26 September 1867. His son Charles Fowler ('c'.1823-1903), architect, studied under his father and then in Germany. He became a fellow of the RIBA and practised in London. 
Peter Leach', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37427


Fowler, Sir Henry (1870-1938), mechanical engineer and metallurgist, was born in Port Street, Bengeworth, Evesham, Worcestershire, on 29 July 1870, the eldest son of Henry Fowler, cabinet-maker, upholsterer, and house agent, and his wife, Mary Hughes. He was educated at Evesham grammar school and, from 1885 to 1887, at Mason Science College, Birmingham, where he gained the junior engineering diploma. From then until 1891 he was apprenticed under John Aspinall, chief mechanical engineer of the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway at its Horwich works near Bolton. 
In 1891 Fowler gained the first Whitworth exhibition awarded to a member of the Horwich Mechanics' Institute. He then became assistant to George Hughes, chief of the testing department, whom he later succeeded. This enabled him to pursue his appreciation and devotion to metallurgy, which had been first inspired by his mechanical engineering studies at Mason College. In 1895 he married Emma Needham Smith (1870-1934), daughter of Philip Smith. They had two sons and one daughter. 
In the same year as his marriage Fowler became a gas engineer and in 1900 transferred to a similar post on the Midland Railway at Derby, where he became assistant works manager in 1905, works manager in 1907, and chief mechanical engineer in 1909. He made a major contribution to production methods in the railway's workshops and to the use of improved metallurgy, in locomotive and rolling-stock construction, as well as being an advocate of the use of super-heated steam and compound expansion to increase locomotive power and efficiency. 
Shortly after the outbreak of the First World War in 1914, Fowler became secretary to the railway munitions committee and the following year was appointed director of production at the Ministry of Munitions. He became superintendent of the Royal Aircraft Factory at Farnborough in 1916 and also assistant director of aircraft production in 1917. In 1918-19 he was chairman of the inter-allied conference on standardization of aircraft components and deputy member of the Munitions Council. For his wartime work he was appointed CBE in 1917 and KBE in 1918. 
Three years after Fowler's return to railway work he became deputy chief mechanical engineer of the newly formed London, Midland, and Scottish Railway (LMS) in 1923 and two years later succeeded George Hughes as chief mechanical engineer. The task of integrating the locomotive, carriage, and wagon design, and the building and repair activities of six important former companies with their own individual practices was extremely difficult. Fowler inaugurated the introduction of line production in locomotive repairs, greatly reducing time spent in workshops, and a firm standardization programme to reduce, as rapidly as possible, the 393 individual locomotive types inherited by the LMS. By 1926 new, and much more powerful, express passenger and freight locomotive designs had been prepared to his directions and, while these were nullified by opposition within a divided management structure, in 1927 the Royal Scot express locomotives were introduced for principal main-line services. In 1931 Fowler was appointed scientific and research adviser to Sir Harold Hartley, vice-president of the LMS and director of research. 
Fowler was a man of great energy and enthusiasm and pursued his wide interests in many fields of engineering with great vigour. He took a keen and sympathetic interest in the education of young engineers and was a member of the governing body of the Midland Institute at Derby. He was awarded an honorary LLD by Birmingham University and an honorary DSc by Manchester. He was president of the Institution of Locomotive Engineers in 1912, the Institution of Automobile Engineers in 1921, section G of the British Association in 1923, the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1926-7, and the Institute of Metals in 1932-3. From 1925 he was also a member of the permanent commission of the International Railway Congress Association, in which he played a very active part, and a member of council of the Institution of Civil Engineers from 1928 to 1934. 
Sir Henry Fowler died at his home, Spondon Hall, Spondon, Derbyshire, on 16 October 1938, and was buried at Nottingham Road cemetery, Derby. 
George W. Carpenter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37428


Fox, Sir (Charles) Douglas (1840-1921), civil engineer, was born near Smethwick on 14 May 1840, the eldest in the family of three sons and one daughter of Sir Charles Fox (1810-1874), civil engineer, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Joseph Brookhouse, clockmaker, of Derby. He attended Cholmondeley School, Highgate School (1851-4), King's College School (1854-5), and King's College, London (1855-7), of which he became an honorary fellow in 1887. 
Fox was to have gone to Trinity College, Cambridge, but that plan foundered with the sudden financial collapse in early 1857 of his father's erstwhile flourishing contracting business. Instead, he was articled to his father who, later in 1857, had begun to practise as a consulting engineer in London. In 1863 Fox joined his father in partnership. The latter had already built an international reputation in railway and allied engineering. By 1865 the new practice was involved in major projects in Britain, the USA, Canada, southern Africa, India, Australia, and South America. Douglas Fox's potential was well exercised when, from 1863 to 1866, the firm, still just father and son, masterminded the complex system of railway viaducts and bridges in Battersea, separating the lines from the east and south to Victoria from those from the south-west to Waterloo, including the widening of the Grosvenor Bridge over the Thames from two to seven tracks. 
Sir Charles Fox died in 1874. His second son, Francis Fox, had joined the partnership, which the two brothers now carried on together as Douglas Fox & Partners. Work continued to pour in, especially from southern Africa and South America, but also at home. The brothers' commitments included acting as consulting engineers to the Central Argentine Railway Company (jointly with Livesey, Son and Henderson); the South Indian Railway Company; the Southern Sao Paulo Railway Company; and also the Dorada (Columbia) Railway Company. In 1886 Douglas Fox and James Brunlees were knighted on completion of the first tunnel under the Mersey which, along with the railway linking Birkenhead with Liverpool, they had jointly engineered. 
Among the many projects for which the firm was responsible during Fox's later years were the Liverpool Overhead Railway (the first electric elevated city railway in the world), the extension from Rugby to London of the Great Central Railway, including its Marylebone terminal, the Great Northern and City tube (with large tunnels to accommodate standard rolling stock), and the 'Hampstead tube' linking Charing Cross with Golders Green and Highgate. Abroad they included much of the Cape government railways in southern Africa, the whole Rhodesia railway system, including the 500 ft span Victoria Falls arch bridge over the Zambezi River, the Benguela railway in Angola, and several railways and other works in South America. 
Fox was president of the Institution of Civil Engineers (1899-1900). He was a JP for many years. Like his father, he was of an urbane and generous disposition. Having inherited his mother's religious principles, he was strict in his observances, and not only at home, but also at his office, prayers began each day for all present. A member of the Church of England, he was active in the Church Missionary Society. In 1863 he married Mary (died 1920), daughter of Francis Wright, a Derbyshire industrialist of Osmaston Manor, Derby. They had one son and four daughters. His brother Francis also married a daughter of Francis Wright, whose Butterley Company manufactured railway equipment, including the cast iron for Vauxhall Bridge and Paddington Station. 
Fox died on 13 November 1921 at 27 Campden House Road, Kensington, the home of one of his daughters. 
Ralph Freeman', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37429


Fox, Sir John Jacob (1874-1944), analytical chemist, was born on 12 April 1874 at 6 Samuel Street, Spitalfields, London, the eldest of the five sons and one daughter of Marks Fox, furrier of London, and his wife, Hannah Jacobs. He was born Jacob Fox and added the name John in the early 1920s. He was educated in London at St Thomas Charterhouse School and entered government service in 1896 as an assistant of excise. He joined the government laboratory in 1896 and, by arrangements recently made for assistants, he attended courses in chemistry at the Royal College of Science from 1897 until 1899, but did not take a degree. After completing his course he married, on 17 October 1899, Amelia 
(Millie; 'b'. 1874)
, daughter of Saul Boas, a diamond dealer. They had a son, Charles, and a daughter, Irene. Fox next attended classes at the East London Technical College, both in the evenings and during holidays, frequently working there for twelve hours at a time. He took his intermediate science examination in 1907, his BSc (by research) in 1908, and DSc (by thesis) in 1910. 
Fox joined the permanent staff of the government laboratory in 1904. His abilities were soon recognized and he was chosen to assist Professor Thomas Thorpe, principal of the laboratory, on the development of 'leadless glazes' to avoid the dangers of poisoning factory workers. Fox carried out much research at East London College and at the laboratory. He became interested in ultraviolet absorption spectra, on which he carried out researches with James Dobbie, his new principal (later termed government chemist), in the years before the First World War. 
During the war Fox devised new rapid methods of analysis to increase activity without a great increase in staff. In 1920 he was appointed a superintending chemist and exercised both his encyclopaedic knowledge of organic chemistry and his administrative abilities to organize an increased work load arising from the 'Safeguarding of Industries Act' of 1921 and from new silk duties in 1926. He also wrote 'The Analysis of Pigments, Paints, and Varnishes' (1927) with T. H. Bowles, and reviewed annually between 1926 and 1933, with B. A. Ellis, all published analytical methods in the 'Annual Reports on the Progress of Chemistry'. He also wrote more than sixty papers for scientific journals. 
Fox continued to carry out much research after the war with Dobbie and Sir Robert Robertson, government chemist from 1920. In 1936 he was himself appointed government chemist, having been deputy from 1929. In 1940 he joined the staff of the director of scientific research in the Ministry of Supply, as chief adviser to the controller of chemical research, while retaining his duties as government chemist. His interest in chemistry continued until the end of his life, together with his ready help to staff and enquirers. He held many offices in learned societies, and was treasurer of his local church for many years. 
Fox was appointed OBE in 1920 and CB in 1938, and was elected FRS in 1943. He was knighted in 1944 and died later that year, on 28 November, at 24 Hayes Crescent, a nursing home in Golders Green. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 37430


Frampton, (George Vernon) Meredith (1894-1984), painter, was born in St John's Wood, London, on 17 March 1894, the only child of Sir George Frampton (1860-1928), one of the leading sculptors of his day, and his wife, Christabel Annie Cockerell (1863-1951), a painter. He was educated at Westminster School, London, and attended St John's Wood Art School and then (1912-15) the Royal Academy Schools. During the First World War he worked on the western front in a field survey company and in interpretation of aerial photographs. He was one of the most accomplished of the many inter-war European painters who represented the observed world with pronounced clarity. From 1920 to 1945 he showed in the Royal Academy summer exhibition in all but four years, being elected ARA in 1934 and RA in 1942. 
The majority of Frampton's paintings are portraits (many of them commissions, both private and institutional). His sitters, who included the duke of York, later George VI, in 1929, were active in imaginative and intellectual pursuits -- art, architecture, music, theatre, literature, science, and public service. He specially admired the French sculptor Jean-Antoine Houdon (1741-1828) for the directness with which he conveyed a sitter's presence and personality without obtruding himself between subject and viewer. Unusually for his generation, Frampton was an heir to this tradition. Early portraits employed austere backgrounds, but he increasingly revealed unusual skill in realizing the appearance of three-dimensional objects with almost 'trompe-l'oeil' verisimilitude, as well as a keen sense of the texture and even the feel of any depicted substance. Carefully chosen attributes both explained a sitter's work and interests and provided a satisfying interplay of forms, within which shapes were made to rhyme in curious and subtle ways. Like his pure essays in the genre, these images proved Frampton a master of still life, with a relish for the particular which embraced test-tubes, matchboxes, skulls, autograph scores, and even a can of weed-killer. For all his love of tradition, both the enigmatic stillness of his paintings of commonplace objects and his interest in purity of form in an abstract sense were peculiarly expressive of the modern era. 
In 1951 Frampton married Hilda Norman, daughter of the architect James Bow Dunn. They had no children. In 1953 he was placed at his own request on the Royal Academy's retired list. Perfectionist in all things, he declined to continue painting once a slight deterioration in eyesight precluded the extreme clarity he sought. But his retirement was into anything but inactivity. A member for sixty-nine years of the Art-Workers' Guild, he had inherited from his father a strong feeling for materials and a commitment to meticulous workmanship. He retired to the striking hilltop house (in Monkton Deverill, Wiltshire) he had designed in the 1930s, its style reminiscent of the architecture of seventeenth-century France. Here he created (and from his studio-cum-workshop maintained for forty years) an interior remarkable for its beauty and its well-thought-out detail, from the mechanism of clocks to the ingenious adaptation of items of furniture. 
After 1945 Frampton's dignified, thoroughly realized art virtually disappeared from public consciousness for thirty years. He was eighty-eight when in 1982 he held his first one-man exhibition, a retrospective at the Tate Gallery, London. To his surprise and delight, members of a younger generation found inspiration in his work and he was able to die knowing that his art would not be forgotten. Prudent and orderly, uncompromising in his views on life and art, and instinctively reserved in a post-war world which contradicted them extensively, he was a man of humour, courtesy, and charm who unbent when he sensed that his deep feeling for beauty, order, and sound technique was shared. Shortly after moving to Mount Pleasant, Castle Hill Lane, Mere, Wiltshire, he died there on 16 September 1984. 
Richard Morphet', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37431


Franklin, Rosalind Elsie (1920-1958), crystallographer, was born at Chepstow Villas, Notting Hill, London, on 25 July 1920, the elder daughter and second of the family of five children of Ellis Arthur Franklin (1894-1964), merchant banker of London, and his wife, Muriel Frances Waley (1894-1976). Both parents came from established Anglo-Jewish families; Helen Bentwich (Labour chairman of the London county council, 1956-7) was her aunt; Herbert Samuel, Viscount Samuel (Liberal politician and first high commissioner for Palestine) was her great-uncle; Arthur Waley (translator of oriental literature) was her mother's cousin. From 1932 to 1938 Rosalind was a scholar at St Paul's Girls' School and went on to Newnham College, Cambridge, where she read natural sciences, taking her part two in chemistry in 1941. Wartime constraints made her time at Cambridge austere and directed her PhD to an industrial problem with the Coal Utilisation Research Association (CURA), while also burdening her with duties as a London air raid warden. 
At CURA Franklin worked on cokes and chars. She found that, although the total volume of the pores in such material increases with increasing temperature, their accessibility decreases. She showed this by a series of ingenious experiments in which, finally, even gaseous helium molecules are unable to penetrate the material. She realized that to reach an understanding of the internal structure of coals and chars it was necessary to use X-ray diffraction methods and these she learned when she moved in 1947 to the Laboratoire Central des Services Chimiques de l'Etat in Paris, where she was employed as a 'chercheur' of the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique. These were personally happy years for her and scientifically very productive. She learned, and improved, X-ray techniques for dealing quantitatively with substances of limited internal order, which presented much more difficulty than the highly ordered crystals which the X-ray crystallographers of the day were more familiar with. In a series of beautifully executed investigations Franklin discovered the fundamental distinction between chars that turned into graphite on heating and those that did not, and further related this difference to the chemical constituents of the material from which the chars were made. These results later proved to be highly relevant for the development of carbon fibres, materials of industrial importance which are made of rolled up parallel sheets of graphite layers. 
The combination of these X-ray analytical techniques with chemical preparatory skill attracted the attention of others, and in 1950 Franklin was invited by John Randall to build up an X-ray diffraction laboratory at King's College, London, for the purpose of studying the structure of DNA. She accepted, and started work in January 1951 as a Turner and Newall research fellow of London University. Although DNA is now almost a household word, at that time it was not at all clear, despite Avery's great paper of 1944, that it was the hereditary substance itself, and certainly no one, not even Crick and Watson, who finally solved its double helical structure, suspected that the three-dimensional structure itself would point to a direct conclusion on how genes replicated themselves. (The crucial feature of the structure of DNA is not the double helical arrangement of the two phosphate sugar backbones, but the unique pairing of the heterocyclic bases projecting from each of these two strands. It means that each strand is complementary to the other so that, when the two come apart, each can be used to assemble a duplicate of its former partner.) In 1950 DNA was only known to be an important chemical constituent of the chromosomes of the cell nucleus, but that it alone carried the genetic information, irrespective of the protein constituents, was not generally accepted by biochemists. 
Work on DNA at King's had been begun by M. H. F. Wilkins who, before 1951, together with a research student, R. G. Gosling, had succeeded in obtaining well-orientated fibres of the long DNA macromolecules, which showed a higher degree of crystallinity, as judged by the X-ray diffraction pattern, than specimens produced by earlier workers. Franklin was asked by Randall to undertake a systematic X-ray study of DNA fibres and Gosling was placed under her supervision. Randall left an unfortunate ambiguity about the respective positions of Wilkins and Franklin which later led to dissension about the demarcation of the DNA research at King's, but a letter of his to Franklin in 1950 makes it clear that on 'the experimental X-ray effort there would be for the moment only yourself and Gosling'. 
Within the first year Franklin transformed the state of the field. By drawing thinner fibres of DNA she was able to enhance the alignment of the molecules within the specimen, and these, together with finer collimation of the X-ray beam, produced much better X-ray patterns. Moreover, by introducing methods to control and vary the water content of the specimens, she showed that two forms of the DNA molecule, which she called A and B, existed, and defined conditions for the transition between them. It became clear that previous workers had been working, unbeknown to them, with a mixture of the two forms, or at best of poorly oriented specimens of the B form. In May 1952 she obtained the superb patterns of the B form which later graced the textbooks, and which J. D. Watson saw early in 1953. Inspection of this helical pattern, together with the distribution in December 1952 of a report by Franklin of her work, gave crucial information to Watson and Crick for the final building of their DNA model in February-March 1953. 
However, despite her discovery of the simpler B pattern, Franklin's attention was mostly directed to the A form, because here the molecules are not in random rotational positions, as in B, but packed in a crystal lattice. The X-ray pattern thus shows sharp crystalline 'spots' and offered the possibility of an objective crystallographic analysis because of the greater wealth and precision of the diffraction data available. In retrospect this may look a misjudgement, but it was a reasonable decision because, if correctly interpreted, the A pattern would yield more precise information about the DNA molecule, though, of course, any model for DNA must be capable of forming either structure A or B. In fact, the analysis ran into an impasse and in January 1953 Franklin turned to the B form, the X-ray pattern which was characteristic of some kind of helical structure. 
By March 1953 Franklin had carried the quantitative analysis of her B form patterns to the point where the paths of the backbone chains were determined, and she wrote up her work in a typescript dated 17 March, that is, one day before news of the Watson and Crick structure reached King's. The draft contains all the essentials of her later paper (with Gosling) in 'Nature' in April, together with one by Wilkins and his colleagues, which accompanied Crick and Watson's paper announcing their model for the structure of DNA. In Franklin's draft, it is deduced that the phosphate groups of the backbone lie, as she had long thought, on the 'outside' of the two coaxial helical strands whose configuration is specified, with the bases arranged on the inside. Her notebooks show that she had already formed the notion of interchangeability of the two purine bases with each other, and also of the two pyrimidines. The step from base interchangeability to the specific base pairing postulated by Crick and Watson is a large one, but there is little doubt that she was poised to make it. The notebooks also show that she had grasped that the A form contained two chains or strands which ran in opposite directions, but had not understood the exact relation between the two forms, namely that the A form is a somewhat more tightly wound form of the B double helix in which the bases change their tilt direction considerably, thus obscuring the helical structure underlying the A form X-ray pattern. In a second paper to 'Nature' in July 1953 Franklin and Gosling showed this conclusively, and indeed this paper stands as the first analytical demonstration of the correctness of the Watson-Crick model. 
In mid-March 1953 Franklin moved to Birkbeck College, London, at the invitation of Professor J. D. Bernal. Here her main work was on tobacco mosaic virus, taking up its X-ray study where it had been left in the work of Bernal and Fankuchen, fifteen years before. Watson had put forward the hypothesis that the large rod-shaped virus particle was composed of a helical arrangement of small protein molecules (or subunits). Franklin showed that this was, in essence, correct. Using her improved techniques, she was able to obtain spectacular, and beautiful X-ray patterns of the virus, of such clarity that she could begin a quantitative analysis of the structure. In four short years, together with a small devoted group of students and collaborators, she determined the precise helical geometry of the protein units, and above all showed that the ribonucleic acid (RNA) of the virus, the carrier of the infectivity, in other words of the genetic information, formed a long single chain embedded deeply within the protein framework. 
On 16 April 1958 Franklin died of cancer at the Royal Marsden Hospital, Chelsea; she was buried at the Jewish cemetery, Willesden, London. Franklin was initially struck by cancer in 1956; she bore her illness bravely, never complaining, and worked as much as possible to the very end. She was cut off tragically at the height of her powers and her early death was a great loss to science. But her mark was made. The results of her work on two major biological problems, as well as the techniques used to obtain them, helped lay the foundations of structural molecular biology. In 1962 Watson, Crick, and Wilkins were awarded a Nobel prize for their work on DNA. The prize is not given posthumously so the practical question of whether Franklin should have been included did not arise. However, since Franklin's contributions, and indeed her actual X-ray data, were crucial to the total achievement, it is difficult to see how she could have been denied a share. 
The impression sometimes given in writing or film in which Franklin figures is of an absolutely dedicated woman. This is only part of her character. She was single-minded and uncompromising in her work, so that she sometimes was bound to provoke exasperation among her colleagues, a feeling immediately tempered by the admiration they felt. But she was not austere, she had a sense of fun, and was a woman of wide culture, at home in several European countries and the USA. She loved travel, took walking and cycling holidays abroad, and was a good mountain climber. 
As a scientist she was not merely a gifted experimentalist, but possessed a good analytical mind. Had she lived she would surely have gone on to further heights, but she will be remembered as one of the select few who made crucial contributions to one of the most important discoveries of the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 37432


Freeman, Richard Austin (1862-1943), writer, was born on 11 April 1862 at 27 Thayer Street, Marylebone, London, the youngest of the five children (four of them sons) of Richard Freeman (1822/3-1890), a journeyman tailor who rose to become the manager of a bespoke tailoring business, and his wife, Ann Maria Dunn. Virtually nothing is known of Freeman's early years; he shrouded his early life in great mystery and the details of his secondary schooling -- which apparently took place at a boarding-school in north London -- remained unknown even to his closest relatives. On leaving school he worked in a chemist's shop and he later qualified as an apothecary (LSA) in 1886. At eighteen he entered Middlesex Hospital, qualifying as MRCS in 1886. 
In 1887 Freeman married Annie Elizabeth (died 1948), daughter of Thomas Edwards, a master plumber of St Pancras Road, London: they went on to have two sons. But newly married and impecunious, Freeman entered the colonial service as assistant colonial surgeon in Accra in the Gold Coast Colony, where he landed in June 1887, remaining for four years. The Gold Coast was notable for the high mortality rate suffered by Europeans, and in 1891 he contracted blackwater fever and was invalided home. Freeman's continuing ill health prevented the establishment of a successful medical practice in London, and in 1896 he retired to Broadstairs to become a writer. From 1902 he lived in Gravesend, where he both wrote books and practised medicine. 
In 1902 Freeman became the co-author of the first of his fictional works to become well known, 'The Adventures of Romney Pringle', written under the pseudonym of Clifford Ashdown, and the fruit of Freeman's collaboration with the physician John James Pitcairn. In 1907, now working on his own, Freeman produced the first of the Doctor Thorndyke stories, the novel 'The Red Thumb Mark', whose plot revolved around the forgery of a set of fingerprints by an ingenious mechanical device. Thorndyke, both barrister and physician, was the first of the fictional 'scientific detectives'. In 1912 Freeman published a new series of Thorndyke short stories in 'Pearson's Magazine', starting with 'The Case of Oscar Brodski', which made secure his important place in detective fiction. 'Brodski' was the first 'inverted' detective story ever written -- that is, one in which the identity of the criminal is known to the reader at the outset and the plot concerns the efforts of the detective to ascertain his identity. Between 1907 and 1942 Freeman produced forty Thorndyke short stories and twenty-one Thorndyke novels, to great critical acclaim. The best stand comparison with those of Arthur Conan Doyle. 
After the First World War (in which he served as a captain in the Royal Army Medical Corps, stationed in Maidstone, Kent) Freeman increasingly became involved in the eugenics movement, producing a lengthy work on the ills of society, 'Social Decay and Regeneration', in 1921. He believed that machinery and urban life had ruined modern life, and advocated what he termed the 'voluntary segregation of the fit' to live and breed in a utopian community of farmers and skilled craftsmen. Freeman was closely associated with the Eugenics Society from the First World War until the end of his life. 
In mature life Freeman was a large, distinguished-looking man with a walrus moustache; he was noted for his humour and self-effacement. Freeman died at his home, Rosemount, 94 Windmill Street, Gravesend, Kent, on 28 September 1943. 


@@@@@


doc= 37433


Freeth, John (1731-1808), innkeeper and political ballad writer, was born at the Bell tavern, Philip Street, Birmingham, the son of Charles Freeth, landlord of the Bell, and his wife, Mary. Nothing is known of Freeth's education or of his early years, although it seems that he was once an itinerant street ballad singer. Where and when Freeth married is not known. His wife's name was Sarah and she was five years his junior. By 1768 John Freeth had become landlord of the Leicester Arms, on the corner of Bell Street and Lease Lane, Birmingham, where he remained until his death in 1808. Freeth's Coffee House, as the Leicester Arms was known, became one of the most celebrated taverns in England, and Freeth became known as 'the Birmingham poet'. 
It was Freeth's custom to write songs -- setting his words to popular tunes -- about remarkable events in local and national news, and to sing them nightly to the company assembled at his coffee house. The habit was profitable: it crowded the place with patrons, attracted eminent visitors, and, since Freeth wrote as a determined radical and nonconformist, created a political meeting-place. The interest aroused by his songs encouraged Freeth to publish them, and the words of nearly 400 songs appeared in more than a dozen collections between 1766 and 1805; John Baskerville (1706-1775) was among his printers. The most substantial of these collections was 'The Political Songster' (1790). 
Freeth usually sang about feats of war, national emergencies, and affairs of state, such as the victories of Earl Howe and Lord Nelson, and the activities of Charles James Fox, Lord North, and William Pitt. To those ballads he added a substantial leavening of others that were complimentary, jocular, and satirical. Although unsophisticated, many of his patriotic songs have a stirring lilt; on politics he wrote with indignation, rough good humour, and an effective turn of phrase that earned him the reputation of being one of the best political ballad writers in the kingdom. From 1771 until 1785 Freeth used the pen-name John Free in punning allusion to his beliefs. His songs offer a significant insight into the popular politics of the late eighteenth century. 
To draw attention to the hospitality provided at his inn Freeth issued printed invitation cards, written in verse. In some fifteen lines, he extends his invitation, comments forcefully on an item of news, and indicates the fare offered. With these cards Freeth originated an unusual, possibly unique, kind of trade card. 
In late Georgian Birmingham, Freeth was an outstanding figure, respected for his probity and the warmth of his friendships. A notable group portrait was painted by Johann Eckstein entitled 'John Freeth and his Circle' (1792). Freeth died, possibly of Paget's disease, in Birmingham on 29 September 1808, and was buried at the Old Meeting-House, Birmingham. He was subsequently reinterred at Witton cemetery, Birmingham, in 1882. His wife, Sarah, died on 25 November 1807. Of their nine children, one son and seven daughters were mentioned in Freeth's will. 
John Horden', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37434


Frith, Francis (1822-1898), photographer and businessman, was born on 7 October 1822 in Chesterfield, Derbyshire, the only son and the second among the three children of Francis Frith (1790-1871), cooper of Chesterfield, and his wife, Alice (1789?-1863). Born into a Quaker family, Frith's childhood combined firm morality with the indulgence given to an only son. His wanderings in the nearby Derbyshire dales laid the foundations for his lifelong love of landscape. Between 1834 and 1838 he attended Camp Hill School, a Quaker establishment in Birmingham. He was a mediocre scholar but loved poetry, science, and travel books. After he had left he was apprenticed to William Hargreaves, of a cutlery firm in Sheffield. The internal conflicts caused by his strong Quaker beliefs and lack of prospects caused a breakdown when he was twenty-one. For two years he travelled through Britain convalescing. In 1845 he started a wholesale grocery business in Liverpool, and later a printing business; hard work and a good business sense allowed him to sell these for a small fortune in 1856. 
In 1853 Frith had been a founder-member of the Liverpool Photographic Society. Fascinated by photography (he also drew and painted), he embarked on the three journeys to the Middle East that were to make his reputation. Between 1856 and 1859 he travelled to Palestine and Syria and up the Nile, where he took pioneering photographs of the landscape and of monuments, often under dangerous and difficult conditions. He slept in tombs and caves and was attacked by wild dogs and brigands; inside an unventilated tent he worked in desert temperatures with collodion chemicals that were prone to boil on the glass-plate negatives. Back in London his work was praised by the Photographic Society and in 'The Times'. He lectured and exhibited, and published his photographs in a series of successful books. 
In 1860 Frith set up a photographic company in Reigate, Surrey (where he settled), to record on film as many locations in Britain as he could. The arrival of the railways had made cheap holidays widely available, and Frith's prints made popular souvenirs, both in postcard and folio format. For a time Frith & Co. was the largest photographic publisher in the world. Frith travelled widely and took thousands of the photographs himself, as well as commissioning many fine photographers, including Francis Bedford. The care taken in the execution and subsequent preservation of these photographs, and the wealth of period detail that they record, has made them an invaluable resource for historians. 
Success allowed Frith to devote more time to leisure and to his family. On 19 July 1860 he had married Mary Ann (1837-1901), daughter of Alfred Rosling of Reigate, a timber importer; they had five sons and three daughters. Frith remained a convinced Quaker all his life and contributed a number of articles to the 'Friends Quarterly Examiner'. Perhaps his most influential publication was 'A Reasonable Faith: Short Religious Essays for the Times' (1844), a work of liberal theology that he co-authored with William Pollard and William E. Turner. For the last twenty years of his life bronchitis made him take holidays on the French riviera; he said of these later years that he 'fell back upon books and art, nature, love and poetry'. He died on 25 February 1898 at his home -- La Petite Bastide -- in Cannes, France, where he was buried. After his death his sons Eustace and Cyril continued the business, which carried on trading until 1971. 
Francis Frith's achievement was two-fold: his photographs of the Middle East set new standards in technical excellence, and his business acumen brought landscape photography to the man in the street. The Frith & Co. archive, now held at Teffont, near Salisbury, Wiltshire, remains one of the most important collections of topographical photographs of Britain in existence, and its contents have been extensively republished in book form. 
T. R. Sackett', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37435


Fromanteel, Ahasuerus (bap. 1607, d. 1693), clockmaker and mechanic, was baptized in the Dutch Reformed church at Norwich on 25 February 1607, the eldest of five sons and two daughters of Mordecai Fromanteel, wood turner, and his wife, Leah. The Fromanteels were an armigerous family of high standing in Flanders during the sixteenth century; to escape life under Spanish rule a number of them crossed to East Anglia, to settle in Colchester, Norwich, and London. During Fromanteel's lifetime he and his children frequently passed between England and the Low Countries, though references to them simply as 'Fromanteel' make identification problematic. 
Fromanteel was apprenticed as a blacksmith for seven years, afterwards moving to London in June 1629 where he set up as a maker of steeple clocks at East Smithfield, joining the Blacksmiths' Company in 1631. He also made conventional lantern clocks with balance-wheel escapement, and spring-driven table clocks. He was made free of the Clockmakers' Company in 1632. The Fromanteels' relationship with the Clockmakers' was always contentious: in 1658 Ahasuerus and his son Louis were proceeded against for taking more apprentices than was allowed, which suggests a flourishing business, and in later years there were arguments over payments of quarterage for those years when they were out of the country. 
In 1631 Fromanteel married Maria de Bruijne of Colchester. They raised six sons and two daughters, of whom Louis, Ahasuerus (1640-1703), John (died before 1692), and Abraham (1646-1730), also became clockmakers. Ahasuerus Fromanteel senior, after a year of fruitless discussion with the elders of the Dutch Reformed church in London, was in 1646 officially proclaimed to have gone over to the Baptists, a move which he and his wife marked by having themselves rebaptized. 
While on a visit to Amsterdam in 1648, Fromanteel spoke with Benjamin Worsley concerning microscopes, explaining that, having made tubes for Cornelis Drebbel's microscopes, he had been sufficiently interested to grind lenses himself, four of which he had brought to Amsterdam for sale. Worsley was impressed by their quality and persuaded Fromanteel to make him a microscope when he returned to London. 
In 1657 John Fromanteel went to the Netherlands to learn the art of making pendulum clocks as invented by Huygens in 1656 and made there by Salomon Coster. On John's return in 1658 Ahasuerus Fromanteel lost no time in advertising this new method of regulation, suitable for steeple and domestic clocks, 'made by Ahasuerus Fromanteel, who made the first that were in England'. They could be had at his house in Moses Alley, Southwark, or at the sign of the Mermaid in Lothbury (for over a century a noted shop for clocks). He also advertised his 'new invented engins for quenching of fire', which were made in a variety of sizes, some small enough to be carried upstairs in a house, and which would also serve for 'the washing of vermin of Trees and Hops, & for the watering of Gardens & Cloaths, & the like' ('Mercurius Politicus', no. 439, 28 Oct 1658). A further (undated) list of his undertakings mentions a weight-driven clock striking the quarters on two bells and the hour on another bell; a watch or clock to run for a month or a year with a single winding; a clock keeping time without a balance, instead of which 'there shall be a pleasant motion of bullets runing continually'; an engine to level the bottom of the river, taking away the shelves or sandbanks on which craft could run aground, and other engines to raise water or weights 'and many things of this kinde' (Hartlib MS 71/19/1A). 
One Fromanteel clock 'to run a month or more' was sold to Dudley Palmer FRS of Gray's Inn in 1654 for $200, another to the lord protector in 1657 for $300, considerable sums at this time. John Evelyn, in 1660, saw one of Fromanteel's more elaborate clocks in the king's cabinet, and in 1661 recorded a visit he paid in the company of Huygens to view Fromanteel's pendulum clocks. In July 1679 one of Fromanteel's fire-engines was ordered for the city of Norwich. 
Fromanteel's decision to settle in the Netherlands between 1667 and 1676 may have been caused by the problems which afflicted Baptists in London at that time. His son Abraham joined him, leaving the London business in the hands of John and his own former apprentice Thomas Loomes, to whom John had been apprenticed and who was married to Ahasuerus's daughter Mary. On his return some ten years later Abraham was made free of the Clockmakers' Company at his father's urgent request; he later settled in Newcastle upon Tyne, where he died in 1730. John returned with his brother Ahasuerus to the Netherlands in 1680, where the latter settled and started an important workshop in Amsterdam. 
After Maria's death, Ahasuerus married, about 1660, Sarah Winnock (died 1665), a widow with three sons and a daughter. He was living in Whitechapel, where other members of the Fromanteel family worked as silk weavers, at the time of his death early in 1693 and was buried at St Mary Matfelon, Whitechapel, on 31 January 1693. 


@@@@@


doc= 37436


Frost, Gualter (bap. 1598, d. 1652), political agent and government official, came from a modest East Anglian background. He was baptized in Chevington, Suffolk, on 15 January 1598, the son of William Frost. He seems to have been trained as a land surveyor and had become manciple of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, by 1628, remaining there until 1639. He was involved in constructing Hobson's conduit, or 'the new river', which provided a water supply for his own college and Christ's College. In 1639-40 he acted as a secret courier, disguised as a commercial traveller, for the English opposition leaders in their clandestine -- if not treasonable -- correspondence with the Scottish covenanters. One source connects him with Thomas Savile (first Viscount Savile of Castlebar), another, more reliably, with Robert Greville, second Lord Brooke. In 1642 he was acting as a commissary, or supply officer, at Chester, sending provisions for the Anglo-Scottish forces in Ireland. In 1642-3 he apparently served as an intelligence officer under the Long Parliament's committee of safety. 
Frost's promotion in 1644 to the important post of co-secretary to the new committee of both kingdoms may have been partly because he was already known to, and trusted by, its Scottish members, but it also suggests more direct patronage. Since Brooke was already dead and Savile discredited, Robert Rich, second earl of Warwick (an old member of Emmanuel), and William Fiennes, first Viscount Saye and Sele (whose eldest son had been there) appear as possible links. When the Scots dropped out, Frost moved with the committee to Derby House in 1647-8, and after the establishment of the Commonwealth in 1649 he became secretary to the newly created council of state. He held this, the most senior post in the republican central executive, until his death. Presumably efficient and discreet as an administrative organizer and record keeper, his were less successful essays into political propaganda, on behalf of the regime against its radical critics, the Levellers. 
It was important for the future of the English republic that Frost was succeeded not by his eldest son, who had become assistant secretary and treasurer for the council's contingencies, but by the candidate of Oliver St John and Oliver Cromwell, John Thurloe. Frost had married Phoebe Seffray in Chevington, Suffolk, in 1619. He died in London on 29 March 1652, leaving a large family and considerable debts. He showed some nepotistic, or rather patrimonial, skill in getting his sons placed in the public service; his failure to amass even a modest competence of wealth may be taken to argue either extreme probity or reckless extravagance, but more probably arose from having over-extended his credit in trying to send supplies to Ireland in 1642. The younger Walter, who seems to have succeeded his father in the service of the City of London as its official chronologer, remained on the council staff until 1660, as did one of his brothers; a third brother had died in its service earlier, and a fourth was appointed to the staff of the council in Ireland under Henry Cromwell. After being at the very centre of public affairs, the Frost family sank back into almost impenetrable obscurity. 


@@@@@


doc= 37437


Fry, Thomas (1718-1772), classical scholar and college head, was the son of Thomas Fry, of Pipe Lane, Bristol. He was educated at Bristol grammar school until 1732, and was then admitted to St John's College, Oxford, as a Bristol fellow. He took his BA degree in 1736, was MA in 1740, and took priest's orders in 1744, a BD in 1745, and a DD in 1750. 
Regularly resident in college during term, Fry held most college offices, beginning as logic reader in 1737-40. He was dean of arts in 1740-44, natural philosophy reader in 1740-41 and 1745-6, the college preacher in 1743-4 and 1746-7, and dean of divinity in 1750-51. He served the college as Waple's preacher (1748-9) and the Wood bursar (1748-9, 1755-6), and became senior bursar (1751-2), junior bursar (1752-3), and rhetoric lecturer (1755). Having been twice vice-president (1754-5 and 1757-8), he was elected president of St John's College on 9 December 1757 on the resignation of William Walker. Fry was curate in three college livings between 1749 and 1757 -- St Giles', Oxford (1749), Fyfield until 1755, and Kirtlington (1755-7) -- and so he was often an absentee incumbent. In 1757, on being elected president, he became rector of Hanborough. 
Fry was determined to uphold the authority of the president; in 1766 he was upset by the appointment of a new steward (who oversaw the domestic arrangements of the college) which had been made at a meeting presided over by the vice-president. Fry persuaded eight of the senior fellows to protest at the action and overruled the appointment on the ground that the proceedings were contrary to statute. Later the same day, with a new vice-president and the senior bursar, he elected the same man steward and clerk of accounts. However, he does not seem to have felt so strongly about public affairs, for in May 1768 he refused a seat on the bench: 'The Master of Ball. [Balliol] pressed me much to have my name inserted in the new Commissn for the Peace, but I absolutely declined it. Clergymen have no business to concern themselves with Civil affairs' (St John's College Records). 
In the diary covering the last four years of his life there is little mention of books, but he had brought out an edition of Aristophanes' 'Plutus' and 'Clouds' in 1767. It is plain that food was one of his permanent interests, and he faithfully records details of dinners, with comments on the madeira in the common-room cellar. This perhaps accounts for the gout from which he suffered in 1771 and for which he collected prescriptions from friends. 
As an old friend of John Wilkes, Fry seems to have been, if not an active radical, at least a passive sympathizer. When in 1768 action was taken against young members of the university influenced by Methodism, he commented: 'The V.C. acknowledg'd that the characters of the men were very unexceptionable in every respect... but the Statutes of the Univy, he thought, obliged him to proceed in this Manner -- thus is Persecution carried on under the masque of Mildness and Moderation. (St John's College muniments, 75, D7)' Fry was a tolerant man, who enjoyed solitude; he had protestant sympathies, but gave no sign of any antipathy to Catholicism. He never married and died intestate in Bristol on 22 November 1772. He was buried in the churchyard at Clifton. 


@@@@@


doc= 37438


Furber, Robert (c.1674-1756), nurseryman, established his Kensington nursery soon after 1700 near Hyde Park Gate and Kensington Gore, on the west of what became Gloucester Road. About 1706 he married Mary Everton; they had a son. 
Furber and Christopher Gray both bought some of the plants collected at Fulham Palace by Henry Compton, bishop of London, after the bishop's death in 1713, and by 1724 Furber's stock was rich enough for some of his exotic trees and shrubs, including the moss rose, to be listed by Philip Miller in his 'Gardeners and Florists Dictionary' (1724). Furber was also one of the Society of Gardeners, led by Miller, which published the first part of its 'Catalogus plantarum' in 1730, but by then he had issued two catalogues of his own, one of English and foreign trees, the other of 'the Best and Choicest Fruit Trees' (both in 1727). About 1720 Furber had published an engraving of a tulip tree, a magnolia (then considered another species of tulip tree), and a silk-cotton tree, all from the garden of Thomas Herbert, eighth earl of Pembroke; presumably the trees had been supplied by Furber, who prefaced his tree catalogue with a pleased account of his success in propagating the tulip tree, 'notwithstanding some Writers have thought it difficult'. 
Furber's pictorial catalogues, collected as 'Twelve Months of Flowers', a dozen plates based on paintings by Peter Casteels, were issued plain or coloured; the main series was issued in 1730, with a thirteenth plate, containing subscribers' names within a border of flowers, following in 1732. So popular were these annotated flower-pieces, engraved by Henry Fletcher, that they were frequently copied at the time, and later reprints kept them in circulation. Smaller versions, engraved by James Smith, were used to illustrate 'The Flower-Garden Display'd' (1732), with descriptions of the flowers probably written by Richard Bradley; and another set of small copies was issued by John Bowles in 1749 as 'Flora'. A similar series of 'Twelve Plates with Figures of Fruit' was published in 1732, again based on Casteels's paintings, illustrating fruit in season month by month. In 1733 Furber's 'Short Introduction to Gardening' appeared, 'Being several Useful Catalogues of Fruits and Flowers' introduced to supplement the large plates and to help his customers 'in furnishing their Gardens and their Tables'. The preface reminds its readers of the contents of Furber's nursery, as well as his own satisfaction with his work: 'Gardening is the Employment Providence has allotted me; and it happily falls out to be a Business the most suitable of all others to my Genius and Inclination. I have spent my Years in collecting, cultivating and improving all the different Kinds of Trees, Plants, Fruits, and Flowers, that I could possibly obtain; and in doing this, have spared neither Cost nor Pains. With intent to make the Love of Gardening more general, and the understanding of it more easy, I have from time to time published Catalogues, containing large Variety of Trees, Plants, Fruits, and Flowers, both Foreign and Domestic, cultivated by me for Sale.' Furber was an overseer of the poor in the parish of St Mary Abbots, Kensington, in 1718, and a churchwarden in 1725-6 and 1736-7. He was buried at St Mary Abbots on 1 September 1756. He left his Kensington house to his wife and a legacy to their son, William, who had been apprenticed to Philip Miller in 1722. Most of his other property was left to John Williamson, who worked with Furber during his later years and who took over the Kensington nursery, which was maintained by a succession of gardeners until the late 1840s. 
Sandra Raphael', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37439


Galloway, John (1804-1894), iron-founder and engineer, was born on 14 February 1804 at his father's house, 37 Lombard Street, Manchester, the second son of William Galloway (1768-1836) and his wife, Elizabeth. His father had moved to Manchester in 1790 from Coldstream, his birthplace, and by the time John was born his father was in business in Manchester as a millwright. John was educated at a local school in Mosley Street until at the age of fourteen he became apprenticed for seven years in his father's firm, Galloway and Bowman, millwrights, engineers, and iron-founders. 
John completed his time in 1825 and remained with the firm of Galloway, Bowman, and Glasgow for another ten years. When the Liverpool and Manchester Railway opened in 1830 he became interested in the construction of locomotives and by 1833 had completed the 'Manchester', the first locomotive to be built in that city. The firm, however, built only about four or five locomotives in all. In 1835 Galloway, in partnership with his elder brother, William (1796-1873), hived off from the original family business and established the firm of W. and J. Galloway at the Knott Mill ironworks, on the site of a former foundry. 
The elder William Galloway died in 1836 and by 1839 the firm of Galloway, Bowman, and Glasgow had been wound up; but by this time William the younger and John Galloway had begun to make their mark as iron-founders and engineers. William and his wife, Elizabeth, had a son, John Galloway (1826-1896), iron-founder and engineer, who was born on 18 July 1826 at Great Jackson Street, Manchester. In 1840 he was apprenticed for seven years to his father and uncle. 
In the early 1840s the use of gas was expanding rapidly and the firm of W. and J. Galloway began to execute increasing numbers of orders for gasworks equipment and gas pipes. At the same time the Galloway brothers were developing an early version of the double-fire flue boiler, a smoke consuming variation of the Lancashire boiler patented in 1844 by their great rival William Fairbairn. From 1848 the two brothers took out frequent patents for improvements to boilers and other parts of the steam engine, and by 1851 the 'Galloway boiler' had been developed to the stage where it could be patented. In the next forty years the firm made nearly 9000 boilers based on the design. 
From about 1850 most of the firm's business consisted of the manufacture of boilers, steam engines, and mechanical equipment for local cotton mills, but from 1852 it exported equipment for gunpowder mills in Turkey and cotton mills in Russia and India, in some cases also supplying cast-iron columns for the erection of the spinning and weaving sheds. At the same time the firm undertook some work in what would now be regarded as civil engineering, building a viaduct on the Ulverston and Lancaster Railway in 1857 and erecting the pier at Southport in 1860. These works, executed under the supervision of James Brunlees, were notable for the first successful use of high-pressure water-jetting in the sinking of cast-iron piles into sand. 
One of the brothers' most percipient and profitable associations was with Henry Bessemer, a customer of the firm for twelve years before he asked them in 1855 to make the special equipment required for trials of his new steelmaking process. It is very likely that, in the course of extensive testing carried out by Bessemer and the Galloways at the Knott Mill ironworks, the first ingots of Bessemer steel in the world were produced there. In 1856 John Galloway and Charles John, son of the elder John Galloway, entered the business as partners, the firm becoming W. and J. Galloway & Sons. Three years later John Galloway senior and his brother William became partners with Bessemer, along with others in the company he formed, to erect a Bessemer steelworks in Sheffield, for which they supplied the converters and other special equipment. Galloways subsequently supplied converters and equipment to a number of other firms making Bessemer steel under licence. 
In 1872 a separate boilerworks was opened in Hyde Road, Ardwick, and thereafter Knott Mill works was devoted entirely to the manufacture of engines. The firm's largest engine was one of 10,000 indicated horsepower, supplied in 1888 to Palmers shipyard in Jarrow. In 1889 the partnership was turned into a private company, with a capital of $250,000, and ten years later Galloways became a public limited liability company. 
For more than thirty years from 1856 John Galloway the younger had been increasingly involved in the management of the rapidly expanding business, but after 1889 it was Charles John Galloway, the chairman and managing director, who effectively held the reins. John had acquired many other business and financial interests; he was also a JP for over thirty years, and with his wife, the daughter of William Crippin, he devoted much time to philanthropic and charitable undertakings. 
John Galloway senior died in Manchester at Coldstream House, Old Trafford, on 11 February 1894 at the age of almost ninety. He was known in commercial circles as the father of the Manchester iron trade; Galloways has been described as the oldest of the large Lancashire engineering firms, and at the time of his death Hyde Road works employed 800 men and Knott Mill works 500. He never took an active part in public movements, though he was known as a Liberal in politics and a member of the United Presbyterian church. 
John Galloway junior died on 16 December 1896 at his Manchester home, The Cottage, Seymour Grove, Stretford, Lancashire. He was survived by one son, William J. Galloway, at the time the MP for Manchester South-west, who was also involved in the family firm. 


@@@@@


doc= 37440


Gamble, Sir David, first baronet (1823-1907), chemical manufacturer, was born in Dublin on 3 February 1823, the only son of Hannah, daughter of Henry Gower, a Dublin solicitor, and Josias Christopher Gamble (1775-1848), chemical manufacturer, who was born at Enniskillen, co. Fermanagh. The elder Gamble, having been educated at Glasgow University (MA 1797), served from 1799 to 1804 as a Presbyterian minister in his native town. He also valued earthly promotion, however, and, perceiving the recent but growing demand for chloride of lime for bleaching Irish linen, he is said to have become interested in its manufacture in the adjacent co. Monaghan. He certainly was active as a chemical manufacturer in Dublin in 1806; there in due course he came to know James Muspratt, and may have had business relations with him. Muspratt pioneered the Leblanc soda-making process in Liverpool in 1823 in order to supply the expanding soap industry of the area, but was soon driven out of the borough because of the extreme atmospheric pollution caused by his factory. In 1828 he moved a dozen miles or so to the east, to the small but growing town of St Helens, which still lacked any form of restrictive local government. He invited J. C. Gamble, then in his early fifties, to join him as junior partner. When Muspratt moved on again after two years, Gamble found other partners, and eventually John Crosfield, then in business in Warrington. 
David Gamble was educated at a private school in St Helens. His father, then unusual in being a university graduate in business, resolved that his son should benefit from the best training in chemistry available. He sent him for a year, aged sixteen, to University College, London, and then (1840-43) to the Andersonian Institution in Glasgow. In 1843 David joined his father (aged sixty-eight) in a small new chemical works which they opened, as J. C. Gamble & Son, close to the original Muspratt premises. He inherited the business at his father's death on 27 January 1848 and built it up so successfully that by 1865 its rateable value had caught up with that of the earlier factory, which itself had grown fourfold in the interim. 
Gamble married Elizabeth, daughter of James Haddock, a prominent local coal owner, at St Helens parish church on 26 February 1847. They lived comfortably in Windle township on the north side of St Helens until the 1860s, when he was in a position to build himself an impressive mansion, Windlehurst, in its own grounds not far from Windle Hall, where the senior member of the Pilkington glass-making family lived. He needed the large house for his growing family. Of eleven children, the four older sons (born 1848, 1852, 1856, and 1858) eventually joined him in the business which, besides the manufacture of Leblanc soda and bleaching powder, developed markets for by-products as well as potassium chlorate and magnesium sulphate (Epsom salts). Although the chemical industry was concentrated on Widnes, a few miles to the south on the Mersey, because of canal transport cost advantages, J. C. Gamble & Son remained at St Helens and became the main chemical manufacturers there, developing a flourishing export trade, especially to the United States. When Parr's Bank was formed into a limited company in 1865, Gamble was made a director, with authority 'to examine the customers' accounts at St Helens from time to time... and to report thereon', though he was specifically forbidden from seeing any of the accounts of other chemical manufacturers. From 1883 he was paid $150 a year 'for St Helens duty' and remained on Parr's board for the rest of his life. 
Although he was a convinced free-trader, Gamble did not hesitate to combine with other manufacturers where this was to their common advantage. In 1867 he joined in the formation of the Tharsis Sulphur and Copper Company to ensure sulphur supplies. In 1883 he was involved in creating the Lancashire Bleaching Powder Manufacturers' Association in an attempt to maintain profitability within the industry against the lower cost ammonia-soda process, worked in Britain by Brunner, Mond & Co. This competition, however, caused the Leblanc manufacturers to merge their businesses into the United Alkali Company Ltd in 1891. J. C. Gamble & Son was then valued at $320,000, considerably more than the next largest chemical concern in St Helens. 
All this business activity did not prevent Gamble from playing a leading part in local government from its inception. In 1845 he became one of the original St Helens improvement commissioners and served as their chairman from 1856 to 1862. When the town was incorporated in 1868, he served as the first mayor, and was re-elected for two further terms in 1882/3 and 1886/7. When the volunteers were formed in 1860, he became their lieutenant-colonel -- until 1887 -- and built the local Volunteer Hall. Colonel Gamble, as he then liked to be called, stood for parliament as a Liberal when the town first obtained independent representation in 1885, but was narrowly defeated. When a new grammar school, Cowley School, was opened in 1882, he contributed $1000 towards it and saw that laboratory facilities were provided. In 1883 he contributed towards University College, Liverpool, together with other chemical manufacturers, who all wished to see higher education facilities available in the region for present and future employees. In 1893 he gave $25,000 to enable a technical institute and library to be built in the town centre 'for the purpose of assisting our people to make themselves equal or superior to those countries where technical education has been an institution for a great number of years'. 
For his many public services Gamble was made a CB in 1887, a baronet in 1897 and a KCB in 1904. He died at Windlehurst on 4 February 1907. 


@@@@@


doc= 37441


Garrard, Sir William (c.1510-1571), merchant, was born in the parish of St Magnus the Martyr near London Bridge, the son of John Garrard, a London grocer. He became a haberdasher and merchant adventurer, growing rich on the cloth-export trade to Antwerp. He bought the manor of Dorney, Buckinghamshire, in 1542, but continued to live mainly in London and remained an active merchant all his life. When the Antwerp market began to contract, he diversified into more risky ventures. In 1552 he exported linen and woollen cloth, coral, amber, and jet to the Barbary coast in return for sugar, dates, almonds, and molasses. He was involved in a number of voyages to Guinea in the 1550s and 1560s, shared in two of the slaving expeditions of Sir John Hawkins, and was a leading promoter of the expedition of Richard Chancellor to Russia in 1553. Garrard was named a consul of the Russia Company when it was founded about 1553, and from 1561 until his death was almost continuously either sole or joint governor of the company. He was also a governor of the Mineral and Battery Works founded in 1568. 
An alderman by 1547, Garrard was elected sheriff of the City of London in 1552, mayor in 1555 -- being knighted during his term of office -- and one of London's MPs in the last parliament of Mary I's reign. But his major contribution to the corporate life of the City was his work for the relief of the poor. In 1545 he was one of those appointed to devise new means of tackling the problem and in the 1550s he took a leading part in drawing up constitutions for the City's new or refounded hospitals. He was a governor of Christ's Hospital in 1553-4, of Bridewell in 1558-9, and of St Bartholomew's from 1559 until his death, surveyor of all the City's hospitals in 1566-7 and their comptroller-general from 1568. He maintained his interest until the end, bequeathing to Christ's Hospital $20, 'which they owe me that I lent them', with an additional $6 13's'. 4died, besides $20 each to St Bartholomew's and St Thomas's. He also left money for prisoners in the City's prisons and the Gate House at Westminster and for poor householders in his ward and in two London parishes -- St Magnus and St Christopher-le-Stocks, where he was then living -- and in the parishes of Dorney and Burnham in Buckinghamshire and Sittingbourne in Kent, where he owned property. 
Garrard died on 27 September 1571 and was buried, as he had requested, in the church of St Magnus the Martyr. He was survived by his wife, Isabel, daughter of Julian Nethermill, a Coventry draper, and their four sons and one daughter. The eldest son inherited Dorney and became a country gentleman, but John, the third son, followed his father as a City merchant and, in 1601, lord mayor. Sir Samuel Garrard, lord mayor in 1709, was a descendant of this son, providing a rare example of continuity in the mercantile elite of London. 
Helen Miller', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37442


Garratt, Herbert William (1864-1913), locomotive engineer, was born on 8 June 1864 at 11 Loddiges Road, Hackney, London, the son of William Garratt, umbrella manufacturer, and his wife, Emma Hunt. He was educated at private schools in London, then served his apprenticeship from 1879 to 1882 in the locomotive works in Bow. From there he went to Doxford's marine engine works in Sunderland, after which he served at sea as fourth and third engineer on several steamships. From 1885 to 1889 he acquired more railway-engineering experience, first as an inspector of engines and railway materials for C. Douglas Fox and Alexander Rendel respectively, then on the London and South Western Railway in conjunction with the Vacuum Brake Company. 
From 1889 to 1906 Garratt worked on railways in many other countries: the Central Argentine Railway appointed him district locomotive superintendent in 1894, but in 1897 he was summarily dismissed for being late in returning from leave in England; in 1900 he went as locomotive superintendent to the Cuban Central Railways, in 1902 to the Lagos Government Railway, and in 1904 to the Lima Railways in Peru. In this way he acquired an unusually wide experience of railway engineering and management under difficult conditions. During those periods of service on overseas railways he made a special study of existing types of articulated locomotive, such as the Fairlie, Meyer, and Mallet, and the problems involved in achieving, especially on narrow-gauge track, adequate stability, traction, and speed. His first sketches of the Garratt articulated locomotive show that he appreciated the advantages of mounting the boiler centrally between a pair of driving bogies carrying the fuel and water tanks. He applied for a patent for his design on 26 July 1907. 
After his ideas had been rejected by Kitsons, the locomotive builders of Leeds, Garratt was fortunate in gaining the support of Beyer, Peacock & Co. in Manchester, who saw the inherent superiority of his design concept. After some initial problems had been overcome the Garratts were outstandingly successful, running on all gauges from 2 feet to 5 feet 6 inches on gradients up to 1 in 20 or more, usually at modest speeds on heavily curved and graded routes, but capable of 75-80 m.p.h. on the Algerian expresses which were headed by probably the fastest articulated locomotives (4-6-2+2-6-4) ever built. A total of 1636 Garratts ran on eighty-six railways in forty-eight countries: of these, Beyer Peacock built just over 1000. Between November 1885 and February 1913 he took out nine patents, eight relating to locomotive engines and one for 'an improved egg-opener'. 
Garratt was elected a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1902. He died at his home, 9 Ellerker Gardens, Richmond, Surrey, on 25 September 1913. 
Ronald M. Birse', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37443


Garrod, Dorothy Annie Elizabeth (1892-1968), archaeologist and prehistorian, was born on 5 May 1892 at 9 Chandos Street, London, the second of four children and only daughter of Sir Archibald Edward Garrod (1857-1936), physician, later first professor of medicine at St Bartholomew's Hospital and regius professor of medicine at Oxford, and his wife, Laura Elisabeth (died 1940), daughter of Sir Thomas Smith, first baronet, surgeon. She was initially educated at home, where her governess, Isabel Fry, was the first in a series of inspirational teachers. Birklands School, St Albans, prepared her for entrance to Cambridge University; she read history (1913-16) at Newnham College, with which she began a lifelong association. During the First World War two brothers and her (unofficial) fiance were killed; her youngest brother died of influenza in 1919 before demobilization. Her own war service (1917-19) with the Catholic Women's League (she converted to Roman Catholicism in 1913) took her to France and Germany, then after the armistice to Malta, where her father was head of war hospitals. It was his suggestion that she occupy her mind among the island's spectacular prehistoric antiquities. 
The family's move to Oxford enabled Dorothy Garrod to study for the university diploma in anthropology, gained with distinction in 1921, under the legendary R. R. Marett, who regarded the study of prehistory as no longer an amateur pastime but a branch of science in its own right. She had pledged to compensate her bereaved parents by achieving a life worthy of the family's formidable intellectual tradition (Caton-Thompson, 341). She now found her goal, to be a prehistorian of the palaeolithic, the Old Stone Age. 
Through Marett, Dorothy Garrod met the great men of French prehistory and saw the wonders of the painted caves; at Count Begouen's house, the Abbe Henri Breuil agreed to take her as his pupil at the Institut de Paleontologie Humaine in Paris (1922-4). During these years she gained fieldwork experience at palaeolithic sites including La Quina with Henri Martin, Les Eyzies (Denis Peyrony), and in Correze (Jean Bouyssonie). At this time also she attracted the notice of George Grant MacCurdy of Yale University, then planning the creation of his American School of Prehistoric Research (ASPR). With Breuil's encouragement she gathered material for her first book 'The Upper Palaeolithic in Britain' (1926), hitherto unsynthesized, for which she was awarded a BSc degree from Oxford. 
To Breuil also Garrod owed her own first major excavation at the Devil's Tower, Gibraltar, discovered by him during wartime missions to Spain. Here she found the middle palaeolithic Mousterian flint industry known from her French studies, thereafter a central interest, and five skull fragments of a Neanderthal child. Though she was not a woman given to sentiment, this discovery made a deep impression. She gave the child the resonant name Abel, recording the date of his disinterment, age at death, and probable age before present (22,000 years) in her private photograph album. The rare ability shown in the digging and publication (1928) of the site established her place in palaeolithic studies. She was appointed -- the only woman and youngest member -- to the international commission charged in 1927 with investigating the notorious Glozel affair. The commission considered that artefacts of a supposed ancient civilization found at Glozel (near Vichy) were fraudulent, though counter-claims were made, some -- unjustly -- against Dorothy Garrod herself. She considered the whole affair absurd, although belief in a 'Glozelian civilization' has proved curiously persistent. 
The years 1928-37 were largely concerned with western Asia and determined Garrod's lasting reputation. Prehistoric archaeology in Palestine under British mandate, though still in its infancy, showed signs of great potential. The patronage of MacCurdy and Sir John Linton Myres, both anxious to explore this field of research, was among the factors which led to her excavation in the Judaean cave of Shukba, in the Wadi en-Natuf, for the British School of Archaeology in Jerusalem. Overlying a Mousterian occupation level were human remains associated with a previously unknown mesolithic culture she named -- after the wadi -- Natufian. Later in 1928 she excavated two caves in southern Kurdistan, Hazar Merd (Mousterian) and Zarzi (late upper palaeolithic). The area, unexplored in prehistoric terms, was as troubled then as later; this apparently held no fears for her, though her small team worked under armed police escort. In Palestine further work at Shukba was abandoned in favour of the need to excavate a group of caves in the Wadi el-Mughara, Mount Carmel, recently reprieved from destruction by quarrying. Dorothy Garrod was appointed director of the Anglo-American expedition which began work in spring 1929. The series of seven seasons' work at Mount Carmel (1929-34) was to prove the most important in her archaeological career. 
At El-Wad cave Garrod found again the distinctive Natufian culture first identified at Shukba, but here in a far richer phase of decorated burials with a complex tool kit of worked stone and bone. Flint blades hafted into bone sickles persuaded her that the Natufians were practising an early form of agriculture. The deepest (Mousterian) of seven archaeological levels in El-Wad corresponded to the uppermost undisturbed level of a further seven in Tabun cave nearby, extending down to a pre-handaxe stone industry at the deepest level. By skilled typological analysis of tens of thousands of stone implements recovered from the Carmel caves she established an almost unbroken cultural sequence, now known to span some 600,000 years or more of human activity, thus imposing order on the hitherto incoherent archaeology of the Levant. In addition to the Natufian burials, the caves contained older human remains. In Tabun cave an adult Mousterian female with Neanderthal characteristics was found, while under her direction T. D. McCown found at Skhul cave a virtual cemetery of ten Mousterian individuals with features more similar to modern humans. 
The young Jacquetta Hawkes, at Mount Carmel during the 1932 season, remembered the personal and professional qualities of her director: 'Small (5 ft. 2 in.), composed and neat beside her fellahin workers -- girls in brightly ballooning skirts and a few lusty pick-men -- her command of them was absolute. When a builder tried to cheat her she overwhelmed him, thumping the table, her normally calm eyes glaring. In the cool peace of the evening after a good dinner there were a few classical records to be played or she might take up her flute. Her talk (low-pitched) was sometimes witty, always congenial. ('DNB')' By the final season (1934) the excavation's surviving daily journal shows how these qualities were tested by the immensity of the task, as anxieties over funding, sickness among her workers, and the privations of daily living all drew on her reserves of courage and humour.Garrod had begun the Mount Carmel excavation as a research fellow at Newnham College (1929-32); she finished it as director of studies (1933-42). She now returned to Cambridge to prepare her final report (including the faunal analysis by D. M. A. Bate). 'The Stone Age of Mount Carmel', 1 (1937) established a new standard for its time, recognized by the award of the degree of DSc by Oxford University. 
Garrod's continuing interest in palaeolithic migration patterns underlay a survey in Anatolia undertaken for the ASPR in 1938. When bureaucratic delays proved unacceptable, she moved on to Bulgaria, then another largely unexplored area. A short excavation in Bacho Kiro cave established the first prehistoric sequence in eastern Europe, with possible evidence of a westward movement by modern humans across the continent in the early upper palaeolithic. Described as calm, self-assured, perfectly confident, and authoritative, Garrod is remembered by an expedition member, Bruce Howe, as 'unique, rather like a glass of pale fine stony French white wine' (private information, Howe). 
On 6 May 1939 Dorothy Garrod was elected Cambridge University's Disney professor of archaeology, becoming the first woman to hold a chair at Cambridge or Oxford. No hint of controversy surrounds this important election. Renowned for her excavations, Garrod was clearly chosen for her qualifications. Although women became eligible for all Cambridge University teaching offices and for membership of faculties and faculty boards in 1926, in 1939 they were still not admissible to degrees, were not yet full members of the university, and thus could not become members of its governing bodies. Garrod's election as professor highlighted this inherent contradiction, accentuated the need for administrative change, and added weight to the argument that women should be allowed to graduate from Cambridge. The event was greeted with joy by the women's colleges and was heralded by the wider community as an immense step towards complete equality with men. Full membership for women in the university followed in 1948. 
In 1942 Garrod was recruited to the RAF Medmenham unit for photographic interpretation, where she served as a section officer, mapping the effects of allied bombing: she was remembered as superbly efficient. Returning to Cambridge in 1945, she gained a reputation as a conscientious, hard-working administrator with a strong distaste for petty politics. In 1946 she proposed that archaeology became part of the full Cambridge tripos. Her endless committee labour resulted in the institutionalization of the desired curriculum and full degree in 1948. 
Fieldwork was maintained during Garrod's professorial years by excavation in France during long vacations with her closest friends, Germaine Henri-Martin at Fontechevade (Charente) and Suzanne de St Mathurin at Angles sur l'Anglin (Vienne). On retirement in 1952 she settled permanently in France. Now free to resume her own research, she began the long-postponed task of relating the prehistoric sequence of the Levant with that of Europe. Her plan (before absolute dating methods became available) was to correlate the Quaternary sea levels of the eastern Mediterranean with the periodic glaciations in Europe; the ancient beaches and caves of the Lebanese coast provided evidence no longer existing in Palestine. Five years (1958-63) of strenuous excavation were necessary to produce the correlation she sought, with a relative succession which -- though greatly extended by modern dating methods -- remains valid. Nevertheless her health was overtaxed in the process and continued to decline. In June 1968, while writing up her Lebanese work for publication and shortly after receiving -- again as the first woman -- the gold medal of the Society of Antiquaries, she suffered a stroke from which she did not recover. She died at the Hope House (Catholic) nursing home in Cambridge on 18 December 1968. Her ashes were buried in her parents' grave at Melton, Suffolk. 
Dorothy Garrod's reputation, and appreciation of her pioneering work in prehistoric archaeology, has increased as research in her subject has grown during the years since her death. The excavation techniques of her day enabled her to see long stratigraphic sequences and define basic frameworks on which her successors could safely build. Through her work in the Levantine caves, she identified and addressed crucial questions that still preoccupy prehistorians: the appearance of modern humans and extinction of Neanderthals during the middle palaeolithic, and the later mesolithic transition from nomadic hunter-gathering to settlement and agriculture. Her publications were prompt, thorough, and prolific (over one hundred academic papers and articles), and showed her continual readiness to revise her opinions and to learn. Her election as professor at Cambridge came to be celebrated as a milestone in the struggle to gain access to higher education for women in England. Using her degree plan, Cambridge has become a world centre for prehistoric studies. 
In addition to her MA (Cambridge) and DSc (Oxford) degrees Garrod received honorary doctorates from Toulouse and Poitiers. She was a fellow of the British Academy (1952), the Royal Anthropological Institute (Huxley memorial medal, 1962), and the Society of Antiquaries (gold medal, 1968). She was appointed CBE (1965). She was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 37444


Garway, William (bap. 1617, d. 1701), politician, was baptized on 10 April 1617 at St Peter-le-Poer, London, the eldest of the ten children of Sir Henry Garway (bap. 1575, d. 1646), draper and lord mayor of London in 1639-40, of Broad Street, London, and his wife, Margaret (died 1656), daughter of Henry Clitherow, merchant of London. He was educated at Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he was admitted in 1632. Garway's father was one of the staunchest royalists in the City during the civil war and Garway himself fought in the royal army as a captain of foot before being captured in November 1644. 
Garway's activities after the death of his father in 1646 are obscure, although he may have succeeded to some of Sir Henry's Levantine business interests. In 1656 he inherited land in Sussex and in 1661 was returned to parliament for Chichester. Garway soon acquired a reputation for independence from the court, coupled with understanding of public finance. He became associated with a group around Sir John Vaughan including Sir Thomas Littleton and Sir Richard Temple, which established itself as the most consistent critic of the government. In 1663 he was involved in the efforts of Temple and George Digby, second earl of Bristol, to remove Edward Hyde, first earl of Clarendon, from power. With his allies he had opposed in 1664 aspects of the government's financing plans for the Second Dutch War, and during the session of 1666-7 Garway was in the forefront of the group's demands for scrutiny of war expenditure, proposing a statutory committee to examine the accounts of the money which had been given for the war with the Dutch. Despite the failure of the bill to give effect to the committee Garway was one of the government's critics who were included in the royal commission on public accounts appointed during the following prorogation. With the fall of Clarendon and the rise to power of George Villiers, second duke of Buckingham, an ally in the session of 1666-7, Garway was appointed in 1668 to the committee of trade. Nevertheless, throughout 1669, often in concert with Sir Thomas Lee, he continued to press for further investigation of corrupt practices in government accounts, to argue for limits to the supply granted to the king and against the new assessment and excise taxes. 
In 1671, however, Garway accepted a commissionership of the customs, and in February 1673 he and Sir Thomas Lee (who later admitted to receiving money from the government) supported the court in its request for $1.2 million in order to carry on the war with the Dutch. Despite this, though, Garway continued to articulate suspicions of the court, and particularly its connections with popery. He criticized the French war and joined the attack on the members of the Cabal. In 1675 he attacked the granting of money for rebuilding the navy. At the end of the autumn session that year he was dismissed from his position as customs commissioner. 
By the session of 1677 Garway was one of the most influential country voices in the Commons, demanding a hostile stance against France, but rejecting most of the policies advanced by the government to achieve it. But he maintained his distance from the most prominent of the government's opponents, Anthony Ashley Cooper, first earl of Shaftesbury, and Buckingham; during the Exclusion parliaments, in which he sat for Arundel, he demanded 'expedients' -- measures against popery, frequent parliaments, the disbandment of the army, and the uniting of protestants -- as an alternative to the exclusion of the duke of York. Garway's resistance to exclusion perhaps earned him the respect of the government of James II. He was returned again to the 1685 parliament, and in 1688 was approved as deputy lieutenant and JP. Nevertheless he greeted the revolution with relief: in the Convention Parliament he was among the first to support William's coup, although he saw it as crucial to take the opportunity to make England's liberties more secure. As the new government consolidated itself Garway returned to his more customary role as the watchdog of the nation's purse: in 1689-90 he was active in pursuing miscarriages in the supplying of the troops in Ireland. In the election of 1690 Garway finally lost his seat at Arundel. Although he lived for eleven more years he did not stand again. 
The roots of Garway's country politics are not clear: Sir William Coventry told Pepys in 1666 that he had 'not been well used by the court, though stout to death' (Pepys, 7.310). But Garway's attitude and deep suspicion of successive Restoration administrations were tempered by an acknowledged expertise in public finance and a well thought out moderation on constitutional issues. He never married and died on 4 August 1701. He was buried at Ford, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 37445


Gascoyne, Joel (bap. 1650, d. 1705), chart maker and cartographer, was baptized in Holy Trinity parish, Hull, on 31 October 1650, the younger child and only son of Thomas Gascoyne or Gaskin, master mariner. The family had since 1605 been prominent in Hull and especially in the Hull Trinity House. Joel Gascoyne was apprenticed for a period of seven years from 21 October 1668 to John Thornton. Thornton was one of a group of manuscript chart makers who, since the early seventeenth century, had plied their trade as members of the Drapers' Company in shops lining the streets and alleys down-river from the Tower of London. Under Thornton, Gascoyne learned the skills of chart making, engraving, and surveying, an unusual combination for the period. 
In 1675 Gascoyne established himself in business as a chart maker at 'The Signe of the Platt neare Wapping Old Stayres three doares below the Chappell' (Ravenhill and Johnson, 1). As a full member of the Drapers' Company and with apprentices indentured to him he produced manuscript and engraved charts. He built up a considerable reputation in chart making, his advice being sought in 1680 and again in 1685 by Samuel Pepys, secretary to the Admiralty. Notable works were a 1678 portolan chart for Captain John Smith of the east coast of North and Central America and the West Indies and 1682 and 1685 maps of Carolina. 
Gascoyne's last payment of dues to the Drapers' Company was recorded in February 1689 and from this date his energies were directed mainly, but not exclusively, towards land surveying. This may have been because he, like other manuscript chart makers, was suffering competition from the publishers of printed charts, or because of the death of his patron the second duke of Albemarle. In 1691 Gascoyne mapped the estates of James Cecil, third earl of Salisbury; the following year he mapped Sayes Court, Deptford, Kent, which was owned by John Evelyn who had there laid out a fine garden (BL, K xviii 18.0 18p). In 1692 he was directed by Samuel Travers, surveyor of land revenue to King William and Queen Mary, to make a survey of the 'Mannor of East Greenwich in Kent' (TNA: PRO, CREST 2 60/1642) following the grant by the monarchs of 'the house at Greenwich to be a hospital for wounded seamen' ('CSP dom.', '1691-2', 481). Gascoyne produced a fine map on vellum (now in the National Archives). 
Travers introduced Gascoyne to his native county of Cornwall where he did his most important work. He produced two large atlases of estate maps; the 'Stowe Atlas' of thirty-three manuscript maps on vellum, detailing estates owned by the Grenville family around Kilkhampton (Cornwall RO, DD X273), and the 'Lanhydrock Atlas' of four large volumes containing 258 manuscript maps on vellum, compiled between 1694 and 'c'.1699, of properties scattered widely over the county belonging to the Robartes family (Lanhydrock House, Bodmin). At the same time Gascoyne took the opportunity of surveying the whole of Cornwall. As a result of this new fieldwork a map, dedicated to Charles Bodville Robartes, second earl of Radnor and lord lieutenant of Cornwall, was published on 27 March 1699. It is a fine map and on what was for the period the large scale of almost 1 inch to the mile, making Cornwall the first major English county to be mapped on this large scale. In 1700 Gascoyne issued proposals to produce a similar map for Devon but, probably through lack of support following a succession of deaths in the family of his patrons, this did not materialize. Such failures were typical of the times and Gascoyne returned to London that year. In 1700 he produced maps and a report on Enfield Chace for the chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster. He continued surveying for the earl of Radnor at Great Haseley and Latchford, Oxfordshire, in 1701 (copy Bodl. Oxf. (E) C 17: 49 (58); original in private hands) and for the earl of Salisbury in Hertfordshire, among others. Between 1702 and 1703 he was commissioned by the vestry to survey the parish of Stepney, producing manuscript and printed maps of the whole parish and of the individual 'hamlets' to help in the administration of this rapidly growing area. 
Gascoyne died in London on 13 February 1705 leaving a wife, Elizabeth. He was undoubtedly a pioneer in his specifications for county maps and initiated the eighteenth-century remapping of England on large scales. 


@@@@@


doc= 37446


Gaskell, Holbrook (1813-1909), chemical manufacturer, was born on 5 March 1813 in Wavertree, near Liverpool, the eldest son (there was also at least one daughter) of Roger Gaskell, manager of the commercial branch of a Warrington sailcloth firm, and his wife and cousin, Anne Hunter. Educated at a private school in Norton near Sheffield, Gaskell was apprenticed as a clerk to Yates and Cox, Liverpool iron merchants and nail makers, in 1827. In 1836 he joined James Nasmyth as a partner with responsibility for commercial and financial operations at the Bridgewater foundry at Patricroft near Manchester. On 28 December 1841 Gaskell married Frances Ann, daughter of Henry Bellhouse, of Victoria Park, Greenhayes, Manchester. They had three sons and three daughters. All three sons became partners in the family firm. A grandson, also Holbrook Gaskell (1878-1951), a director of ICI, was knighted in 1942. The physiologist Walter Holbrook Gaskell was his nephew. 
Gaskell's business acumen placed Nasmyth, Gaskell & Co. among the leading engineering firms in Britain, but in June 1850 ill health forced him to retire. In June 1855, his health restored, he entered into a second partnership, this time with Henry Deacon, industrial chemist and former apprentice of Nasmyth. At first Gaskell supported Deacon's plans to manufacture alkali by the new Solvay process, but later persuaded him for financial reasons to employ the older Leblanc method. In the 1860s Gaskell, Deacon & Co. was among the largest and most successful chemical works in Widnes, owing to Gaskell's commercial management and Deacon's method of recovering chlorine for bleaching powder manufacture. Gaskell was actively involved with the firm until the 1870s, after which he remained a director until November 1890, when it was absorbed into the United Alkali Company. He was then appointed to a vice-presidency in recognition of his services to the chemical industry. 
Gaskell had wide interests in the north-west. Inspired by a sense of private and public duty, he served as a magistrate in Widnes for many years. In politics he was an active liberal, and after 1886, Liberal Unionist, a member of the Liverpool Reform Club, and a supporter of radical causes, including the extension of the franchise. Interested in education, he donated nearly $6000 towards the endowment of a chair of botany and the provision of chemistry laboratories at University College, Liverpool. He presented Widnes with public baths in 1889 and supported convalescent homes in Heswall and Southport. He was a proprietor of the 'Liverpool Daily and Weekly Post and Echo' and became chairman when the 'Daily Post' and 'Liverpool Mercury' amalgamated in 1904. An art connoisseur, Gaskell owned one of the finest collections of paintings in the north of England, including works by J. M. W. Turner and John Constable. The collection was loaned to the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool, in 1885. He died at his home, Woolton Wood, Much Woolton, Lancashire, on 8 March 1909. 
N. G. Coley', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37447


Geikie, James Murdoch (1839-1915), geologist, was born on 23 August 1839 in a house between Bristo Street and George Square in Edinburgh, the third son and third of eight children of James Stuart Geikie and his wife, Isabella Thom, the daughter of a Dunbar sea captain. He disliked the name Murdoch and dropped it as a child. His father was evidently in the perfume trade, but the family preferred to have him remembered as an amateur musician and music critic for 'The Scotsman'. His uncle was the artist Walter Geikie and his eldest brother was the geologist Sir Archibald Geikie. He was educated at the Edinburgh high school (1850-53) and as a schoolboy he joined in the geological rambles of his brother Archibald and John Young, the future professor of natural history at Glasgow University. In August 1850 he conducted some strangers to the summit of Arthur's Seat without realizing that they were Queen Victoria, Prince Albert, and four of the royal children. In 1854 he was apprenticed to the printer and publisher Thomas Constable, but disliked both the work and the indoor confinement. He renounced his apprenticeship in 1858 and resolved to follow his eldest brother into the ranks of the geological survey. While awaiting a vacancy he enrolled in the natural history class at Edinburgh University under George James Allman. 
In October 1861 Geikie joined the local branch of the geological survey as assistant geologist. He was promoted geologist in 1867, when the branch was reorganized as the geological survey of Scotland with Archibald Geikie as its director, and he was promoted district surveyor in 1869. With the survey he was in his element. He loved both the outdoor life and the companionship of genial and talented colleagues. He was a hardy, enthusiastic, and capable field geologist, the superficial deposits being his chief interest. For the survey he mapped in Fife and the Lothians, in the southern uplands, and in the Ayrshire and Lanarkshire coalfields, while from 1875 until 1882 his station was at Perth. It was in 1875, on 8 July, that he married Mary Simson, daughter of John Somerville Johnston of Crailing Hall, Jedburgh. They later had four sons and a daughter. While at the survey Geikie achieved an international reputation as a student of the Quaternary and his book 'The Great Ice Age' (1874; later editions in 1877 and 1894) became a classic, not least because of his advocacy of the reality of interglacial periods. Among his other texts, 'Outlines of Geology' (1886) and 'Structural and Field Geology for Students' (1905) both appeared in several editions. 
In 1882 Archibald Geikie was appointed director-general of the geological survey and moved to London, leaving vacant the directorship of the Scottish survey and the Murchison chair of geology at Edinburgh University, which he had held concurrently with his survey post. Geikie was his brother's obvious successor in both posts, but Archibald announced first that for the moment he would himself retain control of the Scottish survey and second that he would not sanction the holding of the Murchison chair by any survey geologist. Forced to choose between the survey and the chair, James Geikie chose the latter. It was a decision which he regretted for some years, although within the university he proved an effective teacher in both the classroom and the field and he was dean of the faculty of science from 1894 until 1913. He resigned his chair in June 1914. 
A hearty, plain-spoken man, Geikie lacked his brother's wide-ranging talents but was by far the more popular of the two. He was elected FRS in 1875 and was much involved in the affairs of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (president 1913-15) and the Royal Scottish Geographical Society, of which he was a co-founder and president in 1904-10. He travelled widely in Europe and he visited North America twice. Geikie died suddenly in Edinburgh from a heart attack on 1 March 1915. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 37448


Geneville, Geoffrey de, first Lord Geneville (1225x33-1314), soldier and administrator, came from Champagne, and styled himself lord of Vaucouleurs. He was a younger son of Simon de Joinville (died 1233) and his wife Beatrice ('fl'. 1226x1233), daughter of Etienne, count of Burgundy and Auxonne; his eldest brother was Jean de Joinville, biographer of Louis IX of France ('r'. 1226-70). Geoffrey came to England in 1251. His half-sister was the wife of Peter of Savoy, earl of Richmond (died 1268), one of the queen's uncles, and he was linked to a powerful group of Savoyards at court. He was closely associated with the heir to the throne, the future Edward I, and was with him in Gascony in 1255. Through marriage between 1249 and 1252 to Matilda de Briouze, widow of Pierre de Genevre, and a granddaughter and coheir of Walter de Lacy, Lord Lacy (died 1241), he acquired lands in the Welsh marches, at Ewyas Lacy and Ludlow, and in Ireland, where he and his wife held half the county of Meath. His power there was centred on the great castle at Trim, which he held at the king's pleasure. 
Edward, the heir to the throne, used the Geneville castle at Ludlow in the days after his escape from custody in 1265. Geneville also provided important assistance in Ireland in that year. He showed great political skill in reconciling Montfortian and royalist supporters, enabling Edward to receive significant support from Ireland in the campaign that culminated in victory at Evesham. 
There was a strong crusading tradition in the Geneville family, extending back to the mid-twelfth century: Geoffrey and his brother William duly accompanied Edward on crusade in 1270, but returned before him ['see also 'Lord Edward's crusade]. Geoffrey was then appointed justiciar of Ireland in 1273, a post he held until 1276. He was given wide powers, and every effort was made to keep him supplied with money. But his years in office can hardly be regarded as successful, and he was heavily defeated by the Irish in 1274 and 1276. He served in Edward's Welsh wars, but his interests increasingly centred upon Ireland: in 1283 he granted his English lands to his son Peter. Later in Edward I's reign Geneville and his wife had a series of disputes with the Dublin government. They had been successful in the 1250s in recovering the original franchisal rights, as they had existed under Henry II, in their liberty of Trim. In 1293, however, the liberty of Trim was taken into the king's hands, following a dispute over a case of imprisonment. The liberty was restored two years later in recognition of Geneville's service in Wales. It was confiscated again in 1302, but eventually, after a long struggle, he succeeded in maintaining his palatine rights. Geneville was fortunate in having the support of the king in his arguments with royal officials in Ireland. 
Geoffrey de Geneville was an experienced diplomat: he took part in negotiations with the Welsh prince Llywelyn ap Gruffudd (died 1282) in 1267, and in 1280 he acted as Edward's proctor in Paris. In 1290 and 1300 he went on missions to the papal curia, and in 1298 and 1299 took part in Anglo-French peace negotiations. His major role in domestic politics came in 1297, when he supported the king in the crisis caused by royal demands for men and money for the French war. Edward summoned troops to London, and demanded that Roger (IV) Bigod, earl of Norfolk (died 1306), and Humphrey (VI) de Bohun, earl of Hereford (died 1298), enrol them, in their capacities as marshal and constable. This the earls refused to do, so the king replaced them in their offices with Geneville and Thomas de Berkeley respectively. Geoffrey's appointment was appropriate, as he had been assistant to the marshal in the Welsh war of 1282. Once the crisis was over, the office reverted to the earl of Norfolk. Between February 1299 and November 1306 Geneville received a number of personal summonses to parliaments. 
Geoffrey de Geneville outlived his wife, who died on 11 April 1304, and their two sons, Geoffrey and Peter, and died on 21 October 1314, far from his native Champagne and advanced in years, at the Dominican priory of Trim, to which he had retired in 1308, and where he was to be buried. His heir, his granddaughter Joan, married Roger Mortimer, earl of March (died 1330), lover of Queen Isabella. 
Michael Prestwich', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37449


George V (1819-1878), king of Hanover, was born George Frederick Alexander Charles Ernest Augustus in Berlin on 27 May 1819, and was thus three days younger than his cousin, Queen Victoria. He was the only child of Ernest Augustus (fifth son of George III), first duke of Cumberland and Teviotdale (1771-1851), and his wife, Friederike Caroline Sophia Alexandrina of Solms-Braunfels (1778-1841). Ernest Augustus succeeded his brother, William IV, as King Ernst August of Hanover in 1837. Most of Prince George's boyhood was spent at Kew where, in March 1833, he lost the sight of both eyes after an unexplained accident. On 18 February 1843 he married Princess Mary Alexandrina (Marie) (1818-1907), daughter of Joseph, duke of Saxe-Altenburg. They had a son, Ernest Augustus William Adolphus George Frederick (1845-1923), and two daughters, of whom the elder, Frederica, later supported her father's campaign for the restoration of Hanover following its annexation by Prussia. Prince George acceded to the throne of Hanover upon his father's death, on 18 November 1851, whereupon he also became second duke of Cumberland and Teviotdale in the British peerage. 
Bismarck, received in audience two years later, left a vivid, pitiless account in his memoirs of the blind king's handling of government business, without a minister in attendance, in a study 'littered with every imaginable kind of public and private papers'. In 1866 loyalty to the German confederation made George V side with Austria and oppose Prussia in the contest for German primacy. He was present when his troops repelled the Prussians at Langensalza but, within a few days, his kingdom was overrun and he escaped to Austria. From Hietzing he protested in vain at Prussia's annexation of Hanover and the sequestration of his estates. He never abdicated. 
The king's last years were spent in Paris, the tedium of exile relieved by the pleasures of music; he died there suddenly on 12 June 1878, after a drive through the Bois de Boulogne. He was survived by his wife, who died on 9 January 1907 at Gmunden, Austria. To avoid political embarrassment Queen Victoria had discouraged her cousin from settling in England but, as a prince of Great Britain, he was buried at St George's Chapel, Windsor, where his Garter banner had hung since 1835. His son, Ernest Augustus, resumed the title of duke of Cumberland and Teviotdale, as third duke; but as an officer in the Austrian army he was considered to have borne arms against the United Kingdom during the First World War, and lost his peerage in 1919 under the terms of the 'Titles Deprivation Act' (1917). 
Alan Palmer', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37450


George, Walter Goodall (1858-1943), athlete, was born on 9 September 1858 at the Market Place, Calne, Wiltshire, the second of the seven children of Frederick Benjamin George, chemist and druggist, of Calne, Wiltshire, and his wife, Elizabeth Smith. In 1874, aged fifteen, George became 'apprenticed to chemistry' at the Worcestershire sauce firm of Lea and Perrins, where he was often obliged to work a fourteen-hour day. He grew up to a lithe 5 feet 111/4 inches and 101/2 stone. His earliest sporting interests were as a co-founder of the Worcester Rugby Football Club and as a penny-farthing cyclist in 1876. In 1878 he became the joint winner in Birmingham of a handicap walking race over 1 mile with a 45 yard handicap. 
At this time the fastest anyone had yet covered the English mile distance had been set by the Welsh professional runner William Richards, at 4 min. 171/4 sec. in Manchester on 19 August 1865. On 1 June 1878 the nineteen-year-old George wrote down his thoughts on how some 10 yards a lap (5.7 seconds of the total time) could be knocked off the then world standard. He proclaimed his plan to much mirth. The deed, he said, could be done with laps of 59, 63, 66, and 64 seconds. Remarkably, more than seven years later he ran laps of 581/2, 631/2, 653/4, and 66 seconds at Lillie Bridge, London, on 23 August 1886 to establish a world's best time of 4 min. 123/4 sec., which was unbeaten anywhere for the next twenty-eight seasons and was unbeaten by a Briton for forty-nine years, until Sydney Wooderson returned 4 min. 12.7 seconds, running in Glasgow on 3 August 1935. 
George won the English championship for the mile and the 4 miles in 1879 and the same distances at the inaugural Amateur Athletic Association (AAA) championships at the Lillie Bridge grounds, West Brompton, London, which were open to the world in the following year. In 1882 at Stoke-on-Trent and in 1884 at Aston, Birmingham, he performed the feat of taking the 1/2 mile, 1 mile, 4 mile, and 10 mile championships. His dominance was such that few dared challenge him. In 1882 his 4 mile title was a walkover, and in both his 1/2 mile and 10 mile triumphs in 1884 there was only one other finisher. 
George was a moderate smoker and his favourite meal before a race was a glass of beer and a hunk of bread and cheese. He was, however, often racked by asthma and suffered much from hay fever. He became unbeatable over the middle distances in an era before training became scientific. One of his training runs over a mile was timed at 4 min. 9.8 sec. but the absence of opposition and official timekeepers rendered the mark unofficial. He won more than 1000 cups and prizes as an amateur, setting records ranging from 1000 yards (in 2 min. 18 sec.) to 12 miles. Additionally he won the English national cross-country title in 1882, 1883, and 1884 in the colours of Moreley Harriers. 
George resigned from the harriers and turned professional in 1886. He was thus able to confront over a mile the leading pedestrian of the Victorian age -- William Jeffrey Cummings (1858-1919) of Paisley, Renfrewshire. The police, who were overwhelmed, estimated that 30,000 people converged on the red-brick dust track at Lillie Bridge, West Brompton, London, to bet on the outcome of the gladiatorial duel between George and Cummings. Only after he finished in his world's best time of 4 min. 123/4 sec. did George learn that the tenacious Scot had collapsed 60 yards from the tape and had fallen on the grass infield. Because he recorded this time as a professional, it was not recognized by the governing bodies of the sport. George made five journeys to the United States, both as an amateur and as a professional, and proved himself to be the world's greatest middle-distance runner, so starting a British tradition which was continued by Wooderson, Roger Bannister, Derek Ibbotson, Steve Ovett, Sebastian Coe, and Steve Cram. George also pioneered the '100-up' athletic training exercise, on which he published a short book in 1913. 
At St Nicholas's Church, Worcester, on 11 October 1887, George married Ada Annie, younger daughter of George Grainger, the proprietor of the Royal Worcester porcelain works. In the early inter-war years he worked as a park-keeper and groundsman in south London. He received some financial support during hard times from sports journalists. The senior officials of the AAA revered his achievements, but felt inhibited by the strict amateur code of the day from offering more formal and practical recognition to one who had joined the ranks of the professionals. Only his local club, Mitcham athletics club, afforded him true celebrity status. George died at the age of eighty-four, at his home, 21 Frimley Gardens, Mitcham, Surrey, on 4 June 1943, with Ada George, his wife of fifty-five years, by his side. They had one daughter and a son, Walter Gordon, who was shot dead in an industrial fracas in San Francisco in March 1932. 


@@@@@


doc= 37451


Gibbons, (Edward) Stanley (1840-1913), postage stamp dealer, was born on 21 June 1840 in Plymouth, the youngest child in the family of three sons and two daughters of William Gibbons (died 1867), pharmaceutical chemist, and his wife, Elizabeth Langridge, of Portsea, Hampshire. He left Hallorans' Collegiate Establishment, Plymouth, at the age of fifteen to become a junior clerk in the Naval Bank. On the death of his eldest brother only a few weeks later, he was apprenticed to his father as a chemist. 
Already interested in the new hobby of stamp collecting, he started to trade in stamps in 1856 from a desk in his father's shop. He began trading as E. S. Gibbons, then as E. Stanley Gibbons, and later as Stanley Gibbons & Co. A lucky deal in 1863 caused his business to take off: he bought two sacks of Cape of Good Hope triangular stamps for $5 from two sailors who had won them in a raffle in Cape Town. He later claimed to have made $500 on the deal. In November 1865 he issued a sixteen-page price list and catalogue, the forerunner of Gibbons's catalogues. 
On his father's death in 1867 Gibbons took over the chemist's business, and in the 1871 census he was described as 'chemist and dealer in foreign stamps'. He sold the chemist's business in 1872 and moved to new premises at Plymouth Hoe. Here he published his first Gibbons 'V.R.' stamp album, followed by the 'Improved' and illustrated 'Imperial' albums. 
In 1874 Gibbons moved to London, first to Clapham Common, and then in 1876 to 8 Gower Street. He started a monthly magazine, the 'Philatelic Record', which was superseded by the 'Monthly Journal' in 1890. 
At the age of fifty, in 1890, Gibbons retired and sold his business to Charles J. Phillips of Birmingham for $25,000. It became a private limited company, continuing as Stanley Gibbons Ltd, and he remained chairman until his death. The firm first moved to the Strand in 1891. In his retirement Gibbons travelled all over the world, visiting San Francisco, Egypt, Japan, Cochin, and the Hanoi exhibition, witnessing the crash of the Orient Express at Tirnova in Bulgaria in 1894. 
Gibbons was married five times. His first wife, whom he married in 1872, was Matilda Woon, daughter of a Congregational minister. She died in 1877. He married his second wife, Maggie A. Casey, daughter of a Twickenham publican, in 1887. She died in 1899 and he then married a woman called Georgina, who appears to have died in 1905. His fourth wife, whom he married in 1905, was a widow, Mrs Bertha Barth of Chelsea, daughter of Edwin Boswith, a railway clerk. She died during a visit to Ceylon in 1908. His final marriage, in 1909, was to a widow, Mrs Sophia Crofts, of Kensington, daughter of a wine merchant. Stanley Gibbons died at his home, 4L Portman Mansions, Marylebone, London, on 17 February 1913. He had no children. 
G. E. Dixon', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37452


Gibbs, Antony (1756-1815), merchant, was born at the family home in the cathedral close in Exeter and baptized on 3 March 1756 at Mint Presbyterian Meeting-House, Exeter, the sixth in the family of five sons and six daughters of George Abraham Gibbs ('c'.1724-1794), surgeon at the Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital, and his wife, Anne Vicary; an elder son, Sir Vicary Gibbs, became chief justice of common pleas. 
Gibbs went to Exeter grammar school. He was then apprenticed for five years to a Mr Brook of Exeter, a merchant in the Spanish trade. His first trading venture was in 1788 as a woollen exporter, principally to Spain and Italy; he was also briefly involved with a woollen-cloth factory near Exeter. On 3 October 1784 he married Dorothea Barnetta (1760-1820), the youngest daughter of William Hucks, a Yorkshire wine merchant; they had seven children, two of whom died in infancy. In 1787-9, in circumstances that are unclear, he got into financial difficulties, losing not only his own money but some of his family's: it became a matter of pride to make good those losses. 
The first step in Gibbs's financial recovery involved setting up an agency business in Madrid to serve English and other textile manufacturers. In August 1789 he took ship with his wife and children to Corunna, thence overland to Madrid. His family found the hot summers unbearable and in 1792 they returned, in poor health. Early in 1793 Gibbs suffered a terrible accident when the carriage he was travelling in from Madrid to Seville went out of control -- he fell from it, and was run over by one of the wheels. Later, he joined a partnership in Malaga to sell Spanish produce in England. When Spain declared war in 1796, Gibbs faced another financial crisis; but he was eventually able to use Lisbon as an illicit (and profitable) means of entry to the Spanish market for English woollens. When peace came in 1801, he was able to set up a profitable business in Cadiz. However, the outbreak of war again in 1805 forced him to close in Cadiz, and once more he had to struggle to survive. A key to the realization of his assets in Spain was a perilous shipment to Peru; the success of at least the outward journey meant financial relief, but it was not until the war with Spain ended in 1808 that Gibbs's difficulties really began to abate. The reopening of the Cadiz house, and the opening of a London house in partnership with his eldest son, (George) Henry Gibbs (1785-1842), under the style Antony Gibbs & Son, marked the beginning of a period of real prosperity. Debts were paid and a profitable trade to and from the south of Spain energetically fostered. He moved his family from Great Russell Street to Denmark Hill in 1809, to Dulwich Common in 1810, and in 1812 brought them back to a house in Powis Place, where they remained until his death. 
The siege of Cadiz by the French between 1810 and 1812 led to the closure of the Cadiz house; but when the siege was abandoned trade and profits rapidly regained their former levels. In 1813 his second son, William Gibbs -- later the developer of Tyntesfield, near Bristol -- was taken into partnership, and the London house became Antony Gibbs & Sons. 
By 1814 Gibbs was suffering not only from his earlier carriage accident but also from severe loss of memory. Shortly after returning from a visit to Redland, he suffered a stroke on 5 December 1815; he died five days later at his house, 2 Powis Place, Great Ormond Street, London. In his will he left everything to his wife, so that her income and assets depended on the firm's prosperity. It was the trading contacts that he had established in Spain which enabled his firm, after his death, to exploit so efficiently the opportunities afforded in South America after its liberation from Spanish control. 


@@@@@


doc= 37453


Gibson, Reginald Oswald (1902-1983), chemist, was born on 30 September 1902 in Dulwich, London, the only child of Samuel Gibson, civil servant, and his wife, Ethel Crowther. From Wilson's Grammar School in Camberwell he won a scholarship to St Dunstan's College, and from there in 1921 he entered the honours school of chemistry at University College, London. He obtained a first-class BSc degree and in 1925 took a junior research post at Leiden University. In the autumn of the following year he joined Brunner Mond & Co. as a research chemist at Winnington in Cheshire, and at about that time acquired his nickname, Hoot. (Hoot Gibson was a character in the Wild West films of the 1920s.) 
In 1927 Gibson introduced his friend and research collaborator, Anton Michels of the University of Amsterdam, to his colleagues in what was by then ICI. This led to Gibson's being seconded in 1928 to work with Michels on the properties of gases at high pressures, and to ICI's becoming interested in the chemical effects of high pressures; this became the theme of Gibson's work on his return to Winnington in 1931. 
Gibson was joined in this research by Eric William Fawcett (1908-1987). On Friday 24 March 1933 they set up an experiment in which ethylene and benzaldehyde were pressurized to 1900 atmospheres at 170 degree C in the hope that they would combine together. They did not, but when the apparatus was dismantled on the Monday Fawcett noticed that the tip of a steel tube was coated with a waxy substance. This small deposit, less than half a gram, was the first solid polymer of ethylene ever made -- polythene. However, Gibson and Fawcett's apparatus was primitive and the reaction could not be controlled. It was another two years before a different team took up the work again. Polythene finally went into production in 1939, and immediately played a crucial role, enabling radar equipment to be deployed effectively in the battle of Britain. In 1937 Gibson married Lesley Shena, daughter of William George Randles, barrister. They had a daughter and two sons. 
During the Second World War, Gibson was in charge of process work at an ICI factory making anti-knock additives for aviation fuel. After the war this activity was transferred to the Associated Ethyl Company, and in 1948 Gibson left ICI to become that company's chief chemist. The post-war years saw an enormous expansion of the business, and Gibson became research and development manager with a team of some 150 staff. A long illness caused him to relinquish his management role, but he returned to work as scientific adviser until his retirement in 1963. 
Gibson was a patient and thorough man. All his work was carefully thought out and executed with minute attention to detail. In addition to his research career he played a full part in local and professional affairs, holding office in the United Nations Association, the Chester Sailing Club, and the Royal Institute of Chemistry (RIC). His chairman's address to the institute's north-west section on the discovery of polythene became no. 1 in the RIC lecture series (1964). The highlight of Gibson's final year was the polyethylenes 1933-83 golden jubilee conference in London in June. He died the following month, at the Royal Naval Hospital, Plymouth, on 22 July 1983. 
A. H. Willbourn', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37454


Giesecke, Charles Lewis (1761-1833), mineralogist and mineral dealer, was born on 6 April 1761 in Augsburg, Bavaria, the eldest surviving son of the six children of Georg Melchior Metzler (died 1805), a protestant tailor, and his wife, Sibylla Magdalena Gotz (1735-1794). Originally intended for the church, he studied at Gottingen from 1781 to 1783, but there his interests shifted to the law and to mineralogy, which science he pursued under Johann Friedrich Blumenbach (1752-1840). As a young man he had strong theatrical interests, writing plays and librettos, and himself performing. In 1781 he for some reason changed his name to Karl Ludwig Giesecke, and as such edited the 'Regensburger Theater-Journal' between 1784 and 1786. 
During the 1780s Giesecke resided in various south German towns and late in that decade he became established in Vienna, where he was associated with the theatre company of Emanuel Johann Schikaneder (1751-1812). For the company he prepared translations of foreign works, and he wrote the libretto for 'Oberon der Elfenkonig', staged in Vienna in 1790 with a musical score by Paul Wranitsky (1756-1808). In 1791 he took a minor role in 'Die Zauberflote' ('The Magic Flute'), and he evidently co-operated with Schikaneder and others in the writing of that opera's libretto. It has been reported that in 1817 he laid verbal claim to authorship of the entire libretto, but this was probably either braggadocio on Giesecke's part or else the false recollection of a conversation on the part of his auditor. In Vienna he, like Mozart, was an enthusiastic freemason. 
The final decade of the eighteenth century saw Giesecke turn increasingly away from the stage and towards mineralogy. In 1801 he studied the science in Berlin and at Freiberg, he collected minerals widely in northern Europe, and he established a reputation as a mineral dealer and tutor in mineralogy. He collected in the Faeroes during August and September 1805, and in the following year the Danish government commissioned him to collect in Greenland. There he remained from May 1806 until the late summer of 1813. During his absence from Copenhagen his possessions there were destroyed in a fire following upon the British naval bombardment of September 1807. 
Giesecke was a pioneer of the scientific study of Greenland, where he collected minerals, organic specimens, and ethnographical items. A Danish ship carrying some of the earliest of his Greenland materials became a British prize-of-war. She was taken into Leith, where his collection was sold in 1808, many of his specimens passing into the hands of the Scottish mineralogist Thomas Allan. In October 1813 Giesecke himself arrived in Leith. There he was befriended by Allan, and his portrait was painted by Henry Raeburn. He became a candidate for the vacant chair of mineralogy at the Dublin Society, and with Allan's help was elected, on 21 January 1814; he remained its occupant until the end of his life. 
Giesecke's election is surprising. He confessed that, as yet, he lacked the ability to lecture in English, and in Robert Bakewell and Thomas Weaver the society would seem to have had two somewhat better qualified candidates. The appointment smacks of partiality, and suggests the possibility that he may here have secured Irish benefit from his earlier association with Viennese freemasonry. Alternatively, it has been suggested that the society had purchased some of Giesecke's minerals at the Leith sale and was now anxious to offer him some redress for his lost collections. 
Giesecke's relationship with the Dublin Society (it assumed the style Royal in June 1820) speedily became most cordial. In May 1817 the society presented him with a gold medal by William Stephen Mossop; that same year the society received the gift of his Raeburn portrait (a painting still in its possession); and Giesecke was allowed to spend the period from July 1817 until the autumn of 1819 travelling in Europe, among the fruits of which excursion was a mineral collection which he sent to Goethe in May 1819. His duties with the society were threefold. He delivered courses of lectures in mineralogy; he was responsible for its important mineral collection; and he conducted mineralogical surveys on its behalf. He investigated counties Galway and Mayo (1825), Donegal (1826), Antrim, Down, and Londonderry (1828), and Londonderry and Tyrone (1829). His projected book on Greenland was never completed. During 1816 he became a knight of the Danish order of Dannebrog, and henceforth he was always known as Sir Charles Giesecke. The mineral gieseckite was so named in his honour in 1817. He was elected a member of the Royal Irish Academy in 1816 and a fellow of the Geological Society of London in 1817, and was among the founders of the Zoological Society of Dublin in 1830 and of the Geological Society of Dublin in 1831. He died suddenly at Rutland Square West, Dublin, unmarried, on 5 March 1833, and was buried in St George's churchyard, Dublin. The Royal Dublin Society's museum was closed for two weeks in token of the esteem in which he was held. 


@@@@@


doc= 37455


Rothbury, Gilbert (b. in or before 1260, d. 1321), administrator and justice, makes his first appearance in surviving records in 1281. The context suggests that he must already by then have been of age and so was born in or before 1260. He probably came from Rothbury in Northumberland, and the Hugh of Rothbury who was a clerk of the common bench justice William of Brompton in the 1280s may have been his brother. The provisions made by Rothbury's executors to establish loan chests at the universities of Oxford and Cambridge after his death suggest that he may have received some sort of university education. 
During the 1280s Rothbury was probably one of the clerks serving the justices of the 'northern' eyre circuit. It is in 1290, however, that he first comes into prominence, with his appointment to the responsible post of clerk of the king's council. At the same time he also became the first known clerk of parliament, and thus was responsible for beginning the compilation of the rolls of parliament. Only a much less comprehensive record had hitherto been kept of business done in parliament. Rothbury was probably not himself responsible for the change, merely the executor of a policy determined by others. 
Rothbury ceased to be clerk of the council when he was appointed a justice of the court of king's bench in 1295, but he remained clerk of parliament until at least 1307 and perhaps as late as 1314. The few surviving reports of cases heard in king's bench during the period he was a justice (1295-1316) do not suggest that he made a major contribution to the work of the court. His senior colleague, Roger Brabazon (died 1317), evidently had the sharper legal mind. In 1316 Rothbury was transferred to the common bench, of which he remained a junior justice until the time of his death. Again there is little evidence to suggest that he made a significant contribution to the work of the court. 
In 1297 an Irish attorney acting for the abbot of Mellifont in a case before king's bench suggested to the abbot that he would be guaranteed success in his litigation if he paid Rothbury a bribe of 20 marks through the attorney. This appears simply to have been a trick on the part of the attorney, and not evidence that Rothbury was known to have been corrupt. Surprisingly for a royal justice of this period, there is no evidence of Rothbury's accumulating lands or other property, although he did come to hold a number of benefices, and in 1306 and 1307 received papal dispensation to do so. He died in 1321, at some time between early February (the end of Hilary term) and 4 May (the beginning of Easter term). 
Paul Brand', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37456


Gilchrist, Percy Carlyle (1851-1935), metallurgist, was born in Lyme Regis on 27 December 1851, the elder son (there were also two daughters) of Alexander Gilchrist (1828-1861), barrister and writer, and his wife, Anne Gilchrist, nee Burrows (1828-1885), biographer and essayist, daughter of John Parker Burrows, solicitor. His boyhood was first spent in Guildford and then, from 1856 to 1862, in Chelsea, in the house next door to Thomas and Jane Carlyle, who became close friends. Despite his literary and artistic upbringing Percy Gilchrist embarked upon a scientific career. Unlike his cousin, Alexander's nephew Sidney Gilchrist Thomas (1850-1885), with whom he was to collaborate, Gilchrist received a complete education, first at Felsted School, and then at the Royal School of Mines (1868-71), where he trained as a metallurgist and analytical chemist and was Murchison medallist in July 1870. He subsequently gained membership of the institutes of civil and mechanical engineers. His first post was that of analytical chemist at an ironworks at Cwmafan in Glamorgan. In 1876 he took a similar position at the Blaenafon ironworks in Monmouthshire under the management of Edward Martin. 
In 1875 Thomas hit upon a way of removing phosphorus from iron ores in the process developed by Henry Bessemer for the manufacture of steel. To test his idea, Thomas persuaded Gilchrist to carry out experiments during his leisure hours at the Blaenafon works. On learning their secret, Martin agreed to pay for further development and the cost of the patents taken out on the dephosphorization process in 1877 and 1878. On publication of the process in 1879 Gilchrist moved to Middlesbrough to help perfect the dolomite (magnesium limestone) liner for the converter in the works of Bolckow, Vaughan & Co. In 1881 Gilchrist and Thomas developed their own steelworks, North Eastern Steel Company, at Middlesbrough. When this was sold to Dorman, Long & Co. in 1903 Gilchrist retired from active work in metallurgy. Between 1882 and 1894 he was also chairman of the Basic and Dephosphorizing Patents Company, which was set up to safeguard the many patentees with interests in the dephosphorization process and the agricultural disposal of the phosphorus-rich basic slag. 
Gilchrist was elected FRS in 1891. He was a vice-president of the Iron and Steel Institute (1891), a member of the Society of Chemical Industry, a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts, and a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur. In 1887 he married Norah Augusta Mara, the second daughter of Captain Lewis Roper Fitzmaurice RN. They had a son and daughter. Although when awarded the Bessemer medal in 1883 Thomas acknowledged Gilchrist's 'unwearied exertions, conspicuous energy and ability', Gilchrist was always overshadowed by his romantic, inventive cousin, his vivacious mother, and his talented brother, the painter Herbert Harlakenden Gilchrist. In later life he was an invalid. 
Gilchrist died at his home, The Grove, Pinner, Middlesex, on 15 December 1935, having survived his cousin by fifty years. His wife outlived him. 
W. H. Brock', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37457


Gilman, Harold John Wilde (1876-1919), painter, was born on 11 February 1876 in Rode, Somerset, the second son of the seven children of John Gilman (1840-1917), curate of Rode, and his wife, Emily Purcell Gulliver (1850-1940). In 1890 the Revd John Gilman secured the livings of Snargate with Snave in Romney Marsh, Kent, and his son was enrolled as a boarder at Tonbridge School, where a year later he injured his hip in a heavy fall. Confined to bed for nearly two years and on crutches for a third, Gilman was educated privately, read a great deal, and began to sketch. In October 1894 he matriculated as a non-collegiate student at the University of Oxford but after one term left to take up a post as tutor to the children of an English family in Odessa. He enrolled in 1896 at the Hastings School of Art in Sussex, moving on to the Slade School of Fine Art in London in 1897, where he studied until 1901. His long training as an artist culminated in a visit to Spain from 1901 until 1903, where he copied paintings by Velazquez and Goya in Madrid's Museo del Prado. In the Prado in 1901 he met Grace Cornelia Canedy ('c'.1864- 'c'.1957), daughter of a wealthy Chicago industrialist and some twelve years his senior, who was also on a pilgrimage to copy Velazquez. They married on 2 February 1902 in the garden of the United States consulate in Toledo, Spain. Grace was about forty when their first child, Elizabeth, was born (19 January 1904) in England. The couple had three more children over the next five years. 
The murals painted by Gilman in a Canadian government building in Ottawa in 1904 before he joined his wife in Chicago, where their daughter Hannah was born (4 February 1905), are lost, and few paintings of this early period have been traced. However, the influence of Velazquez is apparent in the cool silvery harmonies, fluent liquid brushwork, and sensitive grasp of tonal values of his earliest extant paintings ('c'.1905-1908). His subjects -- at this period repeated studies of his wife and their young family in domestic settings -- were found closer to hand. From the outset he revealed an impressive mastery of formal compositional structure. 
In February 1907 Gilman met Walter Sickert. Together with his Slade contemporary Spencer Gore, he became a founder member of the group which, under the formula 'Mr Sickert at home', rented premises at 19 Fitzroy Street in London to discuss, exhibit, and sell their work to discriminating patrons. In 1908, 1909, 1910, and 1912 he exhibited at the non-jury Salon des Independants in Paris, and from 1908 at its newly formed London counterpart, the Allied Artists Association. Meanwhile, the Fitzroy Street group expanded to incorporate Lucien Pissarro, Robert Bevan, and Charles Ginner. For Gilman, who in 1908 had moved from his parents' home in Romney Marsh to the new garden city of Letchworth, Hertfordshire, the opportunity Fitzroy Street afforded to develop his art and his ideas in collaboration with like-minded metropolitan colleagues was crucial. After 1909, when Grace Gilman, debilitated by childbirth and anaemia, took their three surviving children to Chicago and was subsequently unable to return, Gilman spent more time in London. 
Between 1910 and 1914 Gilman transformed his execution. Within Fitzroy Street, the example of Gore and Pissarro had first persuaded him to adopt a crusty, broken touch and fuller, richer colour. Then, prompted by the overwhelming selection of key works by Gauguin, Cezanne, and Van Gogh included in the exhibition 'Manet and the post-impressionists' masterminded by Roger Fry at the end of 1910, Gilman undertook a more radical overhaul of his style and technique. His passion for French post-impressionism, and above all for Van Gogh, was consolidated on a visit to Paris in the company of Ginner in 1911. On summer visits to Sweden (1912) and Norway (1913) he experimented with vivid colour, forcefully applied, sometimes in striated slashed strokes, sometimes in thickly encrusted broken touches, and sometimes in a patchwork of flat, simplified areas of paint. However daring his execution, he never lost control of the compositional structure of the land and townscape. A prime example is 'The Canal Bridge, Flekkefjord' (1913, Tate collection), the first of his paintings to enter a British public collection (in 1922). 
Throughout this period Gilman pursued the politics of the art world with single-minded passion. While Sickert was the actor-manager and Gore the mediator, Gilman, with his more truculent personality, was the driving force behind the creation in 1911 of the Camden Town Group and in 1913 of the London Group (of which he was first president). Sickert's portrait of about 1912 (Tate collection) captures his fiercely uncompromising character. His didactic temperament also found expression in his teaching, from 1912 to 1915 at the Westminster Technical Institute (where he took over Sickert's evening classes until the latter abruptly reclaimed his post) and in 1916-17, with Ginner, at a private school they established in Soho. 
While Gilman had appropriated the vocabulary of subjects developed in Fitzroy Street under Sickert's leadership -- dingy bed-sitters, shabby London streets, and nudes on metal bedsteads -- he rejected the dinginess of Sickert's palette. Instead he preached the gospel of pure, clean colour applied with no dilutant. He also brought a warmer humanity to his treatment of Sickertian themes. This is well seen in the series of interiors painted from 1914 to 1917 at 47 Maple Street, his first permanent London address, where from 1916 he found the ideal sitter in his landlady, Mrs Mounter (versions include those in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, Tate collection and Leeds City Art Gallery). Because he painted from drawn studies rather than directly from nature, Mrs Mounter is also the subject of many intricately worked reed-pen-and-ink drawings (a technique he brilliantly adapted from Van Gogh's example). Gilman's paintings of women, whether nude or clothed and of whatever age and class, reveal a rare tenderness. In portraits of his first wife, their nursemaid, his mother in Snargate rectory, his friends such as Mrs Bevan, and his second wife nursing their child, he achieved a perfect harmony between subject and treatment. The respect and affection with which Gilman portrays Mrs Mounter is sustained by the loving laboriousness of his handling, whether in paintings constructed from infinite touches of undiluted paint or drawings defined in myriad dots and dashes of ink. 
In 1915 Gilman asked Grace for a divorce. He wished to marry his pupil at Westminster, (Dorothy) Sylvia Hardy, formerly Meyer (1892-1971), daughter of Arthur Reginald Hardy, company director. Their son was born in December 1917. On 20 April 1918, on learning that the interlocutory phase of the divorce had been accomplished in California, they married. Later that year Gilman visited Halifax, Nova Scotia, where he worked with unrelenting dedication, in all weathers, to fulfil a commission from the Canadian war records. His large painting, 'Halifax Harbour at Sunset' (1918), is now in the National Gallery of Canada, Ottawa. 
On 12 February 1919, a day after his forty-third birthday, Harold Gilman died in the French Hospital, Shaftesbury Avenue, London, a victim of the virulent post-war influenza epidemic. A memorial exhibition held that year at the Leicester Galleries was the first devoted to his work. Two earlier substantial shows at the Carfax Gallery in London had been shared, first with Gore (1913) and then with Ginner (1914). Ginner's catalogue introduction in 1914 had announced their credo as 'neo-realists', a term that encompassed the dedicated range of their art but not the resonant brilliance of Gilman's means of expression. 
In 1921 Sylvia married Leofric Gilman, Harold's brother. She lived to witness growing appreciation of her first husband's achievement. An Arts Council retrospective exhibition was held in 1954-5 and over the following years Gilman's work was acquired by major public galleries throughout the United Kingdom and the Commonwealth. 


@@@@@


doc= 37458


Gimson, Ernest William (1864-1919), craftsman and architect, was born in Leicester on 21 December 1864, the fourth child and second son in the family of three sons and four daughters of Josiah Gimson (1818-1883), iron-founder, engineer, and industrial entrepreneur, who established the Vulcan works in Leicester, and his second wife, Sarah Ansell (1828-1899). Josiah Gimson's father was a carpenter. From an early age Gimson's interest in buildings was obsessive; as a young man he was quoted as saying 'I am thinking of architecture all the time I am awake' (Lethaby, Powell, and Griggs, 2). 
After leaving Franklin's School, Stoneygate, Leicester, in 1881 Gimson was articled to a local architect, Isaac Barradale, and also attended Leicester School of Art, where he won national medals for suburban housing and for furniture design. His father was a leading freethinker, founder member and president of the Leicester Secular Society, and a Liberal member of the city council. Gimson's view of life -- which was always to be that of the 'idealist individualist' (Lethaby, Powell, and Griggs, 1) -- was formed more by the mood and the standards of that crowded, argumentative, intellectually zealous, middle-class, provincial household than by his formal education. 
In 1884 Gimson went to listen to William Morris lecturing to the Leicester Secular Society on 'Art and socialism'. Afterwards he met Morris, who suggested the way that he should go in combining his radical conscience with his practical abilities in making and designing. It was Morris who encouraged him to move to London, recommending him to J. D. Sedding, a 'freestyle' church architect himself involved in the practice of the crafts. 
Gimson was a deeply solitary man with a contradictory need for close male friendships. In the mid-1880s in Sedding's office, he joined the small convivial group of young Arts and Crafts architects, satellites around Morris and Philip Webb, becoming a member of such early architectural action groups as the Art-Workers' Guild and the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings. 
In 1890 Ernest Gimson was prime mover in establishing an individualistic London decorating firm, a brotherhood of architects designing and supervising the making of their furniture by cabinet-makers. The other members were W. R. Lethaby, Sidney Barnsley, Mervyn Macartney, Reginald Blomfield, and a less active partner, Colonel Mallet, each contributing $100 of capital. This short-lived but enthusiastic enterprise was called Kenton & Co., after a neighbouring street in Bloomsbury, and was obviously modelled on Morris's own firm. 
Gimson subscribed to the arts and crafts principle that ''doing' is Designing' (Lethaby, Powell, and Griggs, 4). He was fascinated by the practicalities of a new approach to traditional crafts. Before Kenton & Co. opened he had travelled to Bosbury in Herefordshire to learn the craft of turned rush-seated chair making from an old man, Philip Clissett, who had been bodging chairs since 1838. His own versions of these, soon given their own generic title 'Gimson chairs', were still being made at the end of the twentieth century. 
Gimson also learned the techniques of moulded and modelled plasterwork from the London trade firm of Whitcombe and Priestley, having admired the plaster ceilings at such historic houses as Speke Hall, Lancashire, Haddon Hall, Derbyshire, and Chastleton, Oxfordshire. In the William Morris manner of reviving ancient crafts in a new creative spirit, Gimson's plasterwork drew on natural motifs -- pinks, roses, trailing strawberry plants. These images recur in his designs for embroidery made at the same time. As his furniture workshops expanded Gimson was less able to take part in actual processes of making: his chief role became that of director and designer. But plasterwork was the one craft he continued all his life. 
Ernest Gimson was a ruminative character, 'a thinker, an explorer, a teacher', as described by his colleague W. R. Lethaby (Lethaby, Powell, and Griggs, 9). Having private means as a young man he travelled widely in England and Italy, making closely observed Ruskinian architectural drawings, watching with dismay the despoliation of the countryside, and gradually evolving his singular philosophy of craftsmanship and the environment. 
In 1893 Gimson left London with Sidney Barnsley and went to live at Ewen in Gloucestershire. It was a move rich in symbolic overtones, true to Gimson's conviction that to do good work one must live near to nature in uncorrupted, incorruptible surroundings. Sidney's brother, the architect Ernest Barnsley, joined them with his family. In 1894 they all moved to Pinbury, a hamlet in a then remote and heavily wooded area five miles west of Cirencester. Here Gimson converted a stone farm building to make a cottage. 'The room was large, and the floor flagged with white stone... A large black dresser, hung with gay and well-used crockery, a large settle at the fireside, and oak armchair and other rush-bottom chairs made by himself on his pole lathe, were its furniture. (Lethaby, Powell, and Griggs, 18)' Gimson used one of the outbuildings of Pinbury Park as a workshop for plaster and ladder-back chair making. He and Ernest Barnsley entered into a partnership as furniture makers, starting to employ cabinet-makers of their own. 
In 1900 Gimson married Emily Ann Thompson (died 1940), an enthusiastic amateur sketcher, daughter of the vicar of Skipsea in the East Riding of Yorkshire. Two years later the Gimsons and the Barnsleys moved to Sapperton, barely a mile away from Pinbury, where Gimson built himself a large new cottage, high-roofed with straw thatch. They established workshops and a showroom at Daneway House, a rare example of a medieval Cotswold house, leased from Earl Bathurst. (In the mid-twentieth century Daneway was occupied by the modernist architect Oliver Hill.) Tensions arose between the three families. By 1905 the partnership between Gimson and Ernest Barnsley broke up in bitterness. Sidney Barnsley and Gimson were only able to continue their friendship outside their homes. But their work retained recognizable stylistic affinities: a clear respect for techniques and materials, a strong love of tradition, and a belief in the vernacular which had a considerable impact on both theory and practice of British twentieth-century industrial design. 
Gimson's furniture has long been regarded as his supreme achievement, the only relatively modern work to bear comparison with that of the great English cabinet-makers of the eighteenth century. It was highly perfectionist furniture, made by skilled craftsmen under Gimson's expert Dutch foreman, Peter van der Waals, using the minimum of machinery. Though Gimson so solemnly espoused the simple life much of his furniture was elaborate in concept and rich in its materials, using such timbers as ebony, rosewood, and English walnut with carved and inlaid detailing. 
Gimson's furniture was made to commission for wealthy and discriminating clients, notably Sir Ernest Debenham and C. H. St John Hornby, owner of W. H. Smith & Sons. Gimson's woodwork and metalwork -- the wrought-iron architectural fixtures, fire-irons, candlesticks and sconces made by his craftsmen in the blacksmiths' shop at Sapperton -- were commissioned for their buildings by other arts and crafts architects true to the ideal of the union of crafts. Prime examples are Gimson's ebony choir stalls in J. F. Bentley's Roman Catholic cathedral in Westminster and his massive timberwork at St Andrew's Church, Roker, designed by Edward Prior. 
Within and beyond his own lifetime Ernest Gimson was regarded primarily as a furniture designer. In 1936 Nikolaus Pevsner described him as 'The greatest of the English artist-craftsmen' ('Pioneers of the Modern Movement', 1936, 146). The originality and integrity of his few completed buildings had long been recognized, particularly his craggy stone-built cottages at Markfield near Leicester, buildings that themselves seem rooted in their landscape, and the magnificent timbered library at Bedales School, built posthumously. But for many decades Gimson's architecture was considered as an interesting sideline. Only in the 1990s did more concentrated study of the drawings for Gimson's architectural projects, less than half of which were realized, reveal the continuing centrality of his architecture in Gimson's creative life. His designs for the Port of London Authority headquarters and his masterplan for the new city of Canberra show great reserves of visionary energy. He was the most faithful of William Morris's followers and, besides two pairs of stone cottages at Kelmscott, was commissioned by May Morris to design her father's Memorial Hall, opened by Ramsay MacDonald in 1934. 
With his tall well-built frame, his broad and rather florid features, his heavy hobnail boots and country yeoman's tweeds, Gimson seemed the rural Englishman personified. Beneath his bluff exterior was an immense austerity and the will-power to demonstrate what he believed in. When he led the country dances in the village hall at Sapperton it was reported 'there were no idle feet' (Lethaby, Powell, and Griggs, 32). Gimson's verbal uncommunicativeness and his wife's 'de haut en bas' approach to village life worked against the achievement of his ambitions for a national resurgence of the crafts. He had bought land at Sapperton to set up a craft village, model for other villages to come. Plans had not developed far when Ernest Gimson died at his home of cancer on 12 August 1919. He was buried in Sapperton churchyard, under the yews. Peter van der Waals took over Gimson's workshop, continuing to make fine furniture which lacked the inspiration of his master's. Gimson's philosophical and practical influence on the twentieth-century craft workshop movement has been considerable particularly in the small furniture workshops which burgeoned from the 1970s. Collections of Gimson's furniture are in Cheltenham Art Gallery and Museum, Gloucestershire, Leicester City Museums, Belgrave Hall, and the Arts and Crafts Collection, Owlpen Manor, Uley, Gloucestershire. 


@@@@@


doc= 37459


Gleitze, Mercedes (1900-1981), swimmer, was born at 124 Freshfield Road, Brighton, on 18 November 1900, the youngest of three daughters (there were no sons) of Heinrich Gleitze, journeyman baker, and his wife, Anna Kurr, a language teacher. She spent her childhood partly in Brighton and partly with her grandparents in Herzogenaurach, Bavaria, and was educated in both countries, including two years at the Maria Stern Convent School, Nordlingen. In the early 1920s, while working as a bilingual secretary in Westminster, she spent her spare time training in the Thames to become a long-distance swimmer. In 1923 she set a British ladies' record for Thames swimming (10 hr 45 min.). In 1927 she swam the 120 miles from London to Folkestone in stages; and on 7 October 1927, at her eighth attempt, she became the first Englishwoman to swim the channel (from France to England in 15 hr 15 min.). In 1928 she became the first person ever to swim the Straits of Gibraltar (in 12 hr 50 min.). Between 1927 and 1932 she also swam the Wash, Lough Neagh, from Portstewart in Ulster to Moville in the Irish Free State, Loch Ryan, the Firth of Forth, around the Isle of Man (100 miles) in stages, the Hellespont (from Europe to Asia Minor), the Sea of Marmora, Wellington harbour, Galway Bay, and from Cape Town to Robben Island, both ways (the first person to complete the double), as well as many more swims in South Africa, New Zealand, and Australia. During these years she also held the British record for endurance swimming, extending it from 26 hr in January 1930 to 44 hr 30 min. by the end of the year, then to 45 hr in 1931, and finally to 46 hr in 1932. These swims were mainly in municipal baths, and she was supported by the community singing of the thousands of people who filed in to see her perform. She retired in 1932. 
Driven by an urge to alleviate poverty during the depression, Gleitze worked hard to secure sponsorship for her swims and in 1928 set up a trust fund to finance the Mercedes Gleitze homes for destitute men and women. She purchased a large eight-bedroomed house in Leicester, and had it converted into flats, which were then made available to homeless families. These homes were run under the caretakership of the Leicester Rotary club, which was involved in a scheme to move families from distressed areas in the north of England to Leicester; the Mercedes Gleitze homes provided temporary accommodation until employment and permanent lodgings could be found. The homes were used for this purpose from 1933 until the outbreak of war in 1939, when they were used by the Leicester Committee for Refugees from Czechoslovakia. Although her homes were destroyed by enemy action in November 1940, her charity is still active under the trusteeship of the Family Welfare Association. In keeping with the spirit of the founder's intention, its funds are targeted towards grants to alleviate need arising from homelessness -- the demand for such support being as great at the start of the twenty-first century as when she first set up the trust. 
On 9 August 1930, at St Paul's Roman Catholic Church, Dover, Mercedes Gleitze, whose occupation was recorded as professional swimmer, married Patrick Joseph Carey (1904-1983), originally of Dublin, a sheet metal engineer and later a technical representative, the son of Patrick Carey, also a sheet metal engineer. They had two daughters and a son. Gleitze died at Colindale Hospital, London, on 9 February 1981, and was cremated three days later at Hendon crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 37460


Glen, William (1778-1849), missionary and biblical translator, was born in Lochwinnoch, Renfrewshire, on 30 January 1778, the son of William Glen, tailor. He matriculated at Glasgow University in 1797 but left without a degree and studied at the theological college of the Associate Synod in Selkirk, under George Lawson. He was ordained minister of a newly formed congregation of Burgher seceders in Annan, Dumfriesshire, on 15 April 1807. 
On 28 September 1810 Glen married Margaret Scott of Annan; they had five sons, the eldest two being twins. Glen and his wife provided lodgings in their house for Thomas Carlyle, then mathematics master at his old school, Annan Academy. Carlyle praised Glen in his 'Reminiscences' (1881) as 'a most pure and excellent man, of correct superior intellect, and of much modest piety and amiability', and described his wife as 'a handsome, brave, and cheery-hearted woman'. 
Glen resigned from Annan in November 1816; his discouragement was partly caused by the friction created in trying to raise sufficient funds to carry on the work of the congregation. He offered his services to the Edinburgh Missionary Society as an overseas candidate, thus fulfilling a youthful ambition. After training, Glen, accompanied by his wife, went as a missionary to Astrakhan in southern Russia, where he remained for five years. He achieved little in the way of conversion but was more successful in his efforts to master the Persian, Arabic, and Turkish languages. About 1823 he began what was to be his principal life's work, the translation of the 'Old Testament' from Hebrew into Persian. He began with 'Psalms' and 'Proverbs', his translations being published separately by the British and Foreign Bible Society. By the time he returned to Scotland in 1834 his reputation as a Persian scholar was already established. 
Glen continued working on his translation in Scotland until 1837, when he was sent to Persia, by the synod of the United Secession church, to complete his labours. He lived in Tabriz and Tehran; in 1843 he returned to Scotland, taking his completed manuscript with him. It was printed by Thomas Constable of Edinburgh and published in 1845, the cost met by the mission board of the United Secession church, aided by a grant of $500 from the British and Foreign Bible Society. In 1845 he was awarded the degree of DD by the University of St Andrews. 
Glen volunteered to supervise the distribution of his work in Persia and to circulate with it a new edition of the Persian translation of the 'New Testament' by Henry Martyn. Glen and his son Andrew sailed for Persia by way of Constantinople in 1847. In January 1848 they were received by the shah, who was presented with copies of the 'Old' and 'New' testaments and a translation of 'Sketch of the Evidence from Prophecy' (1823) by Alexander Keith. After a short illness Glen died of dysentery in Tehran on 12 January 1849 and was buried there in the Armenian cemetery. 
Grayson Carter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37461


Gloag, William Murray (1865-1934), jurist, was born at 27 India Street, Edinburgh, on 15 March 1865, the eldest in the family of one son and three daughters of William Ellis Gloag, Lord Kincairney (1828-1909), judge, and his wife, Helen Stark, daughter of James Burn, writer to the signet, Edinburgh. He was educated at Edinburgh Academy and Balliol College, Oxford, where he obtained a first class in modern history in 1887. He attended law classes at Edinburgh University and became an advocate in 1889. Success as a pleader eluded him and, like many counsel in that position, Gloag became a law reporter. With J. M. Irvine he published 'Law of Rights in Security Heritable and Moveable Including Cautionary Obligations' (1897) and the future direction of his career was set. Two years later Gloag became assistant in Scots law at Edinburgh University and in February 1905 he was appointed regius professor of law at Glasgow University. Gloag moved to Glasgow, where, with an unmarried sister, he set up home in the university. In 1909 he was made a KC. 
A dedicated scholar, Gloag was an inspired teacher, even for students attending lectures at 8 a.m. He spoke without notes and sprinkled his trenchant remarks with a dry wit which some claim to glimpse in 'Carmina legis, or, Verses Illustrative of the Law of Scotland' (1920). Though reserved, he was popular with his students. To the best among them he offered opulent breakfasts that ended with stronger drink than coffee. He was a founder of the student law society. During term Gloag's life centred on the university. He acted as dean of the law faculty and served on the court. Outside the university, in July 1915 he became a chairman of the Glasgow munitions tribunal, but he proved ill suited to handling its rowdy proceedings and was dismissed the following year. Spells as a subcommissioner under the national service scheme and as assessor to the Glasgow dean of guild court (from 1926) were successful. His leisure was spent at the Western Club and, on Saturday afternoons, at Prestwick Golf Club. Vacations found him at his estate at Murthly, Perthshire, or, after its sale in 1921, on Speyside and in St Andrews. Gloag was an assiduous golfer and bridge player. He achieved a hole in one at Troon in 1907. 
In 1914 Gloag published 'The Law of Contract' (2nd edn, 1929), the principal Scottish monograph on the subject and his lasting memorial. He assembled, organized, and analysed a mass of authorities, both Scottish and English. The resulting exposition is so authoritative that practitioners and the courts departed from it only rarely unless subsequent developments made this necessary. In 1917 he received the LLD degree from Edinburgh University. Ten years later, with Professor R. Candlish Henderson, he produced an 'Introduction to the Law of Scotland' (10th edn, 1995), a succinct and accurate statement of the law. 
Gloag had a deformity of the right arm and a somewhat high-pitched voice, but overall made a forceful impression. He was unmarried. Having become ill in Prestwick, he was admitted to Park Nursing Home, Glasgow, where he died two days later, on 5 February 1934. 
A. F. Rodger', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37462


Glover, John (1817-1902), chemical manufacturer, was born in Newcastle upon Tyne on 2 February 1817, the son of Robert Glover, a cooper, and was brought up in humble circumstances. He was apprenticed to a plumber at thirteen and followed that trade for fourteen years, during which he acquired a taste for study and an interest in science. He studied chemistry at Newcastle Mechanics' Institute in the 1830s. 
On 19 September 1837 Glover married Elizabeth, daughter of William Kelly, a gardener. They had three sons and one daughter. Two of the sons, William and Henry, assisted their father at the Carville works, designing towers for acid plants. In 1841 Glover went to work at the Felling chemical works, where he maintained the lead chambers of the sulphuric acid plant. Here he conceived the idea for his invention of a tower in which the oxides of nitrogen, the catalyst in the lead-chamber process, would be retained and returned to the process for reuse. In 1852 he was employed by H. L. Pattinson at the Washington chemical works, where large-scale trials of his tower were made about 1859. It was found to improve the efficiency of the process by extracting the oxides of nitrogen and facilitating the reaction before the hot gases reached the lead chambers. After eighteen months' successful operation at the Washington works, Glover set up his own chemical works at Carville, Wallsend, in 1861, with W. F. Clark and J. W. Mawson as partners. In 1868 the works became the Carville Chemical Company. He continued to develop his invention but took out no patent and freely explained its operation to visitors. Other chemical manufacturers were thus able to install the tower. Glover and his partners manufactured sulphuric acid, alkali by the Leblanc process, and bleaching powder, but competition from the Solvay process, introduced by Brunner, Mond & Co. at Gateshead in 1873, led to the decline of the Leblanc process on Tyneside and the Carville works closed in 1882. 
Glover was genial, modest, and always eager to improve himself. He read extensively in science, social economy, and religion, became involved in local charitable activities, and was especially interested in the 'Wellesley' training ship for boys on the Tyne. He was a member of many local societies, including the Newcastle Literary and Philosophical Society and the Newcastle Historical Society. He was president of the Newcastle Chemical Society (1871-2) and a vice-president until 1882, when it became the Newcastle section of the Society of Chemical Industry, in which he continued to take an active interest. He received the first gold medal awarded by the Society of Chemical Industry for 'conspicuous service to applied science' at its fifteenth annual meeting in 1896. He died at his home, 20 Holly Avenue, Jesmond, Newcastle upon Tyne, on 30 April 1902. 
N. G. Coley', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37463


Goddard, Guybon (1612-1671), lawyer and parliamentary diarist, was the only son of Thomas Goddard of Stanhoe and his wife, Mary, daughter of William Guybon of Watlington; both families were of long standing in Norfolk. He matriculated at Peterhouse, Cambridge, in 1629, entered Lincoln's Inn on 5 February 1631 (by which time his father had died), and was called to the bar in 1639. In 1642 Goddard married Mary, daughter of John Greene, serjeant-at-law, a match that brought him useful connections, notably with Edward Bysshe, who was appointed Garter king of arms by parliament in 1646. 
In pursuit of a professional legal career Goddard was prominent in the affairs of King's Lynn over three decades -- freeman in 1645, deputy recorder from 1645 to 1651, and then recorder (succeeding Miles Corbet) until the Restoration. In 1656 he secured from the protector a new charter for the borough. During the 1650s he sat on various commissions, including the commission for the assessment in Norfolk and the commission for oyer and terminer in London. A bencher of Lincoln's Inn in 1657, he became a judge in the sheriff's court of London in 1659. Ten years later he was appointed a serjeant-at-law. 
Something of an antiquary, Goddard collected a great deal of (chiefly) Norfolk documents upon which later historians were to draw, notably Francis Blomefield (1705-1752) for his classic 'History' (1739) of the county. In common with many contemporary lawyers he also combined this taste with a concern for current politics. He was elected to the first protectorate parliament in 1654 for King's Lynn, and again to the second in 1656, this time on a double return which was rejected. Returned for Castle Rising 'without any seeking or soliciting' on his part to Richard Cromwell's parliament in 1659, again on a double return, he was allowed to sit but was inactive until the election was overturned a few days before the dissolution in April. He did not sit in any subsequent parliament. For both the 1654 and the 1659 Commons he kept a sort of diary. That for 1654 was printed in 1828 by J. T. Rutt as an introduction to his edition of the diary of Thomas Burton MP. Rutt also drew upon the 1659 record to annotate, supplement, and modify Burton's. Into his transcript of the 1654 diary he slipped brief extracts from the Commons journals while silently omitting -- largely on grounds of illegibility -- 'a great variety of phrases, borrowed from the ancients' (p. cxcii), interspersed in the speeches. 
For 1654 Goddard produced not a plain 'on-the-spot' piece of reporting, but rather more of a compilation, in which he summarized proceedings and debates, naming very few participants, but indicating the general drift of attitudes and conclusions, occasionally at length but often very briefly. Compared with the diaries of Burton or of Sir John Gell for 1659, his diary is somewhat slight, but as the only internal account and commentary on the debates it has unique value. Goddard gives the impression of a house working seriously and in accordance with traditional procedures towards the performance of its roles, especially the legislative one. Though in the event this was an addled parliament, it was by no means faineant: a good many bills, public and private -- quite apart from the major one intended to revise in a parliamentary way the 'Instrument of government' -- were introduced and pursued, as Goddard, who was a conscientious attender, suggests, mostly without acrimony, though references to 'the court party' and 'the soldiery and courtiers' indicate underlying partisanships. Unfortunately and inexplicably, he breaks off in mid-sentence (about finance) on 18 December, leaving the reader uninformed on the major discussions leading to the abrupt dissolution on 22 January 1655. 
The diary is rather colourless, no doubt like its author, but there are some shrewd comments and occasional lively touches. On the first day some members cry 'sit still' when summoned to the painted chamber to hear the protector. In November they are making 'themselves a little merry with puns'. Tearing into the instrument, some behave 'as if they had been in the schools, where each man had liberty to propose his own 'Utopia', and to frame commonwealths according to his own fancy'. Goddard himself seems to have leaned towards 'the more moderate sort' in these matters, as is shown by his reaction to the protector's requirement of a written recognition by MPs on 12 September that government by a single person and a parliament was an unalterable fundamental. He and fellow Norfolk members dined together and decided (most of them) to comply with 'the breach of privilege' rather than to risk putting 'the nation into another combustion and confusion'. Guybon Goddard, oddly for a scribacious lawyer, died intestate in 1671. 
Ivan Roots', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37464


Sir Francis Godolphin (c.1534-1608), landowner, who was the elder son of Sir William's younger brother Thomas Godolphin and his first wife, Katherine, daughter and heir of Edmund Bonython. He followed his uncle's lead, serving as JP for Cornwall from the mid-1570s and sitting as knight for Cornwall in 1589 and MP for Lostwithiel in 1593. In 1580 he was knighted. He was pricked sheriff in 1579 and 1604, was deputy lieutenant from 1585, and became receiver-general of the duchy of Cornwall in 1586. Further details on him are supplied in the 1602 'Survey of Cornwall' written by his friend Richard Carew. Godolphin's pre-eminence on the commission of the peace reflected his 'zeal in religion, uprightness in justice, providence in government, and plentiful housekeeping' (Carew, 228). He was of the quorum by 1583. 300 men worked his tin, silver, and copper mines. Carew also shines a little light upon the library at Godolphin. Having borrowed from Sir Francis Godolphin a scientific treatise on the mind, Carew translated it from Italian into English and dedicated it to him: 'Good Sir, your Booke returneth unto you clad in a Cornish gabardine' (ibid., 34). 


@@@@@


doc= 37465


Gonne, (Edith) Maud (1866-1953), Irish nationalist, was born on 21 December 1866 at Tongham Manor, near Farnham, Surrey, eldest daughter of Captain Thomas Gonne (1835-1886) of the 17th lancers and his wife, Edith Frith Cook (1844-1871), daughter of William Cook, merchant, and Margaretta Cockayne Frith. In April 1868 Thomas Gonne was appointed cavalry brigade major in Ireland and was stationed at Curragh Camp, co. Kildare. Maud's sister Kathleen Gonne (died 1919) was born in September 1868. Edith Gonne, suffering from tuberculosis, gave birth in London to her third child, Margaretta, in June 1871, and died on the twenty first of that month; Margaretta died on 9 August. The trauma affected Maud Gonne deeply. She recalled that her father had said, as he showed her Edith's coffin, that she must not fear anything, not even death. 
The family returned to Ireland and the children and their nurse were moved to a cottage at Howth, a beautiful promontory north of Dublin, which remained a sacred place for Maud Gonne. Thomas Gonne was recalled by Maud Gonne as 'Tommy', an ideal father, and his enchanting letters to 'Lamb' (Maud) and 'Bear' (Kathleen) fully support this. In 1876 Major Gonne was appointed military attache to the Austrian court and the family left Ireland. The children were brought up by a nurse-housekeeper and governesses in England, with unhappy visits to their wealthy Cook relatives. When Thomas Gonne was posted to India in 1879 he moved the children to the south of France for health reasons. They were taught by a governess, Mme Deployant, who contributed to Maud Gonne's identification with republicanism and with France. In 1885 Colonel Gonne was appointed assistant adjutant-general for the Dublin district and Maud Gonne was presented at the levee at Dublin Castle on 9 April, wearing an iridescent dress with a train decorated with water lilies; at the castle ball on 10 April she danced with Prince Albert Victor, eldest son of the prince of Wales. 
By 1886 Maud Gonne had become a nationalist; she recited 'Emmet's Death', from 'The Spirit of the Nation' (1845), at a public dinner at which her father was present. Tommy was indulgent to her embryonic nationalism -- he feared that Maud might, like her mother, die young. Maud Gonne's nationalism was paradoxical: born in England of English parents she was Irish by passionate identification and remote descent. 
In summer 1886 Maud Gonne spent time in France and Germany with her great-aunt Mary, widow of the comte de Sizeranne, who hoped to launch her as a professional beauty; Colonel Gonne intervened and took her to Bayreuth for the Wagner festival. On their return to Dublin he told Maud that he would resign his commission and become a home rule MP; her elaborate autobiographical account of this episode is possibly fabrication. Colonel Gonne died on 30 November 1886 from typhoid fever. Maud Gonne, whose relationship with her father was perhaps over close, recalled 'I was too bewildered to cry' (Gonne, 'Tower'). Maud and Kathleen Gonne spent an unhappy time in London under the guardianship of their uncle William Gonne. Unaware that she would inherit a fortune on her majority Maud Gonne tried to become an actress, but became ill before she could perform; in summer 1887 she went to Royat to recover. Here she met Lucien Millevoye (1850-1918), a married journalist, later a 'depute' and 'at once and without any urging on his part [fell] in love with him' (Yeats, 'Memoirs', 132). Although in both published and unpublished autobiographies Maud Gonne dates this fateful meeting to 1887, in 1898 she told Yeats that she had met Millevoye shortly before her father's death. 
In December 1887 Maud Gonne inherited trust funds in excess of $13,000 and an unentailed sum from her mother's estate and was free to live as she pleased. She travelled to Russia early in 1888 on a clandestine Boulangist mission; her relationship with Millevoye was also politically driven, an alliance against the British empire. She returned to Dublin and established herself in nationalist circles, becoming a close friend of the old Fenian John O'Leary. On 30 January she was in London with an introduction from John O'Leary to the poet William Butler Yeats (1865-1939). Their meeting had a political motive; Yeats was probably already a member of the Irish Republican Brotherhood. However, Maud Gonne's beauty -- tall, bronze haired, bronze-eyed and with a 'complexion... luminous, like that of apple-blossom through which the light falls' (Yeats, 'Autobiographies', 123) -- mobilized an obsessive passion in Yeats which lasted for twenty-five years. 
By April 1889 Maud Gonne was pregnant by Millevoye; her first child, Georges, was born on 11 January 1890, probably in Paris, where she had an apartment. In spring 1890 she began her first political campaign against evictions in Donegal. She lectured on the horrors of eviction to English audiences, returning to Donegal in November. This campaign affected her health and she went to the south of France to recover and to spend time with Millevoye -- and presumably with her child. 
In 1891 Maud Gonne spent part of the summer in Ireland in the company of Yeats but was called back to Paris where her child was seriously ill. Georges Gonne died on 31 August and she wrote Yeats a letter of 'wild sorrow' telling him that an 'adopted' child had died (Yeats, 'Memoirs', 47). On 11 October she accompanied Parnell's coffin to Dublin, wearing deep mourning for her son. She talked obsessively of Georges to Yeats, asking whether he could be reincarnated; she kept a photograph of the dead child for the rest of her life. Yeats and Maud Gonne were possibly briefly engaged, and in November 1891 she joined the Order of the Golden Dawn, the magical order to which he belonged, as 'Per Ignem ad Lucem'. 
On her return to Paris, Maud Gonne resumed her activist career, first in France as a public speaker -- her beauty, histrionic delivery and anti-British polemic ensuring success -- then in Great Britain and Ireland on behalf of the Amnesty Association. Her political bearings were complicated. She became a member of the revolutionary Irish National Alliance, but saw herself as a socialist and joined James Connolly's Irish Socialist Republican Party in 1897. She was also moulded by her right-wing Boulangist associates and endorsed antisemitic and anti-masonic conspiracy theories -- she was a vehement anti-Dreyfusard. Her grasp of history was simplistic, a facile contrast of English vice and Irish virtue, a 'melodrama with Ireland for blameless hero' (Yeats, 'Autobiographies', 206). She summarized her political formula: 'to look on which side England ranges herself & go on the opposite' (White and Jeffares, 437). 
In 1893, hoping to reincarnate her dead child, Maud Gonne and Millevoye had intercourse in the crypt of the mausoleum which she had built for Georges. The birth of her daughter Iseult Gonne ['see 'Stuart, Iseult Lucille Germaine] in Paris on 6 August 1894 ended Maud Gonne's sexual relationship with Millevoye. She rapidly returned to work for the Amnesty Association. Early in 1897 she started her own journal, 'L'Irlande Libre', to present the Irish cause to continental Europe and was involved in the jubilee riots in Dublin in June 1897. Late in 1897 she toured the United States raising money for the 1798 centennial celebrations, with which she was deeply involved. During the celebrations she spoke widely to huge crowds. 
In Dublin in December 1898 she and Yeats had a shared dream of an astral marriage; she then told him of her relationship with Millevoye and of the existence of Iseult, whom she brought up but did not publicly acknowledge as her daughter. Scandal concerning her had circulated in Ireland, but Yeats had discounted this. Their relationship remained close, focused on the Celtic Mystical Order which he had developed, but she refused to marry him. 
In 1899-1900 Maud Gonne was active in Irish and European opposition to the South African War and enthusiastically mythologized those Irishmen who fought for the Boers. One such, Major John MacBride (1868-1916), from a Mayo trade background, toured the United States with her in 1901, and in June 1902 she agreed to marry him. She admired MacBride, whom she thought vital and honourable. She faced opposition from friends and family -- as well as a supernatural warning from Tommy. Yeats begged her not to marry MacBride, reminding her of their own spiritual marriage of 1898. She told her sister that she was ageing and was tired of her lonely struggle. Maud Gonne converted to Catholicism and married MacBride on 21 February 1903 in Paris. The MacBrides travelled to Spain in April 1903, hoping to assassinate Edward VII, who was visiting Gibraltar. Maud Gonne thought that this scheme might have fatal consequences for herself: she had already made her cousin, May Bertie-Clay, Iseult's guardian. 
In May 1903 in Dublin she told Yeats that she had made a disastrous error. However, she realized that she was pregnant and returned to Paris to salvage the situation, prepared to endure MacBride's heavy drinking and brutality. Sean (Seaghan) MacBride (1904-1988) was born on 26 January 1904. Late in 1904 Maud Gonne discovered evidence that MacBride had sexually assaulted Iseult and that he and Eileen Wilson (1886-1972), Maud's illegitimate half-sister, had had an affair before Eileen's marriage to his elder brother, Joseph. Maud Gonne initiated divorce proceedings and confessed to Yeats her disgust with 'a hero I had made' (White and Jeffares, 184). In a widely reported case in which Iseult was identified as her daughter she succeeded on 8 August 1906, in obtaining a legal separation and custody of Sean. The scandal damaged her position in nationalist circles. Her pamphlet condemning Irish women who had illegitimate children by British soldiers now seemed hypocritical and in 1906 she was hissed in the Abbey Theatre, where she had acted in Yeats's 'Kathleen ni Houlihan' in 1902, embodying Ireland itself. In an interview to the 'New York Evening World' she denounced marriage as deplorable for an intelligent woman. 
Maud Gonne's life became centred in France and her political activism diminished for a time, although she helped to establish a women's nationalist journal, 'Bean na hEireann', in 1908 -- she had been a founder member of 'Inghinidhe na hEireann' in 1900 -- and was active in social causes, organizing food for poor children and for the families of striking workers in the 1913 Dublin lock-out. Yeats regularly visited Maud Gonne in Normandy and they had a brief affair, which began on the astral plane in June 1908 and was consummated in December. She ended the affair in May 1909, but Yeats remained a close friend. The outbreak of the First World War greatly distressed her: the alliance between Great Britain and France confounded her allegiances and she drew on conspiracy theories to explicate the conflict. She served as a nurse in French military hospitals during the war. The 1916 Easter rising and the execution of John MacBride transformed her life. She wore mourning and called herself Maud Gonne MacBride, insisting that 'Major MacBride by his Death has left a name for Sean to be proud of. Those who die for Ireland are sacred' (White and Jeffares, 375). 
Yeats proposed to Maud Gonne in July 1916 and on being rejected proposed unsuccessfully to Iseult. In January 1918 Maud Gonne returned to Dublin; in May she was arrested for alleged involvement in a pro-German conspiracy and transferred to Holloway prison in London. She was released in November 1918 and returned to Dublin with her children. In 1920 Iseult Gonne married the writer Francis Stuart, whom Maud Gonne thought vicious and unstable. 
Maud Gonne initially accepted the treaty of 1921, but when the Irish civil war began in 1922 she bitterly attacked the free state government and was twice imprisoned in 1923. Age did not diminish her activism; she frequently led demonstrations on behalf of political prisoners and endorsed a marginalized IRA. In international politics her views were idiosyncratic: in 1938 she pressed what she perceived to be the positive aspects of both fascism and communism as a model for Ireland. In 1938 she published a vivid if disingenuous autobiography, 'A Servant of the Queen'. She was secure in her family life, sharing Roebuck House, Clonskeagh, Dublin, with her son, daughter-in-law, and much loved grandchildren, Anna and Tiernan. She took pride in Sean MacBride's career, both as IRA chief-of-staff and cabinet minister. She remained very close to her daughter, although she could never acknowledge the relationship. Maud Gonne died of heart disease at her home on 27 April 1953: her last recorded words were 'I feel now an ineffable joy' (Iseult Stuart to Francis Stuart, 2 May 1953, Southern Illinois University). Georges Gonne's booties were placed in the coffin at her request and crowds followed the funeral procession to Glasnevin cemetery on 29 April. 
Maud Gonne was the subject of more than eighty poems by Yeats; the last, 'A Bronze Head', meditates on her trajectory from wild young beauty to 'dark tomb-haunter'. Despite a lifetime's grass-roots political activism -- speeches, journalism, pamphleteering, protests -- Maud Gonne remains best known for her role in Yeats's life and work. 


@@@@@


doc= 37466


Gooch, Thomas Longridge (1808-1882), civil and railway engineer, was born in London on 1 November 1808, the first son and second of ten children (five sons and five daughters) of John Gooch, cashier of Bedlington ironworks, near Morpeth, Northumberland, and his wife, Anna, daughter of Thomas Longridge, iron-founder, of Newcastle upon Tyne. His brother Daniel Gooch was locomotive superintendent and later chairman of the Great Western Railway. He was educated nearby at Crow Hall School, by the parson of Horton. In 1823 he commenced an apprenticeship to George Stephenson, working for two years in the workshops of Robert Stephenson & Co. at Newcastle and then in the drawing office. He also assisted Joseph Locke in taking levels and making plans and drawings for the proposed Newcastle and Carlisle Railway. In 1826, with the passage of the 'Liverpool and Manchester Railway Act', he went with George Stephenson to Liverpool, where he prepared most of the working drawings and plans for this railway from Stephenson's rough sketches. 
In 1829 Gooch became resident engineer for the uncompleted Bolton and Leigh Railway and in 1830 resident engineer for the Liverpool section of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway. George Stephenson then appointed Gooch resident engineer for the proposed Manchester and Leeds Railway, for which he worked almost continuously in preparing plans and drawings for the bill to be presented in the 1831 session of parliament. However, strong opposition resulted in rejection of this bill despite his excellent testimony as an expert witness. Later in the same year he assisted Robert Stephenson in preparing plans and drawings for the 'London and Birmingham Railway Bill'. After its passage in 1833 he was appointed resident engineer for the northern section of the line. 
In 1836 the 'Manchester and Leeds Bill' was finally passed. In 1837 Gooch was appointed joint principal engineer with George Stephenson, and was responsible for the line's construction, which was his greatest achievement and required many heavy civil-engineering works, including a 2 mile tunnel under the Pennine hills, the boring of which from thirteen shafts took over three years. On the line's completion in 1841, Gooch was made responsible for the construction of branch lines to Heywood, Oldham, Halifax, and Ashton under Lyne. He also prepared plans for the Manchester, Bury, and Rossendale (later East Lancashire) Railway. During the subsequent 'railway mania' period he was engaged on proposals for several new lines, including the Stafford to Rugby line through the Trent valley, opened in 1847, for which he was principal engineer, working with Robert Stephenson and G. P. Bidder. 
After many years of almost continuous work, broken only by a short honeymoon in 1836, Gooch's health failed and he was taken ill in 1847 at his London office. He was ordered complete rest and convalesced abroad for eight months before resuming work as consultant for the Skipton-Lancaster Railway, at first jointly with Charles Vignoles and then as sole consultant. However, in 1851 his health again gave cause for serious anxiety, and he was compelled to give up full-time activity at the early age of forty-two. He was a sociable man of great ability, but courteous and unassuming, with great kindness and understanding of the problems of others. His later years were devoted largely to charitable work, to which he contributed much in an unostentatious manner. He was elected a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1845. 
In 1836 Gooch married Ruthanna, daughter of Robert Scaife of Liverpool. They had a son, who died aged eleven, and a daughter. Gooch died at Team Lodge, Gateshead, co. Durham, on 23 November 1882. His wife survived him. 
George W. Carpenter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37467


Goodricke, Sir John, fifth baronet (1708-1789), diplomatist, was born at Ribston, near Knaresborough, on 20 May 1708, the eldest of three sons (there were no daughters) of Sir Henry Goodricke, fourth baronet (1677-1738), and his wife, Mary, daughter of Tobias Jenkins of Grimston, Yorkshire. His childhood years were spent on the family estate, in country pursuits, and within an atmosphere of physical and spiritual well-being where books and polite conversation abounded. After receiving his early education from a tutor he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, as a fellow-commoner in 1725; he took his BA in 1728 and his MA in 1734. It was at Cambridge that he refined the traits most commonly associated with him in later years: self-discipline, perseverance, and a sound if not creative intellect. 
On 28 September 1731 Goodricke married his second cousin Mary, illegitimate daughter of Robert Benson, Baron Bingley (bap. 1676, d. 1731), politician; her mother was the daughter of James Sill, a mercer from Wakefield. They had two sons and one daughter. Goodricke succeeded as fifth baronet on 21 July 1738; left with an encumbered estate he spent some difficult years in attempting to restore the family fortune. These attempts, none too successful, ranged from various business ventures to a stint in the Netherlands from 1745 to 1747 as observer for the British government, gathering intelligence on the French army, navy, and court. In 1750, thanks to his Yorkshire connections, he was appointed as British resident in Brussels, an appointment suddenly revoked for reasons unknown. He remained in The Hague from 1751 to 1757, conducting informal discussions with the Dutch about the barrier treaty and gaining valuable diplomatic experience. He also established friendships with the British minister Joseph Yorke (later Baron Dover) and his brother Philip (Viscount Royston and later second earl of Hardwicke), both sons of Philip Yorke, first earl of Hardwicke, lord chancellor. 
It was through their influence that Goodricke was appointed as minister-resident to Sweden in 1758; he had to wait in Copenhagen until 1764 before the Swedish government resumed diplomatic relations with Britain that had been severed at the outset of the Seven Years' War. During his enforced stay in Copenhagen, Goodricke, whose wife had remained in England, had a very public affair with Stoulet Katrine (Jackboot Kate), a ballet dancer, and also mastered the Swedish language. He was finally received officially in Stockholm on 25 April 1764 and remained there until 1773. He collaborated closely with the Russian ambassador, Count Ostermann, and worked to secure a defensive alliance with Sweden (1766), to safeguard British trade, and to prevent France's resurgence in the Baltic by supporting the pro-Russian party of the Caps in their resistance to the pro-France Hats. The principal triumph of his mission to Stockholm was the emphatic victory won by the Caps at the election in 1765, which ousted the Hats from government posts. However, hopes that the Anglo-Swedish connection would lead to a Russian alliance did not materialize, as successive British administrations proved unwilling to provide the peacetime subsidies and co-operation in Poland that the Russians demanded. French influence revived after the 'coup d'etat' of 19 August 1772, by which Gustavus III, a protege of France, restored royal absolutism. 
Goodricke relinquished his Stockholm appointment in 1773, following his wife's succession to the Yorkshire seat of Bramham Park, which brought sudden wealth; he was then free to take his ease as a country gentleman, and devote himself to estate and agricultural improvement. He was elected to parliament for Pontefract in 1774; he supported Lord North's government on the American War of Independence and was in favour of granting further relief to protestant dissenters. He did not stand for re-election to the parliament of 1780 but he was elected for Ripon in 1787 and was appointed a commissioner of the Board of Trade in 1788. He died in New York on 6 August 1789 and was buried in Hunsingore, Yorkshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 37468


Goodridge, Henry Edmund (bap. 1797, d. 1864), architect, was baptized on 26 July 1797 at St Michael's Church, Bath, the son of James Goodridge, a leading builder in the city who carried out much of the development in the suburb of Bathwick, and his wife, Anna Buck. He was apprenticed to John Lowder, then architect to the city, and supplemented this training by visits to France 'c'.1818 and later, in 1829, to Italy. After setting up independently in the city 'c'.1820, he developed a successful practice both in Bath itself and in the neighbouring areas of Somerset and Wiltshire. Harvey Lonsdale Elmes, subsequently the architect of St George's Hall in Liverpool, was an assistant in his office from 1834 to 1837. On 10 July 1822 Goodridge married Matilda Yockney of Upper East Hayes, Bath, with whom he had five children, one of whom, Alfred Samuel Goodridge, continued his father's practice after he retired about 1855. 
Goodridge's best-known work is the Lansdown tower on the edge of Bath, built in 1824-7 for the celebrated William Beckford, who had settled in the city in 1823; and this and his own residence, Montebello (later Bathwick Grange), on Bathwick Hill (1828-30), are compositions of great originality, combining a picturesque irregularity of form with an eclectic mixture of Greek and italianate detail. Others of his early works are more conventionally neo-classical in manner, but he also designed a number of churches in the Gothic style, some of which -- notably that in Rode Hill, Somerset (1822-4) -- are highly, indeed bizarrely, individual, while his Devizes Castle, Wiltshire ('c'.1840), is in a neo-Norman idiom. In his entry for the competition for the Houses of Parliament (1835) he proposed an octagonal House of Commons and a House of Lords in the form of a 'baronial hall with minstrel gallery' (Colvin, 'Archs'., 415). 
Goodridge's 'great passion' was 'the picturesque in landscape gardening', which he exercised in the grounds of his Bathwick villa (Goodridge, 5). He exhibited occasionally at the Royal Academy and became a fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects 'at a very early period of [the] Institution' (ibid.). He died at Belle Vue Villa, Bathwick Hill, on 26 October 1864 and was buried at Lansdown cemetery, Bath. 
Peter Leach', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37469


Gordon, Alexander (1752-1799), physician, was born on 20 May 1752 in the parish of Peterculter in Aberdeenshire. He, and his twin brother James, who became a successful farmer in Logie in Aberdeenshire, were the second and third of the five children of Alexander Gordon, tenant farmer of Miltown of Drum. After a general education Gordon attended Marischal College in Aberdeen, graduating MA in 1775. He then studied medicine in Aberdeen, Edinburgh, and probably Leiden. 
In 1780 Gordon entered the Royal Navy as surgeon's mate, becoming full surgeon in 1782. On 5 February 1784 he married Elizabeth, daughter of Alexander Harvie, who survived until 1843; they had two daughters. Gordon left the navy on half-pay in 1785 to spend nine months in London developing his special interest in midwifery. He was resident pupil at the lying-in hospital in Store Street, received clinical instruction from two of the leading obstetricians of the day, Thomas Denman and William Osborne, and attended the Middlesex Lying-in Dispensary. When he returned to Aberdeen towards the end of 1785 he was appointed physician to the Aberdeen Dispensary. In 1786 he published his 'Observations of the Efficacy of Cold-Bathing in the Prevention and Cure of Diseases', a treatise of no great originality on a fashionable subject. Two years later he was awarded the degree of MD by Marischal College. 
Were it not for a severe epidemic of puerperal fever ('childbed fever') in Aberdeen, which lasted from December 1789 to March 1792, Gordon might well have been forgotten. Puerperal fever was previously unknown in Aberdeen and the epidemic was thought to be no more than the common ephemeral fever known as the 'weed', which was rarely fatal. Gordon, however, had seen many cases of puerperal fever in London. Recognizing that the epidemic was due to this deadly disease, he kept careful notes of every case. From these he was able to make the crucial observation that the disease tended to be confined to the practice of a small minority of midwives. Indeed, he was able to forecast accurately which women would develop the disease merely by knowing which midwife had been in attendance. He also realized that he had himself unwittingly carried the disease from one midwifery patient to another. 
Gordon was the first to provide irrefutable evidence of what had been until then no more than a faint suspicion: that puerperal fever was a contagious disease that could be carried from patient to patient by doctors and midwives. He also showed that it was closely connected with erysipelas. These observations were made some fifty years before the well-known work of Oliver Wendell Holmes and Ignaz Semmelweis, which overshadowed Gordon's early but brilliant contribution to the understanding of puerperal fever. After more than a century of relative obscurity Gordon's 'Treatise on the Epidemic Puerperal Fever of Aberdeen' (1795) was recognized for what it is, a masterpiece of early epidemiology based on astute clinical observation and written with exceptional clarity. 
Sadly, Gordon's treatise damaged his professional reputation. As dispensary physician almost the whole burden of the epidemic fell on his shoulders and the women of Aberdeen turned against him, holding him responsible for the facts he revealed, and disputing his fervent belief in the efficacy of purging and heavy bleeding which were 'repugnant to popular opinion'. Hurt by 'the ungenerous treatment which I met with from that very sex whose sufferings I was at so much pains to relieve', he was glad to leave Aberdeen when recalled to active duty in the Royal Navy. Soon, however, he developed pulmonary tuberculosis and was invalided out. An ill man, he returned to his brother James's farm, where he died at the early age of forty-seven on 19 October 1799. 
Irvine Loudon', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37470


Gordon, Alexander (1841-1931), Unitarian minister and historian, was born on 9 June 1841 at Cheylesmore Manor House, Coventry, the second of the five sons of 
Alexander Gordon was educated by his father, and then at King Henry VIII School, Coventry (1852-4), the Royal High School in Edinburgh (1854-6), and the University of Edinburgh (1856-9). He attended Manchester New College, London, for ministerial training from 1859 to 1862. Between 1860 and 1862 he studied under Dollinger at Munich and was Hibbert fellow at Edinburgh in 1863-4 (MA 1864). Gordon was successively Unitarian minister at Aberdeen (1862-3), Hope Street Church in Liverpool (1863-72), Norwich (1872-7), and the First Presbyterian (Non-Subscribing) Church in Belfast (1877-89). From 1890 to 1911 he was principal of the Unitarian Home Missionary College, Manchester (later the Unitarian College), and lecturer in ecclesiastical history in the University of Manchester. 
Gordon was probably the most eminent and highly regarded historian of nonconformity of his time, with an encyclopaedic knowledge and memory. Through his exhaustive and objective scholarship, based largely on primary sources, he significantly influenced subsequent research into religious dissent. He succeeded in bringing the life and work of early English dissenters in particular into the mainstream of historical research, but his erudition extended to European religious reformers. His acquaintance with minor protestant groups, such as the Mennonites, Collegiants, Anabaptists, and Familists, was hardly less intimate than his knowledge of English sects, such as the Traskites and the Muggletonians. Never formally trained as a historian, Gordon had a passion for writing biography: his outstanding contribution was to the 'Dictionary of National Biography', for which he wrote 778 entries, almost all the articles on Unitarians being from his pen. His articles included extensive memoirs on such major figures as John and Charles Wesley, George Whitefield, Jabez Bunting, and George Fox. Readers, and those who have written for the 'Oxford Dictionary of National Biography', will appreciate the extent of his achievement. Gordon also contributed two articles to the ninth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (1875-88), for which his father had also written, and thirty-nine articles to the eleventh edition (1910-11), seven of which were revised for the fourteenth (1929). Among his books, 'Freedom after Ejection, 1690-92' and 'The Cheshire Classis Minutes, 1691-1745' were standard works for many years. 
Gordon's total output of articles was prodigious. From 1869 to 1930 reviews, chapel histories, and biographies flowed from his pen (he never used a typewriter), and covered every branch of nonconformity. He regularly contributed historical articles of high quality to the weekly 'Christian Life' for over fifty years. His correspondence was as voluminous as his knowledge, which was willingly shared with other scholars. Gordon helped foster the increased interest in nonconformist history which arose at the beginning of the twentieth century, and played a unique role in the foundation of seven denominational history societies (1898-1915). He assembled a library of 12,000 items, together with a considerable collection of railway tickets. 
Gordon was a complex, often cantankerous personality. Gruff and inordinately self-reliant, Gordon was highly conservative in attitude, theology, and lifestyle. Though he was warm and understanding to his students, stories of his sharpness are numerous. When asked by a pompous college dean, 'My good man, I do not think I know you. Who are you?', Gordon replied, 'Oh, I'm just myself. Are you anybody?' His hats were inscribed inside the brim 'Not Yours'. Contemptuous of rank or title, he rejected offers of honorary doctorates from Manchester, Edinburgh, and various American universities. 
On 23 April 1872 Gordon married Clara Maria (1846-1902), daughter of Swinton Boult; they had five sons and one daughter. After 1911 he chiefly resided in hotels. He died, after a brief illness, in Belfast on 21 February 1931 and was buried at the Old Meeting-House, Dunmurry, on 23 February 1931, 'an Englishman by birth, a Scotsman by education and an Irishman by inclination' ('The Inquirer', 28 Feb 1931). 


@@@@@


doc= 37471


Gordon, James Edward (1789-1864), politician and protestant propagandist, was born in Scotland (either in Abernethy, near Perth, or in Aberdeen) on 11 March 1789, one of the numerous children of James (Brae) Gordon of Little Folla, factor to the duke of Gordon, and Ann McDonald. He joined the Royal Navy at the age of fifteen on 14 April 1804. He became a lieutenant in 1811, and in 1814 commanded the schooner 'St Lawrence', on the strength of which he later called himself 'captain'. After 1815 he first involved himself with the religious and social work of Thomas Chalmers in Glasgow and then moved to London where he initially promoted seamen's charities and was an associate of the evangelical Clapham Sect. 
During the 1820s Gordon became a leading figure in the radically conservative wing of Anglican evangelicalism, which rejected compromise with the world and eschewed theological and political liberalism. Above all he was vehemently anti-Catholic, a position that was crystallized by his involvement in the second reformation movement in Ireland. In 1827 he founded the British Society for Promoting the Religious Principles of the Reformation (later Protestant Reformation Society) as a vehicle for outright proselytism, and during the next few years participated in numerous public debates with Roman Catholics, both in Britain and in Ireland. 
In 1831 Gordon was returned as MP for Dundalk and in the House of Commons clashed frequently with Daniel O'Connell over the Irish education question and the government grant to Maynooth College. He saw himself as the political leader of the evangelicals, but in reality his views were too extreme and his style too combative for him to command general support. Accordingly, when he lost his seat as a result of the 1832 'Reform Act' his efforts to return to parliament were unsuccessful. 
Shifting his energies to pressure-group politics, Gordon played a leading role in orchestrating the No Popery crusade of 1834-6 and in organizing the Protestant Association as a focus for the anti-Catholic campaign. Shortly afterwards a serious paralytic illness, from which he never fully recovered, forced his retirement from active public life. In spite of the strong antagonisms he had aroused, he had been a key figure in the religious and political reorientation of evangelicalism and in its forging of an alliance with the resurgent Conservative Party around the defence of the protestant established church. 
In 1836 Gordon married Barbara, daughter of Samuel Smith, a banker and MP. They had a daughter and two sons, the younger of whom, George Maxwell Gordon, was a prominent missionary in the Punjab. Gordon died at 36 Porchester Square, Bayswater, on 30 April 1864. 
John Wolffe', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37472


Markievicz, Constance Georgine, Countess Markievicz in the Polish nobility (1868-1927), Irish republican and first woman elected to parliament, was born on 4 February 1868 at 7 Buckingham Gate, Pimlico, London, the eldest of the three daughters and two sons of Sir Henry William Gore-Booth (1843-1900), philanthropist and explorer, of Lissadell, co. Sligo, and Georgina Mary Hill (died 1927), of Tickhill Castle, near Doncaster. Eva Gore-Booth, the campaigner for women's suffrage, was her sister. Constance Gore-Booth spent most of her childhood at the family house at Lissadell, and although she lived most of her adult life in Dublin and abroad she retained a strong attachment to the west of Ireland. 
Descended from seventeenth-century planters, the Gore-Booths were prominent landowners whose wealth and social standing ensured that their children enjoyed a privileged childhood. The family entertained lavishly, hosting such guests as W. B. Yeats, whose poem 'In Memory of Eva Gore-Booth and Constance Markievicz' (1927) chronicled both his early visits to Lissadell and the subsequent careers of both women. Taking advantage of the family's extensive grounds Constance Gore-Booth enjoyed country pursuits, including hunting, driving, and riding, and became especially well known for her skill with the rifle and in the saddle. With Eva she was educated by governesses at home, her tutelage consisting mainly of instruction in the genteel arts of poetry, music, and art appreciation. In 1886 she made a grand tour of the continent, and in the following year was presented to Queen Victoria. 
Constance Gore-Booth hoped to study art, and finally persuaded her disapproving parents to fund her studies in 1893, when she enrolled at the Slade School of Art, in London. Having moved to Paris to further her studies she met fellow art student Count Casimir Dunin-Markievicz, a Polish widower whose family owned land in the Ukraine. They married in London in 1900 and their daughter, Maeve, was born the following year. Constance Markievicz's relationship with her daughter was strained; the couple returned to Paris in 1902, leaving their daughter in the care of Lady Gore-Booth. The child's family was reunited when her parents moved to Dublin, but from about 1908 she lived almost exclusively with her grandparents at Lissadell House. 
The Markieviczes' move to Dublin coincided with a period of literary and cultural renaissance, and they soon became involved in the city's liveliest artistic circles, displaying their paintings and producing and acting in plays at the Abbey Theatre. They co-founded the United Arts Club in 1907 but Constance Markievicz's interest in Irish nationalism soon took precedence over her artistic ambitions. She joined Sinn Fein and Inghinidhe na hEireann (Daughters of Ireland) in 1908 and helped to found -- and became a regular contributor to -- 'Bean na hEireann' ('Women of Ireland'), Ireland's first women's nationalist journal. She had become interested in women's suffrage as a young woman, presiding in 1896 over a meeting of the Sligo Women's Suffrage Society; she remained committed to this cause but she gave increasing time to overtly nationalist organizations. 
Markievicz became something of a celebrity in Dublin's radical circles. A strident and flamboyant orator, her background and penchant for military uniforms and weaponry made her a figure of fun in some circles, while attracting deep suspicion in others. In 1909 she founded Na Fianna Eireann, a youth movement whose aims included establishing an independent Ireland and promoting the Irish language. By 1911 she had become an executive member of both Sinn Fein and Inghinidhe na hEireann, and was arrested in the same year for protesting against George V's visit to Dublin. She grew increasingly interested in socialism and trade unionism, becoming a strong supporter of the Irish Women Workers' Union and of the political programme advocated by the prominent socialist James Connolly. She assisted striking workers during the lock-out of 1913, organizing soup kitchens in Dublin slums and at Liberty Hall. Strongly opposed to Irish involvement in the allied war effort, she co-founded the Irish Neutrality League in 1914 and became a vocal advocate of the small group of men who split from the nationalist Volunteer movement over the question of Irish participation in the war. She had separated amicably from her husband about 1909; while he worked as a war correspondent in the Balkans she continued to assist in training and mobilizing the Irish Citizen Army and the Fianna. 
Markievicz made no secret of her support for armed rebellion against British forces, and joined whole-heartedly in the Irish Citizen Army's involvement in the Easter rising of 1916. She was second in command of a troop of Irish Citizen Army combatants at St Stephen's Green; her battalion was hopelessly outmanoeuvred by British soldiers and was forced to retreat to the College of Surgeons. After a week of intense fighting Markievicz and her fellow rebels surrendered. She was sentenced to death for her part in the rebellion but this was commuted to penal servitude for life on account of her sex. She served fourteen months of her sentence at Aylesbury gaol before being released in the general amnesty of June 1917. She claimed to have experienced an epiphany during the Easter rising, took instruction from a priest while in prison, and converted to Catholicism shortly after her release. 
In 1918 Markievicz was arrested along with many fellow Sinn Fein members on account of their alleged involvement in a spurious 'German plot'. While in prison she stood successfully in the general election of 1918 as a Sinn Fein candidate for Dublin's St Patrick's division, and became the first woman elected to the British parliament; like all Sinn Fein MPs she refused to take her seat. Released from gaol in March 1919 she was appointed secretary for labour in the first Dail Eireann, but like her colleagues in the proscribed Dail she spent much of her time on the run. She was arrested again in June for making a seditious speech, and was sentenced to four months' hard labour -- her third prison term in four years. After another arrest a sentence of two years' hard labour in the following year was interrupted by the general amnesty that followed the signing of the Anglo-Irish treaty. A vocal opponent of the treaty, she denounced it in the Dail and continued to work against it through Cumann na mBan, a republican women's organization of which she was president. 
Markievicz's stand against the treaty forced her into another period of exile and abstention from the Dail. She publicized the anti-treaty position during a speaking tour of America and through several publications in which she continued to extol the republican cause. Markievicz lost her seat in the general Dail election of 1922 but was elected to the Free State parliament in August 1923. In common with other elected republicans she refused to take the oath of allegiance to the king, thus disqualifying herself from sitting. Her characteristic flamboyance -- she insisted, for example, on wearing her Cumann na mBan uniform while addressing the Dail -- and an increasingly hostile general attitude to female politicians ensured that she was viewed with growing suspicion by a number of her fellow republicans. She was arrested for the last time in November 1923 but was released soon after she went on hunger strike in protest. She joined Fianna Fail on its establishment in 1926 and stood successfully as a candidate for the new party in the general election of 1927. She remained an outspoken republican but her influence waned and her health suffered as a result of hard work and often rough conditions. She died, of peritonitis, in a public ward at Sir Patrick Dun's Hospital in Dublin on 15 July 1927, and was buried in Glasnevin cemetery in the city, following a well-attended public funeral. 


@@@@@


doc= 37473


Booth, Eva Selina Gore- (1870-1926), suffragist and poet, was born on 22 May 1870 at Lissadell, co. Sligo, Ireland, the second of three daughters and the third of the five children of Sir Henry William Gore-Booth, fifth baronet (1843-1900), Anglo-Irish landlord and Arctic explorer, and his wife, Georgina Mary (died 1927), only daughter of Colonel Charles Hill of Tickhill Castle, Yorkshire. Of these five children two others also gave up their privileged positions in society to promote a new order in Ireland. The eldest, Josslyn, introduced co-operatives to Sligo and became the first landlord in Ireland to sell his land to his tenants after the 1903 'Land Act'. Constance ['see 'Markievicz, Constance Georgine, Countess Markievicz in the Polish nobility (1868-1927)] became the 'rebel countess' of the 1916 Easter rising. 
Eva was educated at home by a governess, Miss Noel, who had studied at Cambridge and who grounded her in Latin, Greek, and Italian. She was antipathetic to her mother and was strongly influenced by her devout grandmother Lady Frances Lumley. Studious and introspective, she was quite different from her flamboyant and more robust elder sister Constance. In appearance she was willowy and frail, and she attracted attention with her fair hair and eager expression. The poet W. B. Yeats was thoroughly charmed by her when he stayed at Lissadell in 1894, when they talked of each other's poetry. The west of Ireland was not a suitable climate for Eva's poor constitution: an illness, suspected consumption, led her to travel to Italy in search of health in 1896. At the home of George MacDonald in Bordighera she met Esther Roper, an organizer for the North of England Society for Women's Suffrage. This society was a branch of the national union organized by Mrs Fawcett, who was Esther Roper's mentor. 
For the first time Eva was able to talk to a kindred spirit. Captivated by the woman and her cause, she impulsively decided to leave Ireland and join Esther in the suffrage cause in Manchester. At first under Esther's influence she devoted herself to trade unionism and suffrage, but then on her own account became involved in adult education for women, working with the Manchester University Settlement and the Lancashire and Cheshire Women Textile and Other Workers' Representation Committee. She became the mentor of the young Christabel Pankhurst in 1901, but after three years Christabel became irritated by Eva's gentle gradualism and pacifism and abandoned her friendship and guidance for militancy. Later Christabel quite unjustly damned Eva's character as 'temperament without direction' (Lewis, 97). It was clear to most contemporaries that Eva's work was thorough and painstaking, and maintained over years of campaigning. Roper and Gore-Booth were names prominent in campaigns on behalf of pit-brow workers, flower sellers, and barmaids, but their greatest success was in attracting large numbers of women from the working class to the suffrage movement. In 1901, when the membership of the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies (NUWSS) was about 10,000, they organized a suffrage petition with 30,000 signatures. 
As a relief from her work Eva wrote a great deal, recording her dreams, and incorporating some of them into her verse and plays. She published ten volumes of poetry, including 'Unseen Kings' (1904) and 'The Death of Fionavar' (1916). Her best-known poem, found in many anthologies of Irish verse, was 'The Little Waves of Breffny'. Her poems, from the first volume of 1898, in the publication of which she was encouraged by W. B. Yeats, dwelled on constant themes: Christian mysticism, love of nature, distaste for the 'iron fort' of materialism, and for the militaristic urge to dominate and control. Horrified by the outbreak of the First World War, she was among the pacifist seceders from the NUWSS, which supported the war effort, and she worked tirelessly as a representative of the No-Conscription Fellowship for conscientious objectors at their trials by tribunal, and for the Women's Peace Crusade; this involved travelling all over Britain. 
In the aftermath of the Easter uprising in Dublin in 1916 Eva was instrumental in organizing the reprieve of the death sentence meted out to her sister Constance as one of the leaders of the uprising, but her campaign with Alice Stopford Green and others to prevent the hanging of Roger Casement failed. After the war her health broke down and she retired, with Esther, to Hampstead. During the last years of her life she was the leader of a group -- concerned to reform sexual behaviour and discard gender stereotyping -- that published the journal 'Urania' from 1916. 
Eva Gore-Booth died from cancer on 30 June 1926 at her home, 14 Frognal Gardens, Hampstead, London. In her obituary in 'The Times', Evelyn Underhill claimed that Eva Gore-Booth would be remembered chiefly as a mystical poet, but on the contrary the dominant reminder of her is by W. B. Yeats in his 'In Memory of Eva Gore Booth and Constance Markievicz', written in October 1927. Here he unjustly commemorated her 'dreaming' of a 'vague Utopia', her body and life wasted by politics. She was buried on 3 July 1926 in St John's, Hampstead, where she lies in a joint grave with Esther Roper under a headstone with an interlaced Celtic cross. 


@@@@@


doc= 37474


Gossage, William (1799-1877), chemical manufacturer, was born on 12 May 1799 in Burgh-le-Marsh, Lincolnshire, the youngest of thirteen children of Thomas Gossage and his wife, Eleanor. He had little schooling, and went to work at the age of twelve, apprenticed to an uncle in a chemist and druggist business in Chesterfield. At once he showed a determined character, setting himself, for example, to master the French language. He took out his first patent at the age of twenty-four, after inventing a portable alarm to attach to watches and clocks. For a time he was assistant to the manager at a works at Ardwick Bridge owned by the Tennant Company of St Rollox. He set up on his own in Leamington, trading in medicinal salts, but in 1831 changed his activity to that of manufacturing salt and alkali in Stoke Prior in Worcestershire, a site valuable for its nearness to the Droitwich salt deposits, and to the new lines of transport communication provided by the Birmingham and Worcester Canal. 
In 1836 Gossage demonstrated a solution to an outstanding environmental problem. The main method of alkali manufacture at the time was that of Nicolas Leblanc, which had the defect of pouring into the air large quantities of hydrogen chloride gas, an extremely noxious pollutant. In 1836 Gossage devised a method of absorbing the acid gas; a steady stream of water descending a tower (the 'Gossage tower') containing twigs, bracken, and bricks, came in contact with a steady stream of ascending gas, dissolving it and thus bringing the dangerous nuisance under a high degree of control. This power of control made it possible to enact the 'Alkali Works Act' of 1863, the first statute to provide a quantitative measure of pollution control. Gossage's invention also provided the starting point for the process devised by Walter Weldon for making chlorine and bleaching powder, an invaluable aid to the textile industry. 
For a time Gossage manufactured white lead in Birmingham (1841-4), and then adventured in copper smelting in Neath in south Wales (1844-8). Gossage moved to Widnes in 1850, and experimented with a method of extracting sulphur from copper ores, eventually concentrating on the manufacture of alkali. Sodium carbonate had been the main product of the alkali industry, but Gossage saw a need to develop sodium hydroxide (caustic soda) and pursued this. The suppression of the tax on soap in 1852 encouraged him to embark on soap manufacture. He set up his own works in 1855 and produced his first bar of mottled soap in 1857. This became famous under the brand name of Gossage. Outside business he made a significant contribution to the development of Widnes. 
On 22 May 1824 Gossage married Mary Herbert of Leamington; they had a family of seven children. Two of the sons, Alfred and Frederick, continued to expand the family business after their father's death. Gossage died at Earlsleigh, Dunham Massey, Altrincham, Cheshire, on 9 April 1877. 
Frank Greenaway', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37475


Gosse, Philip Henry George (1879-1959), general practitioner and writer on natural history, was born at 29 Delamere Terrace, Paddington, London, on 13 August 1879, the only son and second of three children of Sir Edmund William Gosse (1849-1928), writer, and his wife, Ellen 
(Nellie; 1850-1929)
, painter, daughter of George Napoleon Epps; Ellen Gosse's sister was married to Sir Lawrence Alma-Tadema. Sylvia Gosse ['see under 'Sickert, Walter, pupils (act. 1890-1939)] was his sister. Educated at Haileybury College (1892-4), Gosse subsequently studied agriculture at Wellingore Hall, Lincolnshire (1894-6). His chief early interest, inherited from his grandfather, Philip Henry Gosse (1810-1888), was natural history; this led to a trip to Newfoundland in 1895. In 1896 he was appointed naturalist to the Fitzgerald expedition to the Andes, and on his return he contributed 'Notes on the natural history of the Aconcagua valley' to E. A. Fitzgerald's 'The Highest Andes' (1899). 
Despite Gosse's passionate interest in natural history, his father insisted that he should have a recognized profession, and the choice eventually fell upon medicine. From 1899 he studied at St Bartholomew's Hospital, and qualified as MRCS and LRCP (1907); he attained the degree of MD (Durham) about 1910. After six months as a house surgeon at Essex County Hospital, Colchester, he set up as a country doctor in the New Forest, his amusing recollections of which appeared in 'St Bartholomew's Hospital Journal' (1933-5). 
Gosse's career was interrupted by the outbreak of war in 1914, in which he served as a captain in the Royal Army Medical Corps. In France until autumn 1917, he was then transferred to India until the armistice. His wartime recollections, 'Memoirs of a Camp-Follower', were published in 1934, and were later reissued as 'A Naturalist Goes to War' (1942). 
After 1918 Gosse worked as a medical referee for the Ministry of Pensions, and later at the Radium Institute, eventually becoming its medical superintendent. He retired from medicine in 1930 and became a full-time writer, producing three biographies, a history of St Helena (1938), and a 'History of Piracy' (1932); this earned him an international reputation, and was translated into French, Spanish, and Dutch. Yet Gosse's most enjoyable works are his elegantly written and witty books of recollections, which include 'Go to the Country' (1935), 'Traveller's Rest' (1937), and 'An Apple a Day' (1948). 
Gosse was an entertaining companion; his somewhat mordant manner hid an essentially kind personality, and he was especially fond of young company. His humour was sometimes expressed in schoolboyish practical jokes, but he possessed also a quicksilver wit, as illustrated by his remark to Lady (Margaret) Keynes ('nee' Darwin), who told him she had been bitten by an ape at Gibraltar: 'He was having revenge on the Darwins.' 
Gosse's friends invariably forgave him for his wayward humour. He possessed a genius for friendship which is reflected in the many literary people who knew, liked, and respected him, from his cousin, Alec Waugh, and Vyvyan Holland, to Siegfried Sassoon (a distant relative) and the Sitwells. He was for many years Brother Buccaneer to the literary dining club, the Sette of Odd Volumes, where his repartee was much appreciated. From 1941 until 1959 he was a fellow commoner of Trinity College, Cambridge. 
Gosse was married three times. On 14 July 1908 he married Gertrude Agnes Gosse Hay ('b'. 1872/3), an Australian cousin, the daughter of Alexander Hay, colonist and politician. They were divorced and on 28 November 1930 he married Irene Ruth Marden ('b'. 1897/8), a widow, daughter of Oliver Hawkshaw, gentleman of independent means. After another divorce he married, on 2 February 1943, Anna Gordon Keown (1896/7-1957), poet and novelist. She was the daughter of Robert Keown, a London wool merchant. There was a daughter by each of the first two marriages. Gosse died of food poisoning in Brookfields Hospital, Cambridge, on 3 October 1959, and was cremated at Cambridge crematorium four days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 37476


Gough, Richard (bap. 1635, d. 1723), local historian, was born in Newton on the Hill in the parish of Myddle, Shropshire, and baptized on 18 January 1635, the son of Richard Gough and his wife, Dorothy Jenks, formerly of Cockshutt. He was the fifth Richard Gough in succession to live as a small freeholder and yeoman farmer at Newton, though his younger sister, Dorothy, married Andrew Bradocke, of Cayhowell, a gentleman. In 1661 his father died at Cayhowell. About this time Gough married Joan Wood (died 1694), of Peplow, with whom he had eight children between 1663 and 1678. 
As a young man Gough served as a clerk to Robert Corbett of Stanwardine, 'custos rotulorum' of Shropshire and MP in 1654-5. He continued to serve the Corbetts, for example, as manorial steward, after he had inherited the Newton freehold. He was a member of the Shropshire grand jury and frequently acted on behalf of his parish in legal matters. In 1700 he wrote 'The antiquityes and memoyres of the parish of Myddle'. During 1701-2 he added his 'Observations concerning the seates in Myddle and the familyes to which they belong', in which he systematically recorded the personal histories of each family in the parish. He was buried on 12 February 1723, having outlived his wife and all but two of his children. His manuscript was preserved by the descendants of his daughter Anne. An imperfect version was printed in 1834; the full manuscript was published in 1875. With its uniquely detailed account of all the members of a rural community, the book has established Gough as the most important of the early parish historians. 
David Hey', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37477


Gould, Sir Nathaniel (1661-1728), merchant and politician, was born on 3 December 1661, the third (but first surviving) son of John Gould, a wealthy nonconformist merchant of London, and his wife, Mary. In 1688 Gould married Frances, daughter of Sir John Hartopp, third baronet, of Freathby, Leicestershire; there were two daughters of the marriage. He was knighted on 14 April 1721. 
It was after the revolution of 1688 that Gould first came to prominence when he became one of the largest suppliers of hemp, pitch, and tar to the Royal Navy; and in this capacity, immediately before the War of the Spanish Succession, he played an important part in providing the navy with Russian hemp from Archangel in place of the supplies that could no longer be obtained from Riga (beleaguered by the Russians). In 1694 Gould invested $2000 in the newly founded Bank of England and he was one of those instructed to draw up its by-laws. In 1697 he became a director of the bank and served continuously (with statutory intervals) down to his death. He was deputy governor of the bank from 1709 to 1711 and governor from 1711 to 1713. It was in the former role that, with the governor and two other directors, he attended the queen on 15 June 1710 to desire on the bank's behalf that she make no further ministerial changes following the replacement (as secretary of state) of Charles Spencer, third earl of Sunderland, by William Legge, first earl of Dartmouth. 
Gould was a member of the group of so-called tobacco contractors who in 1698 had secured from Peter the Great the right to export tobacco from England to Russia. But to be able to do this the contractors needed to gain admission to the Russia Company and Gould played his part in the attack on the company. Eventually he gained admission to the company and became a director and sometime governor. After having been an interloper in the East India trade in 1696, he was a major investor in the 'new' East India flotation of 1698, and was both a director of the company and manager for the united East India trade over the years 1699-1708. 
It was probably the affairs of the East India trade that propelled Gould into politics; with the 'old' East India Company still in existence, many members of the 'new' company sought election to parliament to protect the company's interests. Accordingly, he contested New Shoreham, a venal borough in Sussex, and won it in both of the 1701 elections. (Following the first election, however, he was successfully petitioned against and had to withdraw, but he survived the petition that followed the second.) He represented New Shoreham from 1701 to 1708 and from 1710 until his death. In parliament Gould's career was of little note until the later years of Anne's reign when, in 1713, he spoke three times (and very effectively) against the treaty of commerce with France. Following the accession of George I, he seconded a motion of 12 April 1717 that English trade to the Baltic could not be carried on unless the king of Sweden was brought to reason, and during the South Sea crisis he advocated strong measures against the directors. 
Thereafter Gould spoke on two occasions (1723 and 1725) on customs matters, and in 1726 he published a pamphlet entitled 'An Essay on the Public Debts', which in 1727 prompted a rejoinder, 'A State of the National Debt', reputedly by William Pulteney, earl of Bath. It was on this subject that Gould made his last recorded parliamentary speech in February 1728. He died five months later, on 21 July 1728. 
D. W. Jones', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37478


Gow, Andrew Sydenham Farrar (1886-1978), classical scholar, was born on 27 August 1886 at 100 Gower Street, London, the eldest of the three sons (there were no daughters) of the Revd Dr James Gow (1854-1923), who, after being a fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, was headmaster of Nottingham high school and later of Westminster School, and his wife, Gertrude Sydenham Everett-Green ('b'. 1855). He was the grandson of the historian Mary Anne Everett Green, and the nephew of the novelist Evelyn Ward Everett-Green. He was educated at Nottingham high school, at Rugby School, and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he obtained first classes in both parts of the classical tripos (1908 and 1909), in part two specializing in archaeology, and won several classical prizes. 
In 1911 Gow won a Trinity prize fellowship with a dissertation consisting of a miscellany of papers, several of which were later expanded into valuable articles. He applied four times for permanent posts in Cambridge, but was each time unsuccessful; it was feared that he would alarm and discourage his pupils, particularly the weaker sort. Indeed Gow's appearance was formidable, an uncompromisingly Scottish kind of countenance being set off by bushy eyebrows and side-whiskers, and anything like conceit or pretentiousness on the part of a pupil might provoke a wounding sarcasm. In 1914 he became a master at Eton College, where he remained during the First World War, a heart murmur having disqualified him for military service. Some pupils were indeed alienated by his dryness and his caustic wit; his frequent comment on an exercise shown up to him was 'Oh, death, boy!', and his highest expression of praise was 'Not wholly bad!' But some of the boys appreciated his solid scholarship and the great pains he took to help them, and the nickname Granny Gow was bestowed upon him not without affection. 
In 1925 Gow returned to Cambridge as a teaching fellow of Trinity. He was better placed in a university than in a school, and enjoyed more than he could have done in any other society the life of that great college, which was to be his home for the remainder of his life. He was a congenial colleague to A. E. Housman, and in 1936, the year of Housman's death, brought out a brief memoir which, though mainly concerned with Housman's scholarship, throws more light upon him than almost any of the studies by literary persons. Gow acted as Housman's literary executor, and supervised a reprint of his edition of Manilius. 
Gow lectured effectively, particularly on Theocritus, and used the material collected for his lectures to compose a number of articles, all of solid merit. He sacrificed precious time by taking on the onerous administrative post of tutor, which he held from 1929 to 1942, and also the pious labour of bringing out volume two of the posthumously published 'Early Age of Greece' (1931) of Sir William Ridgeway. In 1943 he became a fellow of the British Academy, and in 1947 Brereton reader in classics in Cambridge. He had honorary degrees from the universities of Durham (DLitt) and Edinburgh (LLD). 
In 1950, a year before his retirement from the latter post, Gow published a memorable edition of Theocritus, a second edition following three years later. The editor's massive learning, unusual accuracy, and sober judgement render this book indispensable to scholars. In 1952 Gow followed the Theocritus with an admirable edition of the Greek bucolic poets in the series of 'Oxford Classical Texts', and a year later he brought out a valuable translation of these writers with a useful introduction. The year 1953 saw also the appearance of an edition of the difficult Hellenistic didactic poet Nicander, in which Gow collaborated with A. F. Scholfield. 
Gow next began work on the Hellenistic epigrams contained in the Greek anthology. A monograph called 'The Greek Anthology: Sources and Ascriptions' appeared in 1958, and in 1965 it was followed by the two-volume 'Hellenistic Epigrams: the Garland of Meleager', in which Gow collaborated with Denys Page, Page being primarily responsible for the poems of Meleager and Gow for all the rest. The same year saw the appearance of Gow's edition, with commentary, of the fragments of the Alexandrian iambic poet Machon; none of his productions makes more entertaining reading than his edition of this scurrilous but amusing author. In 1968 Gow and Page followed up their first volume by bringing out 'Hellenistic Epigrams: the Garland of Philip', again in two volumes; this time Gow was primarily responsible for the 650 epigrams which were either attributed to Antipater of Thessalonica or left over as being either his work or that of Antipater of Sidon. Gow's work on Hellenistic epigrams has the same qualities as his 'Theocritus', and like that book will remain an essential instrument of scholarship. 
The fears expressed early in Gow's career regarding the possible effects of his teaching did not prove entirely vain; his dryness and severity antagonized a number of his pupils, and the austerity of the regime at Trinity encouraged alarming departures from that quality by lesser scholars in certain other places. But pupils of the more pertinacious sort profited greatly from his teaching and his company. During the Second World War he regularly sent to pupils who were on active service a circular newsletter of a highly characteristic kind; these letters were published in 1945 in a book called 'Letters from Cambridge'. 
Gow also did much to interest undergraduates in art, a subject by no means popular among the Cambridge dons of his generation. Several members of his family had been artists or lovers of art, and Gow himself became no mean collector and connoisseur. From about 1909 he was a friend of John Beazley, with whom he once combined to buy a Sienese picture they had discovered in a dealer's; and he often travelled in Italy to look at pictures, sometimes in the company of his friend Scholfield. Although in theory Gow disapproved of all art later than 1500 except for Rembrandt, Velazquez, and, with some reservations, Rubens, he left to the Fitzwilliam Museum, of which he had been a syndic from 1934 to 1957, twenty-four works by Degas and six each by Rodin and Forain. From 1947 to 1953 he served as a trustee of the National Gallery, to which he left a fine collection of photographs of paintings which he had often used to stimulate a love of art in undergraduates. They were accustomed to drop in on him between ten and eleven in the evening, when he could be an agreeable companion; and he, who had spent so little of his life with women, surprised his colleagues by making friends with the celebrated actress Dorothy Tutin. 
In his last years Gow's health became impaired, and in 1965 he left his rooms in Nevile's Court, with a fine Athena for a door knocker, for a set in the King's Hostel, where there was a lift. After breaking a thigh in 1973 he moved to the Evelyn Nursing Home, where he died on 2 February 1978. He was unmarried. 
Hugh Lloyd-Jones', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37479


Gray, Christopher (1694-1764), nurseryman, was probably the second son of William Gray senior, and his wife, Sarah, of Fulham, Middlesex. William Gray junior, the older son, had a nursery garden in Fulham, at Parson's Lane, later Peterborough Road; but the better-known Fulham garden of the period was the one established before 1700 by the elder William Gray and later taken over by Christopher. It occupied nearly 30 acres between Hurlingham Road and the (New) King's Road, with some land on the other side of the King's Road added by the middle of the eighteenth century. 
Early in his career, soon after the death in 1713 of Henry Compton, bishop of London, Christopher Gray was one of the nurserymen who bought plants from the bishop's collections in the gardens of Fulham Palace. These included many plants from North America, and their introduction may have prompted Gray to specialize in them. Gray was also one of the twenty nurserymen in the Society of Gardeners, which was led by Philip Miller and which met frequently in an attempt to standardize the names of the plants they were growing. The first part of their 'Catalogus plantarum', the only section published, appeared in 1730 as a joint catalogue of trees and shrubs, many of them recent introductions and several from North America. 
In the preface to his 'Hortus Britanno-Americanus' (written in 1749 but not published until 1763) Mark Catesby, the pioneer naturalist of the south-eastern states of America, said that 'Mr Gray at Fulham has for many years made it his business to raise and cultivate the plants of America (from whence he has annually fresh supplies) in order to furnish the curious with what they want... Through his industry and skill, a greater variety of American forest-trees and shrubs may be seen in his gardens, than in any other place in England. (Willson, 19)' About 1737 Gray published a broadsheet catalogue in French and English, its alphabetical list of 'American Trees and Shrubs that will endure the Climate of England' framing a 'Magnolia grandiflora' which also appeared in the second volume of Catesby's 'The Natural History of Carolina' (2 vols., 1729-47); the engraving was after a drawing by G. D. Ehret of a magnolia in flower in the garden of Sir Charles Wager in Parson's Green in 1737. The one in Gray's own garden, planted before 1719, survived until 1810. Several American oaks, maples, dogwoods, walnuts, the tulip tree, the tupelo, the amelanchier, and other trees now established in Europe were also in this catalogue, along with the occasional less welcome import, such as poison ivy. 
A later catalogue of 1755 listed more of Gray's stock, 'a greater Variety of Trees, Shrubs, Plants and Flowers... than can perhaps be found in any other Garden, for Sale, not only in England, but also in any other part of Europe' (Harvey, 79). One of Gray's customers was Horace Walpole of Strawberry Hill, who described some of his purchases from 'the nurseryman at Fulham' in a letter of 8 November 1755 to George Montagu: 'I mention cedars [of Lebanon] first, because they are the most beautiful of the evergreen race, and because they are the dearest; half a guinea apiece in baskets... Gray... sells cypresses in pots at half a crown apiece; you turn them out of the pot with all their mould, and they never fail. (ibid., 79)' Gray was buried in Fulham on 15 November 1764. His wife, Hannah, lived on until 24 February 1778. Most of his property was left to her in a will containing no mention of any children. The nursery was taken over by William Burchell, whose family kept the land until it was sold for building in 1882. 
Sandra Raphael', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37480


Gray, Henry (1826/7-1861), anatomist and author, about whose family, childhood, and early education little is known except that his father was private messenger to George IV and William IV, and that he had one sister and two brothers, entered St George's Hospital, London, as a perpetual student in May 1845. There he showed early signs of his intense interest in anatomy and was described by his contemporaries as diligent, painstaking, and methodical. In 1848 he became MRCS (and soon became a fellow by examination) and in the following year was awarded the college's triennial prize for an essay on the nerves of the eye. He won the Astley Cooper prize in 1853. 
In 1850, as a newly appointed house surgeon to St George's Hospital (where he later became lecturer in anatomy), Gray presented a paper to the Royal Society 'On the development of the optic and auditory nerves'. This earned him the unusual distinction of being elected to a fellowship of the society at the age of twenty-five (1852). In 1854 he published 'On the Structure and Use of the Spleen', a substantial work of 380 pages, based on original observations. His famous 'Anatomy, Descriptive and Surgical' (1858) was published by John W. Parker in England, and by Blanchard and Lea in the United States in 1859. No medical text has ever been so widely used by successive generations of medical students and doctors. By the time of its centenary, there had been twenty-six new editions by eight successive editors in Britain and eleven in the United States. 
The success of the book was not due to an absence of rivals. There were already several texts on anatomy, the most famous being 'Elements of Descriptive and Practical Anatomy' (1828) by James Quain. Gray's 'Anatomy', however, eclipsed all others, partly for its meticulous detail, partly for its emphasis on surgical anatomy, but most of all perhaps for the excellence of the illustrations, based on drawings by H. V. Carter, who assisted Gray with the dissections, and engraved by Messrs Butterworth and Heath with remarkable skill. The design of the book, and the skill with which the illustrations were interpolated in the text, could hardly have been improved. For a man in his early thirties it was a remarkable achievement. The book was well received by 'The Lancet' and the 'British Medical Journal', but was savagely attacked by an anonymous reviewer in the 'Medical Times and Gazette' of 1859, who dismissed it, in a ridiculous review for which the most likely reason was personal animosity or jealousy, as 'a book which is not wanted [and] is not even up to the mark of the existing vade-mecums. A more unphilosophical amalgam of anatomical detail and crude surgery we have never met with'. 
Gray was already working on the second edition when he caught smallpox from his nephew, developed the confluent form of the disease, and died at his residence, 8 Wilton Street, Belgrave Square, London, on 12 June 1861, aged thirty-four. It is a measure of Gray's single-minded devotion to anatomy and authorship that Gray's 'Anatomy' continued to be not only an important book of reference but virtually a household phrase. 
Irvine Loudon', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37481


Greathead, James Henry (1844-1896), civil engineer, was born in Grahamstown, Cape Colony, on 6 August 1844, the son of James Henry Greathead of Grahamstown, a member of the legislative council of Cape Colony 1859-60. He was educated at St Andrew's College, Grahamstown. He went to England in 1859 to complete his education at Westbourne Collegiate School, London. 
In 1864 Greathead began a three-year pupillage with P. W. Barlow, followed by a year on the construction of the Midland Railway extension from Bedford to London, under W. H. Barlow and C. B. Baker. At about this time Peter Barlow was promoting the idea of a network of underground railways as the solution to London's street-traffic problems. It was agreed that a pedestrian tunnel, the Tower subway, should be driven under the Thames 'as a sample of the system', but the memory of the extreme difficulties of Isambard K. Brunel in completing the Thames Tunnel resulted in none of the contractors approached by Barlow being willing to tender for the work. In 1868, however, Greathead made an offer to build the tunnel for the sum of $9400 and Barlow accepted. Work began the following year, using a shield which, though similar to one patented by Barlow in 1868, was designed by Greathead; it was forced forward by powerful screw-jacks as excavation proceeded, and the 1350 ft long tunnel was completed in less than a year. 
Greathead set up his own practice as a consulting engineer in 1870 and continued to devise improvements to his tunnelling shield while being employed mainly on surface railway schemes. In 1886, however, work began on the long-delayed City and Southwark subway, the beginning of a line that became the City and South London Railway, the world's first underground electric railway. For the excavation of the twin tunnels through water-bearing strata, compressed air had to be used in conjunction with a much-improved design of the Greathead shield, which enabled the first of the tunnels under the Thames to be completed in only fifteen weeks. 
Greathead was involved in the early 1890s with several other deep tunnel railway schemes, including the Blackwall Tunnel under the Thames, and as a complete contrast he was also associated with Sir Douglas Fox in the construction of the Liverpool overhead electric railway, opened in 1893. He was much sought after as an expert witness in arbitrations and parliamentary inquiries, where his engineering expertise and powers of logical exposition carried much weight. 
Greathead was elected a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1879, and the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1881, serving as a member of the council of the latter in 1894. He retained close connections with South Africa as consulting engineer to the Durban tramways. 
In 1884 Greathead married Blanche Emily Caldecott, daughter of Selby Coryndon of Kimberley. They had one son and two daughters. He died suddenly at his house, Ravenscraig, Leigham Court Road, Streatham, on 21 October 1896. He was survived by his wife. The many underground railway schemes on which he was engaged at the time of his death had to be completed by others, but the Greathead shield was his lasting memorial. 
Ronald M. Birse', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37482


Green, Benjamin (bap. 1813, d. 1858), architect, was baptized on 15 February 1813 in Horsley, Northumberland, the younger son of John Green (1787-1852) of Newcastle upon Tyne, architect and civil engineer, and his wife, Jane Stobart. A pupil of Augustus Charles Pugin, in the mid-1830s he became a partner of his father. Thereafter they practised together until the latter's death in 1852, and it is not always possible to distinguish the work of one from that of the other. The somewhat undistinguished Gothic-style churches in Northumberland and Durham, which formed a substantial element in the firm's output, for example, are in general simply ascribed to 'John and Benjamin Green', and the same applies to their best-known work, the monument to John Lambton, first earl of Durham, at Penshaw Hill, co. Durham (1844), in the form of a Greek Doric temple. However, the normal pattern appears to have been that the father concentrated on the civil engineering works and the son on the more purely architectural. 
The Greens were active as railway architects, and the stations on the main line between Newcastle and Berwick upon Tweed, commissioned by George Hudson in 1846 -- 'Fine, handsome buildings... more like the villas raised by retired tradesmen than residences for railway officers' (Welford, 2.330) -- are said to have been by Benjamin Green. More important, the Theatre Royal (1836-7) and the Grey Column (1837-8) in Newcastle, stately neo-classical structures which were key elements in the heroic replanning of the city centre by Richard Grainger, were evidently also his conceptions, and suggest that he might have become a more significant figure in his own right had he not died relatively young, surviving his father by a mere six years. 
In contrast to his father, Green was 'an artistic, dashing sort of a fellow' whose style was 'ornamental, florid and costly' (Welford, 2.330). He died in a mental home at Dinsdale Park, co. Durham, on 14 November 1858. 
Peter Leach', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37483


Green, Charles (bap. 1734, d. 1771), astronomer, was baptized in Wentworth, near Rotherham, Yorkshire, on 26 December 1734, the youngest son of Joshua Green, a farmer of Swinton. He obtained most of his education from his eldest brother, the Revd John Green, who was master of a school at Denmark Street, Westminster, where Charles later worked as an assistant teacher. In 1760 he became assistant to the astronomer royal, James Bradley, at the Royal Greenwich Observatory, succeeding Charles Mason, who went to the Cape of Good Hope to observe the transit of Venus. Green himself observed the transit with Bradley at Greenwich on 6 June 1761. 
When Bradley died in July 1762, Green remained at Greenwich as assistant to his successor, Nathaniel Bliss, who was in precarious health and spent much of his time in Oxford, with the result that most of the observational work at Greenwich fell to Green. In August 1763 the board of longitude asked Green to go to Barbados with Nevil Maskelyne to make observations in connection with the trial of the fourth timekeeper of John Harrison. Bliss agreed that a temporary assistant should be provided at Greenwich until his return. 
Green and Maskelyne embarked in the 'Princess Louisa' (60 guns) at Spithead on 9 September 1763 and reached Barbados on 7 November, when they set up an observatory ashore and began observations to settle the longitude of the island. William Harrison (John Harrison's son) and the timekeeper arrived on 13 May 1764, the necessary observations were made, and Green sailed for home on 4 June, reaching Greenwich in July. 
Bliss died in September 1764, and Green took charge of the observatory until the arrival of the new astronomer royal, Maskelyne, in March 1765. His Greenwich observations were published at the end of the second volume of Bradley's 'Observations' (1805). On 5 September 1765 Green's youngest sister, Mary, married the astronomer and mathematician William Wales at Greenwich. 
Despite past disagreements, Maskelyne recommended that Green should go with James Cook to observe the 1769 transit of Venus in the Pacific, which Green, then serving as purser in the frigate 'Aurora', agreed to do for 200 guineas. On 8 March 1768 he married Elizabeth Long in London, and on 26 August the 'Endeavour' sailed from Plymouth. Green and Cook successfully observed the transit together in Tahiti on 3 June 1769. During the subsequent exploration of New Zealand and Australia, Green was, in Cook's words, 'indefatigable in making and calculating these observations [for latitude and longitude] which otherwise must have taken up a great deal of my time... Not only this, but by his instructions several of the petty officers can make and calculate these observations almost as well as himself. ('Journals', 392)' Before the 'Endeavour' arrived in Batavia in October 1770 (whence the records of his Venus observations were dispatched to England), Green had been sick with scurvy and dysentery. He died at sea of fever on 29 January 1771. 'He had long been in a bad state of health, which he took no care to repair but on the contrary lived in such a manner as greatly promoted the disorders he had had long upon him, this brought on the Flux which put a period to his life. ('Journals', 448)' 



@@@@@


doc= 37484


Green, John (1787-1852), architect and civil engineer, was born on 20 June 1787 at Newton Fell House, Nafferton, Northumberland, the son of John Green, builder, carpenter, and agricultural implement-maker, and his wife, Ann. After attending a local school he evidently gained a practical education by working in his father's business, and soon after he came of age he was taken into partnership. The firm then moved to the larger town of Corbridge, and here they expanded their activities into general building work, with the son turning his attention to the architectural side of the business. About 1820 he moved to Newcastle upon Tyne, from where he established his extensive professional practice in the area of Northumberland and co. Durham. 
Green's early works as an architect included the Newcastle Literary and Philosophical Society's building (1822-5) and the beginnings of a lengthy sequence of somewhat undistinguished Gothic-style churches. He also developed a reputation as a designer of farmhouses: he was employed in this capacity on the Beaufront estate near Hexham (1824), and by Hugh Percy, second duke of Northumberland. Green's principal contribution, however, was in the field of civil engineering, as a builder of road and railway bridges. In 1829-31 he built two wrought-iron suspension bridges, at Scotswood across the Tyne (dem. 1967) and at Whorlton across the Tees, the latter of which survives as the oldest bridge of its type in the country still supported unaided by its original chains. He also built several handsome examples in masonry; and, most important, at the Ouseburn and Willington Dene bridges (1836-9; dem.) on the Newcastle and North Shields Railway and in a number of subsequent examples he successfully employed a system of laminated timber arches, which, for a short time, was widely imitated in railway bridge construction. In 1840 Green was elected to the Institution of Civil Engineers and the following year he was awarded the institution's Telford medal for his work on laminated arch design. 
Green was said to have been a 'plain practical shrewd man of business' whose style was 'plain, severe and economical' (Welford, 330). In 1805 he married Jane Stobart; they had two sons, John and Benjamin Green, both of whom became architects. The latter in the mid-1830s became a partner of his father, and it is not always possible to distinguish the work of the father from that of the son. The monument to John Lambton, first earl of Durham, at Penshaw Hill, co. Durham (1844), in the form of a Greek Doric temple, for example, is simply ascribed to 'John and Benjamin Green'. In general, however, the father appears to have concentrated on the civil engineering works and the son, who was a pupil of Augustus Charles Pugin, on the more purely architectural. John Green died in Newcastle on 30 September 1852. Drawings by John and Benjamin Green are in the Laing Art Gallery, Newcastle upon Tyne. 
Peter Leach', rev. ' 


