@@@@@


doc= 37485


Greenly, Edward (1861-1951), geologist, was born in Bristol on 3 December 1861, the only child of Charles Hickes Greenly (1804-1895), medical practitioner, and his wife, Harriett, 'nee' Dowling (1818-1892). He was educated at Clifton College, Bristol, and in 1883 became for three years an articled clerk to a London solicitor. His real interests, however, increasingly came to lie in science and, probably from 1886, his father paid for him to attend University College, London, where he studied chemistry. He was mainly self-taught as a geologist, and in his spare time he began an interest in geological mapping. Quite by chance he met Professor A. H. Green (1832-1896) of Leeds, to whom he showed his maps. Green recommended Greenly to the director of the Geological Survey to which he was appointed in July 1889. He went to the northern highlands of Scotland, where he learned geological field techniques from the experienced surveyors B. N. Peach and C. T. Clough, and developed a lifelong fascination with Precambrian metamorphic rocks. On 26 September 1891 he married Annie, the fourth of the five daughters of John Barnard, dispensing chemist, of Bath, who often accompanied him on his geological work. They had no children. 
Greenly resigned from the official survey in the spring of 1895 because of his wife's health. A man of modest but independent means, he spent the next fifteen years mapping the Isle of Anglesey. His meticulously accurate map and report of these mainly Precambrian rocks were 'adopted' by the Geological Survey, published in 1919 and earned him an honorary doctorate (1919) from the University of Wales, and in 1920 the Lyell medal of the Geological Society of London (of which he was a senior fellow and later vice-president). 
About 1917 Greenly moved to Clevedon, Somerset, where he made valuable contributions to Precambrian, Palaeozoic, and Quaternary geology. After June 1919 he lived in Bangor, and mapped in the Arfon district, a natural extension of his studies of Anglesey and which became his final geological work. He continued his researches with vigour, having learned to drive a car at the age of seventy-five and despite the amputation of a leg three years later. He led his last field excursion to Anglesey at the age of eighty-six. 
Greenly, in addition to his Anglesey memoir, was the author of over fifty geological papers, several being conceptually far ahead of their time. He also co-authored (with Howel Williams) the invaluable 'Methods in Geological Surveying' (1930), and other books for the general reader. 
Greenly has been aptly described as 'a gentleman of the old school, kindly, courteous and cultured'. He was a connoisseur of music, especially Beethoven's piano works, poetry, and literature (in several languages). All the field sketches and watercolours illustrating his geological work were his own. He was also a lover of animals, cats especially, and a vegetarian. His exquisite prose is perhaps most evident in his unusual book 'A Hand through Time' (1938), which he had originally intended should not be published until after his death. This meditative and philosophical work, written after the death of his beloved wife in March 1927, is largely composed of memories of her; their relationship was unusually close and mutually inspiring. It also includes descriptions of his early days on the survey and pen portraits of the great geologists of those times. Greenly was religious in a pantheistic, non-doctrinal sense, and had a serene assurance of an immortal reunion with his wife. Greenly died at his residence at Aethwy Ridge, Bangor after a brief illness on 4 March 1951. After cremation, his ashes were interred at Llangristiolus, Anglesey. 


@@@@@


doc= 37486


Greenly, Henry (1876-1947), railway engineer and writer, was born on 3 June 1876 at 20 Priory Street, Birkenhead, the first of three sons and two daughters of Edwin Greenly, railway guard, and his wife, Sophia, daughter of John Howard, the owner of a wood-turning factory in Newington Butts, south London. Henry started his education at a boarding-school in Birkenhead but in the spring of 1887 the family moved to the Queen's Park district of west London, where he continued his education at Beethoven Street School in Kilburn Lane until 1890, when he left to work in the jewellery workshops of William Whiteley of Bayswater. His stay was short and was followed by employment at the Commercial Travellers Institute and then Smith, Fawdon, and Law, solicitors. 
In 1894 Greenly was awarded a London county council scholarship with distinctions, which took him to the Kenmont Gardens Science School (1894-7) and in 1896 he was awarded an evening exhibition to the Regent Street Polytechnic. The turning point in what became a distinguished career came on 22 February 1897, when he started work in the drawing-office of the Metropolitan Railway Company at Neasden works, where he pursued both mechanics and architecture, being ultimately appointed as assistant to the chief surveyor and architect. 
As early as 1895 Greenly was a regular contributor to the 'Engineer' and 'Engineering', taking the great engineers of the day to task over technical issues, and he soon became well known. As a result, on 15 October 1896, he was appointed to a subcommittee at the Science Museum alongside twenty-five other distinguished engineers, with the objective of establishing a permanent railway museum. With the introduction of the 'Model Engineer and Amateur Electrician' magazine in 1898 he became a regular contributor and was a founder member of the Society of Model Engineers. 
He published numerous books throughout his career, such as 'Model Electric Locomotives and Railways' (1921), which became the 'bible' for the model railway world. The 'Model Railways and Locomotives' magazine was founded by him in 1908 and became a platform from which he could share his knowledge and expertise with others. His association with Bassett-Lowke Ltd of Northampton, the world-famous model engineering company, as design consultant led to a remarkable career in the early development of miniature passenger-carrying railways. 
Apart from many ventures, such as the Rhyl Miniature Railway and the Ravenglass and Eskdale Railway, Greenly's most notable success was his involvement with the Romney, Hythe, and Dymchurch Railway in Kent (1925-9). In 1915 he joined the design staff of the Royal Aircraft Factory in Farnborough, where he invented the 'flash eliminator' for machine-guns and in 1937 patented an inductor relay for lift control and automatic train control. 
On 28 September 1901, at the church of St Bartholomew, Gray's Inn Road, London, Greenly had married Lilly Maria, daughter of Henry Richardson, a London businessman. They had a daughter and two sons. By 1942 Greenly was in ill health but still carried on the family model engineering business. He died at his home, 66 Heston Road, Heston, Isleworth, on 4 March 1947 and was buried at Heston parish church. He was survived by his wife, who when she died in 1967 was buried beside him. 
W. J. Milner', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37487


Greenway, Francis Howard (1777-1837), architect, was born on 20 November 1777 in Mangotsfield, Gloucestershire, the youngest of the three sons of Francis Greenway or Grinway, mason of Mangotsfield, and his wife, Ann Webb. He became a pupil in London of John Nash, and it was presumably through Nash's connection with south Wales that in 1801 he was employed to design a small public building in Carmarthen. The story of his subsequent career is an unusually dramatic one. About 1805 he and his brothers Olive and John Tripp Greenway established themselves in Bristol at 7 Limekiln Lane, as 'stonemasons, architects, builders etc.', with Francis the architect member of the partnership (Colvin, 'Archs'., 430). In 1806 he designed the hotel and assembly rooms in the suburb of Clifton, which the firm contracted to build; but at the same time the brothers were speculating by buying unfinished houses in Clifton which they completed and sold, and in 1809 they were overtaken by bankruptcy. Then, some time later, Francis Greenway was accused of forgery in connection with a building contract made shortly before the business failure. He was tried at Bristol assizes on 23 March 1812, pleaded guilty, and was sentenced to transportation for life. 
After arriving in Australia in February 1814, however, Greenway quickly resumed his profession and became the virtual father of Australian architecture. Within months of his arrival he established a practice at 84 George Street, Sydney, and found a patron in Governor Lachlan Macquarie of New South Wales, who had ambitious plans for public works in the colony; and in 1816 he was appointed civil architect. He received his emancipation in the following year, and his wife, Mary (died 1832), whom he had married in 1804, rejoined him in Australia with their three children. In 1822, following Macquarie's departure, Greenway was dismissed from the post, but during his short period of office he had carried out or initiated a remarkable number of substantial building projects in Sydney and its neighbourhood, the most important of which were the Macquarie lighthouse ('c'.1816-18; dem.), the churches of St Matthew, Windsor ('c'.1817), St Luke, Liverpool (1818-24), and St James's Sydney ('c'.1820), the stables at Government House (1817), Fort Macquarie at Benelong Point ('c'.1817; dem.), and the Hyde Park convict barracks (1817; now the district courts), which last project earned Greenway absolute pardon in 1819. The stables and the fort were in a conventional castellated style, but most of his work is in a bold and simple classical idiom of considerable originality and merit. 
Greenway is said to have been self-confident, 'temperamental and quick to take offence' (Herman, 43). After his dismissal in 1822 he continued in private practice in a small way for some years, evidently living in somewhat reduced circumstances. In 1837 he retired from Sydney to his government land-grant property on the Hunter River, where he died in September of that year. He was buried on 26 September 1837 in East Maitland cemetery, New South Wales. His views on Australian architecture were published in an essay in the 'Australian Almanac' (1835). His wife had opened a small school for girls in Sydney, and of their five sons and three daughters, one son, Charles, became an archdeacon and canon at Grafton Cathedral. 
Peter Leach', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37488


Gresham, Edward (1565-1613), astrologer, of Stainford, Yorkshire, was born on 14 April 1565, presumably in Stainford. He was probably connected to the London commercial and financial dynasty, perhaps through Sir Richard Gresham, who had acquired extensive monastic properties in Yorkshire at the dissolution. Gresham (or a namesake) matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1584, proceeding MA in 1606. He divided his time between Stainford and London, where he lived next to Dyers' Hall at Thames Street. 
Gresham held advanced ideas in astronomy. During the plague of 1603 rumours were fathered on him and John Dee to the effect that its future course depended on the imminent fall of a planet to earth. To dispel such idle notions he compiled a scholarly treatise on the planets, 'Astrostereon', in which he championed the Copernican system and denied the existence of solid planetary spheres, arguing that the heavenly bodies moved freely in space. For several years, between 1603 and 1607, he published astrological almanacs. The edition for 1605, no longer extant, was said to have foretold the Gunpowder Plot so accurately that it brought him under suspicion of complicity. Gresham himself, however, placed little reliance on 'vulgar astrologie', and was one of the earliest English champions of a reformed astrological science. A capable mathematician and astronomer, he compiled detailed planetary tables for astrological use. To refute charges of atheism he cited two religious treatises he had written, 'Sabbath-dayes exercises' and 'Positions in divinitie' (apparently unpublished and now lost). He also practised medicine and magic, and the latter brought him an unsavoury reputation. 
In his last years Gresham's fame as a magician drew him into the sordid court intrigues surrounding the divorce of Robert Devereux, third earl of Essex. The countess of Essex had employed the magician Simon Forman to secure the love of Robert Carr (later earl of Somerset), the king's favourite, and to rid her of an unwanted husband. On Forman's death in 1611 she approached Gresham through her confidante Anne Turner, and he employed his skill in efforts to render the earl impotent and to win the queen's goodwill. Essex's alleged impotence was the central issue facing the royal commission set up in 1613, which duly ruled the marriage unconsummated and granted a divorce, freeing the countess to marry Carr. It seems that Gresham also employed his magical arts against Sir Thomas Overbury, an open critic of the proposed marriage, whom the countess was determined to remove. Richard Weston, an associate of Gresham's, was certainly involved in the plot against Overbury and was later hanged for his part in the murder. 
Gresham himself did not live to see the outcome of any of these nefarious schemes. He died in London on 13 January 1613 and was buried the next day at All Saints-the-Less. Shortly before his death he had conveyed his magical paraphernalia (lead and wax images, crosses, and charms) to Richard Weston, directing them to be buried secretly. He left only a daughter, Jane, a lunatic. A near-contemporary judged that 'without all question he was a very skilfull man in the Mathematicks, and in his latter time in Witchcraft'. He was fortunate in dying before the Overbury scandal became public; a maidservant, less lucky, is said to have been hanged subsequently as a witch. 
Bernard Capp', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37489


Gresley, Sir (Herbert) Nigel (1876-1941), railway engineer, was born in Edinburgh on 19 June 1876, the fourth and youngest son and youngest of five children of the Revd Nigel Gresley, rector of Netherseale, Leicestershire, and his wife, Joanna Beatrice, daughter of John Wilson, and grandson of Sir William Nigel Gresley, ninth baronet. He was educated at Marlborough College and began his engineering apprenticeship in 1893 under Francis Webb at the Crewe locomotive works of the London and North Western Railway. Subsequently he was a pupil of John Aspinall of the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway at Horwich, near Bolton; he became an assistant manager at their carriage workshops at Newton Heath, Manchester, in 1901, and works manager in the following year. In 1901 Gresley married Ethel Frances (died 1929), daughter of W. P. Fullager, solicitor, of St Anne's, Lancashire. They had two sons and two daughters. In 1904 he was appointed assistant carriage and wagon superintendent of the Lancashire and Yorkshire, and in 1905 transferred to the Great Northern Railway in Doncaster as carriage and wagon superintendent. 
In 1911 Gresley succeeded Henry Ivatt as locomotive engineer. He introduced more powerful general-purpose main-line 2-6-0 and 2-8-0 freight locomotives, followed in 1922 by the prototype Pacific (4-6-2) type for heavy long-distance passenger trains. In 1920 he was appointed CBE for his direction of war material production at Doncaster works. 
In 1923 Gresley became chief mechanical engineer of the London and North Eastern Railway (LNER), following the merger of independent companies into four railway groups. He was responsible for the maintenance and repair of over 7000 locomotives, 21,000 passenger coaches, and 300,000 goods wagons, as well as for new design and construction, with control of some 30,000 workshop and out-station staff. The task of integrating the individual railways into the LNER was not easy. Over the first five years he introduced new locomotive designs and continued the development of the main-line Pacific type, incorporating detailed improvements pioneered by George Jackson Churchward of the Great Western Railway (GWR), whose work he greatly admired. This was characteristic of Gresley, who ensured that he and his design team were fully informed on the latest developments abroad and adopted ideas pioneered elsewhere if they were proved relevant to his needs. Thus from 1928 onwards he collaborated closely with the French engineer Andre Chapelon, whose rebuilding of existing locomotives enabled their power and efficiency to be greatly increased. His great technical knowledge and ability were combined with thoroughness; all important engineering drawings were personally approved by him and all new features were tested on prototypes before being put into quantity production. While he was a commanding personality and very much the 'chief' in his department he consulted closely with, and was advised by, his engineers before taking technical decisions. He also circulated 'third copies' of all technical correspondence to his design staff to ensure that all were fully informed. 
Gresley's earlier work on improved passenger coaches continued on the LNER and new trains were built with simple but attractive internal decoration and fittings. There were also new restaurant cars with all-electric cooking to reduce fire risks, improved sleeping-cars, and new types of high-capacity goods wagon. In 1934 the LNER investigated using high-speed diesel trains, as in Germany, for a London to Newcastle business service. However, tests showed that a faster schedule could be operated with a Pacific-hauled steam train of Gresley's comfortable coaches seating double the number of passengers. In 1935 the fully streamlined 'Silver Jubilee' train, the first in Britain, went into service, averaging 71 m.p.h. between London and Darlington. In 1938 one of the streamlined Pacific locomotives, 'Mallard', attained a maximum speed of 126 m.p.h., a world record for steam traction. From 1936 184 heavy 2-6-2 mixed traffic locomotives were built and played a major part in main line operation. 
While a strong advocate of improving the steam locomotive to the maximum degree possible, Gresley also tested diesel locomotives and railcars and realized that the future for main-line railway operation lay with electric traction when capital resources were available. In 1936 it was decided to electrify the severely graded cross-Pennine main line from Sheffield to Manchester and he was responsible for the design of electric locomotives for this service. From 1927, and later supported by his friend William Stanier of the London, Midland, and Scottish Railway (LMSR), he had advocated the building of a national locomotive testing station capable of handling the largest locomotives, and in 1937 work on the station was started at Rugby. 
Gresley was involved actively for many years with the International Railway Congress Association as a member of its permanent commission and gave a comprehensive report on improvements in steam locomotives at the Madrid Congress in 1930. He was president of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1936, the Institution of Locomotive Engineers in 1927 and 1934, and the Association of Railway Locomotive Engineers in 1926 and 1927. He served on a number of government committees, including those on automatic train control and on railway electrification. In 1936 he was knighted and awarded an honorary DSc by Manchester University. He enjoyed a simple life in the country best, being with his grandchildren and his dogs, shooting, and fishing. Gresley died at his home, Watton House, Watton-at-Stone, Hertford, on 5 April 1941, shortly before his intended retirement. He was buried at Netherseale, near Burton upon Trent. 
George W. Carpenter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37490


Griess, (Johann) Peter (1829-1888), industrial chemist, was born on 6 September 1829 in Kirchhosbach, Hesse, Germany, the son of Heinrich Griess, a farmer and the village blacksmith, of Kirchhosbach. He studied chemistry at Kassel Polytechnic and then at the universities of Jena and Marburg. He was an unruly student, noted for his eccentricity of dress, and accumulated large debts which his father had to settle by mortgaging some of his properties. 
This seems to have sobered Griess somewhat and he became an assistant in A. W. H. Kolbe's laboratory in Marburg, but his contract was not renewed. However, Kolbe relented when Griess approached him again in 1856 after working in a tar distillery in Offenbach, and took him back. For reasons not apparent he had become a reformed character: he worked diligently and spent long hours in the laboratory. He so impressed Kolbe that when the great German chemist, A. W. von Hofmann, professor at the Royal College of Chemistry in London, visited Marburg in 1858 he recommended Griess for a position in Hofmann's laboratory. To support his recommendation Kolbe provided Hofmann with the April 1858 edition of Liebig's 'Annalen der Chemie', which included a paper by Griess entitled 'A preliminary notice on the influence of nitrous acid on aminonitro- and aminodinitrophenol'. Hofmann realized that Griess had discovered a new and versatile chemical reaction which could provide a route to a wide range of new compounds. Griess was duly invited to London and Hofmann commissioned him to explore the possibilities of his new diazo compounds. The results of his experiments were published in a series of papers in the 'Annalen' over the years 1860-66, entitled 'A new class of organic compounds in which hydrogen is replaced by nitrogen'. 
For the latter part of this period Griess was no longer in London. In 1852 Hofmann had successfully completed an investigation for Allsopp & Sons of Burton upon Trent after the French industrial chemist A. Payen had alleged that Allsopp's famous India Pale Ale -- an important export -- contained strychnine. Through Hofmann Greiss was offered an appointment as chemist at the brewery. He accepted in 1862 and remained there for the rest of his life, being left free to pursue his own research. In 1864 he discovered a further variant of his diazo reaction, known as coupling. In this the diazo compounds were linked with phenol or an aromatic amine, thereby forming intensely coloured compounds. Thus were born the azo dyestuffs, perhaps the greatest single discovery in the history of the dyestuffs industry. Griess played little part in the industrial exploitation of these dyes -- his few patents were not lucrative -- though he published a further series of papers, 'New investigations of the diazo compounds', in 'Berichte der Deutschen Chemischen Gesellschaft'. In 1884 he lodged a patent for the first direct cotton dye: that is, a dye requiring no mordant. The originality of his research was recognized by his election as FRS in 1868. The University of Munich conferred an honorary degree on him. 
In 1869 Griess married Louise Ann (died 1886), daughter of William Mason, medical officer of health for Burton upon Trent. They had two sons and two daughters. In the summer of 1888 he took his family on holiday to Bournemouth and there died of a heart attack, at Pynes, West Cliff Gardens, on 30 August, frustrating his desire to retire to Kirchhosbach when his children's education was complete. 


@@@@@


doc= 37491


Griffiths, Hugh (1891-1954), chemical engineer, was born at 34 Dunning Road, Middlesbrough, on 28 July 1891, the only child of Hugh Griffiths (died 1892/3), a blast furnace manager, and his wife, Emma Jane Watson. He attended school in Middlesbrough and, at the age of fifteen, won a national scholarship in chemistry at Imperial College, London. In the following years he took the diploma of associate of the Royal College of Science and he graduated BSc with first-class honours in 1910. 
After spending a further year at Imperial College as a demonstrator, in 1911 Griffiths accepted an appointment with the Nobel Explosives Company in Ayrshire and began to examine the physical analysis of chemical plant performance. With the onset of the First World War he became responsible for the design and construction of explosives plant for the Ministry of Munitions, as well as plants for heavy chemicals, dyestuffs, intermediates, and synthetic drugs which, until that time, had been imported from Germany. In 1917 Griffiths set up as a consulting chemical engineer in the City of London, a career which he pursued with ever-increasing success. On 7 January 1919, aged twenty-seven, he married Marion Hellen ('b'. 1893/4), daughter of John Stilt, a railway engineer; the couple had no children. 
Griffiths gave great service to the Institution of Chemical Engineers. From 1917 he took on the lectures started by J. W. Hinchley in 1909 at Battersea Polytechnic, which he continued until 1934 when he was succeeded by his former pupils. He was a prime mover in the creation of the Society of Chemical Industry in 1917 and the Institution of Chemical Engineers in 1922. A member of the board of examiners from 1925 to 1952, he took the chair in 1929. He was a member (at times chairman) of the education committee from 1924 to 1949, and president of the institution in 1945 and 1946. 
Griffiths's early collaboration with Dr Emil Passburg, the German designer of vacuum driers, led to a lifelong interest in high-vacuum techniques. His paper in the 1945 'Proceedings' of the chemical engineering group of the Society of Chemical Industry was the definitive work on the subject. Also of great importance was his work on the development of commercial crystallizers, summarized in his 1947 presidential address to the Institution of Chemical Engineers. In 1932 he had joined the board of British Carbo-Union and his work on vapour absorption and recovery -- the subject of his 1946 presidential address -- resulted in the design and erection of the largest installation in the world for the recovery of benzene from coal gas. 
Griffiths was a man of strong individuality and forcefulness of character. His leonine aspect and the mischievous twinkle in his eye made his appearance as arresting as his personality. With his immense practical experience he was suspicious of academics; he was a perfectionist and would not tolerate any sort of inaccuracy. After the presentation of a complicated paper at a meeting it was a joy to watch Griffiths, with his invariable appeal to 'first principles', strip the paper of its frills and expose the essential bones of the contribution. He was a champion against humbug in all its forms. 
Griffiths died at his home, 240 Upton Road, Old Bexley, Kent, on 26 June 1954. 
S. R. Tailby', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37492


Grosvenor, Sir Richard, first baronet (1585-1645), magistrate and politician, was born at Eaton Hall, near Chester, Cheshire, on 9 January 1585, the eldest surviving son and the third of seventeen children of Richard Grosvenor, esquire (1562-1619), of Eaton, Cheshire, and his wife, Christian (died 1610), daughter of Sir Richard Brooke of Norton, Cheshire. He was educated in the puritan household of John Bruen, esquire, of Stapleford in Cheshire, and at Queen's College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 26 October 1599 and graduated BA on 30 June 1602. Meanwhile, he had married in 1600 Lettice, daughter of Sir Hugh Cholmondeley of Cholmondeley, Cheshire. They had one son and three daughters before Lettice's death on 20 January 1612. Two years later, in 1614, he married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Thomas Wilbraham of Woodhey, Cheshire, and after her death, he married Elizabeth (died 1627), daughter of Sir Peter Warburton of Grafton, Cheshire. Grosvenor was knighted on 24 August 1617 and made a baronet on 23 February 1622. 
Grosvenor made his principal mark in local affairs. He succeeded his father as a JP for Cheshire in 1619 and he served on the bench until his removal, as part of a purge by George Villiers, first duke of Buckingham, on 26 October 1626. He was also sheriff of Cheshire in 1623-4 and of Flintshire in 1624-5. Although not one of the foremost Cheshire gentry in terms of wealth or landholdings, Grosvenor became the most influential local governor in the area of his main estate, immediately to the south of Chester. This was because of his industry and his abilities as a man of affairs, and also because of his reputation as a supporter of puritan ministers. William Hinde, who had probably been his tutor at Queen's College, described him as a paragon of the godly gentleman, and another leading Cheshire puritan preacher, Nathaniel Lancaster, hailed him in 1628 as 'a father of the country' (Lancaster, sig. A2). 
Grosvenor represented Cheshire in the parliaments of 1621, 1626, and 1628-9. He was not in the front rank of Commons spokesmen, but he was an effective, if rather long-winded, public speaker and a diligent attender of committees. Most of his interventions in parliament were concerned either with the welfare of his Cheshire constituents or with the defence of the Calvinist religion. In 1621 he spoke out against the patentee Sir Giles Mompesson, and the popish threat to the palatinate, and in 1629 he delivered a notable attack on the influence of the king's Arminian advisers. He was also a meticulous parliamentary diarist, providing the fullest known account of debates in 1626, 1628, and 1629. 
Grosvenor's third and last wife died on 12 March 1627. Between 1629 and 1638 he was imprisoned in the Fleet, having become liable for the debts of his brother-in-law, Peter Daniel, esquire. Although he was not restored to the bench after his return to the county, he remained an influential figure in local politics. In May 1640 he arbitrated a dispute over the parliamentary election for Chester, and in July 1642 he played a leading role in organizing, and probably also drafting, the Cheshire remonstrance, a petition containing over 8000 signatures, which called on the king and parliament to settle their differences and avoid civil war. During the war Grosvenor remained neutral; he is not to be confused with his eldest son, Richard Grosvenor esq., who played a prominent part in the royalist defence of Chester. 
Grosvenor's speeches and writings make it possible to reconstruct his political views in considerable detail. He was a firm believer in the divine right of kingship and in patriarchal authority, but at the same time he staunchly defended the liberties of the subject and of parliament's role as 'the representative of the people'. Above all, he was concerned to root out the evil of popery and to overcome the influence of 'evil counsellors' close to the king. In many respects he was the archetype of the 'patriots' and 'public men' who played a crucial political role as spokesmen for their localities and 'the country' in the years preceding the civil war. Grosvenor died at Eaton Hall on 14 September 1645 and was buried in Eccleston church, Cheshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 37493


Gruffydd, William John (1881-1954), Welsh writer and university teacher, was born in Gorffwysfa, Bethel, in the parish of Llanddeiniolen, Caernarvonshire, on 14 February 1881, the eldest child in the family of two sons and two daughters of John Griffith (1852-1929), quarryman, and his wife, Jane Elizabeth Gruffydd (1859- 'c'.1927), daughter of Thomas Gruffydd. He received his early education at Bethel primary school and Caernarfon county school. Caernarvonshire always exerted a strong influence on Gruffydd: 'To me it would seem that 'no' Welshman has ever been more conscious than I have of his roots' (Gruffydd, trans. Lloyd, 58). He rebelled early in his career against the constricting standards of his culture, and while still in his teens began to take a passionate interest in Welsh poetry. From 1899 to 1903 he was an exhibitioner at Jesus College, Oxford, taking a third class in classical honour moderations (1901) and graduating with a second in English (1903). In 1900 he published with R. Silyn Roberts a book of lyrical verse entitled 'Telynegion'. He taught for a year in Scarborough (an unhappy experience), and for two years at Beaumaris grammar school before being appointed in 1906 to an assistant lectureship in the department of Celtic at what became University College, Cardiff. 
In the same year Gruffydd published his second volume of poetry, 'Caneuon a cherddi'. His early poetry was suffused with an Englishness and a romanticism which was lacking from his later work. On 16 August 1909 he married Gwenda Evans ('b'. 1883/4), daughter of Thomas Evans, the Calvinistic Methodist minister of Aber-carn; they had one son, and settled in Tongwynlais, Glamorgan (Gwenda later published translations from French literature). In 1910 Gruffydd won the crown poem competition at the national eisteddfod on the subject of the Lord Rhys: in its control of poetic structure in the Welsh language it is judged one of his primary literary achievements. 
After 1910 Gruffydd's poetic output was spasmodic due to the demands of scholarship. A subtle and discerning critic and anthologist, he produced an edition of Goronwy Owen's 'Cywyddau' (1907) and in 1909 'Y flodeugerdd newydd' ('The new anthology'), a selection of medieval poetry intended for college use. (A later anthology, 'Flodeugerdd Gymraeg', was published in 1931). In 1907-8 Gruffydd published landmark papers in the 'Transactions of the Guild of Graduates' on the connections between Welsh and continental literature in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, and in 1912-13 in the 'Transactions of the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion'. 
In the same period he also wrote a play, 'Beddau'r proffwydi' ('The graves of the prophets'), first produced by the students' Welsh Drama Society in March 1913. This and another play, 'Dyrchafiad arall i Gymro' (1914), were significant contributions to a new naturalistic movement in Welsh drama. 
From 1915 to 1918 Gruffydd served as an officer in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, predominantly in the Persian Gulf, and by the time he was released he had been appointed professor of Celtic (a title later changed to Welsh) at Cardiff, a post he held until his retirement in 1946. Among his important contributions to scholarship 'Llenyddiaeth Cymru, 1460-1600' (1922) and 'Llenyddiaeth Cymru, 1540-1660' (1926), a history of Welsh literature, are significant. 
From 1922 until it ceased publication in 1951 Gruffydd edited 'Y Llenor', the highly successful Welsh quarterly journal, to which many of the leading Welsh writers of the period frequently contributed. The editorial notes, which commented, often with scorching indignation, on many aspects of life in Wales, including support for the Welsh language, aroused considerable interest and feeling and contributed greatly to the character and impact of the journal. Gruffydd contributed autobiographical pieces as well as poetry. 
The collection 'Ynys yr hud a chaneuon eraill' (1923) is considered to be Gruffydd's first mature work -- here he returned to the working community of his childhood in a tauter style and more sombre tone than the effusions of his earlier verse. 'Caniadau' (1932), a selection which he himself made of his poetry down to 1931, which excludes much of his early poetry, is a useful edition of his later work. 
Prose became Gruffydd's main medium of literary expression in his later years, and among his more important works are the autobiographical 'Hen atgofion' (1936), his biography of Owen Morgan Edwards (1937), both of which are classics of Welsh prose literature, and 'Y tro Olaf' (1939). From 1950 onwards he made Welsh translations of 'Antigone' and 'King Lear' for broadcast. 
Gruffydd's major contributions to Welsh scholarship were the numerous studies he published of the intricate structure of the four branches of the 'Mabinogi' and of aspects of the Arthurian legend, a field in which his interest had been aroused by the work of Sir John Rhys. Outstanding among those contributions are his 'Math vab Mathonwy' (1928) and 'Rhiannon' (1953) which, in spite of some evident shortcomings, particularly a failure on the author's part to make sufficient use of the comparative method, testify to Gruffydd's originality of mind, his general perceptiveness, and his clarity of exposition. The validity of his basic hypothesis has not been seriously challenged. 
Gruffydd's lifelong adherence to the principles of tolerance and freedom of thought, as well as his strong aversion to dogma and to any formalized critical doctrine, stemmed partly from his nonconformist upbringing and beliefs. Temperamental, moody, and irascible, he appeared to many of his critics to be culpably inconsistent in the attitudes he took to some of the contentious issues of his day. His shifting standpoints, however, were invariably based on genuine conviction. In 1943 he fought a famous by-election for the University of Wales seat when he stood as the official Liberal candidate against Saunders Lewis of Plaid Cymru. He held the seat until it was abolished in 1950. He was elected president of the council of the national eisteddfod (1945), and was awarded the gold medal of the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion (1946) and honorary doctorates by the universities of Rennes (1946) and Wales (1947). 
During the Second World War and after Gruffydd suffered periods of ill health. He began to find editing 'Y Llenor' troublesome and he retired from the Welsh chair in 1946. He moved then to Chertsey to concentrate on politics but, beleaguered by further illness, he returned to Caernarvonshire. He died at his home in Bangor Road, Caernarfon, on 29 September 1954, and was buried at Llanddeiniolen graveyard, not far from the yew tree which is the subject of one of his most celebrated poems. 
Gruffydd was one of the most important literary figures writing in Welsh between the wars: his poems about working communities contributed to the development of Welsh poetry away from romanticism and lyricism. 


@@@@@


doc= 37494


Grumbold, Robert (bap. 1639, d. 1720), mason and architect, was baptized in June 1639 at Raunds, Northamptonshire, the son of Edward and Mary Grumbold, and was a member of a family of masons originating at the quarry villages of Raunds and Weldon which was active in the Northamptonshire area over several generations. It is not known where he learned his trade, but if it was not in Raunds it could have been in Cambridge, where a Thomas Grumbold (died 1657) had settled; and it was in Cambridge that he established himself, perhaps succeeding to Thomas Grumbold's business. In the course of a long career he became the leading locally based figure in the architecture of the town during the later seventeenth century and the beginning of the eighteenth, and was involved in many of the collegiate building projects of the period. 
Like many other master masons, Grumbold worked as an executant of both his own and others' designs. His first recorded project in Cambridge was the building of the west range of Clare College (1669-76), where Thomas Grumbold had worked previously and where the design was probably the joint work of Grumbold, a 'surveyor' called Jackson, and the college authorities. Subsequent works designed by him include the north range at Clare (1682-6) and probably the rebuilding of St Catharine's College (1674-1704). The most important project on which he acted as contracting mason only was the building of the library at Trinity College (1676-84) to the design of Sir Christopher Wren, and he was also associated with the latter over some work at Ely Cathedral (1699). The contact with Wren is of particular interest in that it provided an influence on Grumbold's own architectural style, to be seen, for example, in the Clare north range; but otherwise his designs display a pleasant artisan manner rather than a full understanding of the grammar of classical architecture. 
Grumbold's will indicates that he accumulated considerable wealth, acquiring a substantial amount of leasehold property in Cambridge. He appears to have had one son and one daughter living at the time of his death, which occurred in Cambridge on 7 December 1720. 


@@@@@


doc= 37495


Gubbins, Norman Hector Leifchild (1893-1976), journalist and humorist, was born on 31 May 1893 at 4 Somerset Road, Ealing, Middlesex, the only surviving son (there were also three older daughters, of whom the younger two were twins) of William Gubbins, commercial traveller, formerly an Oxfordshire farmworker who had run away to London at the age of twelve to sell groceries, and his wife, Marie Cecile, 'nee' Richards. His father died when he was two. Gubbins was educated at Battersea Polytechnic, but left at sixteen, after the headmaster told his mother that educating him had proved a hopeless task. He began work at 10's'. a week in the 'Daily Express' library where, by his own testimony, he spent many miserable years filing cuttings in the wrong envelopes and losing reference books. 
Gubbins served in the First World War as a private from August 1914 to February 1919; it was, he later said, an equally unhappy experience, but he was invalided home early, which may well have saved his life. On 4 February 1922 he married Phyllis Magdalen Hughes ('b'. 1894/5), fashion editor for the 'Daily Mirror'. She was the daughter of Francis George Hughes, a furnishing company's representative. They had two daughters, Felicity Anne, who died at the age of thirty-eight, and Stephanie, who married Leo Halmsley, the writer. Gubbins's professional career continued to stall, however, as more years of miscasting as a reporter followed before the editor of the 'Sunday Express', John Rutherford Gordon, decided he needed a humorous column. Gubbins got the job, he later claimed, because there was no one else in the office at the time. His first column, under the generic strap-line 'Sitting on the fence', appeared on 30 November 1930 on page 3 -- a star position -- and under his new byline, Nathaniel Gubbins, which was to remain with him for life. 
The first few weeks were shaky; Gubbins seemed uncertain whether he could pull it off. But he soon got into his stride, and began to develop a whole bestiary of characters who were to delight millions of readers for the next twenty-three years. There was the Worm, apotheosis of the suburban man for whom Gubbins wrote. There was the Sparrow, vehicle for his most sustained and ferocious satire on the sex war (Sparrow dallied with the Other Sparrow at the Tree Tops Club). There was Sally the Cat, his archetypal female, and the Ginger Cat, a tom with all the foibles of its gender. His daughter Stephanie was the acknowledged basis for The Awful Child, forever asking awkward questions. Gubbins also produced a series of brilliant dialogues with his own stomach, which acquired a separate, living, suffering identity as Tum, his gastric 'Doppelganger'. (Gubbins suffered from chronic dyspepsia, smoked fifty cigarettes a day, and confessed he found the world intolerable without a glass in his hand.) 
Gubbins was at his finest during the Second World War (he mocked his Home Guard service but in truth was an artillery officer at a secret Home Guard site). He was a hero to the Eighth Army, the darling of W. M. Aitken, first Baron Beaverbrook, and the subject of two 'Times' leaders. 
The BBC ran a series of Thursday evening programmes based on his characters in 1944. In 1953 Beaverbrook decided the column had lost its appeal and Gubbins was sacked; he moved to the 'Sunday Dispatch', but the transplant did not take. The last twenty years of his life were spent in retirement; indeed, in 1963 he had to write to the 'Sunday Times' to point out that he was not, as they had reported, dead. Some thirteen years later, Gubbins succumbed to cancer and heart disease, and died on 3 February 1976 at Victoria Hospital in Deal. 
Godfrey Smith', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37496


Gurle, Leonard (c.1621-1685), gardener and nurseryman, had one of the earliest general nursery gardens in London from the early 1640s, when he moved from Southwark to a 12 acre site in east London between Brick Lane and Greatorex Street, north of Old Montagu Street. During the 1660s and 1670s his nursery was the largest in London, and he was famous as a supplier of fruit trees in particular, though he sold ornamental trees and shrubs and seeds as well. Leonard Meager in 'The English Gardener' (1670) printed 'a Catalogue of divers sorts of Fruit, which I had of my very Loving friend Captain Garrle', containing over 300 varieties, many of them from France (Meager, 82). By 1661 Gurle had raised the hardy nectarine 'Elruge' and given it his own name reversed, with an extra 'e' for euphony. 
In 1672 Gurle sold pear and other fruit trees, cypresses, spruces, and other forest trees, jasmine, and honeysuckles, with a box of seeds, to Sir Roger Pratt, for his garden at Ryston Hall, near Downham, Norfolk. Late in 1674 he supplied fruit trees to Sir Richard Temple at Stowe, and to William Russell, first duke of Bedford, at Woburn Abbey. The Woburn order included dwarf plums and cherries, French pears, an Elruge nectarine, and other fruit, with more young trees 'to make good those that died last year' in accordance with Gurle's guarantee to supply 'the best of every sort in case any fail or die' (Thomson, 251). After the death of John Rose in 1677, Gurle succeeded him as the king's gardener at St James's Palace, with $320 a year to maintain the garden and another $240 a year as his own salary. There he had an official residence, but he continued to run his Whitechapel nursery, with another in London Fields. 
Gurle died in the spring of 1685, before 2 April, and was buried in Woodham Walter, near Maldon, Essex, which may have been his place of birth. His widow, Joyce, was his second wife, whom he had married in 1676, and a son, William, was given the power to administer his estate. Two other sons, Martin and Joseph, baptized in 1641 and 1644, and three daughters, Rebecca, Margaret, and Jane, survived their father. The area occupied by the nursery was called Gurle's Ground for some time after Gurle's death; in 1719 part of it was still occupied by a Martin Girle, possibly the nurseryman's eldest son or a grandson. 
Sandra Raphael', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37497


Gurney, Ivor Bertie (1890-1937), composer and poet, was born at 3 Queen Street, Gloucester, on 28 August 1890, the elder son and second in the family of two boys and two girls of David Gurney (1872-1919), proprietor of a small tailoring business, and his wife, Florence (1861-1945), daughter of William Lugg, house decorator. He was educated at the King's School as a chorister of Gloucester Cathedral, then as an articled pupil of the cathedral organist, A. Herbert Brewer, and finally, on winning a composition scholarship (1911), at the Royal College of Music under Sir Charles Stanford. During these formative years he owed much of his musical, literary, and intellectual development to his godfather, the Revd Alfred Hunter Cheesman (1865-1941), vicar of St Matthew's Church, Twigworth, near Gloucester. Cheesman, a philanthropic bachelor, made his large library available to the young Gurney and provided a stimulus and encouragement that was not available in his home and scarcely available at any of his official places of education. 
Though rejected by the army in 1914 on grounds of defective eyesight, Gurney enlisted on 9 February 1915 while still a student and from 25 May 1916 served in France as a private with the 2nd/5th Gloucesters. He sustained a minor bullet wound on Good Friday 1917 and more serious gas injuries on or about 10 September 1917 during the third battle of Ypres (Passchendaele). He spent time in various war hospitals in England and, after showing signs of mental instability (including a suicide attempt on 19 June 1918), he was finally discharged in October 1918. 
Gurney resumed his studies at the Royal College of Music, this time under Ralph Vaughan Williams, but could not concentrate. He returned to Gloucester and, failing to find permanent employment, had to live on a small disability pension and the charity of friends and family. Music now poured from him, but his behaviour (eccentric before the war) grew increasingly erratic. Further threats of suicide followed, and in September 1922 he was diagnosed as suffering from paranoid schizophrenia and was committed to Barnwood House Asylum, Gloucester. On 21 December 1922 he was transferred to the City of London Mental Hospital, near Dartford, Kent, where he remained until his death. 
Opinions vary as to the origins of Gurney's mental problems. Although it would be unwise to dismiss his wartime experiences as a contributory factor, the source seems more likely to have been genetic and stemming from his mother's side of the family. Signs of instability were evident before the war, while the companionship of his fellow soldiers seems, by virtue of their shared suffering, to have afforded him a rare degree of stability. This evaporated as soon as he was granted his discharge and had to face the world alone. As a composer Gurney found his voice in 1913-14 with the composition of 'Five Elizabethan Songs'. Although he wrote chamber and orchestral music, songs were his true vocation. Manuscripts of more than 300 are to be found in the Gurney archive at Gloucester Public Library. Poetry was a secondary interest that grew only when conditions in the trenches made composition almost impossible (he nevertheless did write several fine songs in the trenches). After the war he pursued both arts with equal fervour. 
Gurney's songs began to find publishers from 1920 onwards. His two Housman cycles, 'Ludlow and Teme' and 'The Western Playland', were included as part of the 'Carnegie Collection of British Music' in 1923 and 1926 respectively. Both were scored for solo voice, piano, and string quartet and greatly enhanced his reputation as a composer of substance. However, it was not until the Oxford University Press issued two volumes of twenty songs in 1938 that his true stature could be appreciated. Further collections followed in 1952, 1959, and 1979, made possible by the faith and industry of Gurney's friend the musicologist Marion Scott (1877-1953), who had saved his manuscripts, and the editorial expertise of the composers Gerald Finzi and Howard Ferguson. His manuscripts pose great ethical and aesthetic problems because so much of his work is uneven, unpolished, and sometimes incoherent. 
Similar considerations afflict his poetry, of which over 1700 items exist in the Gloucester archive. Two volumes were published during Gurney's lifetime: 'Severn and Somme' (1917) and 'War's Embers' (1919); and minor selections appeared in 1954 and 1973, edited by Edmund Blunden and Leonard Clark respectively. In 1982 the Oxford University Press issued a major selection of some 300 poems, edited by P. J. Kavanagh, and it was on the basis of this volume that his importance as a poet came to be recognized. Further evidence of the breadth of his literary abilities came with the publication in 1983 of his 'War Letters', and in 1991 of his 'Collected Letters', both edited by R. K. R. Thornton. In 1995 two volumes, 'Best Poems' and 'The Book of Five Makings', which Gurney himself had planned and titled, were edited by R. K. R. Thornton and George Walter and issued under one cover by the Carcanet Press. A similar volume, '80 Poems or so', from the same editors and publisher, followed in 1997. Since 1995 the establishment of an Ivor Gurney Society, which issues an annual journal (vol. 1, August 1995), has provided a focus for research into his life and work. 
Gurney's poems celebrate his love of the Gloucestershire countryside with the same unsentimental vigour as they report on the realities of trench warfare and chart his gradual descent into madness. His songs are equally forceful and direct, covering a wide range of emotional expression and empathizing with poets of every period, particularly his contemporaries, the Georgians. In both fields he was an individualist, and in both his successes mark him out as an artist of power and originality. 
Gurney died from tuberculosis on 26 December 1937 at the City of London Mental Hospital, Stone, near Dartford, Kent. He was buried on 31 December in St Matthew's churchyard at Twigworth, near Gloucester. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 37498


Gurney, Samuel (1816-1882), philanthropist and banker, was born on 3 February 1816, at Upton, Essex, the second of three sons of Samuel Gurney (1786-1856), Quaker philanthropist and discount banker, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Sheppard (died 1855). He had six sisters. 
Educated at the Friends' school, Rochester, and at Grove House, Tottenham, Gurney married young in 1837. His wife was Ellen (1814-1892), daughter of William Foster Reynolds, of Carshalton House, Surrey. Gurney lived for many years at The Culvers, Carshalton, near the Reynolds property. He became a Surrey magistrate and was high sheriff of the county in 1861. Subsequently he moved to 20 Hanover Terrace, Regent's Park, and took a house at Brighton. 
His father was a partner in Gurney's Bank of Norwich and in Overend, Gurney & Co., bill brokers of Lombard Street. When as a young man Gurney became a partner in the latter business it was already the leading discount house in the City of London. After his father's death in 1856 a new generation of partners made a series of bold and ill-judged investments before floating the business to the public in 1865. In the most notorious bankruptcy of the mid-Victorian period, Overend Gurney stopped payment on 10 May 1866, leaving debts of some $11 million. Other businesses were sunk in its wake and the limited liability company was temporarily discredited as a device. Samuel Gurney junior's reputation was less damaged by this fiasco than those of some colleagues: he remained on the board of companies interested in marine and life assurance, and in submarine telegraphy in the Mediterranean and elsewhere. 
As befitted a Quaker, Gurney's chief contributions were public and philanthropic. The abolition of the slave trade in British colonies in 1833 had fissured the British anti-slavery movement. One new campaigning organization was the British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society, formed in 1839 chiefly by whig radicals; Gurney joined its committee in 1846, and served as its president for eighteen years. Older generations of abolitionists considered that the society was antagonistic to anti-slavery's traditional religious and political ecumenicism. The society was riven by policy disputes. At its annual meeting in 1855, for example, Gurney left the chair in anger when speakers criticized Anthony Ashley Cooper, earl of Shaftesbury, and the Turkish Aid Mission Society of the USA for associating with slave owners. Gurney's relations with American merchants and financiers gave him a realistic sense of the prospects of American abolitionists. Like his father, Gurney was active in the peace movement, but felt alienated by the growing sectarian militancy of campaigners like Richard Cobden and John Bright. 
From 1857 until 1865 Gurney was MP for the small borough of Penryn and Falmouth (which seat he represented jointly with the whig banker Thomas Baring, afterwards first earl of Northbrook). He was an independent Palmerstonian Liberal who supported religious liberty and the extension of free trade but made no parliamentary mark. He was one of a group of rich, influential Quakers nicknamed 'weighty Friends'. 
Gurney served on committees for penal reform and for public amenities in London, and against the opium trade. He was a founder of the Metropolitan Drinking Fountain and Cattle Trough Association in 1859 which relieved alike the thirst of Londoners and the suffering of dumb beasts. The Linnean and Royal Geographic societies elected him to fellowships. Gurney died from diabetes at Bishop's Down, Grove Spa, Tunbridge Wells, on 4 April 1882. 


@@@@@


doc= 37499


Gwynne, Sir Rowland (c.1659-1726), politician, was the eldest son of George Gwynne ('c'.1623-1673) of Builth, Radnorshire, an MP under the protectorate and in the 1660 Convention, and his wife, Sybil, only child of Roderick Gwynne of Builth. He attended St John's College, Oxford, matriculating on 16 July 1674, and was entered at Gray's Inn in 1679. In 1681 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. 
Having barely attained his majority, Gwynne was returned to the first Exclusion Parliament for Radnorshire, and, although a gentleman of the privy chamber and knighted by Charles II in 1680, threw himself with an almost desperate zeal into the cause of exclusion, with the result that in 1683 he went into voluntary exile in the Netherlands, suspected of complicity in the Rye House plot. 
Gwynne had married Mary Bassett (died 1722), daughter and heir of William Bassett of Glamorgan. However, having wasted his own considerable inheritance and his wife's fortune, he stood in need of a greater reward at the revolution than the minor place of treasurer of the chamber, which, aside from various local dignities, was all he received. In 1692 he forfeited even this office when a characteristic political gamble backfired. He laid an information before Queen Mary accusing the lord lieutenant of Ireland, Henry, Viscount Sidney (later earl of Romney), of corruption, but was unable to prove the charge. Deprived of royal favour and hounded from Radnorshire politics by his great rivals the Harleys, he sought out a new patron, Thomas Grey, second earl of Stamford, a new parliamentary seat (first for Brecknockshire and then as Stamford's nominee for Bere Alston), and a new reputation as an energetic House of Commons man. 
It was Gwynne who in 1696 proposed the introduction of a loyal association, in response to revelations about the assassination plot, and who in 1698 led the inquiry into clandestine trade with France during the Nine Years' War. By 1701 he was serving as chairman of the influential elections committee, and was even talked of as a possible speaker. In politics he was a thoroughgoing whig, committed to the maintenance of the revolution settlement and the Hanoverian succession. Indeed, he was selected to carry up the 'Bill of Settlement' to the Lords, and in 1702 piloted through parliament a measure to attaint the Pretender. He was thus a particular target for the tories, and according to his own account lost his seat at the 1702 election after a specific campaign against him inspired by the tory leaders. Harassed by creditors and pressed by the Treasury to render his long overdue chamber accounts, he fled to Hanover, where he attempted to ingratiate himself with the electoral family. 
In 1706 Gwynne blundered badly once more in permitting his name to be subscribed to a paper written by the philosopher Leibniz in support of moves in England to invite over the Hanoverian heir presumptive to the throne, which was published in the form of an open letter to Lord Stamford. The effect was to alienate both Queen Anne and the Electress Sophia. Gwynne retired to Hamburg, a sad and lonely figure, 'rusting for want of the conversation I was used to' (Gwynne to Robert Harley, 9 Dec 1710, BL, Add. MS 70229), until Queen Anne's death opened the way for him to return to England. Although he sailed over with King George, as some twenty-five years previously he had accompanied the prince of Orange on his voyage to claim the crown, he received only an annuity of $400 from the new monarch, was soon deep in debt again, and ended his days in a debtors' prison. 
Mary Gwynne died in 1722, four years before her husband. The couple left no children, and at Sir Rowland Gwynne's death her entailed estate returned to her family. Gwynne himself was able to bequeath only plate and household goods, and to request in his will to be buried under a 'plain black stone' with a simple inscription recording his Christian belief (PROB 11/607, fols. 46'v'-47'r'). Gwynne died 'in the rules of the King's Bench' on 24 January 1726. 


@@@@@


doc= 37500


Hackworth, Timothy (1786-1850), locomotive engineer, was born on 22 December 1786 in Wylam, Northumberland, the eldest of three sons and five daughters of John Hackworth (died 1802), master blacksmith at Wylam colliery, and his wife, Elizabeth Sanderson of Newcastle. He went to Wylam School and at the age of fourteen was apprenticed, initially to his father, who died the following year. He showed a natural aptitude for mechanical construction, and on completing his apprenticeship he was appointed to his late father's post at the colliery. There he was involved in experiments with steam locomotion. In 1812 Hackworth and Jonathan Foster, the colliery engine-wright, were responsible for the 'Wylam Grasshopper' and in 1813 for the 'Wylam Dilly', two locomotives incorporating novel means of propulsion. 
In 1816 Hackworth regretfully left Wylam colliery, because Sunday work offended his Methodist principles, and became foreman blacksmith at the nearby Walbottle colliery. In 1825 he became locomotive superintendent, and also manager and contractor, for the Stockton and Darlington, Britain's first public railway. Its early locomotives were unreliable, and in 1827 the owners' committee authorized Hackworth to build a new one to his own design. The result was the 'Royal George', a marked advance on previous types, which established the effectiveness of the steam locomotive. It had two vertical cylinders with direct rod drive to cast-iron wheels with shrunk-on tyres of wrought iron, the first of their type; most importantly, it pioneered the discharge of exhaust steam through a converging nozzle blast pipe in the chimney, greatly increasing combustion intensity and steam production. It was also the first to use controlled pre-heating of boiler feed-water. Twelve similar locomotives, with further improvements, were built. In 1830 Hackworth built the 'Globe', which had inside cylinders and crank axle, and a boiler with transverse water tubes running through the main flue -- a forerunner of the Galloway patent boiler. 
In 1840 Hackworth left the Stockton and Darlington Railway to concentrate on his own engineering business, conducted from new workshops at New Shildon, co. Durham, where locomotive, marine, and industrial engines and boilers were built. As well as supplying a number of British railway companies, the firm supplied some of the earliest locomotives for Russia and Canada. 
Hackworth was one of the great pioneers of the steam locomotive and the eminent railway engineer D. K. Clark stated in 1855 that no single individual had, up to the year 1830, done so much for the improvement of the locomotive. He had the reputation of a kindly man, much respected by those who worked for him. He was elected to the British Association for the Advancement of Science. His 'Sanspareil', which competed unsuccessfully in the Rainhill locomotive trials of 1829, instituted by the directors of the London and Manchester Railway and won by the 'Rocket' of Robert Stephenson, gave excellent service on the Bolton and Leigh Railway until 1844 and subsequently became an exhibit at the Science Museum, London. 
In 1813 Hackworth married Jane Golightly, who shared his devout Methodism. They had three sons and six daughters; the eldest son, John Wesley Hackworth (1820-1891), carried on the business after his father's death, which took place from typhus on 7 July 1850 at his home, Soho, Shildon, co. Durham. He is commemorated by the Timothy Hackworth Museum at Shildon. 
George W. Carpenter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37501


Haines, Richard (bap. 1633, d. 1685), farmer and pamphleteer, was baptized on 4 or 14 May 1633, the eldest son of Gregory Haines, yeoman farmer of Shere in Surrey and Sullington in Sussex, and his wife, Elizabeth Pollard. He farmed at Sullington, near Horsham, and was the most prominent member of the Horsham Baptist congregation, of which Matthew Caffyn was minister. He styled himself 'gentleman' and his publications show him to have been something of a virtuoso, interested in the state of agriculture, industry, and the national economy. He corresponded with members of the Royal Society, had lodgings in Christ Church parish, Newgate Street, London, and sought support for his projects at court, and in parliament and the City. 
In 1672 Haines obtained a patent for a new method of cleaning trefoil so as to improve the seed, and this led to public controversy with Caffyn, who was himself a local farmer, jealous of Haines's influence with local notables, and convinced that patents were unchristian and patentees covetous. Haines published 'New Lords, New Laws' (1674) in his own defence, but his excommunication by Caffyn was not finally overturned by the general Baptist assembly until 1680. Also in 1674 Haines published 'The prevention of poverty, or, A discourse of the causes of the decay of trade, fall of lands, and want of money throughout the nation', stressing the importance of the balance of trade and advocating a 25 per cent devaluation of shilling coins in order to stimulate domestic manufactures and discourage imports. In the following years, however, Haines turned his attention to workhouses as a panacea for national ills, after a visit to the Netherlands, where he admired Dutch methods of employing the poor. 
In 1677 Haines published 'Proposals for building, in every county, a working-alms-house or hospital, as the best expedient to perfect the trade and manufactory of linen cloth'. In 1678 he took out a patent for a simple 'engine' that turned wheels for spinners of flax, and recommended county workhouses to parliament in 'Provision for the Poor'. Further publications followed, all aimed at a parliamentary audience: 'A Breviat of some Proposals for the Promoting of Industry' (1679), including wool as well as linen manufacture in the workhouse scheme; 'A Method of Government for such Publick Working Alms-Houses' (1679), proposing the union of small parishes for workhouse purposes and the election of 'delegates or overseers' by contributing parishes to oversee the new institutions; and finally 'England's Weal and Prosperity Proposed' (1681), a summary statement. The Exclusion parliaments found no time to discuss Haines's scheme, but, along with the proposals of Thomas Firmin, whom Haines knew, it influenced later projects for reform of the poor laws. 
Haines's last publication was 'Aphorisms upon the New Way of Improving Cyder or Making Cyder-Royal' (1684), publicizing his third patent, for a method of doubling the strength of cider and so competing with imported wines and spirits, and including general advice on the management of orchards. His own farming seems not to have been profitable, however, perhaps because of his other activities; he and his heirs sold off over 500 acres in the late seventeenth century. He married Mary Green on 14 December 1654, and had seven children, three of whom (two sons and one daughter) survived infancy. He died in London on 29 May 1685 and was buried at Christ Church Greyfriars. 
Paul Slack', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37502


Haines, Stafford Bettesworth (1801/2-1860), political agent in Aden, was from a Sussex family, but his place and date of birth are unknown. He was appointed midshipman in the Bombay marine in 1817 and arrived in India in May 1818. Haines made his name as a surveyor in the Persian Gulf, and was appointed assistant surveyor in 1826. In 1829 he went on leave, taking the opportunity in June 1831 to marry Mary Saulez in Alton, Hampshire. They had a daughter and a son, born after his return to India in 1832. After a short period as quarantine master in Bombay in 1832, Haines was appointed to the survey ship 'Palinurus' to chart the south coast of Arabia. 
In 1833 Haines was instructed to survey the island of Socotra as a possible coaling station for steamships, which had just begun to sail between Britain and India. Following the sultan of Mahra's refusal to sell and British troops' failure to seize Socotra, Haines convinced the government of Bombay that Aden could be made into both a strategic and a great commercial centre. 
In 1837 Haines persuaded the sultan of Lahej to sell Aden despite the opposition of his son, who tried to kidnap Haines to thwart the sale. Haines returned to India, but because there was a fear that Mehmet Ali Pasha, governor of Egypt, might seize Aden, Haines returned with 700 troops successfully to storm the town on 19 January 1839. Haines was appointed political agent, and administered Aden from 1839 to 1854, being promoted captain in 1841. His first tasks were to erect fortifications, to intrigue to prevent the Arabs from uniting to expel the intruder, and to use the Jews to set up a highly efficient intelligence network. After he had beaten off three attacks to retake Aden, Haines was able to concentrate on his plans for turning a ramshackle town where 600 people, nearly half of them Jews, lived in squalor into the main entrepot for Arabia and east Africa. An attempt to bring the imam of the Yemen into alliance was vetoed by India, but he played tribal politics with consummate skill, cheaply keeping the peace with well-placed bribes. At the same time, offering low rents to those who would agree to build in stone, he laid out a town which after seven years had a population of 25,000, served by a free port. 
Haines had no friends in high places and his requests for administrative help went unheeded. He was a virtual dictator, but had to write every letter himself and took no leave for fifteen years. When auditors arrived they found a deficit of $28,000, for, in the absence of a bank, Haines had used the Treasury for political and administrative expenses without keeping proper records. He was recalled to Bombay by the East India Company in February 1854 and put on trial for fraud and embezzlement, and, although twice acquitted, he was nevertheless cashiered. No one believed him guilty of financial dishonesty, but the governor, John Elphinstone, demanded restitution of the money. Haines, with an annual salary of $2400, was unable to pay and was consigned to a debtors' prison. He remained there for six years until the new governor of Bombay, Sir George Clerk, took pity on him. He was released on 9 June 1860. 
Haines was a strange mixture, a man with a romantic vision for the future of the first conquest of Queen Victoria's reign, a skilful politician among Arabs but not among his fellow countrymen, who was possessed of a sailor's practicality in such matters as building a town but not in administration. He was a formidable man, often devious, but liked by his colleagues and subordinates, energetic, and determined. He was thickset, with a broad forehead, full beard, and very light-coloured, widely set eyes that could be most intimidating. Haines died on 16 June 1860, at Bombay harbour on a ship that was to take him to England, one week after his release from prison. 
Robin Bidwell', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37503


Haldane, Alexander (1800-1882), newspaper proprietor and barrister, was born in Edinburgh on 15 October 1800, the second of three sons, one of whom died young, and the fifth of nine children of James Alexander Haldane (1768-1851), pastor and religious writer, and his first wife, Mary (1771-1819), daughter of Major Alexander Joass of Culleonard, Banffshire. His half-brother was the physician Daniel Rutherford Haldane. He was educated at Edinburgh high school and the University of Edinburgh before moving to London, where he entered the Inner Temple in 1820. In August 1822 he married Emma Corsbie (1800-1867), youngest daughter of Joseph Hardcastle of Hatcham House, Surrey, a merchant and treasurer of the London Missionary Society; they had one son, James Robert Alexander Chinnery-Haldane, later Episcopalian bishop of Argyll and the Isles, and five daughters. 
Haldane's personal convictions and family connections caused him quickly to assume a prominent role on the more extreme wing of Anglican evangelicalism. He was associated with Edward Irving and Henry Drummond and participated in the early prophetic conferences at Albury, but later distanced himself from the movement that was to result in the formation of the Catholic Apostolic church. In 1828 he began to write for the fledgeling 'Record' newspaper, and subsequently became its chief proprietor and the dominant influence on editorial policy for half a century. Under his leadership 'The Record' was the major public voice of a new school of evangelicals that emerged about 1830. The Recordites, as they were called, followed Haldane in affirming the verbal inspiration of the 'Bible', attacking liberal theology and Catholicism, maintaining a rigorous sabbatarianism, and staunchly defending the established church. Haldane further contributed to evangelical self-awareness by writing the lives of his father and of his uncle, Robert Haldane, and describing their careers as itinerant evangelists. 
Although never an MP Haldane was keenly interested in politics and was an active force in a variety of parliamentary and ecclesiastical networks. He was a close friend and adviser of Anthony Ashley Cooper, seventh earl of Shaftesbury, and through him, between 1855 and 1865, influenced the church appointments made by the third Viscount Palmerston. A vigorous and intellectually acute controversialist, he worked with great energy to sustain the protestant character of the English church and nation, and hence contributed substantially to the entrenched conservatism of Victorian Anglican evangelicalism. Haldane died at 118 Westbourne Terrace, London, on 19 July 1882 and was buried at Paddington cemetery on 24 July. 
John Wolffe', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37504


Hamilton, Charles (bap. 1704, d. 1786), landscape gardener, was baptized on 13 November 1704 in Dublin, the fourteenth child and youngest of the nine sons of James Hamilton, sixth earl of Abercorn (c.1661-1734), and his wife, Elizabeth (1667/8-1754), daughter of Sir Robert Reading, first baronet, of Dublin. He was educated at Westminster School and Christ Church, Oxford (BA, 1723), where he formed a lifelong friendship with Henry Fox (later first Baron Holland), to whose social, financial, and vocational backing his career owed much. Next, making the grand tour to Rome, he became inspired by the landscape paintings of Claude Lorrain, Nicolas Poussin, and Salvator Rosa. In 1727 he became MP for Strabane in the Irish parliament. 
In 1732, on a second visit to Rome with Henry and Stephen Fox, Hamilton's portrait was painted by Antonio David ('c'.1680- 'c'.1738). The portrait shows him fashionably dressed, holding a gun, with an attendant, dogs, and a brace of partridges -- he was highly rated as a shot. In Rome he acquired antique sculpture, including busts of Roman emperors and a 7 feet tall 'Bacchus', later to adorn his property at Painshill. 
In 1734 Hamilton's father died, and, needing an income, in 1738 he gained a position in the household of Frederick, prince of Wales, through the influence of his sister Lady Archibald Hamilton, the prince's mistress. He was MP for Truro (1741-7) and receiver-general in Minorca (1743-57). He was dismissed by the prince of Wales in 1747, and the loss of Minorca in 1756 cost him his receivership. Henry Fox secured a secret service pension for him of $1200 a year as compensation. 
By 1737 Hamilton had begun to acquire over 200 acres of what was regarded as desolate heathland sloping down to the River Mole, near Cobham in Surrey, which he turned into the ornamental Painshill Park. He used his varied talents as a soil improver, a collector and grower of newly available exotic trees and shrubs, and an impresario of entertaining devices -- ranging from a water-wheel pump to a grotto, a hermitage, and rare sculptures and follies, ingeniously placed -- to create a series of agreeable surprises on a tour revealing successive aspects of nature presented in terms of art. He created a 30 acre lake and planted two vineyards. 
Hamilton was recognized by his contemporaries as having contributed decisively to the emergence of the new naturalistic style of English landscape, and his guidance was sought by his friends for such outstanding creations as Stourhead, Bowood, Hagley, and Holland Park. It was a time when converging philosophical, political, scientific, and economic influences inspired a number of English landowners to transform their estates into prosperous miniature centres for civilized living. To fulfil the process, however, they needed to integrate nature with inspired landscape design in terms consistent with practical land management, silviculture, and land forms which could be changed only within strict limits. By his talents, dedication, social connections, and ability to get quick and exciting results within narrow constraints of money and manpower, Hamilton devised the right model at the right moment. However, in 1773 he was forced to sell Painshill in order to repay a loan from Henry Fox. 
Hamilton was married three times. Nothing is known of his first wife, whom he married 'c'.1730, but they had two daughters. In 1772 he married Agnes, daughter of Dr David Cockburn of Ayr, and they had one daughter. After Agnes's death later that same year Hamilton moved to Bath, then in its social heyday, where a benign-looking portrait shows him at seventy, grasping a book entitled 'Views of Painshill'. In 1774 he married Frances Calvert. Hamilton died on 11 September 1786 in Bath and was buried at Bath Abbey. 
Neglect, culminating in damage and destruction, almost destroyed Painshill, until Elmbridge borough council acquired most of it for the Painshill Park Trust, which revived Hamilton's original designs through a vigorous programme of renewal. 
Max Nicholson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37505


Hammerton, Sir John Alexander (1871-1949), author and editor of reference works, was born in Alexandria, Dunbartonshire, on 27 February 1871, the second in a family of two sons and one daughter of James Hammerton (1832/3-1874/5), clog maker of Oldham, and his second wife, Janet ('b'. 1841/2), shopwoman, daughter of Alexander Lang, mason. His father died when he was aged three, and the family, then living in Manchester, returned to the home of their maternal grandmother in Scotland. He attended first the Freeland School, Glasgow, and then Alexander's endowed school in the same city. As the breadwinner in the family, he left school at fourteen, and for the next four years he was apprenticed as a sculptor and tomb-cutter to the firm of stonemasons J. & G. Mossman. During this time he attended evening classes at the City School and at Glasgow University. He was known to his friends as Sandy. 
The most successful creator of large-scale works of reference that Britain has known, Hammerton began his journalistic career in 1889 as a reporter on the Scottish temperance paper 'The Reformer'. His light, humorous sketches began to appear regularly in London newspapers and in periodicals such as 'Punch'. A succession of posts in journalism took him to Bolton, Blackpool, Nottingham, and Birmingham. While working in Blackpool, he married, on 3 January 1895, Rhoda (1871/2-1948), daughter of Colin Gibb Lawrence, of Glasgow. In 1900 he settled in London, where his lively, robust style of writing caught the eye of the founder of modern popular journalism, Alfred Harmsworth. In 1905 Hammerton was invited to join Harmsworth's Amalgamated Press, then the largest periodical-publishing empire in the world, and for the next seventeen years his employer's energetic and 'radium-like personality', as described by Hammerton, provided him with the background to his life's work. Of the more than ten million bound editions that bear his name as editor or author, he was proudest of the fortnightly 'Harmsworth's Universal Encyclopedia' (1920-22) which, under the slogan of 'a penny a day's subscription', sold twelve million copies throughout the English-speaking world and was translated into six languages, including Japanese. 
In 1911-13 Hammerton lived in Buenos Aires, where he edited 'El diccionario encyclopedico Hispano-Americano'. He also wrote under pseudonyms, most notably a novel, 'The Call of the Town' (1904), light reminiscences, and biographies of, among others, Arthur Mee and Sir J. M. Barrie. Despite the shortage of paper and the requisitioning of most commercial photographic glass negatives for the war effort, he was never happier, as he recounts in his autobiography, 'Books and Myself' (1944), than during those days in the First World War when he worked late into the night to the background of a pavement barrel-organ in the Farringdon Road, alert to imminent air attacks on the city. 
Hammerton's formative influence as a boy had been John Cassell's 'Popular Educator', first published in 1852. In 1934 he was able to consummate, in his own words, 'one of the romances of modern publishing', by revising and reissuing the work under the new title 'Practical Knowledge for All', which was, in turn, to become the most familiar series of educational books in millions of homes for a new generation. 
To Hammerton's gifts of communication must also be attributed that most popular of all gestures of the twentieth century: the 'V' sign. In late 1940 he reported in the 'War Illustrated' his sighting of a 'V' for victory sign apparently blazed by a Hawker Hurricane in the sky over the village of Firle in Sussex. Within months the sign had replaced the customary 'thumbs-up' and had been adopted throughout beleaguered Europe as a symbol of defiance to Nazism. 
A lifelong enthusiast of the stage, Hammerton first fell under the spell of music-hall as a boy in Glasgow; from then on he attended performances of all the great variety artists of the day, and for a brief spell managed his own theatre company in Eastbourne. In 1926 he settled near Eastbourne, where he became a familiar sight driving at speed in his superb Lagonda through the Sussex lanes. 
Hammerton was knighted in 1932 and was subsequently made a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts and of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. After his first wife's death in 1948 he married on 12 February 1949 his long-time friend and collaborator, the actress and journalist (Kate) Janet Maitland (1878-1961), daughter of Charles Dallas Alexander, of independent means, and widow of the actor Lauderdale Maitland. He died on 12 May 1949 at the Mayfair Hotel in Westminster, London. 
Bridget Hadaway', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37506


Hammond, Thomas (c.1600-1658), parliamentarian army officer and regicide, was the third son among the five children of Dr John Hammond (c.1555-1617), physician to the royal household under James I, and his wife, Mary (or Marie) Harrison. Thomas's eldest brother, Robert, was the father of Lieutenant-Colonel Robert (Robin) Hammond, Charles I's gaoler in the Isle of Wight during 1647-8, and Oliver Cromwell's cousin through the Hampden family. His youngest brother was the eminent Anglican divine Henry Hammond. His only sister, Mary (or Marie), married Sir John, father of the more famous Sir William Temple. The family had a country seat at Chertsey in Surrey, and by the time of his death in 1617 Hammond's father was clearly a wealthy man, giving generously to charity as well as providing for his widow and children, Thomas's share being a lease worth $40 per annum and a legacy of $200. 
Nothing certain is known of Hammond's career from then until the eve of the civil war, but he must have seen military service in the continental wars, either in the Netherlands or Germany, since he was a trained gunnery officer before 1642. Why he took the side of parliament against the king must remain surmise, unless explained by family connections and/or religious commitment. Evidence of his radicalism is found in 1644 when, as lieutenant-general of the ordnance in the army of the eastern association, he testified against his own commander-in-chief, Edward Montagu, second earl of Manchester, in the latter's celebrated clash with his lieutenant-general of horse, Oliver Cromwell. It is not surprising that Hammond was appointed to the corresponding post in the New Model Army from the spring of 1645. 
Hammond was among the politically active officers of 1647-9, serving on the small standing committee to which Sir Thomas Fairfax handed over control of issuing all commissions, and acting as a spokesman for the high command in their successive dealings with the parliament, the king, and the radicals in the army itself (the agitators and their Leveller allies). He was named to the high court of justice in January 1649, attending no fewer than fourteen of its sittings, including the occasion on which judgment was given against the king; he did not, however, sign the death warrant, though there is no corroborative evidence for the statement that he positively refused to do so, and in 1660-61 he was clearly regarded -- albeit posthumously -- as having been a regicide ['see also 'Regicides]. 
Hammond did not go on the Irish expedition of 1649, but remained on active service; unlike Fairfax he took part in the pre-emptive invasion of Scotland the following year. Like Cromwell, he fell seriously ill in that country and his health appears to have been permanently shattered. Hammond retired from his military position in the course of 1651-2, but continued to be much preoccupied with the pay arrears due to himself and the other personnel of the artillery train from his years of service. He received a grant of Irish lands, having been an 'adventurer' for $200 back in 1642. The artillery men received grants of former crown lands in Middlesex and Surrey in settlement of their arrears; his own share was the royal manor of Byfleet, only 4 miles from his family's seat in Chertsey. He had already acquired, in 1647-8, some previously episcopal lands in settlement of earlier debts owing to him on the public faith. 
Hammond had a brush with the Commonwealth's accounts committee in 1651, but protested that he had accounted fully and properly for all the sums which he had received in all the three armies in which he had served; he pointed out that his account from July 1649 onwards was with the army in Scotland, where by this time George Monck had succeeded him as lieutenant-general of the ordnance. He was still acting as a trustee for the officers and men of the artillery train when additional compensation was voted out of crown lands in the act of 1652; a misleading reference from May of that year has led some authorities to assume that Hammond was dead by then. 
Hammond was clearly in very poor health when he made his will in 1657, and he died in 1658, not long before the protector, his old colleague and then commander. The liberal if optimistic provisions for his family made in his will (proved 27 April 1658) were all destroyed by the events of 1660. The former church and crown lands which he had acquired were automatically forfeit; the residue of his property was confiscated by his retrospective attainder as a regicide. His widow, Martha, and seven surviving children must have had to make their own ways in the world, unless they received help from their in-laws, the Temple family, after whom one of Hammond's sons was named. His famous Anglican brother had died on the eve of the Restoration. 
G. E. Aylmer', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37507


Hammond, William (1727-1793), master mariner and merchant, of Kirk Ella, East Riding of Yorkshire, was the son of Anthony Hammond (1696-1759) and his wife, Mary Hayes. He was accepted as a younger brother of the Hull Trinity House in 1749, eventually becoming an elder brother and three times warden, in 1779, 1785, and 1792. As a representative of the house he regularly attended sessions of the House of Commons during the passage of the 'Spurn Lights Act' of 1766. In November 1771 he sold to the Admiralty two vessels constructed at Whitby which, renamed 'Resolution' and 'Adventure', were fitted out for the second great voyage of discovery (1772-5) of Commander (later Captain) James Cook. The two men were reputedly friends and these sturdy cat-built vessels were of a type familiar to Cook from his earliest days at sea, apprenticed to a Whitby shipmaster. 
Hammond represented Trinity House, in close co-operation with David Hartley, MP for Hull, during the course of the 'Hull Dock Act' of 1774. As chairman of the Hull Dock Company, Hammond superintended the creation of the town's first enclosed dock, which opened for shipping in 1778. While sheriff of Hull in 1785 he headed a committee set up by the Hull Trinity House to found a navigation school, an establishment which celebrated its bicentenary in 1987. 
Hammond married Ann Bean, of York (died 1785). They had twelve children. Hammond died on 26 June 1793 in Kirk Ella and was buried at Welton, near Hull. His son George Hammond was secretary to David Hartley MP and at twenty-eight became the first British resident minister in Washington, USA (1791-5); he was later under-secretary for foreign affairs. William's grandson Edmund Hammond became Baron Hammond and was appointed an honorary brother of Hull Trinity House, thus renewing the family link with this institution. 
Arthur G. Credland', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37508


Hythe, Hamo (b. c.1270, d. in or after 1357), bishop of Rochester, was born in the parish of St Leonard, Hythe, about 1270, the son of Gilbert and Alice Noble; his brothers were John and William (died 1328). Professed as a Benedictine monk about 1302, in 1307 he became chaplain to Bishop Thomas Wouldham of Rochester. On the resignation of John Greenstreet in May 1314 he became prior of Rochester, and although rivals procured a visitation from the archbishop of Canterbury to the chapter, they failed to overturn his appointment. 
Following Wouldham's death the monks of Rochester elected Hythe as bishop on 18 March 1317. On 19 March, however, Pope John XXII ('r'. 1316-34) reserved the see for Giovanni di Puzzuoli, chaplain of Edward II's queen, Isabella. The contest between the two candidates was first fought out before cardinals Gaucelin and Luca (Fieschi) in England, but in 1318 the case was revoked to the papal curia at Avignon, where Hythe was himself constrained to go in early 1319. His biographer, as represented by the 'Historia Roffensis', attributes the protracted proceedings there to Hythe's unwillingness to bribe the cardinals (although it is clear that he retained at least Cardinal Guillaume Testa at the curia), as well as to the proliferation of other candidates with royal support. His election was confirmed on 21 July 1319, and he was consecrated at Avignon on 26 August. By the end of the year he had obtained livery of his spiritualities and temporalities, receiving the latter from Archbishop Walter Reynolds on 2 December and from the king on 5 December. He was enthroned on 13 January 1320. However he was engaged in a protracted and bitter dispute for over a year with Archbishop Reynolds over the sums Hythe claimed as due to him from the period during which the see of Rochester had been in the archbishop's hands. During this time Hythe was desperately pressed with debts and with the payment of his common service of 1450 florins to the curia, which he effected by February 1321. 
Nothing in Hythe's episcopate matches the activity surrounding his election. His natural caution kept him on the political sidelines, although he was well placed to know what was going on at the highest level, as the 'Historia Roffensis', written by a clerk in his entourage, demonstrates. He excused himself from diplomatic assignments on the grounds of (often genuine) ill health and the poverty of his bishopric, and spent much time improving episcopal residences, especially at Halling and Trottiscliffe (both in north Kent). He appears as sympathetic to the regime of Edward II's last years and clearly distrusted the baronial opposition in 1321. In 1326 he advised the king against an attempt to divorce his wife, and was especially commended by Edward to Hugh Despenser the younger (died 1326). Caught in London during the revolution of that year, he refused to join either John Stratford, bishop of Winchester (died 1348), or the archbishop of Canterbury in embassies to Queen Isabella, and fled to Rochester. He was one of four prelates who refused to do fealty to Edward III in January 1327, although he took part in the new king's coronation in February. He is said to have affirmed his support for the new fourth clause of the coronation oath, under which the king swore to observe such laws and customs as should be approved by the community of the realm, at this time. 
Hythe soon made his peace with the new regime, meeting the queen and the young king when they went on pilgrimage to Canterbury in Lent 1327. He refused to join Archbishop Simon Mepham (died 1333) in his precipitate support for the opposition to the Mortimer regime. But when in June 1329 he was urged by Roger Mortimer, first earl of March (died 1330), to serve on the council, he declined. In Lent 1330 he opposed a grant of clerical taxation to the regime of Mortimer and Isabella. His biographer comments that Hythe might have become treasurer in 1332 but for his reluctance to buy the office. In 1333 he rallied the men of the Cinque Ports to defend the country during Edward III's absence in Scotland, and throughout the early stages of the Hundred Years' War was inevitably involved in the organization of coastal defence. But he firmly eschewed political involvement and devoted his time to his diocese and to building. The new bell-tower at Rochester Cathedral was raised under his auspices. He clashed with the monks of Rochester on several occasions, and in Mepham's visitation of 1329 was accused of not preaching and of being impatient and irascible. But he supported Mepham in 1332 when the other prelates appealed to the curia. In 1333 he made a rare journey abroad to deliver the pallium to the new archbishop of Canterbury, John Stratford, at Rue in Ponthieu. From 1331 to 1336 he was engaged in a bitter dispute with Bishop William Airmyn of Norwich (died 1336). 
Illness prompted Hythe's resignation of the bishopric no later than 1352. He was succeeded by John Sheppey (died 1360), whom he had himself chosen as prior in 1333. In June 1353, at Sheppey's request, Hythe was granted a papal pension of $40. The grant specifies that he was more than eighty years old. He was still living in May 1357. 


@@@@@


doc= 37509


Hannington, Walter (1896-1966), trade union official and political activist, was born on 17 June 1896 at 22 Randolph Street, Kentish Town, London, the youngest of four sons and sixth of seven surviving children of Henry William Hannington, foreman bricklayer of Kentish Town, and his wife, Eliza Smith. Born and reared in lodgings in the basement of a three-storey house in a working-class district of north London, Wal Hannington attended the local elementary school from the age of five. 
Hannington left school at fourteen and after several jobs became apprenticed to a toolmaker, joining the Amalgamated Society of Toolmakers in March 1916. Largely self-taught in Marxist literature, he joined the Marxist British Socialist Party (BSP), where he came into contact with Russian Marxist exiles such as Maksim Litvinov and Georgy Chicherin. By 1917, aged twenty-one, he was a foreman in the Beta Engineering works in Camden Town and president of the Kentish Town branch of the Toolmakers' Society. The First World War, which the BSP opposed, and the Bolshevik revolution in Russia reinforced his commitment to militant activity as part of the shop stewards' movement in the engineering trades. 
After a period of unemployment in 1919 Hannington found work at the government-run Slough Transport Depot where he became chairman of the shop stewards' committee, organizing strikes and demonstrations against its eventual closure in April 1920. In July of that year he followed the Toolmakers' Society into the merger which created the Amalgamated Engineering Union (AEU) and in the same month became a founder member of the Communist Party of Great Britain (CPGB) in which the BSP was absorbed. Both the AEU and the CPGB were to retain his allegiance throughout his life. 
But it was as a leader of the unemployed that Hannington rose to national prominence. Already established as a meticulous organizer, a good platform speaker, and an activist with a flair for publicity, he was instrumental in October 1920 in bringing together representatives of unemployed groups in the capital into a London district council of unemployed with himself as organizer. Demonstrations were staged outside poor-law offices with the slogan 'Work or full maintenance at trade-union rates.' In April 1921 fifty delegates from England and Wales set up a national organization, the National Unemployed Workers' Committee Movement (NUWCM), with Hannington as national organizer. In 1922 it planned the first of a series of national hunger marches which were to become the NUWCM's principal contribution to the inter-war years. Seen as a subversive organization by the government, the NUWCM was quickly penetrated by police informers and its activities were harried at local and national level. 
In 1922 Hannington received his first term of a month's imprisonment for uttering seditious words. Unabashed, he made a clandestine visit to Moscow in 1923 as a delegate to the Red International of Labour Unions. In late 1925 he was one of twelve leading communists arrested and tried on charges of sedition and incitement to mutiny, for which he received twelve months' imprisonment. Released in September 1926, following the defeat of the general strike, he organized national hunger marches in 1929, 1932, and 1934, which were largely ostracized by the labour movement and were harassed by the police, sometimes leading to violence. As a result of the 1932 hunger march Hannington served another three months in prison for offences against the 1931 'Incitement to Disaffection Act'. 
The later 1930s saw small triumphs amid a larger failure. Although led by communists, Hannington's movement was criticized by the Communist Party for failing to politicize the unemployed, large numbers of whom joined the movement only to leave it quickly once work was obtained. By the mid-1930s it was past its peak, but it played a prominent part in the agitation which led to the suspension of the National Government's Unemployment Assistance Board scheme early in 1935. The now renamed National Unemployed Workers Movement (NUWM) mounted a last national march in 1936 which obtained C. R. Attlee and Aneurin Bevan as platform speakers for its rally in London, but even this success was overshadowed by the publicity attracted by the apolitical Jarrow crusade at the same time, the one hunger march in which the NUWM was not involved. With the outbreak of war, the activities of the NUWM were suspended, and finally wound up in 1943. Hannington returned to work as a lathe turner and while serving as convener of shop stewards was elected a national organizer of the AEU in November 1941. Taking up the post in February 1942, he held it until defeated in an election in 1951. In 1952 he was elected assistant divisional organizer for division no. 25, retiring in June 1961. Ebullient, sociable, and respected even by those who disagreed with his political views, Hannington saw his work in the AEU rewarded in 1938 with the Tolpuddle award, the top award of Britain's trade union movement, and the AEU's special award of merit in 1962. 
Hannington unsuccessfully contested parliamentary seats in 1929, 1931, 1934, and 1950. Among a large number of writings, 'Unemployed Struggles, 1919-1936' (1936), 'The Problem of the Distressed Areas' (1937), 'Ten Lean Years' (1940), and his unfinished autobiography, 'Never on our Knees' (1967), were important polemical documents of the inter-war years. In 1917 he married Polly Winifred, daughter of Edwin Stanley, a railway labourer. There was one daughter of the marriage. 
Hannington died of a heart attack on 17 November 1966 at Hammersmith Hospital shortly after attending for a medical examination. He was survived by his wife. 
John Stevenson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37510


Hargreaves, James (1834-1915), chemical manufacturer and inventor, was born in May 1834, at Hoarstones, Pendle Forest, Lancashire, the eldest of the seven sons of John Hargreaves, a schoolmaster. Hargreaves's education began at his father's school in Slaithwaite. In 1844 his father left schoolmastering to become a druggist and Hargreaves was introduced to medicine and chemistry. In 1856 he turned to technical chemistry, especially the problem of recovering sulphur from alkali waste. John Mercer persuaded him to contact William Gossage, who had been experimenting on similar lines, and in 1859 Hargreaves joined Gossage's soap works. Here he invented methods for recovering chromates used for bleaching oils and fats in soap manufacture and bleaching common brown soap. He was also the first to prepare blue mottled soap. 
After leaving Gossage in 1865, Hargreaves worked for two other soap manufacturers in Runcorn and Liverpool. In 1871 he and his youngest brother, John, set up as consulting chemists in Widnes. Turning to metallurgy, James proposed a modification of the Bessemer process for the manufacture of steel, using sodium nitrate instead of air. James Heaton of Widnes tried this on a small scale at Langley Mill, Nottinghamshire, but the cost proved too high. Hargreaves also devised a method for recovering phosphorus from blast-furnace slag; the by-product, ferric chloride, was converted into ferric oxide and chlorine. 
About 1872 Hargreaves, with Thomas Robinson, an iron-founder, invented a process and plant for making salt-cake from salt without using sulphuric acid. The Atlas Chemical Company, Widnes, was formed in 1873 to make salt-cake and hydrochloric acid by Hargreaves's method. Hot gases from pyrites burners, mixed with steam, were passed over small blocks of moulded salt, a process which worked successfully for many years; the works was absorbed by the United Alkali Company in 1890 and the last Hargreaves-Robinson salt-cake plant closed in 1918. 
With Thomas Bird, an electrical engineer, Hargreaves about 1893 invented an electrolytic process for decomposing common salt, using an asbestos diaphragm. After trials the General Electrolytic Alkali Company was established in 1899 with Hargreaves as a director, and production began at Cledford Bridge near Middlewich in 1901. In 1914 the company was reorganized as Electro-Bleach and By-products Ltd. The process, which was highly efficient, was extensively adopted in Europe and America. 
Hargreaves's inventions were numerous and diverse; besides his innovations in the soap, alkali, metallurgical, and electrochemical industries, his 'thermo-motor' anticipated the idea of the diesel engine, and he was among the first to advocate the use of gaseous chlorine for treating sewage. Shrewd in business, he had a ready wit and a distinctive appearance, with a full beard and piercing eyes. 
The name of Hargreaves's wife and the date of their marriage is unknown but they had one son and five or six daughters. Hargreaves died at 32 Sayce Street, Widnes, on 4 April 1915. 
N. G. Coley', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37511


Harland, Sir Edward James, baronet (1831-1895), shipbuilder, was born on 15 May 1831 in Scarborough, the fourth of six sons (the third of whom died in infancy) and seventh of ten children of Dr William Harland, physician, a close friend of the engineer George Stephenson, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Gowan Peirson of Goathland, Yorkshire. He was apprenticed to Robert Stephenson & Co. at Newcastle from 1846 to 1851. Through his uncle, Dr Thomas Harland, he got to know Gustav Christian Schwabe, a partner in the Liverpool shipping company of John Bibby & Sons. Schwabe arranged for him to work for the Clyde engineering and shipbuilding firm of J. and G. Thomson, who were building ships for Bibby. He returned to the Tyne in 1853 to manage a shipyard, leaving the following year to take up a similar post at Robert Hickson's shipyard in Belfast. Here he quickly became notorious for his stern management, which turned the shipyard round, allowing it to survive the financial embarrassment of the owner in 1855. Two years later he recruited Gustav Wilhelm Wolff, Gustav Schwabe's nephew, as his personal assistant. In 1858 he purchased the yard, renaming the business Edward James Harland & Co. Immediately Bibby placed a contract for three boats. They were so pleased with these that they ordered a further six vessels in 1860 of novel long design, with a narrow beam and flat bottom, which earned them the nickname of 'Bibby's coffins'. Harland and Wolff went into partnership in 1861 to form the company of that name. 
Over the next thirty years the shipyard prospered. Building on the technical success of the Bibby ships, the partners established a strong relationship with the White Star Line of Thomas Ismay, Cunard's principal competitor on the north Atlantic. In 1879-80 the partners added an engine works to their enterprise and the following year equipped the yard to handle the newly introduced open-hearth steel. By this time most of the contracts were being negotiated by William James Pirrie, who had become a partner in 1874. During the home rule crisis in 1885, Harland made secret preparations to withdraw to mainland Britain if the situation became intolerable. This proved unnecessary and massive investment followed to provide facilities for the construction of the latest generation of Atlantic liners. In 1891, when shipbuilding was distressed, Harland was persuaded to introduce a system of cost plus contracts for favoured customers which secured a large volume of business over the next four years. 
The success of the shipyard depended on improvement to the Lagan waterway made by Belfast harbour commissioners. Harland served as a commissioner from 1875 and was chairman from 1875 to 1885. Although a unionist in politics, he tried to pursue a policy of non-discrimination in the shipyard, strained by the sectarian troubles in 1864 and in 1884-5. He was mayor of Belfast in 1885-7 and helped co-ordinate the campaign against the 'Home Rule Bill'. He was elected MP for North Belfast in 1887, moving to London but rarely speaking in parliament. He was knighted in 1885 and created a baronet later the same year. 
A Presbyterian, Harland was a member of the First Congregation in Rosemary Street, Belfast. In January 1860 he married Rosa Matilda, of Vermont, near Belfast, the daughter of Thomas Wann, a stockbroker and insurance agent. They had no children and the baronetcy became extinct when Harland died on Christmas eve 1895 at his Irish home, Glenfarne Hall, near Enniskillen, co. Leitrim. 
Michael S. Moss', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37512


Harmer, Sir Sidney Frederic (1862-1950), zoologist, was born in Heigham, Norwich, Norfolk, on 9 March 1862, the second son among the five children of Frederic William Harmer, wool merchant and manufacturer, and his wife, Mary Young Lyon. He was educated at Amersham Hall, Reading, and at seventeen won a mathematical scholarship to University College, London, where he studied natural sciences. He subsequently went to King's College, Cambridge, where he had a distinguished career as exhibitioner, scholar, and fellow. He obtained first classes in both parts (1882 and 1883) of the natural sciences tripos. 
In 1885 Harmer became university lecturer in advanced invertebrate morphology, and five years later became superintendent of the University Museum of Zoology. As a teacher he was highly respected for his industry, patience, and accuracy in observation, his clarity and precision in recording, and his ability to impart knowledge. Throughout his life he inspired affection by his gentleness, courtesy, and kindness. 
In 1891 Harmer married Laura Russell, daughter of Arthur Pearce Howell of the Bengal civil service. They had two sons and two daughters (a son and a daughter predeceased him). 
Harmer was appointed keeper of zoology at the British Museum (Natural History) in 1907 and from 1919 to 1927 was its director. His industry was prodigious and he left to the museum a volume of files, indexes, and notebooks filled with accurate and methodically arranged taxonomic work, together with his exceptionally fine library of works on Polyzoa and whales. 
At Cambridge Harmer's research centred on the embryology, anatomy, and taxonomy of Polyzoa and 'Cephalodiscus', for which he was the first of the Cambridge zoologists to use the binocular microscope. He also developed an interest in whales, and worked at the Stazione Zoologica in Naples and the Plymouth laboratory of the Marine Biological Association, with which he was long connected. His first three volumes on 'The Polyzoa of the Siboga-Expedition' were published in 1915, 1926, and 1934, and the material for the fourth was prepared by 1941. Harmer published numerous influential papers on the Cetacea and enhanced the collections. His equanimity led to good relationships with the trustees of the British Museum (Natural History), and he steered the museum smoothly through a difficult time with tact and judgement. 
Harmer had a long connection with the Museums Association, of which he was president in 1904, becoming an honorary member in 1922. For thirty-one years he was a fellow of the Linnean Society, serving on the council in 1921-4 and 1927-32, and being vice-president in 1931-2 and president in 1927-31. In 1934 he received the Linnaean medal. Harmer was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1898, served on the council, and was a vice-president. Other honours included being made a foreign member of the Norwegian and Swedish academies and an honorary member of the Boston Society of Natural History and the Societe Zoologique de France. He was appointed KBE in 1920. 
Harmer travelled extensively, was fond of music, and was a competent pianist. He was a keen cyclist on the high bicycle until quite late in life, and was always an enthusiastic and knowledgeable gardener. Harmer died at his home, 5 Grange Road, Melbourn, Cambridgeshire, on 22 October 1950. 
Neil Chalmers', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37513


Harris, Geoffrey Wingfield (1913-1971), physiologist and endocrinologist, was born on 4 June 1913 in Acton, Middlesex, the elder child and only son of Thomas Harris, physicist, from Oxfordshire, who worked at University College, London, at the ballistics department at Woolwich arsenal, and later at Cambridge, and his wife, Winifred Irene, 'nee' Stiles, of Buckinghamshire. He was educated at Dulwich College, and for a few months at University College, London, before he went in 1932 to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he was awarded a double first in the natural science tripos, 1934 and 1935. He chose St Mary's Hospital, London, for his clinical training and gained the Cambridge degrees of MB (1939), MD (1944), and ScD (1950). His life's work led to the creation of neuroendocrinology, of which he is regarded as the father figure. 
In 1936 Harris married Georgina Mary Birnie, daughter of a Scottish engineer. They had a son who qualified in medicine. This marriage ended in a divorce in 1951. In the same year Harris married Margaret (Peggy), daughter of Dr Michael John O'Kane, general practitioner, of Cushendall, Northern Ireland. They had two daughters. 
From 1940 to 1947 Harris was demonstrator in anatomy at Cambridge, in 1947-8 lecturer in anatomy, and from 1947 to 1952 lecturer in physiology. In 1952 he became head of the laboratory of experimental neuroendocrinology at the Maudsley Hospital, London, and in 1953 professor of physiology at the University of London. From 1962 until his death he was Dr Lee's professor of anatomy in Oxford, honorary director of the Medical Research Council's neuroendocrinology unit in the university, and fellow of Hertford College, Oxford. He was also an honorary consultant in psychiatry at the Littlemore Hospital, Oxford. He played an important part in establishing the new physiological sciences honour school, in which neuroendocrinology was one of the options. 
To understand the significance of Harris's work, it is necessary to realize that until the mid-1930s the connection between the nervous system and the endocrine glands was unknown. In the early 1930s, however, Francis Marshall of Cambridge -- who had an immense influence on the young Harris -- pointed out that the great majority of animals have a more or less definite season when they breed, raising the question of what it is that controls breeding seasons and how the body is able to react to environmental signals. 
While still an undergraduate, Harris took this as his starting point and developed the idea that the seasonality of breeding might be controlled by the transmission of stimuli from the brain to the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland. It was a brilliant insight which led to what is possibly his best known work, 'Neural Control of the Pituitary Gland' (1955), in which he established that environmental stimuli, acting through the nervous system, led to the release of what later became known as releasing factors from the hypothalamus. These factors travel through a portal system of blood vessels (so called because of the analogy with the hepatic portal circulation), which links the under surface of the hypothalamus and the anterior pituitary, and controls the release of pituitary hormones. Later he showed that this mechanism was common to a wide range of vertebrates, suggesting that it must have a very important functional role. It was this which led to the establishment of neuroendocrinology as a new and rapidly expanding discipline. 
Although his ideas were accepted by most of his contemporaries, Harris had his opponents, most notably Solly Zuckerman -- an extremely powerful figure in the world of science -- who, on the basis of a single flawed experiment on one ferret, decided Harris was wrong and described his work in 1952 as 'an edifice of speculation... that has been erected because of an urge to explain the incomprehensible' (Vogt), a view which Zuckerman held throughout his life, although everyone else knew that Harris's findings were so firmly based as to be incontrovertible. 
Harris then showed that there was a link between the central nervous system and other endocrine glands. For example, he showed that the control of the secretions of the adrenal cortex was mediated through the release of ACTH (adrenocorticotrophic hormone) by the anterior pituitary when it received the appropriate signals from the hypothalamus. Further research by Harris was concerned with the effect of gonadal hormones on sexual differentiation of the brain during neonatal life, and the isolation of hypothalamic releasing factors. 
It has been said that 'Harris put the brain into the endocrine system' (Raisman). Certainly his work was immensely broad and influential. It has led to an understanding of the neural mechanisms which underlie cycles of birth, growth, reproduction, and death in the animal kingdom. In medicine it has clarified a whole range of clinical conditions, and it has increased our understanding of the physiological changes associated with stress, emotional trauma, and jet lag. 
Harris was a large, powerfully built, and energetic man, a keen boxer and rugby player in his youth, who continued to play squash into his fifties, often beating much younger players. He was an excellent teacher and generous and helpful colleague; his outstanding success was based on the combination of an excellent operative technique, a continual bubbling flow of ideas, and a huge capacity for work. His publications included chapters in more than twenty texts, and over a hundred original papers. He was elected FRS in 1953, received an Oxford DM in 1962, was appointed CBE in 1965, and received the Dale medal of the Endocrine Society in 1971. Harris died at the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, on 29 November 1971, survived by his wife. His ashes were later buried in Bladon churchyard. The Physiological Society established a lecture in memory of Harris in 1986. 


@@@@@


doc= 37514


Harris, John (1791-1873), artist and facsimilist, was born on 17 November 1791 in Kennington, London, the son of the watercolour painter John Harris (1767-1832), with whom he has often been confused. His grandfather was the entomologist and illustrator Moses Harris. 
Harris occasionally exhibited at the Royal Academy between 1810 and 1834. As an academy student he specialized in portrait miniatures, and with his father he executed the illuminations in the British Library vellum copy of John Whittaker's 1816 gold-printed 'Magna Carta'. Harris worked for Whittaker, a printer and bookbinder, from 1815 until about 1820. By then he had also begun to produce the facsimile work for which he is principally remembered. Both Thomas Grenville and G. J. Spencer (second Earl Spencer) were among the collectors who employed him, and in 1854 Harris described himself in a manuscript memoir of his father as 'an Artist following a variety of branches connected with the Fine Arts, but priding himself more particularly upon executing fac-simile Leaves for perfecting rare old books' (Harvard U., Houghton L., Bi 65.820F*). 
Harris married his wife, Mary, on 13 February 1820, and about the same time began his long association with the British Museum. In his memoirs Robert Cowtan described an incident in which the librarian Anthony Panizzi, along with two others, was unable to identify the facsimile leaves in a rare volume, and called in Harris to distinguish his own work, which he was able to do only after considerable examination of the book. On 8 July 1843, following this episode, the museum trustees at Panizzi's request ordered that Harris in future sign any leaf he restored with the formula 'This is by J. H.'; other signatures used on facsimiles include 'F. S. J. H.', 'by H', and 'J. H.'. Harris's unsigned work is often difficult to distinguish from an original, and his minute signature is sometimes overlooked, as when the British Museum for many years reproduced as genuine a signed Harris facsimile of the printer's device of William Caxton. 
In 1851 Harris showed his facsimiles at the Great Exhibition; his own brief account of his technique and early work appears in the 1852 'Reports by the Juries'. By August 1856 he had become totally blind, and in 1858 an appeal for contributions on his behalf was launched in the advertisement columns of 'Notes and Queries'. Two years later Harris and his wife became residents of the Royal Masonic Benevolent Institution for Aged Freemasons in Croydon; he had been an active freemason since 1818, and in 1849 had published a set of designs for lodge tracing boards, which became standard for many years. While resident at Croydon, where he died on 28 December 1873, Harris published two poems, 'Lines on the Royal Masonic Benevolent Institution', sold in aid of the Freemasons' Life Boat Fund in 1871, and 'Lines on the Fiftieth Anniversary of the Wedding Day of John and Mary Harris' (1870). He left a daughter, Helen Caroline Martin, and a son, John Alfred, who for a time continued his father's business of supplying facsimiles. 


@@@@@


doc= 37515


Harrison, Edward (bap. 1759, d. 1838), physician, was baptized on 4 November 1759 at St Michael's, Kirkham, Lancashire, the eighth child of Richard Harrison, landowner, of Bankfield and Singleton, both in Lancashire, and his wife, Agnes. He studied medicine at the University of Edinburgh (MD, 1784). After further study in London and Paris he settled in Lincolnshire, first in Louth and then in Horncastle, where in 1789 he was appointed first physician at the Horncastle Dispensary by Sir Joseph Banks. On 24 September 1790 he married Margaret Bickerstaffe, of Stanah Grange, Lancashire, at St Chad's, Poulton-le-Fylde. They had no children but from 1796 were guardians to the two sons and a daughter of Harrison's brother John. 
Harrison was a member of the Medical Society of London, and with his collaborator Banks was awarded the society's silver medal in 1797 for their 'Paper on the Solution of Iron in the Human and Canine Stomachs by Means of Diluted Nitric Acid'. One of the first physicians to recognize the parlous state of medical education and the practice of physic, he founded the Lincolnshire Medical Benevolent Society in 1804, which charged him with the investigation of medical practice in Britain. His findings, which included a vivid account of the scandalous extent of quackery, were published in 1806 as a pamphlet entitled 'Remarks on the ineffective state of the practice of physic in Great Britain; with proposals for its future regulation and improvement'. This caused such a stir that Harrison threw himself into the cause of medical reform. 
Harrison's proposals for reform of the education and organization of all medical practitioners had much merit. He moved to London where, with the backing of Sir Joseph Banks and the support of many influential physicians and members of parliament, a bill for medical reform was drawn up in 1806. William Pitt, the prime minister, promised his support but died before anything could be done. An additional obstacle was the opposition of the Royal College of Physicians, whose own bill had been rejected by parliament in 1806 and which still hoped to act as a national regulating body. Harrison persevered, and 'Dr Harrison's Plan for a Medical Reform, and of the Sketch of a Bill for the Improvement of the Medical, and Surgical, and Veterinary Sciences, and for Regulating the Practice Thereof' appeared in 1810. The Royal College of Physicians remained implacable, arguing that Harrison's proposed regulations would lead to the loss of social rank and independence for the physician, and in 1811 Harrison and his allies abandoned medical reform, although Harrison's measures had some influence on the 'Apothecaries Act' of 1815 and subsequent developments leading to the 'Medical Act' of 1858. 
Harrison's wife died in 1817, and on 14 August 1818, at Southwell, Nottinghamshire, he married Charlotte Chaplin ('bap'. 1770), daughter of Charles Chaplin of Tathwell Hall, near Horncastle. Soon afterwards he successfully reset his new wife's cousin's four displaced vertebrae by combining massage with rest for the patient on a special couch, and so began a new specialism in the treatment of spinal disorders, a subject on which his unorthodox views ('Pathological and Practical Observations on Spinal Diseases', 1827, and 'Observations on Spinal Diseases', about 1832) were initially derided; they were, however, accepted after his death. He resigned from Horncastle Dispensary in 1821 and moved permanently to London. He chose to practise without a licence from his old rival, the Royal College of Physicians, thereby flouting the college's right to license all physicians practising in London, and leading to a court case in 1827 where Harrison was acquitted on a technicality by a sympathetic jury. The case inspired subsequent reform of the college's monopoly. 
Harrison's efforts were eventually rewarded in 1832 when John Underwood, a former East India Company merchant, responded to the successful treatment of his ward by offering to support a charitable institution to make Harrison's methods available to the poor. With contributions from Underwood, other subscribers, and $1000 from Harrison himself, Harrison's Spinal Institution opened at Stanhope Street, Hampstead Road, London, in 1837, allowing Harrison a wider selection of patients and the opportunity to train others in his methods. Harrison died in Marlborough, Wiltshire, on 6 May 1838, while on his way to the west country to see a patient with a spinal affliction. He was survived by his second wife, and was buried next to his first wife in St Mary's churchyard, Horncastle. He had recently given $300 to the North London Hospital. In his will he left $3000 to his Spinal Institution and $100 each to the Horncastle Dispensary, Horncastle grammar school, and the Lincolnshire Medical Benevolent Society. His Spinal Institution survived him by at least sixteen years. 
Irvine Loudon', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37516


Hart, Horace Henry (1840-1916), printer, was born on 23 March 1840 in Ballingdon, Sudbury, Suffolk, the son of William Hart ('b'. 1829), a shoemaker and schoolmaster, and his wife, Caroline Elizabeth, 'nee' Clark. At fourteen he became a reading boy at the publishers Woodfall and Kinder in London. He worked as a proof-reader and cashier, and was appointed manager at the age of twenty-six. He took over the management of Savill, Edwards & Co. for the Edinburgh printers Ballantyne, Hanson & Co. in 1878, and joined Clowes & Son two years later. In 1883 he became controller of the Oxford University Press; this newly created post made Hart general manager at Walton Street in Oxford, and he remained there until his retirement. 
Hart came to Oxford as a modernizer. Benjamin Jowett had become vice-chancellor of the university in 1882, and, like the delegates of the press, Jowett was determined to abolish the unprofitable share partnership in the printing business. Hart's appointment led to the end of the partnership, as Jowett dismissed Edward Pickard Hall, the senior printer, and the delegates regained all shares in the press. With their guarded support Hart set out to reorganize Oxford's printing, and to regulate the different practices within its two sides, the learned press and the 'Bible' press. Oxford's London office remained under its publisher, Henry Frowde. Jowett established a committee to investigate printing standards, and Hart reported to it. He favoured retaining the foundry -- the sheer variety of language and type size in Oxford's output rendered other possibilities absurd -- and obtaining fresh stocks from Europe. As Hart pointed out, this was precisely the course John Fell had followed when building up Oxford's printing in the seventeenth century. Hart toured Germany during 1887, and brought back thirty new founts. He introduced new casting machines and enlarged the ink factory in 1888, and a collotype department was established in 1890. Folding and stitching machinery was purchased a year later, establishing the bindery. Monotype keyboards and casters arrived in 1903, and soon became vital to Oxford's work. 
Hart's love of printing led to the two works for which he is best remembered. In 1900 he published 'Notes on a Century of Typography'. Charles Daniel had revived John Fell's types in 1876, and Hart used the neglected collection for Robert Bridges' works, notably the 'Yattendon Hymnal'. Hart decided then 'to save the ancient printing materials belonging to the University from a state of rust and confusion' (Hart, xiii), and he cleaned, preserved, and catalogued Oxford's vast holding of matrices and punches. The 'Notes' presented comprehensive specimens from this treasure trove; a beautiful limited edition, it reached a wider audience when reprinted in 1970. Hart put the rediscovered Fell to good use in his acclaimed facsimile reprints of Tudor and Stuart works, and in printing the order of service for the coronation in 1902. Hart's second major work was 'Rules for Compositors and Readers'. It was issued privately in 1893, but demand was so great that Hart published the booklet in 1904. Intended as house rules for Oxford printers, it became the accepted authority on English grammar, punctuation, and disputed spellings. It was through the 'Rules' that the spelling 'Shakespeare' entered standard usage. 
As controller Hart printed such volumes as Max Muller's edition of the 'Rig-Veda', and early parts of James Murray's 'New English Dictionary'. His broader concerns made him first chief officer of the press fire brigade in 1885, and led to his founding the Clarendon Press Institute in 1893. Hart married twice. With his first wife he had two daughters, Agnes and Beatrice. With his second wife, Susan Ellen, from whom he separated in 1914, he had a son, Harold Raven Hart, and a daughter, Daisy. A series of nervous breakdowns forced Hart to retire from the press in 1915, and he committed suicide by drowning in Youlbury Lake near the home of one of his daughters in Boars Hill, near Oxford, on 9 October 1916. He was buried at St Peter's, Wootton, Berkshire. It was a tragic end to a successful career. Staff at the press had revered him, and in the course of his work there he had preserved the heritage of the press, while also thoroughly updating its procedures. Under him, Oxford won an unprecedented grand prix for books and printing at the Paris Exhibition of 1889, and weathered recession and competition from Cambridge in the 1890s. The university awarded him an MA 'honoris causa' in 1897, and although the merger of learned and 'Bible' sides in 1906 somewhat dented his prestige, nevertheless, at Hart's retirement, the press was modern, profitable, and much admired. 


@@@@@


doc= 37517


Haslam, Sir Alfred Seale (1844-1927), engineer and politician, was born on 27 October 1844 in Derby, the fourth of the five sons and the fourth of the eight children of William Haslam, ironmaster of Derby, and his wife, Ann, daughter of Joseph Smith of Branstone, Staffordshire. He was educated privately in Derby and was taken into apprenticeship with the Midland Railway Company. Once qualified, he joined the firm of Sir William G. Armstrong in London as a hydraulic engineer. In 1868, in partnership with his father and financed by his uncle Joseph Smith, he purchased the old Union foundry in Derby. 
He started the Haslam engineering works with a staff of twenty and by 1871 he was able to repay the loan from his uncle and later dissolve the partnership with his father, leaving himself in sole charge. By 1876 the firm had become a limited company. In 1875 he married Annie (died 1924), the daughter of Thomas Tatam, farmer, of Little Eaton, Derbyshire. They had three sons, one of whom was killed in the First World War, and three daughters. 
Haslam was a perceptive developer of the promising research of others, having that rare combination of commercial acumen and technical expertise, making him one of the great engineers. He could see that refrigeration would bring about a complete change in people's lifestyles and in 1880 he took over the patents of the Bell-Coleman cold-air machine and developed what was known as the dry air refrigerator. The excellence of this machine eventually gave him a monopoly in refrigerated shipping. His equipment on board ship and on land enabled British people to enjoy meat, fruits, and other perishable products from countries overseas. On 5 October 1881 the SS 'Orient' docked at Plymouth with 150 tons of frozen Australian meat on board, an event described vividly by many newspapers (for example, 'Daily News', 5 October). 
By 1900 the dry air refrigerator had lost its place to chemical machines using carbon dioxide or ammonia. Haslam produced equipment using these refrigerants for most purposes where cold was required, such as meat freezing stations, meat cargoes on board ship, cold stores of all kinds for perishable food, ice factories, chemical works, dye works, and works for the manufacture and storage of explosives and ammunition on land and on warships. 
Haslam also played a busy role in public life. In 1879 he became a Derby town councillor and in 1886 was made a JP for the borough. In 1890 he was elected mayor of Derby and in 1891 became JP for the county. His biggest achievement in his year of office was the replacement of the old William Strutt Infirmary. He invited Queen Victoria to lay the foundation stone for the new Derbyshire Royal Infirmary and at the end of her visit she knighted Haslam (1891). 
Politically Haslam was prominent in the Liberal Unionist cause. In 1892 he unsuccessfully contested Derby, but he entered parliament in 1900 as a representative of Newcastle under Lyme, retaining his seat until the election of 1906. He was a generous benefactor -- for example, he presented bronze statues of Queen Victoria to Newcastle under Lyme, Derby, and London. 
His fellowships and honours were numerous and included membership of the Iron and Steel Institute, the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, the Royal Institution, and the Institute of Refrigeration, of which he was president in 1914-15. He was a liveryman of the City of London and in 1905 was presented with the freedom of Newcastle under Lyme, having occupied the chair of mayor for three consecutive years (1901-4). 
Haslam died at the St Pancras Hotel, London, on 13 January 1927 while on a business trip. He was buried in Morley churchyard, Derbyshire. Two sons and a daughter predeceased him. 
A. J. Cooper', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37518


Hatch, Frederick Henry (1864-1932), geologist and mining engineer, was born on 7 March 1864 at 7 Westbourne Park Place, Bayswater, London, eldest son in the London family of five sons and two daughters born illegitimately to Henry Hatch (1817-1885) of Oxford, boot- and shoemaker (later merchant, draper, Liberal councillor, and lessee of the Theatre Royal, Oxford) and his common-law wife, Elizabeth Ann ('bap'. 1832) of Witney, Oxfordshire, daughter of William Collier, weaver, and his wife, Elizabeth. (In 1838, Henry Hatch had married Eliza, daughter of John Thomas Dobney, superintendent registrar of births, deaths and marriages for the district of Oxford, and his wife, Ann; their four sons and two daughters were born between 1840 and 1847.) 
Hatch was educated at private schools in London and Paris. By 1879 he was studying general science, both privately and at University College, London. Passing the intermediate science exam in 1883, he was second in the first division with honours in chemistry, his 'obtained number of marks qualifying [him] for Scholarship, Exhibition or prize' (private information). His subsequent claim to have 'gained a gold medal and the Tuffnell scholarship for proficiency in analytical chemistry' (Hatch, 'Vita') appeared widely in contemporary biographical notices. However, University of London records do not show him receiving such an award, nor taking a London degree. Nevertheless, in 1883 he began study at the University of Bonn, and from April 1885 also worked as assistant to A. von Lasaulx in the museum of the Institute of Mineralogy. He completed his dissertation 'Ueber die Gesteine der Vulcan-Gruppe von Arequipa' ('On the volcanic rocks of Arequipa' [Peru]) in December 1885 and was awarded his PhD in 1886. 
Having returned to London, Hatch joined the Geological Survey of Great Britain as a temporary assistant geologist (petrologist for England and Wales), undertaking studies of rocks from Britain and Ireland. He translated K. H. F. Rosenbusch's 'Hilfstabellen zur Mikroskopischen Mineralbestimmung in Gesteinen' in 1889 and published his own 'Introduction to the Study of Petrology' (1891) and 'Mineralogy' (1892). He was also instructor in geology at the Royal Geographical Society and lectured aspiring explorers in the subject. 
On 13 September 1890 Hatch married Mary Elizabeth (1866-1921), eldest daughter of William Henry Randall, merchant and one-time American consul in Madeira, and his wife, Mary Ann de Villiers. She was an intrepid, high-spirited woman of feminist views who felt that 'a career in the civil service however distinguished did not offer the prospects commensurate with the talents she believed her good-looking husband possessed' (private information). She persuaded him, in 1892, to go to Johannesburg as a mining engineer. Hatch joined the South African Trust and Finance Company, and soon demonstrated that the apparently separate gold-bearing 'reefs' being worked in several mines were all down-faulted parts of the same main reef leader, thus providing an important guide for future exploration. 
In 1893, Hatch became assistant to the American mining engineer John Hays Hammond (1855-1936) who had recently joined the De Beers Consolidated Mines company. Early in the following year Hammond was invited by Cecil Rhodes to become chief consulting engineer to Consolidated Gold Fields of South Africa, and Hatch moved with him. He subsequently accompanied Hammond and Rhodes on a two-month expedition to evaluate the gold-mining potential of Matabeleland and Mashonaland. By 1895, Rhodes was encouraging Dr Leander Jameson and Hammond (by then a ringleader of the reform movement) to engineer a general uprising against the Boers. Hatch wisely returned with his family to England that summer. The subsequent failure of the Jameson raid on the fort at Johannesburg at the turn of the year 1896 resulted in the imprisonment by the Boers of Hammond and other leading reformers. 
After some months of work on copper mines in Huelva, Spain, Hatch returned to South Africa where, under difficult conditions, he mapped 8000 square miles of the southern Transvaal, greatly assisting subsequent exploration for the main reef. A steadily worsening political situation led Hatch to return to England in October 1897. Subsequently, as a consultant, he studied gold, copper, and nickel mines in Canada, Spain, India, and Eritrea. He returned to Johannesburg as a mining engineer following the end of the South African War in 1902. His subsequent proof that gold-bearing reefs similar to those of the Central Rand were also present at depth in the East Rand was another important aid to future gold exploration. He also served as president of the Geological Society of South Africa for 1905-6. 
Hatch returned to England in March 1906, and again set up as a consultant mining engineer, travelling to the Orenburg goldfields in Siberia (1906) and undertaking a survey of the mines and mineral resources of Natal and Zululand, South Africa (1909). From 1910 to 1913 he was a member of Christ's College, Cambridge, and he lectured in economic geology. He gave the James Forrest lecture to the Institution of Civil Engineers (1911) and was a member of the advisory board of the Royal School of Mines, London (1912-14). 
The First World War began shortly before Hatch became president of the Institution of Mining and Metallurgy (IMM) for the 1914-15 session. As the war progressed, stocks of imported iron and manganese ores, vital to production of the steel used in munitions and ship construction, became increasingly critical. Hatch was appointed to the Imperial Institute advisory committee on mineral resources in 1916 (a move which soured his relationship with the IMM) and in March 1917, he moved to the iron and steel production department of the Ministry of Munitions with responsibility for ensuring a sufficient home-production of ferrous ores. Following the armistice, he was appointed director of the mineral resources development branch of the Board of Trade (1919-20). He became a technical adviser to the mines department (1920-32) and was on the governing boards of the Imperial Mineral Resources Bureau (1919-25) and Imperial Institute (1927-32). 
Hatch's publications include 'The Gold Mines of the Rand' (with J. A. Chalmers, 1895); 'The Geology of South Africa' (with G. S. Corstorphine, 1905); 'An Introduction to the Study of Ore Deposits' (1929); and the two volumes of 'The Textbook of Petrology' -- 'Igneous Rocks' (1914; 8th edn, with A. K. Wells, 1926; 10th edn, with A. K. and M. K. Wells, 1949) and 'Sedimentary Rocks' (with R. H. Rastall and T. Crook, 1913; 3rd edn, with M. Black, 1928) -- which became standard university texts, in addition to over one hundred scientific papers and discussions. 
Photographs show Hatch to have been an imposing moustached figure. His contemporaries knew him as 'a painstaking, studious, highly-cultured scientist' who 'always retained a scholar's intellectual integrity and... intolerance of sham' (private information); as president of the IMM he had 'by example, and by precept, cultivated the habit of studiously short speeches' (Trewartha-James). Correspondence and anecdotal evidence suggest that, at least in later life, he may have had a somewhat irascible nature. He was a keen golfer and a member of the Bath Club and the Athenaeum. He was appointed OBE in 1920, principally for his work on ore-supplies during the First World War. The rare sulphide mineral hatchite is named after him. 
Hatch's wife accompanied him to the Transvaal and on fieldwork in the Indian jungle. They had four sons, the two youngest of whom were killed in action in 1915 and 1916, and one daughter. Following his wife's death from influenza in 1921, he married Amie ('b'. 1873) (daughter of William Henry Poole, and the divorced wife of Henry Farquharson Kerr, president of the Kerr Steamship Company of Kingston, Jamaica) in 1923, but they appear to have lived apart in 1925-7 and finally separated in 1928. Hatch died of bronchopneumonia on 22 September 1932, at his home, D3 The Albany, Albany Square, Piccadilly, London, following an operation, and was buried in Gap Road cemetery, Wimbledon, the next day, adjacent to his first wife's grave. 


@@@@@


doc= 37519


Hathaway, Dame Sibyl Mary (1884-1974), dame of Sark, was born on 13 January 1884 in Guernsey at the house once owned by her privateer great-great-grandfather, John Allaire, whose business dealings led to the seigniory of Sark passing into her family. The elder daughter (there were no sons) of William Frederick Collings, twenty-first seigneur of Sark, and his Canadian wife, Sophia Wallace (daughter of George Moffat of Montreal), she grew up on Sark to become a lively, intelligent, and headstrong young woman, encouraged by her eccentric father to ignore her congenital lameness and follow many physically demanding pursuits. With the rest of the household she also had to contend with his uncertain temper and even wilder moments during occasional drinking bouts. Few of her governesses stayed for long and, with the exception of two terms at a French convent near Tours, she had little formal education. 
She met Dudley John Beaumont, son of Captain William Spencer Beaumont, of the 14th King's hussars, in the spring of 1899 when he visited Sark and painted her portrait. Two years later, following a fierce argument with her father, she fled to England and married Beaumont in London. The marriage produced four sons and three daughters, the youngest of whom was born seven months after her husband's death at the age of forty-one in the influenza epidemic of 1918. 
From 1921 to 1923 Sibyl Beaumont lived with her family in Cologne, helped run YMCA canteens, and learned the German which twenty years later was to prove so useful to her. On her father's death in June 1927 she succeeded to the seigniory and became dame of Sark, determined from the outset to bring improvements to the island without sacrificing its unusual charms. After a brief engagement to a man later convicted for bigamy and fraud, in 1929 she married American-born Robert Woodward Hathaway (second of three sons of Charles Hathaway, a Wall Street banker). According to Sark law, by her marriage her estate, including the seigniory, passed to her husband, but she had no intention of relinquishing her hold on island affairs and, although he then became the official seigneur, she sat beside him at meetings of the chief pleas (Sark's governing body), prompting his actions and continuing, albeit illegally, to give voice to her own opinions. 
It was during the Second World War that Sibyl Hathaway faced her greatest challenge, when Sark, with the other Channel Islands, was occupied by the Germans in July 1940. She managed throughout the following years to maintain a front of firmness and dignity, earning the respect of the Germans and at the same time extracting the best terms she could for Sark and its people, with whom she shared the hunger and other privations of occupation, the anxieties engendered by two unsuccessful British commando raids, and the pain of separation when many islanders, including her husband, were deported to German prison camps. Liberation finally came on 10 May 1945. 
When Robert Hathaway died in December 1954 she regained her full status as dame of Sark and, despite many stormy passages with her islanders, continued to be treated by the majority with the greatest respect, if not always with affection. Through her travels and writings (which included a novel, 'Maid of Sark', in 1939 and an autobiography, 'Dame of Sark', 1961) and television, radio, and press interviews, her island became known worldwide and its subsequent prosperity owed much to her determination to retain its unique laws and peaceful atmosphere, unpolluted by cars or aeroplanes. She was appointed OBE (1949) and DBE (1965). She died on 14 July 1974 on Sark, having outlived five of her children. Her eldest son was killed in an air raid on Liverpool in 1941, the second died in Australia in 1973, the third (aged nine months) in 1909, and two of her daughters in 1948 and 1967 respectively. Her grandson (John) Michael Beaumont succeeded her to the seigniory. 
Barbara Stoney', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37520


Havell, Ernest Binfield (1861-1934), artist and art teacher, was born on 16 September 1861 at 1 Jesse Terrace, Reading, the second son and third child in the family of three sons and two daughters of Charles Richard Havell, professional artist, and his wife, Charlotte Amelia Lord. The Havell family had been leading artists and publishers since the late eighteenth century. He was educated at Reading School, and trained at the Royal College of Art, at Paris studios, and in Italy. Havell joined the Madras School of Industrial Arts as principal in 1884, a post he held until 1892, when he returned to England. He won early recognition with his report on Indian industrial arts, thus laying the foundations of his later influential doctrine on the Indian arts. The revival of traditional handloom weaving initiated by him was later to win the support of M. K. Gandhi. 
Appointed principal of the Calcutta School of Art and keeper of the Government Art Gallery in 1896, a post he held until 1906, Havell was responsible for momentous changes in the art school curriculum which led to the first Indian nationalist art movement, the Bengal school of painting, under the artist Abanindranath Tagore. Although a believer in raj paternalism, Havell's aesthetically radical, anti-Renaissance, arts and crafts tenets, and his synthetic vision of architecture as unifying all the different traditional arts of India, helped undermine the primacy of salon art in India, hitherto identified as one of the triumphs of the raj westernization of the subcontinent. 
Even though his period in Calcutta was extremely brief -- for he was forced to retire in 1906 after a breakdown -- Havell became celebrated in the West and in India for advocating the greatness of Indian art with a fervour that bordered on fanaticism. He was largely responsible for its recognition in the West: by his pioneering studies in ancient Indian art, such as 'Indian Sculpture and Painting' (1908) and 'The Ideals of Indian Art' (1911); by encouraging the fledgeling Bengal School with sustained writings on its behalf; and finally by helping to found the India Society with William Rothenstein, for many years the bastion of Indian culture in Europe. The society was set up in 1910 in the aftermath of the controversy surrounding the disparaging remarks of Sir George Birdwood about Indian art. 
Although Havell was away from Britain between 1916 and 1923 as a member of the British legation in Copenhagen, 'India was his first and remained his only love.' He plunged headlong into the controversy over the architectural style for New Delhi, urging the imperial government to adopt the Mughal style for its new capital as a gesture of goodwill towards their Indian subjects. The appointment of Sir Edwin Lutyens as the city's architect put an end to Havell's dream. None the less the pronounced Indian elements in the otherwise classical design of New Delhi were a tribute to Havell's persistence. 
Havell married Lili, daughter of Admiral George Jacobson, of the Danish royal navy, in 1894; they had one daughter. He died on 30 December 1934 at the Acland Nursing Home, Oxford, and was survived by his wife. 
Partha Mitter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37521


Hawkins, Laetitia-Matilda (bap. 1759, d. 1835), writer, was born in London and baptized on 8 August 1759, the second of three children and only daughter of Sir John Hawkins (d. 1789), attorney, musicologist, and biographer whom Samuel Johnson famously called 'unclub[b]able' (Hill, 2.297-8), and his wife, Sidney Storer (died 1793), whose inheritance (added to her original dowry) enabled the family in 1760 to acquire a fine house in Twickenham. 
Hawkins's first novel was published before 1780 by Thomas Hookham after rejection by Thomas Cadell. Written to raise money for 'a whim of girlish patronage' (Hawkins, 'Memories', 2.156), it brought in twice as much as was needed. The work is now unidentified, as are 'many subsequent volumes' whose production she was too ashamed to mention. 
After the deaths of her father and mother in 1789 and 1793 respectively, Hawkins remained at Twickenham, living with her scholarly brother Henry and a friend, Margaret Mitchell. In 1793 she replied to the politically radical 'Letters from France' of Helen Maria Williams with 'Letters on the Female Mind, its Powers and Pursuits'. After maintaining that with few exceptions 'the feminine intellect has less strength but more acuteness' ('Letters', 1.2), she argued the Christian anti-revolutionary case. 
Hitherto anonymous ('I chuse to be concealed'; Hawkins, 'Letters', 1.2), Hawkins set her name in 1806 to her translation from German of Johann Martin Miller's 'Siegwart' and then, 'with the utmost repugnance', to 'The Countess and Gertrude, or, Modes of Discipline' (1811, xxix). Hawkins is a busy authorial presence in this 'Bildungsroman', which she dedicated to Henrietta Maria Bowdler, not for her own writings but as friend and editor of the scholar Elizabeth Smith. The popularity of this novel has been linked to its didacticism; a second edition followed the next year. 'Rosanne, or, A Father's Labour Lost' (1814), in which a daughter becomes her father's religious and moral salvation, and 'Heraline, or, Opposite Proceedings' (1821) share many of its features: slightly heavy-handed authorial notes, careful attention to the influences which shape their heroines' moral and intellectual development, condemnation of various aspects of behaviour prescribed for women, and matter-of-fact presentation of libertinism in high life. Each is published by name and dedicated to a noblewoman. Jane Austen called 'Rosaline' 'very good and clever, but tedious' (Austen, 289). The anonymous 'Annaline, or, Motive-Hunting' (1824) is also ascribed to Hawkins. 
Hawkins collaborated with her brother Henry on 'Sermonets' (1814) 'Addressed to Those Who have not yet Acquired, or who may have lost, The Inclination to Apply the Power of Attention to Compositions of a Higher Kind'. Her topics include female dress, female education, and 'the female Character of the present Age', which begins with the fact that Christ chose to confide in women. She compiled 'Devotional Exercises' (1823) from an earlier book by Bishop Simon Patrick, and left to Margaret Mitchell a manuscript diary of travels round much of England and Wales between 1824 and 1827. Her 'Anecdotes, Biographical Sketches, and Memoirs' (1822) and the more personal and autobiographical 'Memoirs, Anecdotes, Facts and Opinions' (1824) are her best-known works; they were abridged and adapted by Francis Henry Skrine (1926) and D. H. Simpson (1978). Laetitia-Matilda Hawkins died on 22 November 1835 in Twickenham. She was unmarried. 
Isobel Grundy', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37522


Hay, William Thomson (1888-1949), comedian and actor, was born on 6 December 1888 in Stockton-on-Tees, the second of the three sons and third of the six children of William Robert Hay (died 1919), engineer, of Inverness-shire, and his wife, Elizabeth Ebden (died 1910), the daughter of a Barnsley fish merchant. He was educated at local authority schools in Lowestoft, Hemel Hempstead, and London, and in evening classes in Manchester. While working as a commercial correspondent in Manchester he married, on 7 October 1907, Gladys, the eighteen-year-old daughter of Thomas Perkins, postmaster of Broughton, Salford. They had three children: Will junior and Gladys (both of whom went on the stage), and Joan. The marriage broke down in 1934, but the couple never divorced; Hay subsequently formed a relationship with Randi Kopstadt, a Norwegian showgirl. 
Soon after his marriage Will Hay embarked on a music-hall and concert-party career (he tried several times to enlist for active service in the First World War but was rejected on medical grounds; he served instead with the voluntary training corps, a forerunner of the Home Guard). His initial sketch, 'Bend Down', was based on the anecdotes of his schoolteacher sister, Elspeth. After obtaining valuable experience with the Fred Karno troupes during the war he concentrated on developing his character of the Schoolmaster Comedian. From about 1920 he performed his main sketch, 'The Fourth Form at St Michael's', which soon became something of a national institution and was featured in the royal command variety performance of 1925 (he also appeared at the royal command shows in 1928, 1938, and 1945). After years of apprenticeship, Hay's triumph came suddenly and comprehensively. His first overseas tours, to Australia and New Zealand in 1923-4 and to the USA (where British comedians usually failed) in 1927, were successes, and by the early 1930s 'The Fourth Form at St Michael's' was featured on radio, on record, and in the children's comic 'Radio Fun'. 
Cautious with money, and often intimidatingly caustic as a theatrical overseer, Hay was more respected than loved by his fellow professionals. His private life was conservative, austere -- even niggardly -- with little of showbiz glitter about it. He was largely self-educated, with a particular interest in astronomy. He was a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society; he built his own observatory, and in 1933 discovered a white spot on the surface of Saturn. He published 'Through my Telescope' in 1935. Having entertained the troops in the First World War with Fred Karno, he was more likely to have been found in the Second World War offering them lectures on astronomy. 
Such private endeavours were far removed from the seedy, blustering, and ineffectual teacher of Hay's stage creation, and the potency of his prototype was so vivid that for decades his name remained a byword for hapless teaching. With a small company of three or four 'boys', he topped variety bills across the country for many years. The verbal character of much of his comedy promoted its transfer to radio; he became a noted broadcaster, among whose other characters was the failing academic Dr Muffin. 
Hay transferred his mastery of comic timing and expression to film more successfully than many other British comedians. Most famously in concert with Graham 'Albert' Moffatt (1919-1965) as the impertinent fat boy, and Moore 'Harbottle' Marriott (1885-1949) as the resilient ancient, he made some seventeen films between 1934 and 1944, many of them directed by Marcel Varnel. Nine were made by Gainsborough Pictures. Hay was adept at ringing the changes on his characterization of grudging, evasive, and inadequate authority, playing, 'inter alia', a prison governor, a fire chief, a civil servant, a sea captain, a disbarred solicitor, and a police sergeant, as well as a schoolmaster. 'Oh, Mr Porter!' (1937), with Hay as the troubled stationmaster of Buggleskelly, is regarded as both the popular and critical pick of the genre, and, together with 'Good Morning, Boys' (1937), 'Ask a Policeman' (1939), 'The Ghost of St Michael's' (1941), and 'My Learned Friend' (1944), this, his best work, has been favourably compared with the screen antics of the Marx brothers. 
Hay played his pathetic, seedy characters with a firm sense of their background and personal histories. This made for three-dimensional portrayals, which, temporizing between guile and befuddlement, led his audiences to feel sympathy as well as disdain. The tilted mortarboard, the crumpled gown, the wispy hair, the devious countenance, the slightly husky voice, the deprecating cough, the disapproving sniff, and above all the pinched eyeglasses which provided a focus for a wide range of facial reactions, from foxiness via smugness and irascibility to dismay, were the physical keynotes of his performance. Like the American comedian Jack Benny he was the master of the slow and silent double take, a skill which was to stand him in glorious stead on film. His fictitious school, Narkover, was adopted from Beachcomber's log of its adventures in the 'Daily Express'. It is an interesting cultural reflection that vast audiences, most of whom had no experience of minor private boarding-schools, comprehended every last nuance of Hay's presentation, a tribute to the lengthy popular appeal of the Billy Bunter school of popular literature. Will Hay suffered a stroke in 1946 from which he only partially recovered; another stroke led within hours to his death in the early hours of Easter Monday, 18 April 1949, at his London flat, 16 Chelsea Embankment. He was buried in the garden of remembrance, Streatham. 


@@@@@


doc= 37523


Haycock, Edward (bap. 1790, d. 1870), architect, was baptized on 20 September 1790 at St Chad's Church, Shrewsbury, the second of the three sons of John Hiram Haycock (1759-1830), architect and builder, of Shrewsbury, and his wife, Elizabeth (1758/9-1848), daughter of William Trevitt of Newport. He became a pupil of Jeffry Wyatville, entered the Royal Academy Schools in 1809, and exhibited student's work at the Royal Academy from 1808 to 1810. After returning to Shrewsbury to join his father in the family business, he exhibited at the Liverpool Academy from 1812 to 1814 and in the latter year became involved in an ambitious public project in the town, the erection of a monumental column in honour of Rowland Hill, first Viscount Hill. A competition was held, in which Haycock won the second premium; and it was then decided to adopt his design but to put it 'into the hands' of Thomas Harrison of Chester, who made certain minor modifications to it (Colvin, 'Archs'., 479). 
On 13 February 1827 Haycock married in St Sepulchre, Holborn, Mary Hatton ('b'. 1801), daughter of Robert Hinckesman of London, with whom he had three sons and four daughters. Thereafter it appears that Haycock himself rather than his father was the main architect member of the family firm, although, in partnership with his brother Robert, he continued to engage in building as well as architecture until 'c'.1845, after which he practised as an architect only. From 1834 to 1866 he was also county surveyor for Shropshire, a post previously held by John Hiram Haycock from 1824 until his death. He was a moderately prolific architect with an extensive practice in Shropshire, the Welsh marches, and south Wales, and his output encompassed further public buildings, including the Royal Infirmary, Shrewsbury (1827-30), numerous churches, and country houses. The churches are in a conventional lancet Gothic style, one example of which is St George's, Frankwell, Shrewsbury (1831-2); but in his major country house commissions, notably Clytha Court, Monmouthshire (1824-8) and Millichope Park, Shropshire (1835-40), Haycock confirmed his promise as a neo-classical designer of considerable merit. 
Haycock also played an active part in the political life of Shrewsbury: he sat on the council for thirty-four years, rose to become an alderman, and served as mayor in 1842. He was a friend of the Shropshire architect John Carline and also of Dr Robert Waring Darwin, the father of the naturalist Charles Darwin. The eldest son, Edward junior, continued Haycock's practice after his death, which occurred in Shrewsbury on 20 December 1870. Haycock was buried in St Chad's churchyard, Shrewsbury. 
Peter Leach', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37524


Hayes, Edward (b. c.1550, d. in or after 1613), seaman and promoter of colonization, was probably born in West Derby, Lancashire, the son of Edward Hayes and his wife, Alice, small landowners in Lancashire. His father moved into Liverpool before 1567 and established himself as a merchant, and the younger Edward probably attended a grammar school there before his admission to King's College, Cambridge, in 1565. His presence was not continuous as he was entered again as a scholar-commoner in 1571; he did not take a degree. Shortly afterwards he apparently became tutor to a son or sons of Sir Thomas Hoby of Bisham Abbey, Berkshire, whose wife, Elizabeth, commended him to her brother-in-law William Cecil (later Baron Burghley), whom Hayes apparently served in unknown capacities for at least twenty years. He may have accompanied Edward Hoby on a continental tour in 1576 or 1577. 
Hayes evidently had a taste for the sea and for exploration. In 1578 he subscribed to the first unsuccessful colonizing voyage of Sir Humphrey Gilbert. He acquired a small ship of 40 tons, which he named the 'Golden Hind' in honour of Sir Francis Drake. After interminable waiting he accompanied Gilbert to Newfoundland in 1583, witnessed Gilbert's actions there, and survived various disasters, culminating in the loss of Gilbert at sea, to bring his ship home in September 1583 as the sole vessel to survive the expedition. He contributed information on the voyage to 'A True Report' by Sir George Peckham before the end of the year, and sat down to record a detailed narrative of the voyage and some description of Newfoundland. This he passed eventually to Richard Hakluyt for publication in his 'Principall Navigations' in 1589. It is one of the finest voyage narratives in the collection, vivid and informative, and conveying well the atmosphere of an exploring voyage. This is especially true of the circumstances of Gilbert's death at sea. Sailing, as he insisted on doing, in his tiny 8 ton frigate 'Squirrel', Gilbert kept close company with Hayes's 'Golden Hind', and came on board from time to time. Hayes last saw him: 'sitting abafte with a booke in his hande, cryed out unto us in the Hinde (so often as wee did approche within hearing): Wee are as neere to heaven by Sea, as by lande. Reiterating the same speeche, well beseeming a souldier, resolute in Jesus Christe, as I can testifie he was. The same Mundaye night about twelve of the clocke, or not long after, the Frigat beeing a heade of us in the Golden Hinde, suddenly her lights were out, whereof as it were in a moment we lost the sight, and withall our watch cryed, the Generall was cast away, which was too true. For in that moment, the Frigat was devoured and swallowed uppe of the Sea. (Hakluyt, 'Principall Navigations', 1589, 695)' During the Spanish war Hayes is found engaged in privateering between 1589 and 1591, but the rest of his life was spent largely in projecting. He bombarded Burghley with schemes for exploiting Newfoundland in 1585 and 1586, interestingly proposing the financing of one of them on the tontine principle, but they involved impractical proposals, as the international fishery could not be controlled by any one country except at vast expense. In the early 1590s Hayes turned his attention to the maritimes and New England, and his long proposal for colonizing and developing the commerce of this region is one of the fullest and most sensible colonial projects of the period. It was printed in shortened form in the 'Briefe and True Relation' (1602) by John Brereton. Hayes kept in close contact with the twists and turns of English interest in North America for nearly thirty years, even if his plans for financing the Virginia Company in 1606 form a mere footnote to the history of that enterprise. 
Hayes moved his residence frequently. In 1585 he lived at Charing Cross, in 1589-90 in Writtington, Essex, by 1596 he writes from 'my house in Hamsell Park, Sussex', while early in the 1600s he may have lived for a time in Isleworth, Middlesex. In association with his technically minded relative Thomas Hayes (the exact relationship is not known) he may have had an iron furnace and hammer pond at Hamsell Farm, and possibly a smelter and perhaps a coining press in Isleworth at the end of the century. He wrote numerous promotion schemes, mostly involving the grant of monopolies to himself and his associate. His favourite was the making of a copper coinage for England, with which he approached successive lord treasurers between 1579 and 1613. He acquired his sole opportunity in 1599 when he induced Sir Robert Cecil to approve a copper coinage scheme for Ireland, which was put into operation in 1601, though he was not able to secure a monopoly for its production. He also directed the issue of a debased silver coinage, which caused much hardship in Ireland and was finally withdrawn in 1603. He was for a time in Ireland overseeing the introduction of these changes, and he and Thomas were both given substantial pensions ($100 each) in 1603. 
Hayes's other projects from time to time involved the militia, the London water supply, various technical innovations in rolling-mill design, a stamping machine for coinage (these may well have originated with Thomas Hayes), and others. In 1606 he returned to the financing of colonies. With Thomas, he proposed a scheme by which government and private capital could be combined for the financing of the proposed Virginia colony: this is of some interest, but was not taken up. He disappears from view in 1613, and may have died shortly afterwards. He was a typical projector of the period, and he also had gifts as a writer, though some of his projects appear wrapped in airy rhetoric: only his colonizing plans are of enduring interest. 


@@@@@


doc= 37525


Hays, Mary (1759-1843), writer, was born on 4 May 1759 in Southwark, London, the daughter of John and Elizabeth Hays, rational dissenters living at 5 Gainsford Street, Southwark, and worshipping at Blacksfields Particular Baptist Chapel on the corner of the street. Her father was a mariner in the merchant fleet and died in or before 1774 when his daughter Sarah married. Mary's siblings included Sarah, Joanna, Elizabeth, John, and 'little Tommy'. The death of her father was the first in a series of 'blows' which encouraged a deep belief in determinism which was to influence Mary's mature life. As a very young woman she cherished 'exquisite sensibility' (Hays to Godwin, 7 Dec 1794) and exhibited a habitual melancholy. In 1778, while living with her widowed mother and two unmarried sisters at Gainsford Street, Southwark, she began a correspondence with John Eccles, and after much opposition from both families, it was agreed that the two could marry. Eccles died weeks before the ceremony, however, and she never fully recovered from the shock. 
Despite an 'irascible' temper and a persistent belief that 'much of misery has been my portion' (Hays to Godwin, undated), Hays gained some solace in her religion under the tutelage of Robert Robinson and may have attended the newly established dissenting academy at Hackney. The attack by Gilbert Wakefield there on public worship roused her to produce a pamphlet in its defence, 'Cursory Remarks on an Enquiry into the Expediency and Propriety of Public Worship' (1792), under the pseudonym Eusebia. The pamphlet was widely acclaimed and a second edition produced. Its success precipitated her acceptance into the radical circle surrounding the publisher Joseph Johnson, which included William Blake, Thomas Paine, and William Godwin. The following year she published 'Letters and Essays, Moral and Miscellaneous'. 
Hays wrote articles for the 'Monthly Magazine' during 1796 and 1797, joining in debates about the female intellect and, under the influence of Claude-Adrien Helvetius, insisting on the recognition of environmental and educational influences. She felt that this sensationalism legitimated the passions within rational philosophy which she claimed was 'impotent... against reiterated feeling' (Hays to Godwin, 13 Oct 1795). In 1794-1800 she engaged in a correspondence with the radical William Godwin, who had taken over the educative role vacated by Eccles. Her initial encouragement led to his marriage to her friend Mary Wollstonecraft. The lengthy correspondence between Hays and Godwin displays initial acquiescence and reverence on Hays's part developing into antagonism and later attack on his uncompromisingly rational philosophy. Hays argued instead for an alternative, intuitive logic based on experience which she felt was more appropriate to daily life. As she said, 'how much further... does a little nature go than mere philosophy' (Hays to Godwin, 29 April 1796). The correspondence ended abruptly with the death of Wollstonecraft after Godwin refused Hays admittance to the deathbed and she refused to attend the Anglican funeral service. 
Hays had also met and won approval from leading dissenters such as George Dyer, Joseph Priestley, John Disney, and William Frend. She was a worshipper at Salters' Hall and Essex Street Chapel, and was invited to Priestley's farewell gathering before his exile to America in 1794. Through dissent Hays found a 'voice' to articulate her concerns and so contribute to its platform of discussion and controversy. At William Frend's instigation, she formed a close but unresolved relationship with him. According to Henry Crabb Robinson her feelings were reciprocated but Frend claimed to lack the means to support a wife. Their relationship formed the substance of her scandalous first novel 'Memoirs of Emma Courtney' (1796). It is unapologetically autobiographical and her frankness about her fictionalized feelings for Frend won her notoriety, despite the preface's insistence that it was 'calculated to operate as a 'warning', rather than as an example'. Her second novel, 'The Victim of Prejudice', was published in 1799 and, according to the 'Advertisement', delineates 'the mischiefs that have ensued from the too great stress laid on the reputation for chastity in women'. She continued to write, producing among other works books for children and an acclaimed 'Female Biography, or, Memoirs of Illustrious and Celebrated Women of All Ages and Countries' (6 vols., 1802). Her most radical work was the 'Appeal to the Men of Great Britain in behalf of Women' (1798), in which she argued that there were no scriptural or rational arguments to justify the continued subjection of women. It was written at the same time as Wollstonecraft's much more celebrated 'Vindication of the Rights of Woman', though not published until six years later, and echoes many of Wollstonecraft's views on the position of women in society. In particular, Hays joins Wollstonecraft in advising women to throw off their shackles by educating themselves rationally so that they realize their potential as the intellectual equals of men. Hays argued consistently against the disadvantages built into female education and especially against the damaging effects of 'sexual distinctions' (Hays to Godwin, 21 Nov 1795). Her forthright depictions of female passion made her a target for satire, most notably as Bridgetina Botherim in 'Memoirs of Modern Philosophers' (1800-01) by Elizabeth Hamilton, and as Lady Gertrude Sinclair in 'Edmund Oliver' (1798) by Charles Lloyd. 
Hays never married, but had a varied circle of male and female friends. She had a long friendship with the novelist Eliza Fenwick and was considered 'Mamma' to Fenwick's son Orlando. Fenwick invited her to help run a school in Barbados in 1813 and in America in 1821. Despite her wish to become accepted within rational circles she insisted on the acceptance of 'the affections' and may have been instrumental in Godwin's revisions of his writings. Towards the end of her life she confessed to Henry Crabb Robinson that 'I have done with systems. I am a complete and an indifferent skeptic' (Hays to Henry Crabb Robinson, 27 Feb 1802, DWL). Her 'exquisite misery' and longevity were ironic comments on her search for happiness and frequent wishes to be dead (Hays to Godwin, 6 Feb 1796). She died in Lower Clapton on 20 February 1843 and was buried in Abney Park cemetery, Stoke Newington, on 25 February. Although she would not have approved of the Anglican service she would have been pleased at Henry Crabb Robinson's observation that the rest of the afternoon was spent in controversial conversation. 


@@@@@


doc= 37526


Hayward, Sir Rowland (c.1520-1593), merchant and local politician, was the eldest son of George Hayward of Bridgnorth, Shropshire, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of John Whitbrooke. He was educated at Bridgnorth School, and then apprenticed to a London clothworker, becoming a freeman in the Clothworkers' Company of London in 1541 or 1542 (and its master in 1559). By 1560, when he was elected alderman, he was already a substantial figure in London, and he became one of the city's commercial magnates. He was a merchant adventurer (he had traded at Antwerp before 1553), exporting cloth, importing fustians, camlets, and buckram, and dealing in silk. He was a founder member of the Russia Company and remained active in its affairs, serving as governor eight times between 1567 and 1587. He was a promoter of the third slaving voyage of John Hawkins in 1567 and a governor of the Mineral and Battery Works from 1568 onwards. These varied interests brought him considerable wealth and influence. In 1553 he bought property in four counties, some of it formerly monastic, and by his death he had seventeen manors in five counties, besides London property. He had a large house, Elsinge Spital, in the city, and, from 1583, a country residence, King's Place, Hackney, where he entertained the queen, to whom he also lent money. 
Hayward married twice, first Joan Tillesworth (died 1580), daughter of a London goldsmith, and then Catherine, daughter of 'customer' Thomas Smith and granddaughter of alderman Sir Andrew Judde. Nine children survived infancy. The two sons -- George, who died childless at the age of twenty-eight, and John, who settled in Kent -- were both knighted. Of the seven daughters, Elizabeth married Thomas, Baron Knyvet of Escrick, and Joan ['see 'Thynne, Joan] married John Thynne, son of the builder of Longleat. 
A major figure in the politics as well as the business of the city of London, Hayward emerges from the records of the corporation as the most active and energetic of Elizabethan aldermen, a man with a finger in every pie and an obsessive devotion to committee work. He was president of St Bartholomew's Hospital from 1572 to his death, comptroller-general of all the hospitals from 1581, and MP for the city from 1572 to 1583, naturally serving on House of Commons committees concerning London, trade, and industry. He was lord mayor in 1570-71, when he was knighted, and again in 1591, when he stepped in on the death of a mayor in mid-term. As father of the city (senior alderman) from 1586, he was involved in matters as various as military preparations in case of Spanish attack, the management of the city's property, and the furtherance of its interests in parliament. He was a mainstay of city government in the crisis caused by plague in 1593, when he was in his seventies, just as he had been thirty years before, in the devastating epidemic of 1563. 
Hayward's fortune was dispersed at his death, his personal estate being divided according to the custom of London between his widow, his children, and various legacies. He left money for the poor and the sick, and an endowment of $20 a year for Bridgnorth School. He died on 5 December 1593, and was buried at St Alfege, London Wall. 
Paul Slack', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37527


Headlam, Stewart Duckworth (1847-1924), Church of England clergyman and Christian socialist, was born on 12 January 1847 in Wavertree, near Liverpool, the elder son and third of four children of Thomas Duckworth Headlam, an insurance underwriter. He was educated at Eton College and at Trinity College, Cambridge, taking a third-class degree in classics in 1869. His theological formation was strongly influenced by Frederick Denison Maurice, whose lectures he attended at Cambridge. In later life he called Maurice his 'great teacher'. Following Maurice, he rejected the doctrine of eternal punishment, marking a decisive break with his father's evangelicalism. He possessed considerable private means, which enabled him to ride out years without church employment and to subsidize his varied religious and political activities. 
Headlam was deaconed in 1870 and priested in 1872, serving his title as curate at St John's, Drury Lane, London, from 1870 to 1873, but he was forced to leave when his incumbent took exception to his views on eternal life. This was the first of his many clashes with ecclesiastical authority. From 1873 to 1878 he was curate at St Matthew's, Bethnal Green, where he acquired an intimate knowledge of urban social conditions, and developed his political and social views in a radical direction. It was, however, his open and, at that time, unorthodox support for the theatre and for ballet which led to the bishop of London's ban on his preaching in 1877, and to the withdrawal of his licence by the bishop (John Jackson) early the following year. There followed short curacies at St Thomas's, Charterhouse, and St Michael's, Shoreditch. His chances of a permanent position were ended when, in 1883, he publicly supported abolition of the House of Lords, and his request for a licence was refused. Although his licence was eventually reinstated in 1898 he was never again to hold permanent office in the Church of England. 
Headlam's wholehearted endorsement of Maurice's incarnational theology served to unify a wide and seemingly erratic range of social and political interests. He believed the incarnation at once rooted human beings in a filial relationship with God and underscored the social character of humanity. He strenuously opposed puritanism, cultivating friendships with artists, actors, and literary figures, and founding in 1879 the Church and Stage Guild. He defied his bishop by sending a message of sympathy to Charles Bradlaugh in prison, despite having debated with him frequently in public. Characteristically, despite open hostility from friends as well as strangers, he stood bail for Oscar Wilde in 1895. He was an avowed ritualist, with a sacramental personal devotion, and a reverence for Our Lady. His fusion of sacramentalism and Christian socialism was expressed most forcefully in his books 'The Laws of Eternal Life' (1884) and 'The Meaning of the Mass' (1905), in his Fabian Society pamphlet 'The Socialist's Church' (1907), and in the Guild of St Matthew, an association for high-church laity and clergy sympathetic to socialist ideals, which he led from its founding in 1877 until its dissolution in 1909. Even at its peak in the early 1890s the guild never had more than about 360 members; its close identification with socialism meant that it received little support from the church at large, but it was valuable in providing a link between the church and the nascent labour movement. 
Christian socialism, in Headlam's hands, became a more strident and yet more practical position than it had ever been to Maurice. He supported trade unionists and socialist politicians, and though he served on the executive committee of the Fabian Society for three periods between 1890 and 1911 he was impatient of its gradualism. He bought and then financed a journal, the 'Church Reformer', for eleven years from 1884, and through its pages supported land reform as advocated by the American Henry George. In later life he became increasingly preoccupied with educational reform. He sat on the London school board from 1882 until its demise in 1903, taking an active role in the promotion of evening classes for adults, especially as chairman of the Evening Continuation Schools Committee from 1897. In 1907 he was elected to the London county council for the Progressive Party, sitting until his death. Despite Headlam's energy, his rebellious character and his unusual combination of socialism with Christian sacramentalism deprived him of much permanent influence either in the church or in the political world. His practical achievements were limited. He was a prophetic figure, whose passion for social justice was to inspire the small group of Anglican clergy exploring the political application of Christian social concern in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. 
Headlam was a warm-hearted, buoyant, sociable, and passionate man, with intense convictions and an utter disregard for the personal cost of expressing them. In 1878 he married Beatrice Rosamond, daughter of Charles Plumer Pennington, but they were separated a few years later and Headlam refused to speak of the marriage in later life; there were no children. A series of heart attacks led to his death at his home, Wavertree, Peter's Road, St Margaret's-on-Thames, Middlesex, on 18 November 1924. 


@@@@@


doc= 37528


Hebdon, Sir John (1612-1670), merchant and diplomat, was probably born in London or Oxfordshire, the elder son and eldest of three children of John Hebden ('b'. 'c'.1583), merchant tailor of London, whose family came from Yorkshire, and his wife Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Pope of Oxfordshire. The first record of him in Russia is in 1640, and in 1651 he was a signatory for a loan from Tsar Alexis to Charles II of 20,000 roubles ($10,000), paid in furs and grain. Possibly as a result, Hebdon became a roving agent for Alexis from 1652, buying, to order, arms and many examples of western craftsmanship, recruiting military and other professional men to the tsar's service, and acting as partial translator at audiences with Oliver Cromwell's envoy to Russia in 1654. In 1656 he arranged ships to carry the tsar's embassy to Venice (from Archangel to Leghorn). 
After the Restoration, Hebdon settled in Tooting, but remained Alexis's agent. He addressed two remonstrances to the king, urging him to send ambassadors to Russia, and arranged accommodation for Russian ambassadors in England. When Charles II repaid the Russian loan, in the presence of Russian envoys in May 1663, Hebdon was knighted and appointed a privy councillor. Soon afterwards he accompanied Charles Howard, earl of Carlisle, as envoy to Alexis, but was not admitted to the negotiations, the Russians probably suspecting him of changing masters. Carlisle's negotiations for the restoration of the long-standing English trading privileges, withdrawn on the execution of Charles I, were unsuccessful, as were Hebdon's own efforts when he made his final visit to Russia in 1667, this time as envoy himself. 
Hebdon and his wife, Phillippa, had four sons and two daughters. The eldest son, John, was envoy to Russia in 1676. The second son, Richard, a merchant, died in January 1668, and the third son, Thomas, died while accompanying Thomas Bryan (who also died), Sir John's son-in-law, on a mission to Persia in 1669 for Alexis. Sir John died in Tooting on 5 June 1670 and was buried in the old church; his will shows a debt due from the tsar and an amount still owed him for his allowance as ambassador. 
J. R. Hebden', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37529


Avranches, Henry d' (d. 1262/3), poet, was a Norman by birth; his father's name may have been Troteman. The title of master was accorded him, but nothing is known of his education. However, his works show a knowledgeable interest in grammar, logic, Aristotelian philosophy, medicine, and canon law, and a marked penchant for the translation of prose texts into verse. 
Henry's poetic career began as early as 1215. He was in England by 1219, when he wrote an epitaph for William (I) Marshal, earl of Pembroke, who died in that year. In the 1220s he began the series of verse lives of English saints that constitutes the greater part of his work: Birinus, Guthlac, Hugh of Lincoln, Oswald, Edmund, and Fremund. He also wrote an account of the translation of the relics of St Thomas of Canterbury. Moreover, at this time Henry contributed a poem to the fund-raising campaign for the construction of Salisbury Cathedral, which had begun in 1221, and wrote for patrons in Cologne. About 1228 he moved to the papal court, where he wrote occasional verse for patrons throughout western Europe. He composed his 'magnum opus', the 'Life of St Francis' in fourteen books, for Pope Gregory IX ('r'. 1227-41). He also wrote at the court of the patriarch of Aquileia, and approached the emperor Frederick II ('r'. 1220-50) with a series of poems about 1236. Henry left Italy in the late 1230s. He seems to have travelled in the Rhineland, and was in Paris in 1241, when he commemorated the arrival of relics of the crucifixion, and then in Angers, where he taught and disputed with local poets. 
By 1243 Henry d'Avranches had entered the service of Henry III in England, and composed lives of St Edward (Edward the Confessor) and St George (both now lost) for the king. He left the king's service for a few years after March 1245, and it was probably during this period that he compiled a metrical grammar for the children of Hamo Peche, a Cambridgeshire magnate. In 1251 Henry returned to the royal service. He seems to have been intimate with the king and perhaps prominent at court: writing in 1258 the poet John Garland praised Henry in a list of the great figures of the English court; but there is no reason to believe that Henry held a position corresponding to the modern poet laureate, as has sometimes been alleged. He is best known today for the series of public contests of poetic invective in which he engaged with his student Michael the Cornishman (Michael Blaunpayn) in the mid-1250s; unfortunately only Michael's verses survive. These contests were notable events, judged by such prominent patrons as the king's half-brother Aymer de Lusignan (died 1260), bishop-elect of Winchester. Henry died, presumably in England, between 26 January 1262 and 2 April 1263. 
Peter Binkley', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37530


Bray, Henry (b. before 1248, d. 1311x13), administrator, first appears in surviving records, but already in a responsible position, in 1269. He is therefore likely to have been born some years before 1248. He was the son of William de Bray of Hinton, near Woodford Halse in Northamptonshire. His use of the title 'magister' indicates that he had received a university education, presumably at Oxford. In the late 1260s and early 1270s he is to be found as the business agent of the west midland baron John de Verdon. 
In 1273 Bray became a king's clerk. His first royal commission was levying arrears of a clerical tenth granted to the king. Later the same year he was appointed to the custody of various Welsh castles and honours that had come into the king's hands on the death of George de Cantilupe, lord of Abergavenny, at about the beginning of November. In 1275 he surrendered custody of Cilgerran but retained Abergavenny itself until 1281, and was embroiled during this period in a number of disputes with the tenants of the honour. In 1281 he was commissioned by the king to search the chirograph chests for all deeds relating to Jewish debts which had come into the king's hands through the forfeiture of the creditors concerned, and then to levy those debts for the king. Shortly afterwards he was also given the status of a justice of the Jews. He was paid as such until 1287, and in 1290 was still in possession of a key to the Jewish treasury, but it is doubtful whether he actually served as a justice for most of this period, since in February 1283 he was appointed to the full-time position of escheator of England south of Trent. 
Bray held this position until May 1290, when he was arrested and sent to the Tower of London and his lands seized, probably as the result of an allegation made against him in the course of the 'state trials' of 1289-93. The contemporary chronicler Bartholomew Cotton records that Bray attempted to drown himself 'en route' for the Tower, and that he also tried to dash his brains out while in custody, but he came to no harm and by October had been released and begun paying a fine. By Easter term 1292, however, he was back in the Tower and his lands once more in the king's hands, apparently after a second conviction. Although the amount of his fine was fixed at 2000 marks as early as October 1292, he remained in prison in the Tower, and later in Winchester Castle, until 1294, when his release was obtained in return for a promise by Bray and his sureties to pay the fine off at the rate of 300 marks a year. In 1299 he reached an agreement with the king, granting the latter some of the Northamptonshire lands he had acquired in return for a remission of all the king's financial claims against him. He was never again employed directly by the king. 
There is no evidence that Henry Bray was ever married, and by 1284 he had taken orders in the church that were incompatible with married status. He is, however, known to have had a son, also named Henry. He was still alive at the end of 1311 but was dead by September 1313. 
Paul Brand', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37531


Eastry, Henry (d. 1331), prior of Christ Church, Canterbury, was born to unknown parents, probably in the village of Eastry, Kent, as his name indicates. While still a young man he entered the Benedictine priory of Christ Church, Canterbury. Over the next few years he gained considerable administrative experience, serving first as a member of the household of Archbishop Robert Kilwardby (died 1279), and later as warden of the priory's Essex manors and as treasurer for two terms. In 1285 he was elected prior after the resignation of the incompetent Thomas of Ringmere, and he remained in charge for the next forty-six years. Finding the priory heavily in debt he drew up a plan for reducing household expenses and delegated a greater measure of control, especially for the collection of arrears, to the monk-wardens of the priory estates. 
By the 1290s the priory's financial base was secure enough to enable Eastry to invest in the local land market and, after the expulsion of the Jews, to acquire the former Jewish tenements in the city of Canterbury. But the election of Archbishop Robert Winchelsey (died 1313), in 1293, and the outbreak of war with France and Scotland in 1294 and 1296 respectively, imposed new strains on the priory's resources. In early 1297 the monks' support of Winchelsey in his struggle with the crown caused them to be temporarily driven out of their house and they had to watch their grain rot in their granary. Eastry, however, reduced expenses, spending scarcely anything on the purchase of land and rents, or rebuilding, and halving the convent's expenditure on wine and grain. Later high grain prices, at a time of excellent harvests, allowed the treasurers to build up a substantial surplus. By the end of 1299 the priory had nearly one year's revenue in hand. 
This surplus revenue financed agricultural improvement and extensive rebuilding at both a local and central level. Under Eastry's direction the priory poured substantial sums into increasing the size of sheep flocks and cow herds. In addition, on some manors, the liberal application of marl made possible an extension of the area under wheat. The priory also invested in the construction of new wind-, water-, and fulling mills. The building of sea walls helped to protect its marsh manors from flooding. On the manors themselves new barns, halls, and chapels were erected, and in the house at Canterbury Eastry renovated the choir and chapter house, as well as the prior's own apartments. During the first thirty-seven years of his rule, he was said to have spent no less than $839 on 'new works' within the cathedral precincts. In the area of urban investment Eastry exploited opportunities more intensively than anyone before him. He increased the priory's rents within the city of Canterbury by building nine stone shops in the Burgate, and by purchasing other property. He also built fourteen new shops at the priory's London property of Southwark. These achievements are recorded in a magnificent collection of documents -- correspondence, registers, a memorandum book, and innumerable local accounts. 
Within the convent, Eastry had difficulties keeping the monks within the strict confines of the Benedictine rule. Winchelsey, after his first visitation in 1298, complained that brothers were living too well, wearing silks and rich furs, and eating too much meat. A few years later, he complained that the monks had been given permission to leave the monastery and wandered round the countryside on the pretext of making pilgrimages. In the 1320s Archbishop Walter Reynolds (died 1327) reiterated these complaints, stressing that the monks should be spending more time in their celebration of divine office. Finally, towards the end of his life, Eastry's authority was challenged by a small group of discontented monks, who sent letters and a list of grievances to both the archbishop and the pope. It is not clear how widespread their support was. In 1317 Eastry publicly cleared himself of charges of abstracting and secreting letters destined for the chapter and for failing to pay a promised pension. In the 1320s the accusations surfaced again, and Eastry sequestered their suspected author, Robert Aledon, for several years. His charges appear to have been totally unfounded. 
So far as national affairs were concerned, Eastry attended several royal parliaments and ecclesiastical conventions. During the political unrest of Edward II's reign Eastry sought to restore tranquillity to the realm. He co-operated with Archbishop Reynolds and they wrote to each other constantly. In the years 1325-7 they were greatly concerned about the rumours of a French invasion and the possibility of open strife between Edward II and Queen Isabella. Both prelates were anxious not to antagonize either party, but their pleas for order, at a time of political violence and uncertainty, went unheeded. Nor was Eastry any more successful in maintaining peace at home. In his treatment of others he could be haughty, dictatorial, and overbearing. His tenants at Sandwich were ousted from their houses, and at one point the citizens of Canterbury rose in revolt and threatened to blockade the monks. None the less, he did succeed in maintaining the rights of the convent, and on his death in April 1331 he left the priory a considerable estate of books, vestments, plate, and horses. He was buried in Canterbury Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 37532


Wakefield, Henry (c.1335-1395), administrator and bishop of Worcester, was from the West Riding of Yorkshire, probably from a family of modest account. His spinster sister, Alice, lived with him and was his principal legatee. Other kinsfolk included at least one other sister, the brothers John and Thomas Sneynton, Cecily Sneynton, John Thomas, and Eleanor and Joanne, daughters of Agnes. He also had 'poor relations' in Aton in Pickering in 1395. He was a royal clerk, probably by July 1359, certainly by 1361. Exhibiting nothing more than competence, he became keeper of the great wardrobe on 27 June 1369, at the time when Edward III, and hence his court and government, were lapsing into passivity. 
In such circumstances Wakefield, like others well placed, could direct royal patronage in the church towards himself without doing much in return: the treasurership of St Paul's Cathedral (1369-75), the archdeaconry of Northampton (1371-2), the prestigious archdeaconry of Canterbury (1374-5), and much else. Wakefield even secured election to the small but immensely rich see of Ely in June 1373, but such was the disarray round the old king that Edward III also nominated his confessor, John Woodruff. Pope Gregory XI chose Thomas Arundel, the twenty-year-old son of Richard (II) Fitzalan, earl of Arundel, and a future archbishop of Canterbury. Undoubtedly this proved the right decision, if for the wrong reasons. On 12 September 1375 the pope awarded Wakefield the lesser see of Worcester, his share of the spoils carved out between royal and papal envoys at the concordat of Bruges; this superseded an election by the chapter of their prior, supposedly confirmed by the king. 
Wakefield received the temporalities on 14 October 1375, and was consecrated in Hatfield on the 28th. According to scandal, his promotion also dashed the hopes of John Wyclif, who thereupon took the road to heterodoxy in his disappointment: this cannot be more than a fragment of the story. Wakefield was a court creature, and only a draught animal at that. Still, after the court had been rocked by the impeachments and accusations of corruption made in the Good Parliament of 1376, John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, led a vicious counter-attack against the critics, and on 11 January 1377 put in Wakefield as treasurer of the realm, an uncompromising and unconvincing choice. As soon as Edward III died (Wakefield being an executor of his will) and a general reconciliation was mooted to look after the young Richard II, Wakefield was replaced (19 July 1377). He retired from public life (or, just as likely, was not invited to continue in it). 
Although he attended parliaments regularly enough, Wakefield spent his last twenty years running his diocese with the same competent mediocrity by which he had acquired it. None the less, his deathbed will is a surprisingly sensitive and austere statement, with an unusual concentration of his goods upon the sick and poor, especially those among his own tenants, and 'particularly those who have been hurt by me' (Marett). Though his kin, servants, and three former benefices were remembered dutifully enough, there is nothing of the wider political world where he had made his fortune, scarcely more of his own diocese or even of the cathedral itself, before whose pulpit he sought burial. He died the day after he made his will, 11 March 1395. 
R. G. Davies', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37533


Hepplewhite, George (1727?-1786), cabinet-maker and furniture designer, of whose origins firm evidence is lacking, was almost certainly born in 1727, the son of George Hepplewhite (1678-1733) of Ryton, a prosperous Tyneside village in co. Durham, and Sarah, 'nee' Rootlish (died 1729), his wife. If this identification is correct, both Hepplewhite and his successor in the standard canon of English furniture designers, Thomas Sheraton, were natives of co. Durham, albeit from opposite ends of the county. Hepplewhite was first mentioned when his fourth son, Benjamin William, was baptized at St James's, Clerkenwell, in 1768. Clerkenwell was then an important centre of the furniture trade, the seat of such celebrated firms as those of Giles Grendey and of William and Richard Gomm. Hepplewhite is next mentioned, again in Clerkenwell, in 1776, when his first son, George, was apprenticed to John Bowyer, citizen and turner, of Clerkenwell Close. In November 1784, when George achieved his freedom, the family were still in Clerkenwell. At Christmas 1785, however, Hepplewhite and his son George insured premises at 48 Redcross Street, Cripplegate, with the Sun Insurance Company. 'Utensils and stock' were valued at $500. Hepplewhite had died intestate at Redcross Street by 27 June 1786, when administration was granted to his widow, Alice. In 1786 'Kepplewhite & Son' were listed in Lowndes's London directory at 48 Redcross Street. The auction of 'the valuable stock on trade and household furniture of Mr. Hepplewhite, cabinet manufacturer deceased' was announced in the 'Public Ledger' (10 October 1786). That Hepplewhite's third son, John, subscribed to the 'Treatise on the Five Orders of Architecture' (1787) by George Richardson, a former draughtsman for the Adam firm, and that his second son, Andrew, was listed as a drawing master at 6 Oxendon Street, Haymarket, in 1811, suggests connections with the book trade and with architectural and design circles. 
In 1788 Isaac and Josiah Taylor published 'The cabinet-maker and upholsterer's guide, or, Repository of designs for every article of household furniture, in the newest and most approved taste... the whole exhibiting near three hundred different designs, engraved on one hundred and twenty-six plates: from drawings by A. Heppelwhite and Co. cabinet-makers' from their architectural library at 56 Holborn. No compendium of furniture designs had appeared since 1762, when Thomas Chippendale issued the third edition of his 'Gentleman and Cabinet-Maker's Director'. In publishing the Hepplewhite 'Guide' the Taylors were filling a yawning gap. The plates were issued in batches at the beginning of July, September, and October 1787. In January and February 1788 a subscription was promoted in such papers as the 'Lincoln, Rutland and Stamford Mercury' and 'Williamson's Liverpool Advertiser'. The price was 2 guineas. The preface adopts a modest tone: 'To unite elegance and utility, and blend the useful with the agreeable, has ever been considered a difficult but an honourable task.' It stressed the 'Guide''s utility to 'the mechanic', to 'young workmen in general, and occasionally to more experienced ones'. A successful subscription 'enabled us to exceed the number of plates originally proposed'. 
The designs, covering many furniture types, are either plain and functional or in a competent but unadventurous neo-classical manner, which seems indebted to the example of James Wyatt. Given their backward character and the fact that they appeared scarcely a year after George Hepplewhite's death, the traditional suggestion that Alice, his widow, was capitalizing on his designs seems plausible. However, the appearance in 1789 of a second edition with an extra plate, and of six plates signed 'Hepplewhite' or 'Heppelwhite' and dated October, November, and December 1792 and May 1793 in 'The Cabinet-Makers' London Book of Prices' edition of 1793 suggests that the firm designed after his death. This was proven when, in reaction to criticism from Thomas Sheraton, who stated in his 'Cabinet-Maker and Upholsterer's Drawing Book' (1793) that the Hepplewhite 'Guide' had already 'caught the decline' in design standards, a third edition was issued in 1794 containing new or altered plates, in which many curvilinear or shield-back chairs of 1788 are replaced by neat rectilinear forms in the French style, which Sheraton had derived from Henry Holland at Carlton House. Perhaps John and/or Andrew Hepplewhite may have been responsible for these 'posthumous' productions. The 'Guide''s text, containing information on nomenclature, fashion, materials, finishes, and upholstery, was changed in 1794 to take account of the altered plates, only two of which bear that date, but, curiously, comments of 1788 on a chair 'executed with a good effect for his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales' apply, in 1794, to a completely different design. 
The Hepplewhite 'Guide' was influential beyond England, in America, in Denmark, where J. C. Lillie used it for designing chairs for Liselund in 1793, and in Germany, where F. G. Hoffmann pirated Hepplewhite designs in his 'Meubles-Magazin' (1795). A late nineteenth-century Hepplewhite revival led to an 1897 reprint of the 'Guide' by Batsford, and a modest myth grew up around George Hepplewhite, who was stated to have been apprenticed to Gillows of Lancaster and London: this seems unlikely as, in 1801, they wrote: 'We have not Hebbelthwaite's Publication' (Westminster Reference Library, Gillow Records). 


@@@@@


doc= 37534


Herbert, Aubrey Nigel Henry Molyneux (1880-1923), diplomatist and traveller, was born on 3 April 1880 at Highclere Castle, Hampshire, the son of Henry Howard Molyneux Herbert, fourth earl of Carnarvon (1831-1890), secretary of state for the colonies under Lord Derby (1866-7) and Disraeli (1874-8), and lord lieutenant of Ireland under Lord Salisbury (1885-6), and his second wife, Elizabeth or Elisabeth Catharine 
(Elsie; died 1929)
, daughter of Henry Howard of Greystoke Castle, Cumberland, his first cousin. Aubrey was the elder son (there were no daughters) from the second marriage, Lord Carnarvon already having had a son and three daughters from his first. Although born into a family of great wealth and influence, Herbert suffered an affliction of the eyes from an early age which made him in effect blind for much of his life. He scraped through the Eton College of Dr Edmond Warre, under the particular care of Arthur Benson, his housemaster, without distinction, but in 1902 gained a first class in modern history at Balliol College, Oxford, where he also made a reputation for himself as a roof-climber, despite his blindness. 
On leaving Oxford, Herbert was secured the position of honorary attache at the embassy in Tokyo in 1902, but never allowed himself to become much interested in Far Eastern affairs. It was his next appointment in March 1904, to the embassy in Constantinople, which fired his enthusiasm for the Middle East and settled the subsequent course of his brief but eventful life. He was the model for the eponymous hero of 'Greenmantle' (1916) by John Buchan, first Baron Tweedsmuir. 
On his marriage on 20 October 1910 to Mary Gertrude (1889-1970), only child of John Robert William Vesey, fourth Viscount de Vesci, and his wife, Lady Evelyn Charteris, daughter of the eighth earl of Wemyss, Herbert's mother gave him Pixton Park, in Somerset, with 5000 acres, and a substantial family property in Portofino, Italy. Lady de Vesci gave them her splendid London house at 28 Bruton Street, and it was thought he should have a seat in parliament. After twice contesting South Somerset in the Conservative interest in 1910 he won the seat at a by-election in November 1911 and remained an MP for the rest of his life, for South Somerset until 1918, and then for Yeovil (as the constituency was renamed). 
Membership of the House of Commons did not interrupt Herbert's extensive travelling in the Middle East. Throughout 1911 his attention was focused almost exclusively on the Balkans, to which he travelled frequently, having many friends among remote inland brigands as well as among the cream of Kemal Ataturk's reformist movement in Constantinople. His tireless work for the cause of Albanian nationalism was rewarded in 1913 with the first of two enquiries on the point of whether he would be prepared to accept the throne of Albania, if it was formally offered to him. On this occasion Herbert was quite keen to accept, but H. H. Asquith (a close family friend) was not encouraging and Sir Edward Grey, the foreign secretary, was against any British involvement in the Balkan tangle. The prize this time went to Prince William of Wied, representing the Austrian faction. He did not last six months. Herbert was largely responsible for the creation of the modern, independent state of Albania after the First World War, championing the rights of the Albanians against the other Balkan states. 
On the outbreak of the First World War, Herbert joined the Irish Guards, despite his near blindness, by the simple method of buying himself a second lieutenant's uniform and falling in as the regiment boarded ship for France in August 1914. After being wounded and briefly taken prisoner during the retreat from Mons, he joined the intelligence bureau in Cairo, later known as the Arab bureau, in December 1914 with T. E. Lawrence, who became a close friend and ally. As liaison officer and interpreter he took part in the Gallipoli campaign in 1915. He found that his ready command of French, Italian, German, Turkish, Arabic, Greek, and Albanian, and his personal friendship with many of the key figures in the area, made his presence invaluable to the commander-in-chief, although eyebrows were sometimes raised at his unremittingly pro-Turkish stance. He spent the rest of the war in intelligence work in Mesopotamia, Salonika, and Italy. 
By 1920, although still receiving the Conservative whip in parliament, Herbert regarded himself as an independent, formally crossing the floor on the Irish vote on 20 November and thereafter sitting on whichever side he felt inclined. Effectively he was immersed in Albanian politics, although in February 1921, at the request of Sir Basil Thomson of Scotland Yard's special branch, he travelled to Germany for a secret meeting with Talaat, the Turk generally held responsible for the post-war Armenian massacres. Later that year, in Constantinople, he found himself put under surveillance by British military intelligence, the task being entrusted to his nephew, Henry Herbert, Lord Porchester. 
Herbert's eccentricity was to dress as a tramp, and his appearance was further affected by his blindness and by a piebald hair coloration, the result of an early attack of alopecia. Herbert and his wife had one son, Auberon Mark Yvo Henry Molyneux Herbert, and three daughters, the youngest of whom, Laura, became the wife of Evelyn Waugh. In the last year of his life Herbert was revisited by the total blindness which had afflicted his earlier years. In 1923, at a Balliol gaudy, he met his old tutor, A. L. Smith, now the master, who advised him that the best cure for blindness was to have the teeth extracted. Following this advice, Herbert developed blood poisoning and died on 26 September 1923 at 12 Beaumont Street, Portland Place, London. 
Auberon Waugh', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37535


Herland, Hugh (d. 1406?), master carpenter, was the presumed son of 
As Edward III's chief carpenter and administrator, William Herland contracted carpenters for the king's works, for instance at Hadleigh Castle, Essex (June 1358); the king's house at Rotherhithe, Surrey (1361-75), where he was comptroller; Eltham Palace, Kent; and the new castle of Queenborough on the Isle of Sheppey (1367-72), where William Wykeham was the initial overseer and where Hugh Herland was paid 8died a day for making 'springalds', catapults for hurling stones which had become semi-portable weapons by the late fourteenth century. Since both Herlands worked as military 'engineers', clearly this aspect of the craft remained an important component of a carpenter's skills at that time. 
As a reward for his long service, in 1371 William Herland was given a tenement in London and it was probably here that he died, in 1375. His office of 'disposer of the king's works' was then transferred to Hugh Herland. William's will, enrolled in the court of hustings (16 July 1375) indicates that he was survived by his wife, Agnes, but mentions no children. 
Hugh Herland's career began 'c'.1360 as the king's under-carpenter at Westminster, the Tower, and Windsor Castle, at the last of which he probably met his future patron, William Wykeham. In 1360 both Herlands were issued with robes from the great wardrobe and in 1369 each received a mourning robe for the funeral of Philippa of Hainault, at which time William Herland ranked among the 'esquires of great estate', while Hugh was an esquire of craftsman's rank ('de mistere'). Given this close association with the royal household, they may have collaborated on the wooden tester above Philippa's fine alabaster effigy in Westminster Abbey, prepared before her death by the sculptor, Jean de Liege; similarly, Hugh may have executed the tester above the tomb of Edward III, also in Westminster Abbey, following the king's death in 1377. 
In 1375 Hugh succeeded his father as chief carpenter, and after a brief hiatus (1377/8) received a new patent 'for life' from Richard II in 1379 as one of two chief carpenters. He remained 'disposer of the king's works of carpentry' until his retirement in 1404/5. During his long career Hugh Herland executed numerous works for the crown and supervised the royal castles south of the rivers Trent and Humber, including Carisbrooke, Isle of Wight (1384/5), Winchester (1390), and Portchester, Hampshire ('c'.1385 and 1396-9), where Herland and Henry Yevele presumably administered the works for Richard II's new domestic range, employing Thomas Clevere, who received the warden's wage of 6died a day. 
Herland's most important work in the 1390s was unquestionably the new roof for the Norman aisled hall at Westminster Palace, the largest medieval hall in England. For this vast 'renovatio' Herland was not only the master carpenter but also served as comptroller to John Godmaston, clerk of the works (Herland's account survives as BL, Add. Roll 27018). Herland made the oak framing during 1394-6 at a site near Farnham, Surrey, after which the timbers were transported piecemeal to London for assembly in 1397. The complex roof structure (ingeniously preserved by Sir Frank Baines in the early twentieth century) spans nearly 68 feet internally and combines a massive arch structure with angels and hammer beam brackets, each bearing the royal arms of Richard II. In 1399 Hugh was reappointed by Henry IV to act as comptroller to Godmaston for repairs made to the great hall and to the outer gate of the palace at Westminster, for which he was instructed to report directly to the exchequer. 
In addition to works for the crown, Herland was employed in 1387 by William Wykeham, bishop of Winchester, at the latter's manor of Highclere, Hampshire, and also worked at Wykeham's collegiate foundations at Winchester and New College, Oxford (founded 1379). Accompanied by his servants, Herland dined at New College nine times in 1390/91. While little original work remains, the chapel vault at St Mary's College, Winchester (1393/4) survives; moreover, Herland's likeness (with inscription) appears in the east window of the chapel, along with representations of the master mason, William Wynford, and of Simon Membury, clerk of the works. At Oxford, contextual evidence suggests that the New College chapel roof (rebuilt by Gilbert Scott), possibly designed by Herland, was of a low-pitched angel hammer beam type. The William Herland of Kingston, Surrey, listed as one of Wykeham's original scholars of Winchester College and admitted as a scholar to New College in July 1397, was very likely Hugh's son. 
In recognition of his long and expert service, Herland received various annuities and grants. As early as 1383 he received a patent of 1's'. a day for life, and in 1391, in return for his good service, he was granted an additional 10 marks a year for life from the fee farm of Winchester. In 1397 Richard II granted Herland an annual pension of $18 5's'. from the exchequer. These patents were reconfirmed by Henry IV (1399 and 1403). Herland not only increased his income but was also given a house 'in the little outward ward' of Westminster Palace about 1386, to keep his tools and moulds. A property transaction of July 1391 records the quitclaim to a certain Hugh Herlande, his wife, Joan of 'Upchirche of Kent', and their heirs, of a substantial property at Kingston upon Thames, Surrey. Given Master Hugh's income and status, and the proximity of Kingston to Herland's framing site, it is very likely that this refers to Hugh Herland, the king's carpenter. The last recorded payment of Herland's pension was made on 13 May 1406, suggesting that he died within the year. He appears to have had three sons, Thomas, William, and John. 


@@@@@


doc= 37536


Herle, William (d. 1588/9), political agent, was the son of Thomas Herle of Montgomery and his wife. His father was a half-brother to Sir Richard Herbert (1468-1539). He had at least one brother and a sister. His early life is obscure but he was well educated with a good knowledge of languages, including Latin, Flemish, and Italian, and probably also French and Spanish. 
Herle was in Antwerp in February 1559 when he sent Sir William Cecil, principal secretary, a letter containing news from the Low Countries. Disguised as a merchant, he travelled in 1560-62 to northern Germany where he established contacts with the nobility. He was back in London in July 1564, begging Cecil for his assistance in the case of Augier de l'Estrille who had been illegally captured by Herle and his fellow petitioners following an act of piracy. Herle continued to dabble with piracy and the privy council sent him to the Marshalsea prison on 13 November 1570. He entreated, both in English and Latin, for Cecil's help. From April 1571 he acted as a prison spy for Cecil. He played an important role in supplying information against Charles Bailly, a participant in the Ridolfi Plot of 1572. At the beginning of the year he uncovered a plot by Kenelm Berney and Edmund Mather to assassinate Cecil -- having probably encouraged them in their plotting in order to impress his patron all the more by the revelation of it. 
Herle was sent by Cecil, now Lord Burghley, to the Low Countries and returned in June 1573 with a long dispatch recording his conversations with William, prince of Orange. Cecil used this dispatch as an argument for aiding the Dutch, but Elizabeth I was not prepared, at this time, to quarrel with the Spanish. Herle spent the next few years in London, at Redcross Street, where he busied himself on behalf both of Paul Buys, the Dutch envoy, and of the English merchants trading with the Low Countries. He probably did not marry but he had a relationship with Rosa Jones and they had at least one illegitimate daughter, Jana, who was baptized at Guilsfield, Montgomeryshire, on 23 October 1576. In February 1582, when Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, escorted Francois, duke of Alencon, as far as Antwerp on his return to France, Herle accompanied them. He later claimed that he had been left in Antwerp as Leicester's agent. He was assiduous, during the spring and summer of 1584, in supplying information to Burghley and to Sir Francis Walsingham, principal secretary, on affairs in the Low Countries. Fear of imprisonment for debt rather than a desire for public service kept him in Antwerp and his letters frequently plead for assistance with his debts. In April 1583 the Spanish ambassador noted that the queen had sent Herle to Cologne. He was appointed ambassador to Emden on 8 June 1584 and instructed to reconcile Count John and Count Edzard of Emden, the joint rulers of East Friesland, and he remained there until the spring of 1585. 
On his return to England, Herle was again involved in English policy towards the Low Countries. Disagreements between Burghley and Leicester are probably behind a series of letters in which Herle explained that Burghley's role in Anglo-Dutch relations was unpopular and the queen's vacillating attitude unhelpful. Burghley took this candour in good part and justified his stance. He wished to explain his position and Herle was well placed to make the contents of these letters generally known. However, Burghley was not pleased when he discovered that Herle had shown the letters at court. Herle may have been acting on Leicester and Walsingham's behalf in trying to induce Burghley into more actively supporting the protestant cause in the Low Countries. Despite this his relationship with Burghley was reinforced by joint economic ventures. 
Leicester led an English army to the Low Countries in December 1585 and Herle followed him in February 1586. The privy council ordered Leicester to send him again to Emden in order to mediate in the quarrel between Emden and the states of Holland and West Friesland, which was preventing English trade. The embassy met with little success and Leicester himself had to overcome the difficulties over trading. Despite his failure, Herle was sent in July 1586 as an envoy to Utrecht. He returned to London on 22 August 1586. He was elected MP for Callington, Cornwall, on his return, probably through Burghley's influence, enabling him to avoid his creditors. While Herle supplied both Walsingham and Burghley with information during 1587 and 1588, he failed to receive any further commissions. An appeal to Burghley on 3 May 1588 for employment and for help with his debts was answered with an annuity from the exchequer. Herle died in the parish of St Clement without the bars of the New Temple towards the end of 1588 or at the beginning of 1589; the administration of his estate was granted on 8 February 1589. 
Herle's mastery of foreign languages enabled him to play a small part in England's relations with the Low Countries. Except for his embassies to Emden and to Utrecht, neither of which was notably successful, his role while abroad was to provide information, which he did in many prolix letters. A great part of his life was spent battling against ill health and in coping with his debts. In 1571 he obtained the office of rhaglaw of Cardiganshire and he believed that the profits of this office would provide him with financial security; after years of struggle, the Cardiganshire gentry defeated him. Still in debt, Herle was content to go to the Low Countries where he could avoid his creditors. His many requests for a permanent position were ignored by his powerful friends and this suggests that they considered him useful but not entirely trustworthy. 


@@@@@


doc= 37537


Herne, Sir Joseph (bap. 1639, d. 1699), merchant and financier, was born in London and baptized on 17 April 1639, the eighth son of Nicholas Herne, a merchant tailor, and the fourth son of Susan, his second wife. His early career is obscure, but in 1671 he became a freeman of the East India Company, and on 23 July 1672 he married Elizabeth, the daughter of Sir John Frederick of Old Jewry, London. Frederick was himself a major figure in trade with the Peninsula, and Herne succeeded him as head of their joint firm in 1685. The Hernes had seven sons and three daughters. 
In 1678 Herne was elected to the committee of the East India Company, on which he served continuously down to 1686, and then from 1687 to 1694 and from 1698 until his death. In 1686 he became a London alderman, sitting for Broad Street; but he discharged himself the following year, probably in anticipation of the purging of Anglicans from the bench. Membership of the Mercers' Company followed in 1687. 
It was after the revolution of 1688, however, that Herne emerged to some prominence. He was elected MP for Dartmouth on 28 November 1689 (and represented the constituency until his death), and was knighted on 15 September 1690. He invested widely in a number of the new industrial and trading concerns of the early 1690s and, in partnership with the goldsmith-banker Sir Stephen Evance and others, used his international trading connections to handle the government's military remittances, first to Ireland (1690-91) and then, between May 1691 and October 1694, to the continent. This latter business was undertaken in the most difficult financial circumstances and, even after the newly founded Bank of England had taken over from Herne, it was his credit that kept the artillery train in Flanders from starving late in 1694. 
After being elected governor of the East India Company for 1690-92, Herne defended the company's monopoly and the record of its previous governor, Sir Josiah Child, in the Commons. With Sir Thomas Cooke, his successor as governor, he appears to have been party to some extremely shady deals to break up the opposition group in 1693-4, and to have engaged in bribery to help secure a new charter for the company in 1694; all this brought a parliamentary storm on his head in the spring of 1696. But when in 1698 a new company finally won the trade in return for a loan of $2 million, Herne broke with Child and brought the 'old' company into the subscription so that it could continue in the trade. 
East India affairs apart, Herne's parliamentary career was limited to sitting on a number of committees (the committee set up early in 1695 to prevent the clipping of the coin being probably the most notable). During 1696 he was appointed one of the commissioners to receive subscriptions for a land bank, but the subscription failed; and in 1697 he was made one of the trustees for circulating exchequer bills. It fell to Herne, as chairman of the trustees, to face the parliamentary attack of early 1698 on the fraudulent endorsements of these bills by Charles Duncombe. About the same time, and rather surprisingly for a tory committed to the old East India Company and one who had lost the remittance contract to the newly founded Bank of England, Herne also joined the so-called tobacco contractors. These contractors had won from Peter the Great the right to export tobacco from England to Russia, but many were 'whiggish' and closely connected with both the Bank of England and the soon to be established 'new' East India Company. (Possibly this connection has some bearing on Herne's break with Child.) 
Herne died suddenly of a brain haemorrhage on 26 February 1699, worth 'near $200,000', and received a sumptuous funeral. 
Herne's brother 
Herne led an extremely busy life spanning business and politics. His firm's west country connections led him to engage in parliamentary politics in support of Joseph Williamson in 1667. His attendance at East India Company committee meetings from 1667 onwards was exemplary: he held the deputy governorship from 1672 and the governorship from 1674 until his death, and engaged in covert intelligence gathering for the company and the government. In the City he was elected sheriff in 1674-5, common councilman in 1675-6, and alderman from 1676 until his death. Maintaining his links with Dartmouth, where it is believed that he expended no less than $1000 per annum on improving the town's water supply, he was elected its MP in 1679. In parliament he sat on seventeen committees, the most important being that for securing the king and kingdom against popery. Herne died after a short illness on 10 August 1679, leaving a substantial holding of East India Company stock, valued at the revolution of 1688 at $10,838. 


@@@@@


doc= 37538


Herringman, Henry (bap. 1628, d. 1704), bookseller, was born in Carshalton, Surrey, the son of John Herringman, yeoman, and was baptized on 14 March 1628 at the Carshalton parish church. His mother's name may have been Margaret. He served an apprenticeship with the London bookseller Abel Roper from 1 August 1644 until 28 June 1652, when he became free of the Stationers' Company. 
Herringman is probably best-known as the publisher of John Dryden, but his first enterprising move was to purchase the stock of John Holden, who had died in May 1652, and to set up business at Holden's former shop at the Blue Anchor in the Lower Walk, New Exchange, London, during 1653. Samuel Pepys writes of several occasions when he met friends and had news of Herringman's authors there. He married Alice Abel on 29 September 1653 at the church of St Dunstan-in-the-West, London, and with her had five daughters and four sons. At about the same time he began buying copyrights: the first book to bear his imprint was an edition of Horace's 'Lyrics', published in 1653; the first copyright he registered with the Stationers' Company was a translation by Sir Kenelm Digby of Albert the Great's 'Treatise Adhering to God', entered on 19 September 1653. By the late 1650s it is almost certain that, as Thomas Shadwell suggests in 'The Medal of John Bayes' (1682), Herringman began employing the young Dryden to write prefaces, commencing a relationship that developed through the 1660s and 1670s when Herringman bought up the copyrights to most of Dryden's work. Dryden briefly mentions his publisher in 'MacFlecknoe' (1682), describing Herringman as captain of a guard of 'Bilk't 'Stationers'' (Dryden, 57). 
Herringman's early association with the established literary publisher Humphrey Moseley was another important element of his career. The two published a number of works together, and after Moseley's death in 1661 Herringman purchased from Moseley's estate copyrights to the poems of Abraham Cowley, Richard Crashaw, Sir John Denham, John Donne, Sir John Suckling, and Edmund Waller, as well as some of the plays of Ben Jonson and Sir William Davenant. Although numerous entries in the Stationers' Company register attest to the variety of Herringman's early trade list, he concentrated on the publication of 'belles-lettres' from the 1660s. 
Herringman's middle career was assisted in some ways by the great fire of London, which saw the disruption of his competitors' businesses and the destruction of whole editions of many books, including much of Shakespeare's third folio. Herringman was instrumental in the publication of the fourth. Herringman bought few copyrights after 1678, concentrating instead on republishing popular literary works and bringing out collected editions -- Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher in 1679, Shakespeare in 1685, Jonson in 1692. In 1684 he turned over the retail side of his business to Francis Saunders and his partner Joseph Knight. A year later he became master of the Stationers' Company. 
It is evident from his will, written the day before his death, that Herringman's hope was to keep his publishing business in the family. He stipulated that his kinsman John Herringman should have 'my Coppyes and partes of Coppys of Books as they stand entered in the Register Booke of the Company of Staconers... provided that he serves out his seaven years of Apprentishipp justly and truly' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/474, fol. 322'v'). Instead the younger Herringman abandoned a book trade career for the wardenship of the Carshalton parish church. Many of these copies were acquired by Jacob Tonson, who developed even more strongly the line of fine literary publishing begun by Moseley and Herringman. 
Herringman probably retired to Carshalton in the mid-1690s, when his name no longer appears in the poor rate ledgers for the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields. He died in Carshalton on 15 January 1704 and was buried at the parish church, where a memorial was erected. 
C. Y. Ferdinand', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37539


Herschel, Sir William James, second baronet (1833-1917), developer of fingerprinting and judge, was born on 9 January 1833, probably in Slough, the eldest child of the three sons and nine daughters of Sir John Herschel, first baronet (1792-1871), astronomer and chemist, and his wife, Margaret Brodie, daughter of Alexander Stewart, Presbyterian minister of Blair Atholl. 
Herschel was educated at Clapham grammar school and the East India Company's college at Haileybury. He arrived in Bengal in 1853 and was posted to Malda as an assistant magistrate. In later years he served as magistrate of Midnapore (1866-71), district judge of Dinajpur (1871-2) and Nadia (1872-4), commissioner of Cooch Behar (1874-5), and magistrate of Shahabad (1875-7) and Hooghly (1872-8). On 19 May 1864 he married (Anne) Emma Haldane, youngest daughter of Alfred Hardcastle of Hatcham House, Surrey. She died at the birth of their second son on 5 October 1873, leaving two older girls, a boy, and the baby in Herschel's care. 
In 1858 at Jangipur, while still a relatively junior civilian, Herschel realized that taking and recording fingerprints could prevent impersonation. Over the next fifteen years he noted that not only were the ridge and furrow patterns of each individual's prints unique, but they never changed. In 1877, as magistrate of Hooghly, he instituted the first known system of fingerprinting as a means of combating fraudulent contracts, false pension claims, and prisoner substitution. Although the scheme enhanced his reputation among local Bengalis as an incorruptible administrator, he received no official encouragement for his work and in 1878 he resigned the service and returned to England. Fingerprinting was not to be formally adopted in India until 1897. 
Despite claims to prior discoveries made by Henry Faulds, who was the first to publish on the subject, Herschel is generally recognized as the pioneer of fingerprinting. His work was built upon by Sir Francis Galton and Sir Edward Henry, whose systematic methods had practical applications for the detection of criminals, and to whom with characteristic modesty he paid tribute in his book 'The Origin of Finger-Printing' (1916). 
Back in England, Herschel settled at Oxford. There he became an unattached member of the university and in 1881, at the age of forty-eight, was awarded a first-class degree in theology. Typical of him, wrote a friend, was his readiness to 'clothe himself in the humility of the commoner's gown' ('Oxford Magazine', 2 Nov 1917). For a few years he lectured in divinity at Hertford College and in 1911 published 'A Gospel Monogram'. Living at Lawn Upton, Littlemore, he undertook many philanthropic and religious activities, including work for the Temperance Society, and set about recording the local dialect, a task subsequently taken up by his younger daughter, Emma Dorothea. He was a member of the Oxfordshire county council from 1895 to 1904. Inspired perhaps by his father's early photographic inventions, he took a special interest in colour photography and presided at the national photographic convention in Oxford in 1901. 
In 1908 Herschel moved to Warfield, Berkshire. He died at home in Rectory House, Warfield, on 24 October 1917 and was buried in the family vault in Hawkhurst, Kent, on the 27th. His elder son, John Charles William ('b'. 1869), succeeded him as third baronet. On his death in 1950 the baronetcy became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 37540


Boreham, Hervey of (b. before 1228?, d. 1277), administrator and justice, was probably born some time before 1228 in the village of Boreham in Essex, the son of Ralph, son of William of Boreham, a minor landowner. He had at least one brother, named John. His first appearance in surviving records appears to be late in 1249, when he was appointed the abbot of Westminster's attorney for litigation in the common bench. He may already by then have become the abbot's steward, a position he is known to have held in 1254, and apparently retained until 1259. In that year he passed into the service of Richard de Clare, earl of Gloucester (died 1262), as his steward, and went round the earl's estates hearing complaints against the earl's officials. 
Although an ordained cleric, Boreham is said by the contemporary chronicler William of Rishanger to have been one of two standard-bearers of the men of London at the battle of Lewes in 1264. After the victory of Simon de Montfort, earl of Leicester (died 1265), he became a king's clerk, and for a few months was one of those in day-to-day control of the royal administration. In Michaelmas term 1264 he was appointed a junior justice of the common bench, and remained a justice of the court until the end of Trinity term 1265. He may not, however, have sat in the final term as he was under sentence of excommunication, possibly for his part in the battle of Lewes. 
Boreham's retention of the custody of a number of escheated royal honours in Essex and of Hadleigh Castle (originally granted to him in July 1264) until the end of 1265 or beginning of 1266, and his subsequent association with John de Burgh in June 1266 in the keeping of the peace in the counties of Essex and Hertfordshire, indicate that he successfully negotiated the transition from Montfortian rule to royalist restoration after the battle of Evesham. He may already have been linked by this date with Earl Richard's son, Gilbert, earl of Gloucester (died 1295). He was certainly in the earl's service by 1267, when he was one of those who advised him to occupy London in support of the claims of the disinherited, and was given a safe conduct to bring a message from the earl to the king. 
Boreham re-entered the king's service in the last month of Henry III's life and in early November 1272 was appointed a baron of the exchequer. In the final years of his life he achieved high office in the church. By 1272 he had become precentor of Hereford Cathedral and a canon of St Paul's; in 1274 he became dean of St Paul's. In 1275 he is said to have been a serious rival to the saintly Thomas de Cantilupe (died 1282) for the see of Hereford. Boreham probably died a few days before 7 February 1277. 
Paul Brand', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37541


Heyrick, Elizabeth (1769-1831), slavery abolitionist and philanthropist, was born in St Nicholas Street, Leicester, on 4 December 1769, the elder daughter and second child in a family of two girls and three boys (one of whom died young). Her parents were dissenters. Her father, John Coltman (died 1808), a pupil of John Aikin (1713-1780), was a scholarly worsted manufacturer; her mother, Elizabeth Cartwright (1737-1811), was a skilled craftswoman, a published poet and book reviewer, and a friend of Robert Dodsley (1703-1764) and William Shenstone (1714-1763). John Wesley visited their house, which in the riots of 1785 was plundered by a machine-breaking mob. Elizabeth, known as Bess when young, 'was singular in her childhood' (Hutton, 61): anecdotes depict her giving scarce pennies to a beggar and choosing for rescue a plain kitten in preference to a pretty one. Her talent for landscape painting gave her father 'half a mind' to 'make an Angelica Kauffman of her' (Hutton, 61). Instead, on 10 March 1789, aged nineteen, she married John Heyrick, eldest son of John Heyrick, Leicester town clerk, and descendant of the poet Robert Herrick. He soon exchanged a legal career for a cornetcy in the 15th light dragoons, and he and his wife lived thereafter in English and Irish barracks. He died of angina on 18 June 1797 (while Elizabeth was out at church), in the act of proof-reading a sheet of his own poems. The marriage was said to have been stormy, but she mourned fervently, with lifelong observance of the anniversary of his death. They had no children. 
Elizabeth rejoined her family, left the Methodists to become a member of the Society of Friends, and 'stepped boldly forward the champion of black men and tortured beasts' (Hutton, 63). Her twenty or more books and pamphlets also address war, prisons, corporal punishment, the level of wages and the plight of the industrial poor, election issues, and vagrancy legislation. In 1809 she stopped a bull-baiting at Bonsall in Derbyshire by purchasing the bull. With her friend Susannah Watts (1768-1842) she canvassed large areas of Leicester in 1824, promoting the boycott of West Indian sugar; by the following June almost one quarter of the town's population had given up sugar. Heyrick also visited prisons and liberated long-incarcerated poachers by paying their gaol fees. Late in life she campaigned against capital punishment, in alliance with William Allen of Guy's Hospital. 
Elizabeth Heyrick published anonymously at Leicester and London. Her first work, 'The Warning' (1805), opposed war: ''multitudes', equally unacquainted with the origins and the object, are always eager to rush to the standard of blood' (p. 18). She imitated Hannah More in 'Bull-Baiting: a Village Dialogue between John Brown and John Simms' (1809), and treated public as well as private morality in 'Familiar Letters Addressed to Children and Young Persons of the Middle Ranks' (1811), written for a sister-in-law's children. Her anti-slavery works included appeals directed to British women and ''not' to the Government, but to the People of England'. The best known is 'Immediate, not gradual abolition, or, An inquiry into the shortest, safest, and most effectual means of getting rid of West Indian slavery' (1824), a pamphlet which broached the idea of speedy abolition while William Wilberforce and other male leaders were still gradualist. It sold hundreds of thousands of copies in Britain and the USA. In the mid-1830s the American abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison praised Heyrick and her work in a public speech in Glasgow. 
Elizabeth Heyrick's philanthropy has been better recognized than her executive acumen, her grasp of power systems and of pressure-group politics, and her forceful analysis of the interdependence of social evils. She left 'a mass of unpublished manuscripts, chiefly consisting of essays, sermons, prayers, etc.' (Beale, 215). Of a manuscript list of eighteen titles she published, thirteen are untraced (though three other known works are omitted from the list). She died in Leicester on 18 October 1831, and was buried there. The 'Brief Sketch' of her life (1862) was probably the work of Alicia Cooper, a younger relation. 


@@@@@


doc= 37542


Hickey, William (1749-1827), lawyer in India and memoirist, was born in St Alban's Street, Pall Mall, Westminster, on 30 June 1749, the eighth child of Joseph Hickey ('c'.1712-1794), an Irishman, a successful London attorney, and his wife, Sarah Boulton (1720-1768), whose family were landed property owners in Yorkshire. Joseph was evidently an indulgent parent, whose efforts to advance William's career were largely wasted on what was, by his own account, an exceptionally wayward adolescent. William went to Westminster School from 1757 until he left in 1763, as he himself put it, 'most deservedly in high disgrace'. By then his disinclination for systematic work or study, his capacity to spend money, and what he called his 'propensity to women' were all well developed ('Memoirs', ed. Quennell, 24). A succession of scandals finally persuaded his father that William must seek his fortune overseas. In 1769 he obtained a cadetship in the East India Company's army at Madras and made the journey to India, but, seeing no prospect of advancement there, returned to London via China. An attempt in 1775 to set him up in Jamaica was no more enduring. In 1777, however, he was packed off to India again, this time to Calcutta, where, with the exception of an interval of two years in London managing a parliamentary petition, he was to remain until he retired in 1808. 
For some thirty years Hickey practised as an attorney at the supreme court established in 1774 in the capital of the new British empire in India to administer English law to the inhabitants of Calcutta and to British subjects in Bengal generally. In addition Hickey served for some years as deputy to the sheriff of Calcutta and became clerk to Sir Henry Russell, ultimately chief justice of the supreme court. Although in his style of living he remained for many years something of a rake, his career in Calcutta appears to have been a success. He built up a large practice, relying especially on 'native' clients, and earned enough money to enable him to live in a very opulent way, even if he did not save any considerable fortune. He prided himself on being a very well-esteemed member of the British community. He was known as the Gentleman Attorney and the company he kept 'always was the best' ('Memoirs', ed. Quennell, 234). Fearing for his health, he reluctantly left India in 1808. Little is known of his retirement in Britain. He settled at first in Beaconsfield, moving to London in 1817. 
Any assessment of Hickey's career and of his personality depends almost entirely on a single source provided by Hickey himself: his 742 pages of memoirs written shortly after his return to Britain. Little is otherwise known about him. No collection of his own papers survives, nor is there much about him in the letters of others. At least two portraits of him can, however, be definitely identified; one was painted in India by Thomas Hickey (no relation to William) and another by William Thomas was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1820. 
The memoirs are extremely detailed, yet Hickey states that he wrote them almost entirely from memory, having only a few documents available to him and those mostly from his later years. By strict standards, therefore, the memoirs must contain much that can be regarded only as fiction. For instance, Hickey includes many conversational passages that purport to be verbatim records, but must be reconstructions of what he thought was appropriate to have been said on the occasion. Nevertheless, the memoirs undeniably deal with real people, places, and events. Subject to many small mistakes, the memoirs stand up well to cross-checking with other records. They therefore constitute a significant historical source, above all in bringing to life the British community in Calcutta. 
For Hickey, however, the memoirs were evidently much more than a mere record of past events. In them he tried to recreate the characters of people who had meant much to him. In some cases he was brilliantly successful, as with the 'irresistibly attracting and engaging' ('Memoirs', ed. Quennell, 126) (but also outrageously insensitive) Robert Pott, his friend for thirty years. The main character of the memoirs is of course ultimately their author, and, although he ostensibly denied this, they constitute his apologia. In them he presents himself as a 'pickle', that is as a self-confessed reprobate, who made good. Even at his worst he implies that he never transcended the ultimate standards of gentlemanly conduct and human decency -- or at least never did so without sincere repentance. 
Hickey never married. Being, as he freely admitted, of an 'amorous disposition', among innumerable liaisons he formed a number of enduring relationships with women. One of these, Charlotte Barry (1762-1783), took the name of Mrs Hickey. After Charlotte's death the great love of Hickey's life was Jemdanee, one of his Indian mistresses, with whom he had a son, who died in infancy. His death date is unknown, but his burial was recorded on 10 February 1827 at St John the Evangelist, Smith Square, Westminster. Prior to his death he had been living nearby in Holywell Street. 


@@@@@


doc= 37543


Hickman, Henry (1800-1830), promoter of anaesthesia, was born at Lady Halton in the parish of Bromfield, Shropshire, on 27 January 1800. He was the fifth son and seventh child in the family of eight sons and five daughters of John Hickman, farmer (also clerk of the course at Ludlow races), and his wife, Sarah, daughter of Benjamin Hill, yeoman, of Stanton Lacy. From 1819 he sometimes inserted Hill after Henry, although this was not a baptismal name. His early education, apprenticeship, and hospital attendance are unknown save for a surviving fair-copy notebook dated 1816-18, containing extracts from textbooks and a record of attendance for two weeks at Brookes's school of anatomy, London. In November 1819 Hickman matriculated at Edinburgh, registered with the university, and joined the Royal Medical Society, but he did not graduate. In 1820, although under age, he became MRCS. On 29 May 1821 Hickman married Eliza Hannah, daughter of Benjamin Gardner, a farmer, of Leigh Court, near Worcester; they had one son and three daughters. 
Hickman set up practice as a surgeon in Ludlow. Advertising for an apprentice he promised instruction in the different branches of the profession and access to his museum. In May 1824, however, before moving to Shifnal, near Telford, he auctioned some of the natural history specimens. Commercial directories listed him as physician in Shifnal. 
In February 1824 Hickman wrote to T. A. Knight FRS, suggesting the use of suspended animation to tranquillize fear and relieve suffering during surgical operations. He reported standard surgical procedures on animals, rendered insensible under a bell glass by denying them fresh air or by administering carbon dioxide, without evidence of pain and with full recovery. Usually haemorrhage was trifling and healing clean; he attributed the latter to the antiputrescent properties of carbon dioxide. The origins of his inspiration, twenty years before Horace Wells discovered nitrous oxide anaesthesia, are unknown. Suggestions that Hickman experimented with nitrous oxide remain unsubstantiated. 
In August 1824 Hickman produced a pamphlet entitled 'A letter on suspended animation, containing experiments showing that it may be safely employed during operations on animals, with a view of ascertaining its probable utility in surgical operations on the human subject, addressed to T. A. Knight esq. of Downton Castle, Herefordshire, one of the presidents of the Royal Society'. The next line (overscored on the only surviving copy) reads: '... and read before it by Sir Humphrey Davy' -- an event which did not take place. The text was also reproduced in the 'Shrewsbury Chronicle'; 'The Lancet' responded in 1826 with a scathing letter, under the heading 'Surgical Humbug', signed 'Antiquack'. 
In 1828 Hickman appealed to Charles X, king of France, for the collaboration of the king's medical schools with his experiments on insensibility produced by 'introduction of certain gases into the lungs'; these were ridiculed by the Academie de Medecine. On his return to England, Hickman practised in Tenbury Wells, Worcestershire. He died at Tenbury Wells on 2 April 1830 and was buried at Bromfield three days later. 
Denis Smith', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37544


Hill, John (1786-1855), Church of England clergyman, was born on 23 October 1786 in the City of London, apparently in the parish of St Gregory by Paul with St Mary Magdalen, Old Fish Street, the son of John Hill. His first instructor was probably John Eden, vicar of St Nicholas, Bristol, and his early diaries show that he was also influenced in boyhood by T. T. Biddulph of St James's, Bristol. From 1803 to 1806 he boarded at a school kept by Edward Spencer, vicar of Wingfield, Wiltshire, where other notable evangelicals were educated. Hill matriculated from St Edmund Hall, Oxford, in 1806, subsequently obtaining a second class below the line in 'literae humaniores' in 1809. Thereupon he was made assistant tutor, proceeding MA in 1812, when he became sole tutor and vice-principal (the principals of the Hall at this time played virtually no part in teaching or administration). During Hill's formative years at Oxford, until 1807, Isaac Crouch had been vice-principal of St Edmund Hall, followed by Daniel Wilson, afterwards bishop of Calcutta. Hill's significance in church and Oxford history can be adequately understood only in terms of his links with these two predecessors. Vice-principal from 1783, Crouch had brought into being, and Wilson continued more formally, a system of close academic teaching with constant pastoral oversight. Crouch established thus a thriving evangelical tradition at St Edmund Hall, which lasted until 1854. Hill promoted it effectively, considerably longer than Crouch, and for much longer than Wilson or his own successor, E. A. Litton, who looked back on Hill's 'pure simplicity of character and benevolence of spirit' ('The Record', 5 March 1855, 4). The hymnologist W. H. Havergal, an early pupil, 'often spoke... of his kindness and fitness for his office' (J. M. Crane, 'Records of... Wm. H. Havergal', 1882, 6). Soon this influence extended further afield in the university: Archdeacon Phelps, scholar of Corpus from 1815 to 1822, and his undergraduate associates recalled Hill's 'friendship and counsels' long after they had all left Oxford (C. Hole, 'Life of W. W. Phelps', 1, 1871, 130). 
With entire responsibility for teaching and discipline, Hill had little time to produce original works of scholarship: during the long vacation of 1818 he wrote over 1000 pages of lectures. However his 1816 version of Henry Aldrich's 'Artis logicae compendium' proved an acceptable university textbook, reaching a sixth edition in 1850. Apart from this he published only a lengthy poem, 'The Boor' (1829), a scriptural analogy relating to Roman Catholic emancipation, and a few sermons. Made deacon in 1809 and ordained priest in 1810, Hill fulfilled his pastoral vocation both at the Hall and by officiating as curate of Hampton Gay, a small village near Oxford, becoming perpetual curate in 1814 and serving the parish until 1851. On 17 July 1811 at St George's, Hanover Square, London, Hill married Sophia ('c'.1788-1849), only daughter of George Warriner, linen draper of New Bond Street and of Bloxham Grove, Oxfordshire, niece of Edward Grubb, sculptor. Their house in the High Street, Oxford (latterly no. 65), a focus for evangelicals from near and far, became the centre of an affectionate family life, where between 1812 and 1824 four sons (of whom two died young) and four daughters were born. 
In 1825 Hill founded a local association (still extant) of the Church Missionary Society, followed in 1827 by a similar branch of the London Society for Promoting Christianity amongst the Jews. Of these he remained active secretary until he ceased to reside in the university. Among assistant secretaries, for a year in 1829-30, was J. H. Newman, then vicar of St Mary's. By this time Hill was himself a recognized evangelical leader in Oxford. Francis Newman, then an undergraduate at Worcester College, recalled that 'to young Academicians of the 'Evangelical' school, whatever their College, the Revd. Mr. 'Hill' was an important standard-bearer' (C. H. O. Daniel, 'Our Memories', 1893, 46). Hill's pupils included a Bampton lecturer (J. E. Riddle), a Savilian professor (W. F. Donkin), and William Jacobson, afterwards regius professor of divinity (1848-65) and bishop of Chester. 
In 'Gleanings of Past Years' (1879) W. E. Gladstone described Hill's men of about 1830 as ultra-Calvinistic. While this was undoubtedly true of a few contemporary Oxford evangelicals, including H. B. Bulteel (1800-1866), curate of St Ebbe's, where Gladstone sometimes worshipped, it does not seem clear how far doctrinal Calvinism at St Edmund Hall, even in Hill's time, went beyond the moderate form of article 17, if at all. But Hill did, privately at least, identify himself with Bulteel. His quieter personality and genial temperament, however, made him a more sympathetic advocate of evangelical beliefs. 
In 1840-41 Hill's vice-principalship received the unusual recognition of a portrait, albeit by the minor artist John Wood, which now hangs in the old dining hall. Hill proceeded BD in 1844. During the later 1840s he felt less vigour for dealing effectively with young men. Numbers at St Edmund Hall were declining. To this period nevertheless belongs a reference of William Tuckwell, then an undergraduate of New College, recalling 'the evening parties of John Hill... where prevailed tea and coffee, pietistic Low Church talk, prayer and hymnody of portentous length' ('Reminiscences of Oxford', 1900, 96). 
The death of his wife in September 1849 was perhaps a decisive factor in Hill's decision to quit. Late in 1851 he was appointed by Charles Sumner, bishop of Winchester, as rector of Wyke Regis, Dorset. At the same time he was elected a city lecturer, requiring occasional duty in Oxford, at St Martin's, Carfax. Having made a promising start at Wyke, in 1855 serious illness intervened and he died at his rectory on 22 February. A mural tablet in Wyke church commemorates his ministry there and at Oxford, where he was buried on 2 March in his family vault in St Peter's-in-the-East churchyard. His surviving diaries were presented to St Edmund Hall by a great-grandson, the Revd A. D. du B. Hill, in 1925. Some twenty of Hill's letters, in a freer style, came to light in 1990. 


@@@@@


doc= 37545


Hill, Oliver Falvey (1887-1968), architect, was born on 15 June 1887 at 89 Queen's Gate, London, the third son and seventh of eight children of William Neave Hill, manufacturer, of London, and his wife, Kate Ida, daughter of Martin Franks. He was educated at Uppingham School. Having decided to become an architect, he was advised by Sir Edwin Lutyens, a family friend, to gain experience in a builder's yard. This developed his sense of texture and materials. Simultaneously, he trained his colour sense by studying Persian and Chinese ceramics in the Victoria and Albert Museum. Between 1909 and 1911 Hill attended evening classes at the Architectural Association while a pupil of William Flockhart. 
Hill's first major commission was to reconstruct the house and garden at Moor Close, Binfield, Berkshire, in which his love of rich colour and baroque forms was displayed. During the First World War he served in the London Scottish regiment and attained the rank of captain. After returning to architecture, he designed Cour, Argyll (1921-3), a picturesque country house in local stone, and a series of houses either thatched and timbered or in neo-Georgian style, such as Cock Rock, Croyde, Devon (1926), and Woodhouse Copse, Holmbury St Mary, Surrey (1926). Hill designed furniture and paid great attention to interiors and colour schemes. He became a fashionable architect for London houses and flats, and designed two much publicized houses in Gayfere Street, Westminster, for Wilfrid Ashley (later Baron Mount Temple) in 1926 and 1931. In these, his use of mirrors and simple room arrangements indicated his developing interest in the modern movement in Europe, which became the main theme of his work in the 1930s, although never to the exclusion of other styles. Among Hill's modernist houses were Joldwynds, Holmbury St Mary (1930-32), for Wilfred (later Baron) Greene; Holthanger, Wentworth, Surrey (1935); and Landfall, Poole, Dorset (1938). He also designed the Midland Hotel, Morecambe, Lancashire, in 1933 as a pioneer modernist public building, and was involved in the attempt to build a modernist seaside resort at Frinton Park, Essex. 
As designer of the exhibition of British industrial art in the home at the Dorland Hall, London, in 1933, and the exhibition of contemporary industrial art in the home in the same hall (1934), Hill promoted modernism in architecture and household objects. He was architect of the British pavilion at the Paris Exhibition of 1937, and was involved in designing displays and selecting exhibits under the chairmanship of Frank Pick. His approach to modernism was aesthetic rather than sociological or mechanistic, although he built a fine primary school at Whitwood Mere, near Castleford, Yorkshire (1939). Architects and critics with purist views were suspicious of Hill, but he helped to popularize the modern style. He was notable for commissioning works of art for buildings and displays from Eric Gill, Eric Ravilious, John Skeaping, and others. 
After 1945 Hill suffered neglect, although completing some fine work, notably Newbury Park bus station in Essex (1949) and Uppingham School Library and war memorial in Leicestershire (1949). He organized the Cotswold Tradition exhibition at Cirencester in 1951 with considerable panache, and retired to Daneway House, Sapperton, Gloucestershire, where he created a new garden. He wrote several books on architecture, notably 'English Country Houses: Caroline, 1625-1685' (with John Cornforth, 1966). He loved being out of doors, often without clothes, and kept many animals. He was tall and rather deaf, an unselfconscious eccentric, with a great appetite for work. 
On 19 December 1953 Hill married Margaret Jeanette (Titania) Beverley ('b'. 1929/30), the musician daughter of the architect Samuel Beverley, and forty-three years his junior, who shared in the creation of a lifestyle of unworldly fantasy at Daneway; they had no children. Hill also had a long-term relationship with Helena Rosa Wright, nee Lowenfeld (1887-1982), family planning practitioner. He died on 29 April 1968 at home, and was survived by his wife. 
Alan Powers', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37546


Hill, Philip Ernest (1873-1944), property developer and financier, was born at 8 Scarborough Terrace, Torquay, on 11 April 1873, the younger son and youngest of three children of Philip Hill (1839-1922), cab proprietor, and his wife, Mary Smith (1830-1883), a lodging-house keeper. His mother died when he was ten, his only sister subsequently bringing him up. In 1886 he entered Taunton Independent college, where he received a good commercial education. At the age of sixteen he became a junior in a Newton Abbot estate agency. In 1892 he sought adventure by joining the army, but purchased his discharge two years later, just before the regiment was posted overseas. He resumed his estate agent's career, this time in Cardiff, where he married, in 1897, Katherine Keziah, daughter of Thomas Evans, a Cardiff gentleman. 
After his only child -- a daughter -- had died, aged six, of meningitis (his wife died a little later), Hill moved to London in 1912. Aware that London agents were far better remunerated than those in the provinces, and that an exclusive locality greatly improved the chances of making good, he set up as an estate agent and valuer at 42 Albemarle Street, just off Piccadilly. He did well, but was less successful as a public works contractor during the First World War, erecting camps and portable buildings for the government. He thus emerged at the end of the war with a substantial bank overdraft, which was not fully repaid until 1922. 
In 1917 he married for the second time; his second wife was Jessica Gertrude (daughter of Richard Gerrard, civil engineer), an actress and formerly the wife of Eric Spencer Wentworth Fitzwilliam (later the ninth Earl Fitzwilliam). She introduced Hill to London cafe society, but they were divorced in 1922. That same year he married the actress Vera Blanche Neville (daughter of Alfred Neville Snepp, cigarette manufacturer), the former wife of Henry Algernon Claude Graves (later the seventh Baron Graves), a bookmaker. 
Hill entered the world of corporate finance and takeovers in 1923, as adviser to the Beecham family, whose pill-making firm had become entangled in property affairs after the purchase in 1914 by Sir Joseph Beecham (1848-1916) of the Covent Garden estate in London. By 1924 Hill had completed the buying out of the family interests and he helped to establish Beecham Estates and Pills Ltd. He carried out the first major flotation of a company on his own behalf in 1927, when he obtained control of Taylors Drug Company Ltd and other retail chemists' chains, following this up in 1928 with the acquisition of Timothy Whites Ltd. In the same year, by an adroit property deal, he divided the two not very compatible sides of the Beecham company into separate enterprises, becoming chairman of both. 
Of these enterprises, the Covent Garden Properties Company Ltd concentrated entirely on general estates business. Hill's plan for the newly registered Beechams Pills Ltd was to build it up into the largest patent medicine and household goods company in Britain. Having already acquired the ailing Veno Drug Company Ltd, in 1938-9 he strengthened Beechams by purchasing on its behalf the firms which manufactured Macleans toothpaste and powders, Eno's fruit salts (which had substantial overseas assets), and the hair preparation Brylcreem. His interest in research and development for this company sprang from his friendship with the medical scientist Sir Edward Charles Dodds; and in 1936 Beechams endowed a laboratory for primary research at the Royal Northern Hospital, London. Accepting that the long-term prosperity of Beechams Pills lay in the development of ethical medicines, in 1942 Hill authorized the establishment of Beecham Research Laboratories. On these foundations his successor, Henry George Leslie Lazell (1903-1982), converted the renamed Beecham group into a major pharmaceutical company (from 1989 onwards SmithKline Beecham plc). 
In 1929 Hill became a director of the Eagle Star Insurance Company which, during Britain's economic recovery in the 1930s, grew rapidly into a leading financial institution with considerable funds to invest. His reputation was such that in 1930 the chancellor of the exchequer, Philip Snowden, appointed him to a committee to assess the extent and use, and possible sale, of government property holdings. With the support of Eagle Star's chairman, Sir Edward Mountain, in 1932-3 he set up Philip Hill & Partners (which later became, through amalgamation in the 1950s and 1960s, the merchant bank Hill Samuel), and the Second Covent Garden Property Company (which eventually became part of MEPC plc), to finance industrial ventures and commercial properties respectively. 
In 1933 Hill suffered the one major commercial reverse in an otherwise highly successful career: his failure to purchase Boots Pure Drug Company Ltd, which he had intended to be the core of a rationalized multiple chemists' combine in Britain. Boots, earlier controlled by the United Drug Company of America, was being sold back into British hands. Hill made an acceptable bid, only to be overruled by the Treasury, which refused to sanction the required dollars under emergency regulations introduced during the national economic crisis of 1931. 
Among Hill's other property interests were those connected with the steadily growing leisure market in Britain. He secured a large stake in cinemas, most notably in Odeon Theatres Ltd, and acquired the Olympia exhibition centre in West Kensington. In 1935 he helped to form the Hawker Siddeley Aircraft Company Ltd, and thus facilitated the development of the Hurricane aircraft which fought in the battle of Britain (1940). 
Hill's practice was to buy companies for cash, which he raised by issuing shares taken up mainly by financial institutions. However, he seldom subjected his acquisitions to a thoroughgoing internal restructuring, which many of them needed. He was extremely successful in selecting businesses and properties, able to make an instinctive judgement of their value, but he was less successful in his choice of managers; he behaved fairly but strictly towards employees, perhaps showing excessive loyalty to under-performing subordinates. 
In the world of finance, Hill's business skills and integrity earned him wide respect. He could make bold decisions with great speed, and his word was always his bond. A strong personality reinforced his large physical presence (in later life he weighed 18 stone). His rule in life was 'start early and work late', and with so many business commitments, opportunities for recreation were necessarily limited. Latterly, however, in the pre-war years, he often spent several winter months in the West Indies or Florida, while keeping in regular touch with his businesses. He had boxed during his brief spell in the army, and in later life he was a golfer and an expert at the game of poker, thanks to his long experience of cliffhanging property deals. He also enjoyed gossiping about money matters with chosen associates, was a reader of thrillers, and a film addict. On a higher cultural level, in 1944 his initiative ensured that the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, would return to its proper function after wartime use as a dance hall. 
About 1930, after separating from his wife Vera, Hill began living with Phyllis Lytton, daughter of Reuben Partington, manufacturer's agent. A one-time dancer and in 1930 a racehorse owner twenty-five years his junior, she changed her name to Hill, married him in 1934, and gave him ten years of happiness. There were no children of the last three marriages. Hill died of prostate cancer on 15 August 1944 at his home, Windlesham Moor, Sunninghill Road, Windlesham, Surrey, survived by his fourth wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 37547


Hill, William (1903-1971), bookmaker, was born in Birmingham on 16 July 1903, the second son and fourth of the eleven children (there were also a twin son and daughter who died at birth) of William Hill, journeyman coach-painter, and his wife, Lavinia Knight, the daughter of a farmer who also kept an inn on the border of Warwickshire and Leicestershire. 
Hill ran away from school at the age of twelve to work on an uncle's farm. After a short time working for his father he moved to a tool-making factory in Birmingham, where he took up bookmaking in a small way, by collecting bets on his motor bicycle. Shortly afterwards he became a more serious bookmaker, but plunged too heavily at first and lost all his capital. However, he started again in the cheaper rings, and after five years moved to London in 1929. 
Hill started betting at greyhound stadiums, then extended to pony-racing at Northolt Park, and in 1934 opened a one-room office in Jermyn Street. He soon moved to much larger premises in Park Lane (and later to even larger offices at Piccadilly Circus in 1947). By 1939 he had given up the dogs and the main business was credit betting, though he was still operating at Northolt Park. 
In 1944 Hill produced the first fixed-odds football coupon, and set up a separate football company in 1944. In 1955 he gave up on-course bookmaking. In 1960 his great rivals, Ladbrokes, went into the football business, and Hill sued them for infringement of the copyright in his coupon. The case went to the House of Lords, where Hill won the $1 damages for which he had asked, with costs. In 1954 with Lionel Barber he bought 75 per cent of Holder's Investment Trust, to which he sold his interests between 1955 and 1961 for over $5 million. So successful was the business that Holder's shares rose from 2's'. 10died in 1956 to $18 10's'. in 1960. This purchase of a 'shell' company was the first time that the manoeuvre had been executed and the first time that a bookmaking company had been floated on the stock exchange. 
Hill loathed the idea of betting shops, which were legalized in 1960, but rivals moved in and he followed in 1966. In the same year he reluctantly began to take bets on elections. He did not, as he said on 9 December 1958, when as owner of Be Careful he spoke at the Gimcrack dinner, object to bookmakers paying something towards the racing industry's expenses. However, as he wrote in the following May, it galled him to be expected to do so and still to be refused admission to the members' enclosures at smart meetings. 
Hill's first stud was Whitsbury in Hampshire, which he bought in 1943. Nimbus was foaled there in 1946, and, having been sold for 5000 guineas at the yearling sales, won the 1949 Two Thousand Guineas and Derby. In 1945 Hill bought Sezincote stud in Gloucestershire, where he stood his stallion Chanteur II, sire of Pinza, winner of the 1953 Derby. 
William Hill was a great bookmaker, who had the courage to take enormous bets. He was an ebullient, sometimes irascible, charming man. In his latter years he took little day-to-day interest in racing, but was seen as an elder statesman of the turf. He had become accustomed to great wealth, but he had a social conscience and may even have considered himself a socialist. 
In 1923 Hill married Ivy Burley, a ladies' hairdresser of Smallheath, Birmingham, who survived him. They had one daughter. Hill died in Newmarket on 15 October 1971. 
C. R. Hill', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37548


Hillary, Richard Hope (1919-1943), air force officer and author, was born on 20 April 1919 in Sydney, Australia, the only child of Michael Hillary (1886-1976), DSO, OBE, an Australian government official, and his wife, Edwyna Mary Hope (1881-1966). He arrived in England at the age of three, when his father received a London posting. From Shrewsbury School he went in 1937 to Trinity College, Oxford, where he started to read philosophy, politics, and economics and then moved to modern history. He stroked the Trinity boat to head of the river, and as a notably good-looking but somewhat challenging undergraduate enjoyed to the full the leisured life of his college. He also joined the university air squadron, with the motive, he later asserted, not of patriotism but self-realization. The Second World War began before he took his degree. 
After enlistment and commissioning in the RAF and completion of his service flying training Hillary was posted on 6 July 1940 to 603 (City of Edinburgh) fighter squadron in Dyce. The battle of Britain was beginning, and on 10 August no. 603 was ordered south to Hornchurch. Hillary's valiant combat career lasted three weeks, during which he was credited with five enemy aircraft. On 3 September 1940, over the North Sea, he was himself shot down. He fell from his Spitfire, but was sustained in the water by his buoyancy jacket and parachute. Horribly burned about the face and hands, he was rescued after three hours by the Margate lifeboat. There followed months in hospital and repeated operations, mostly by Archibald McIndoe. His face was miraculously mended -- he was given new upper eyelids and a new upper lip -- but he was left with very wasted and weakened hands. 
During 1941 Hillary persuaded the Air Ministry to send him to the United States on a speaking tour. But when he arrived there the British embassy expressed fears that his scarred features would only reinforce anti-involvement sentiments among American parents. His talks were confined to broadcasts, where he could not be seen. In America, Hillary met many prominent people and enjoyed the affection of the film star Merle Oberon. He also finished a book and secured its publication there (in February 1942) under the title 'Falling through Space'. 
The book was retitled 'The Last Enemy' and published in England the following June. It begins with a vivid account of Hillary's final flight. The narrative switches back to Oxford and the RAF, and then forward again to his hospital and surgical experiences. But it is concerned less with the facts of his life than with his feelings and motivation. The self-analysis is sustained and unflattering. Hillary presents himself as an individualist, who only later and almost reluctantly becomes aware of the wider aspects of the war as a battle for civilization and humanity. The success of 'The Last Enemy' was immediate. The author was acclaimed not only as a born writer but also as a representative of the doomed youth of his generation, although in his constant self-analysis he was in fact a most untypical British fighter pilot of 1940. 
After returning from the United States in October 1941 Hillary had gone through Staff College and thence to the headquarters of Fighter Command. But he became obsessed with a desire to return to operations -- as he saw it, to keep faith with his dead comrades. After repeated pleas he secured a medical board to consider his case. Surprisingly, it passed him fit for operations. On 24 November 1942 Hillary joined 54 operational training unit at Charter Hall in Berwickshire for training as a night fighter pilot. On 8 January 1943, in a night of poor weather, he was circling a beacon on an exercise when his Blenheim lost height and crashed nearby, at Crunklaw Farm, Edrom, killing both Hillary and his radio operator. The subsequent inquiry, unable to determine a specific cause for the accident, concluded that the pilot had lost control of his aircraft. Later a Richard Hillary Trust was instituted and a Hillary archive was accumulated at Trinity College, Oxford. 
After Hillary's death a considerable literature developed. Arthur Koestler, Eric Linklater, and John Middleton Murry all wrote about him, the last-named falsely hypothesizing a death wish and suicide. Lovat Dickson, his publisher, wrote a biography. Much later, in 1988, Michael Burn, in 'Mary and Richard', published a selection of the love letters which had passed in 1942 between Hillary and Mary Booker, an understanding and beautiful woman twenty-two years Hillary's senior, whom Burn later married. A fully detailed biography by David Ross appeared in 2000. Hillary's own letters, remorselessly self-analytical as ever, confirm the writing talent of this brave, charming, self-assertive, mocking, and rather uncomfortable young man. 
Denis Richards', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37549


Hinchley, John William (1871-1931), chemical engineer, was born on 21 January 1871 in Grantham, the fourth in the family of nine children of John Hinchley (died 1913), plough fitter and Methodist lay preacher, and his wife, Eliza Holland (died 1932), a worker in a lace factory. His education was hampered by lack of money but, following the family's move to Lincoln in 1872, he attended John Holton's school until 1881, when he won a scholarship to Lincoln grammar school. Between school hours he earned money cleaning and mending clocks and watches for a local clockmaker. After leaving school, he became an engineering apprentice with Ruston Proctor & Co. Ltd of Lincoln (1887-90), also attending evening classes at Lincoln School of Science. For one year, 1891-2, he taught science at a boys' school in Eastbourne, Sussex. In 1892 he moved to London and graduated in mining in 1896 at the Royal School of Mines. In 1903 he married Edith Mary, daughter of John Mason, whom he had met while she was at the Royal College of Art. 
Graduation was followed by a difficult period in consulting, and Hinchley's appointment as assayist to the royal mint of Bangkok in 1903 was a welcome relief; his wife joined him there in 1904. They returned from Siam in 1907 and Hinchley started consulting again, covering topics as diverse as sherardizing and the manufacture of composition billiard balls. Another consulting activity which lasted until his death concerned the manufacture of pencils, which took him to various parts of Europe. 
It was later that Hinchley became a teacher of chemical engineering, starting in 1909 with an evening course of twenty-five lectures and practical work at Battersea Polytechnic. He moved to Imperial College in 1911, was appointed assistant professor of chemical engineering in 1917, and was elevated to the chair in 1926. Hinchley's courses included a practical element: his earliest students learned to erect experimental plant and do pipe fitting. His methods trained men to work well in the chemical industry of the day. 
Parallel with his teaching was Hinchley's concern with professional bodies. His work led to the formation in 1919 of the chemical engineering group of the Society of Chemical Industry. This was not enough: he pursued with renewed vigour his ideal of a qualifying body and, following many meetings of kindred enthusiasts, the Institution of Chemical Engineers was incorporated on 21 December 1922 with Hinchley as its first honorary secretary. One who attended these meetings described Hinchley as an enthusiast, 'obviously highly strung, quick in thought and rapid in speech, as though his overfilled brain could scarcely get rid of the thoughts and ideas quickly enough -- sensitive to a hostile audience but quick to respond to a friendly one'. 
Hinchley was a balanced man who never allowed the professor or the scientist to take over his life. His leisure was as full and useful as his working hours. In later life he became a devoted freemason. After a short illness, Hinchley was taken to the Freemasons' Hospital in Chelsea where, following an operation, he died on 13 August 1931; he was cremated at Golders Green crematorium, where his ashes were scattered. He was survived by his wife. 
E. H. T. Hoblyn', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37550


Hiorne, Francis (1744-1789), architect, was the elder son of William Hiorne ('c'.1712-1776), mason and architect of Warwick, and his first wife, Mary Duncalfe. William Hiorne and his younger brother David (1715-1758) had established themselves as leading practitioners of their trade in the midland area, and Francis Hiorne succeeded to the family business on the death of his father. By then he was already active as an architect and his subsequent practice, mainly in the midlands but also on occasion further afield, developed immediately; however, his career was cut short by his early death at the age of forty-five and the total number of his executed works was not large. 
Hiorne's work in a classical idiom included two buildings of some individuality, the churches of St Anne's, Belfast (1776; dem.), which showed the influence of the baroque St Philip's, Birmingham, and Tardebigge, Worcestershire (1777), with its striking needle spire. But it was as an architect specializing in the Gothic style that he gained a particular reputation. His best-known work, Tetbury church, Gloucestershire (1777-81), is one of the most elegant examples of late eighteenth-century Gothic and was widely admired at the time: the poet William Mason, for example, commented that it gave him 'the very highest opinion' of Hiorne's 'Gothic taste'. Hiorne's approach to Gothic design appears to have embraced at least the rudiments of scholarship as well as its decorative appeal: his preparations for carrying out work at Arundel Castle, Sussex -- a project curtailed by his death -- were reported by a correspondent of the antiquary Richard Gough in 1787: 'At Greystoke Castle I found Mr. Hiorne the gothic architect, whom the Duke of Norfolk had invited there to consult with relative to his intended repairs at Arundel Castle; and we made a party to see Alnwick Castle, etc. in Northumberland, for Mr. Hiorne's information. (Nichols, 423)' Hiorne's antiquarian leanings are reflected in his election as a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1784; and like his father, who had been an alderman of Warwick and served as mayor in 1765-6, he was also a prominent figure in the public life of his home town. He was elected an alderman in October 1773, held office as mayor in 1773-4, 1782-3, and 1787-8, served as treasurer to the corporation from 1781 to 1789, and as the Warwickshire county bridgemaster during the same period. He died in Warwick on 9 December 1789, in his will leaving to his wife, Elizabeth, a newly built house at Beausale, near Warwick. 


@@@@@


doc= 37551


Hislop, Joseph Dewar (1884-1977), singer and singing teacher, was born at 16 Bowmont Place, Edinburgh, on 5 April 1884, the second child in the family of two sons and two daughters of Joseph Dewar Hislop (1849-1915), painter and decorator, and his wife, Mary White Lunn (died 'c'.1935). He was educated in the choir school of St Mary's Episcopal Cathedral, Edinburgh. He left school, trained as a photo-process engraver in Edinburgh and London, and then took up the post of demonstrator in a firm at Goteborg, Sweden, in 1907. In his spare time he sang in a male voice choir, Till Sang. His potential was recognized in 1910 by a visiting soloist who introduced him to Dr Gillis Bratt in Stockholm. Hislop trained with Bratt. After attending the Royal Opera School and making a test recording for the Gramophone Company at Hayes, Middlesex, in June 1914, he made his debut as a principal singer at the Royal Swedish Opera, Stockholm, as Faust in C. F. Gounod's opera on 12 September 1914. 
Hislop sang for a season at the San Carlo Opera in Naples, Italy, in the spring of 1920, sharing the role of Mario Cavaradossi with Gigli. He made his Covent Garden debut on 14 May 1920 as Rodolfo in Puccini's 'La Boheme'. In 1920 and 1921 he appeared in Chicago and New York, touring America three times. A return to Italy in 1923 saw him in Venice, Turin, and at La Scala, Milan, where his was the first appearance by a British male singer in a leading role (Edgardo in Donizetti's 'Lucia di Lammermoor'). Hislop sang regularly in most of the major European houses, but also appeared frequently in the Baltic states as well as in the Colon, Buenos Aires (1925). He made a farewell British tour in 1934. He became a Swedish citizen in 1937 in order to take up the offer of teaching posts in the Royal Opera School and the Music High School (later renamed the Royal Academy of Music), Stockholm, where he had great influence on a generation of singers, including Birgit Nilsson and Jussi Bjorling, whom he taught (the latter privately). In 1949 he became professor of singing at that academy. From 1948 to 1954 he was an artistic adviser to the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, and at Sadler's Wells. In 1952 he became a professor of singing at the Guildhall School of Music. There, he taught a succession of fine singers -- Peter Glossop, Elizabeth Fretwell, and William McAlpine as well as (privately) Alberto Remedios and Donald Pilley. He retired to Fife in 1964, where he continued to teach for many years, his most celebrated pupil at this time being the baritone Donald Maxwell. 
Hislop was awarded the gold medal Litteris et Artibus in 1922 by Sweden for achievement in the arts. In 1926 he was made a knight of Dannebrog (Denmark) and in 1929 made a knight of the Vasa (Sweden). 
On 26 May 1915 he married Karin, daughter of Olof Asklund, owner of a large Goteborg bakery firm. They had one son and two daughters, one of whom, Geraldine, trained as an actress and singer and appeared with some success before her death in 1984. Divorced in 1940, in the same year Hislop married Agnes (Nancy) Fraser (1911-1987), daughter of Walter Passmore, character comedian in the Savoy Opera Company. There were no children of the second marriage. Hislop died on 6 May 1977 at his home, Berryside, near New Gilston, Fife, and he was cremated at Kirkcaldy crematorium on 10 May. 
Hislop had a relatively small repertory of 29 spinto tenor roles, giving some 921 performances in total between 1914 and 1934. He made 180 recordings, 4 for Pathe Freres in Stockholm, the remainder for the Gramophone Company (later EMI). 


@@@@@


doc= 37552


Hoare, Henry (1705-1785), banker and patron of art, was born on 7 July 1705, the eldest son of Henry Hoare (1677-1725), banker, and his wife, Jane (died 1741), daughter of Sir William Benson of Bromley. His grandfather, Sir Richard Hoare (1648-1719), was the founder of Hoare's Bank. The elder Henry Hoare bought the manor of Stourton in Wiltshire in 1717 and employed Colen Campbell to build a new house, Stourhead, which was completed in 1724, just before his death, and which he bequeathed to his son. The younger Henry (known in the family as Henry the Magnificent) moved to Stourhead on his mother's death in 1741, but succeeded his father immediately as a partner of Hoare's Bank in 1726, abandoning his previous life, which he had led largely at Quarley in Hampshire 'hunting and drinking with other young men of his age', and applied himself to serious study of the classical writers. In 1734 he bought the Palladian mansion Wilbury House in Wiltshire, and was elected MP for Salisbury. Later he went abroad to pursue his study of painting and began collecting works of art. The death of his uncle Benjamin (1693-1750) made him undisputed senior partner of the bank and the steady rise in deposits and profits reflected his constant attendance to bank affairs. He was keenly aware that the success of his plans for Stourhead depended entirely on the careful management of the business. 
Hoare married first in 1726 Anne, daughter of Samuel Masham, first Baron Masham ['see under 'Masham, Abigail, Lady Masham]. She died in 1727, leaving one daughter, Anne (died 1735). He married second, in 1728, Susan, daughter and heir of Stephen Colt (died 1708), and from this marriage had three sons (two died in infancy, and his surviving son, Henry, died in 1752) and two daughters. His elder daughter, Susanna (1732-1783), married first in 1753, Charles Boyle, Viscount Dungarvan (died 1759), and second, in 1761, Thomas, Baron Bruce, of Tottenham Park, Wiltshire, created earl of Ailesbury in 1776. His younger daughter, Anne (1737-1759), married in 1756 her first cousin, Richard Hoare (1735-1787), created baronet in 1786; their son, Richard Colt Hoare, second baronet (1758-1838), inherited his grandfather's estate. He recalled Henry thus: 'tall, comely in his person, elegant in his manners and address and well versed in literature'. 
Hoare's second wife died in 1743, and as a widower, he began in earnest the creation of the gardens and the embellishment of the house through collecting and patronage. He transformed the Stourhead landscape into a Claudian idyll, damming the River Stour to create a lake and engaging Henry Flitcroft, who designed the classical temples of Flora (1745) and Apollo (1765), and the Pantheon (1753-4), which is regarded as an outstanding example of his work, recalling Claude Lorrain's 'Coast View of Delos with Aeneas'. The gardens at Stourhead are historically important as an early example of 'le jardin anglais'. 
It was Hoare who started the picture collection at Stourhead: he patronized John Wootton, Samuel Woodforde, and his namesake, William Hoare of Bath (no relation, but whose daughter Mary married Hoare's nephew Henry, known as 'Fat Harry' (1744-1785) in 1765). Among his old masters were two pictures by Nicolas Poussin, a double portrait by Carlo Maratta ('Marchese Pallavicini and the Artist'), and pictures by Rembrandt, Gaspard Dughet, and Claude-Joseph Vernet. He commissioned 'Caesar and Cleopatra' from Anton Raffael Mengs in 1758 as a companion to the Maratta. Both pictures remained in the house, though many were sold at the Stourhead heirlooms sale at Christies in 1883. The sculptor John Michael Rysbrack was associated with Stourhead from 1744 to his death in 1770. His 'Hercules' (1756) is in the Pantheon at Stourhead, together with his 'Flora' (1761). 
Not only was Stourhead an attractive and dependable asset for the bank's customers, but also, Hoare's profits exceeding $10,000 p.a., it enabled him to make generous provision for his daughters, and to increase his country estates in addition to spending well on them. He was troubled in his old age by the threat to the country and his beloved Stourhead, by Lord North's weak wartime government, leading to 'public calamity' and 'our ruin'. Accordingly, on Colt Hoare's betrothal to Hester Lyttelton in 1783, he settled his estate on his grandson, provided all connection with the bank was severed. He left his share of the bank, and his house in Lincoln's Inn Fields, to Colt's father, his nephew (and son-in-law) Richard, who felt deprived of his full inheritance. Hoare moved to his house, The Wilderness, Clapham, designed for him by Flitcroft thirty years before, where he died on 8 September 1785, his children having predeceased him. He was buried in Stourton churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 37553


Hobhouse, Sir Charles Edward Henry, fourth baronet (1862-1941), politician and diarist, was born on 30 June 1862 at Dormansland, near Lingfield, Surrey, the only son and third of six children of Sir Charles Parry Hobhouse, third baronet (1825-1916), Wiltshire landowner and former judge in the high court of Calcutta, and his wife, Edith Lucy, daughter of Sir Thomas Turton, second baronet, of Felcourt. His mother died in 1867 and his father soon remarried, having a further son and four daughters. Hobhouse was educated at Eton College (1875-9) and at Christ Church, Oxford (1880-81), and seemed destined for a military career, attending the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. He joined the King's Royal Rifle Corps in 1884. He was diverted into politics both by his upbringing in a Liberal tradition and by his marriage on 24 April 1890 to Georgina Fleetwood (died 1927), daughter of George Pargiter Fuller, of Neston Park, a neighbouring squire and Liberal MP. 
In 1892 Hobhouse narrowly won Wiltshire East for the Liberals against a formidable Conservative opponent. In the ensuing parliament he served as a private secretary at the Colonial Office. The Liberal set-back in 1895 cost him his seat, and his chronic hay fever directed him to an urban constituency. He won East Bristol in 1900 and retained it in the general elections of 1906 and 1910. 
The Liberals returned to office in 1905, and in 1907 Hobhouse became under-secretary of state for India. He headed a royal commission into decentralization whose report influenced subsequent Indian legislation. In April 1908 he became financial secretary to the Treasury, and in October 1911 gained a place in the cabinet as chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster. His career reached its peak in February 1914 when he became postmaster-general, an office then involved in the early developments of wireless telegraphy and the controversies concerning rival telegraphic systems. He succeeded his father in the baronetcy in 1916. 
Hobhouse commanded confidence as a hard-working administrator and straightforward spokesman for his department. He did not make a great impact beyond his own office, nor was he in sympathy with some trends in Liberal affairs. He stood by traditional causes, such as free trade and Irish home rule, but he believed that David Lloyd George, as chancellor of the exchequer, should restrain spending and not encourage it. He deplored Sir Winston Churchill's big-navy policy, and he opposed quite provocatively the campaign for women's suffrage. 
The First World War ended Hobhouse's career. He lost office when the first coalition was formed in May 1915, suffered discredit by opposing, and then capitulating to, the campaign for military conscription and, as a supporter of H. H. Asquith (later first earl of Oxford and Asquith), was crushed in the 1918 election by a Lloyd George Liberal and a Labour candidate. (He even suffered the indignity of losing his deposit, a provision but recently instituted to discourage 'freak' candidates.) Hobhouse remained active in Liberal affairs after 1918. Only as the party faded did he turn his attention from politics to his estates. 
Hobhouse began keeping a diary during his round-the-world honeymoon in 1893, and continued to do so for five years. He returned to the practice in 1904 and did not cease until he lost office in 1915. These documents are of particular interest for a succession of dramatic episodes. Notwithstanding personal predilections and occasional misunderstanding of events, his diaries provide incisive sketches of key individuals and insights into the course of events. Their value is enhanced by the fact that at the time no official records were kept of cabinet meetings (apart from the prime minister's low-key letter to the king), and few diaries by leading politicians have survived from this period. Extracts from Hobhouse's diaries were published in 1977. 
Of medium height and strong build, Hobhouse (despite his hay fever) was much given to outdoor activities, undertaking long expeditions on his bicycle and riding to hounds with a recklessness that sometimes resulted in personal injury. His first wife died in 1927. On 18 June 1931 he married Aimee Gladys (died 1965), widow of Benjamin Adams Brendon, of the Indian Civil Service, and daughter of David Charles Ballinger Griffith, of Huntworth, Bedford. Both marriages were childless. Hobhouse died at his home, Monkton Farleigh Manor, Bradford-on-Avon, Wiltshire, on 26 June 1941. He was succeeded in the baronetcy by his half-brother, Reginald Arthur (1878-1947). 
Trevor Wilson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37554


Hobson, Paul (d. 1666), Particular Baptist preacher, was a tailor from Buckinghamshire according to the heresiographer Thomas Edwards. An opponent of the solemn league and covenant in 1643, Hobson had probably by this time joined the London separatist church founded by John Spencer and John Green in 1639. By 1644 Hobson had organized a Particular Baptist church; in 1644 and 1646 he and Thomas Gower, on behalf of their congregation, signed the Particular Baptists' confession of faith articulating their Calvinist and separatist tenets and their belief in believers' baptism by immersion. Hobson's tenets prompted the presbyterian Sion College to condemn him along with Milton, Roger Williams, John Biddle, and other radicals in December 1644. Hobson was now serving as a captain in Charles Fleetwood's regiment in the eastern association army. When Lawrence Clarkson heard him preach, Hobson 'brake forth with such expressions of the in-comes and out-goes of God, that my soul much desired such a gift of preaching' (L. Clarkson, 'The Lost Sheep Found', 1660, 10). In 1645 Hobson published three works, a collection of sermons entitled 'Christ the Effect not the Cause of the Love of God', 'A Discoverie of Truth', and 'The Fallacy of Infants Baptisme Discovered', which had been written for a debate, subsequently banned by the lord mayor, between various Baptists and the presbyterian Edmund Calamy. Opponents such as Edwards and Richard Baxter denounced Hobson as an antinomian. In June 1645 Sir Samuel Luke had captains Hobson and Richard Beaumont, who were travelling on a pass from Fleetwood, arrested at Newport Pagnell, Buckinghamshire, for preaching contrary to the Westminster assembly regulations. Luke sent them to Sir Thomas Fairfax in Leicester, where they complained that Luke's officers had maltreated them. Praising Hobson's and Beaumont's military service, Fairfax had Luke's officers cashiered. Fleetwood too defended the captains and protested about their uncivil treatment. Infuriated by their return to Newport, Luke complained to the MP Richard Knightley, but a parliamentary committee released Hobson after examining him in London. Until he received orders in August to go to Leicester, Hobson preached in London. Thereafter he was ordered to Bristol, which Fleetwood's troops helped capture and garrison. Here too Hobson preached. After a farewell sermon to the army in June 1646, he went to Exeter to raise support for the godly cause. He published 'Practicall Divinity' (1646), an exposition about the Christian life, and 'A Garden Inclosed' (1647), articulating an almost mystical experience. 
Hobson returned to the army in 1647 as a major in Robert Lilburne's infantry regiment. As an army agent he met the royalist Sir Lewis Dyve, who gave him an introduction to Charles in search of a negotiated settlement. In the autumn Dyve told Charles that John Lilburne deemed Hobson 'the fittest man to be employed' by the king to strike an agreement with army dissidents such as Edward Sexby ('Letter-book', 92), but when troops in Robert Lilburne's regiment mutinied at Ware in November, Hobson joined other officers in denouncing the rebels. By July 1648 Hobson was in Newcastle upon Tyne, where his troops were quartered on the residents, raising fears of an uprising. At Newcastle he served as deputy governor to Sir Arthur Hesilrige. After signing a letter supporting the Leveller petition of 11 September condemning negotiations with Charles, on 9 October he endorsed 'The Declaration of the Armie' to Fairfax, denouncing the Newport talks with the king. Promoted lieutenant-colonel by October 1648, he was appointed an assessment commissioner for Durham and Newcastle in December 1649, November 1650, and (for Durham only) December 1652. His prominence prompted a conservative attack in 1649 entitled 'Newes from Powles', alleging his troops had baptized a colt in St Paul's Cathedral, London. At Newcastle he became embroiled in controversy when he exposed a Scottish witchpricker commissioned by the common council as a fraud. In January 1650 he quashed a minor rebellion by cavaliers and moss-troopers. During the spring he lamented the distrust between the 'honest' parties in England and Scotland, which may explain the council of state's suspicion in July that he was prepared to serve Scottish interests and was thus unfit to be deputy governor. Nevertheless, during the ensuing Scottish campaign Cromwell put him in charge of four garrisons at Leith, and he was responsible for conveying Scottish prisoners from Dunbar to Durham. An estimated 1600 died 'en route', and comparable numbers perished in Durham owing to inadequate food. Some time after this, Hobson resigned from the army. 
Hobson now focused on religious activities, especially in Newcastle, where he and Gower had founded a Baptist church about 1649. In February 1653 he was appointed a commissioner for propagating the gospel in the north. He welcomed the nominated assembly as an indication of the imminence of Christ's earthly kingdom, signing a congratulatory address to Cromwell from the people of co. Durham on 28 April 1653. After the assembly's dissolution, he called for the excommunication of church members who signed addresses of loyalty to Cromwell. He was involved in religious controversies, including one with Hexham Baptists in 1653 over the belief that ministers should not be wholly dependent on their churches for financial support; the following year Thomas Tillam and the Hexham Baptists accused Hobson of fomenting dissension. The General Baptist Henry Haggar accused Hobson of being out of communion with other Baptists. Hobson's attack on the Arminian doctrine of a limited atonement, 'Fourteen Queries and Ten Absurdities' (1655), provoked a response from William Pedelsden, 'Sound Doctrine' (1657), and Tillam's 'The Fourth Principle of Christian Religion' (1655) criticized Hobson's opposition to the laying on of hands. Hobson also battled with the Quakers, who converted six of his followers. On a preaching foray in Wiltshire about 1655 he denounced Quaker tenets, prompting John Story and John Wilkinson to complain that he said 'many filthye things to render the truth odyouse' (Swarthmore papers, 1, fol. 35'r'). In 'The Quaker's Jesus' (1658) William Grigge unconvincingly associated Hobson with Socinians. From 1654 until his ejection in 1660 Hobson served as chaplain of Eton College, and about 1657 he was a visitor of Durham College. Appointed a militia commissioner for Durham in July 1659, he subsequently supported Lambert's efforts to prevent the restoration of monarchy. 
On settling in London in 1660, Hobson joined William Kiffin's church. With Tillam and Christopher Pooley he established a godly community for several hundred families from the Durham area on former monastic lands in the palatinate, and while abroad he preached to congregationalists in Rotterdam. On his return to London, he apparently associated with Nathaniel Strange, but he was in Durham by August 1661, when Bishop Cosin arrested and briefly imprisoned him owing to suspicions about his German project. To avoid interrogation by deputy lieutenants in November Hobson fled to London, where he was briefly detained in the spring. Suspected of complicity with the Tong plotters, he was rearrested in November 1662, but released on a $1000 bond. By this time he was practising medicine at Bishopsgate, London. The following year, Hobson, alias Dr Love, participated in the conspiracy that culminated in the northern rebellion in October. Hobson was arrested on 20 August. According to a fellow conspirator, Robert Atkinson, Hobson informed on his compatriots, though continuing to urge them to act, partly by ambushing Buckingham's troops as they marched north in August (a plan the conspirators were unable to implement). Accused of treason, Hobson was incarcerated in the Tower, moved to Chepstow Castle in March 1664, and then back again in January 1665. Suffering from ill health, he repeatedly sought permission to go to Jamaica. He was finally released on 28 April 1665 on condition that he move to Carolina, though he never went. His final work, 'Innocency, though under a Cloud, Cleared' (1664), was an apologia. After his release he was accused of sexual misconduct with two female members of the Devonshire Square Baptist Church. His will, in which he described himself as a barber-surgeon, was dated on 12 March 1664 and proved on 13 June 1666. He expected his wife, Hester, and his children, Paul, Lydia, Sara, and Reubenah, to settle on his property at Sacriston, Durham; a fourth daughter, Hester, was married to Henry Woolfe. One of the leading Baptists in the north-east, Hobson was a tireless promoter of godly government and society. 


@@@@@


doc= 37555


Hoby, Margaret, Lady Hoby (bap. 1571, d. 1633), diarist, was baptized on 10 February 1571, the only child of Arthur Dakins ('b'. 'c'.1517, died 1592), gentleman and JP of Linton in the East Riding of Yorkshire, and his wife, Thomasine Gye (died 1613). She was educated in the household of Henry Hastings, third earl of Huntingdon, president of the council in the north, and she learned there the puritan habits of self-examination and regular religious exercises which she later practised in her own household. As an heiress she was a valuable commodity in the Elizabethan marriage market, and she was married three times, to well-connected younger sons approved by the Hastings family. 
In 1588 or 1589 she married Walter ('b'.1569), son of Walter Devereux, first earl of Essex, the Irish adventurer. The younger Walter was the brother of Robert, second earl of Essex, and stepson of the countess of Huntingdon's brother, Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester. The manor and parsonage of Hackness in the North Riding were purchased for the couple, and remained Margaret's property after the death of Devereux at the siege of Rouen in 1591. Before the end of the year she had been married again, to Thomas Sidney, brother of Sir Philip Sidney, the poet, and nephew of the countess of Huntingdon. When Sidney died in 1595, Margaret agreed to Huntingdon's deathbed request that she marry another suitor of 1591, Sir Thomas Posthumous Hoby (1566-1644), second son of Sir Thomas Hoby, of Bisham, Berkshire, and his wife, Elizabeth ['see 'Russell, Elizabeth, Lady Russell]. They were married on 9 August 1596 and lived at Hackness, where Hoby established a political powerbase (he was JP and MP) and a reputation as a humourless puritan and cantankerous opponent of rival, especially Catholic, gentry. 
Margaret Hoby's diary -- the earliest known by an Englishwoman -- is notable for its depiction of the domestic disciplines of Elizabethan puritanism. Written between 1599 and 1605, it describes the religious exercises and prayers for the whole household as well as the private prayers and readings which occupied a large part of each day, and in which Lady Hoby was guided by her chaplain, Richard Rhodes. The diary also shows other aspects of the household routine of a gentlewoman: managing the estate in her husband's frequent absences, supervising and paying servants, sorting linen, playing music, gardening, giving medical advice and treatment to neighbours and tenants. It tells little about the writer's private feelings. It is a document written as a pious exercise, and its discipline and restraint spring from that. References to Sir Thomas Hoby are perhaps deceptively formal, though Margaret was strong-minded enough to resist until 1632 his request that she make over her Hackness and other properties to him and his heirs. She had no children herself. Puritanism, the household, and property dominate the diary, as perhaps her whole life. 
Lady Hoby died on 4 September 1633 and was buried on 6 September in the chancel of Hackness church, where her husband erected an alabaster monument to her. It still survives, but St Margaret's Chapel in Harwood Dale, which Hoby also built to her memory, is in ruins. 
Paul Slack', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37556


Hodgskin, Thomas (1787-1869), economist, political theorist, and journalist, was born on 12 December 1787 in Chatham, the son of a keeper of stores at the Admiralty docks. He described his childhood as impoverished and joyless. When he reached twelve his father cut short his education and procured him a naval cadetship in March 1800. For the next twelve years he cruised in the North Sea and Mediterranean and along the coasts of Africa. Although he distinguished himself in action Hodgskin found naval discipline irksome and his comrades' company desultory. While at sea he began to read widely, but necessarily unsystematically. Conflicts with his superiors deprived him of the prospect of promotion, and at the age of twenty-five he found himself on the retired list, reduced to half pay in 1812. In his first published work, 'An Essay on Naval Discipline' (1813), he contrasted the arbitrary brutality of naval life with the good government with which Britain was reputedly blessed. Publication of the 'Essay' brought Hodgskin to the attention of the London radicals, notably Francis Place, who was to offer Hodgskin intellectual companionship and patronage. 
In July 1815 Hodgskin embarked on a walking tour which took him first to Paris and later to Germany, where he made a detailed study of the political and economic institutions of Hanover. Although his investigations were shaped by a questionnaire devised by Jeremy Bentham, his suggestion, in 'Travels in the North of Germany' (2 vols., 1820), that 'many evils are in Germany, occasioned by governing too much' was far from Benthamite. Hodgskin expounded a minimalist conception of the state, insisting that government tended to shackle the energies and liberties of individuals. The guarantor of good government was the influence of public opinion. He concluded that if Britain was better governed than the states of Germany this was principally because of the greater freedom of expression in Britain and because the political education of the working classes had progressed further in Britain than in Germany. By 1819 Hodgskin was in Edinburgh, married to Elisabeth, a young German woman whose surname is unknown. The next few years were marked by excruciating poverty. He failed to break into the charmed circle of the Edinburgh reviewers, and was constantly held back by his painful self-abnegation and the growing radicalism of his opinions. Late in 1822 he arrived back in London and Place secured him a position as a correspondent for the 'Morning Chronicle'. 
Respectable journalism gave Hodgskin a regular income, but no outlet for his real opinions. In 1823 he was instrumental in establishing the 'Mechanics' Magazine' and the mechanics' institute, where in 1825 he delivered a course of lectures later published as 'Popular Political Economy' (1827). His reputation as an economist rests on these lectures, the trenchant 'Labour Defended Against the Claims of Capital' (1825), and 'The Natural and Artificial Right of Property Contrasted' (1832). He has frequently been described as a 'Ricardian socialist', but the description is more ironic than accurate. Certainly Hodgskin used elements from Ricardian economics, but only as tools with which to undermine the Ricardian edifice. At the same time he pressed the labour theory of value to far more radical ends than David Ricardo, seeing skilled labour as both the measure and producer of all value. Fixed capital was no more than accumulated labour. Hodgskin saw a shameless deception at the centre of Ricardian economics and British capitalism: both pretended that capital was productive and the essential spring to greater prosperity, but, Hodgskin argued, capitalists were always parasitic, holding wages close to subsistence levels and diverting the fruits of labour's productivity to unproductive and anti-social consumption. Although Karl Marx's formulation of the theory of surplus value was more sophisticated, his debt to Hodgskin is unmistakable. 
Hodgskin fathered seven children, and the need to provide for his family may explain his failure to produce any major work after 1832. He intended to complete a critical study of law, 'The absurdity of legislation demonstrated', but this never appeared. Instead he became a prolific journalist, contributing to at least four daily newspapers, as well as several provincial weeklies; and for a time he assisted Thomas Hansard in publishing parliamentary reports. In the early 1840s he published pamphlets for the Anti-Corn Law League, and in 1846 he joined the staff of 'The Economist'. In the same year the navy awarded him the rank of retired commander. Hodgskin's enthusiasm for free trade was rooted in a belief that the power of governments would wither as the relationships within society became subject to economic laws rather than arbitrary legal systems. In two lectures in 1857 he attributed crime not to personal depravity but the corrupting tendencies of the law. He died in Feltham, Middlesex, on 21 August 1869 after a short illness. No London newspaper published a notice of his life and work. 
David Eastwood', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37557


Hoechstetter, Daniel (1525-1581), mining promoter, was born in Augsburg, Germany, the second son of the twenty-year-old Joachim Hoechstetter and his wife, Anna, daughter of Eitelhans Langenmantel, patrician and Anabaptist. Joachim died, probably in Denmark, in 1535. At some time before 1541 his relatives placed Daniel Hoechstetter with a branch of his grandmother's Wieland family, who trained him at their lead, copper, and silver mines and smelting works in the Rauris and Gastein valleys in the Tyrol, part of the archbishopric of Salzburg. He was apparently fully trained by 1549 and began to operate independently. On 16 July 1553 he married, in Augsburg, the twenty-year-old Radagunda, daughter of the prominent Augsburg merchant Leonhard Stammler. They had five sons and five daughters, of whom three sons and four daughters survived infancy. Between December 1555 and January 1557 he returned to live in Augsburg with his growing family. 
Nothing is known about Hoechstetter's activities until he was authorized, by Elizabeth I's signet of 8 July 1563, to prospect for minerals in England, which he did during that summer. For reasons which can only be guessed at, he decided to establish himself near Keswick in Cumberland and returned in the following year with Hans Loner, a relative by marriage, and twelve German workers, to set up works and to prospect more fully. In 1564 he also concluded an agreement with the Augsburg firm of Haug, Langnauer & Co. to finance the enterprise with himself as manager, and to invite English participation. By 1568 they were incorporated as one of the first two English joint-stock companies, the Society of the Mines Royal, with some important royal servants and London merchants as members. The English partners became increasingly reluctant to supplement their original investment of $1200 per share and finally refused in 1580, and agreed to lease the works and mines to Hoechstetter and 'customer' Thomas Smith, one of the wealthiest London merchants. 
Hoechstetter had meanwhile built up the works, from a large smelter in three storeys to coal-sheds, workshops, a stamp mill, and housing in Brigham, almost a mile east of Keswick on the River Greta. They produced fair quantities of copper and a little silver but, with a declining market for copper, could not cover the costs of installations and the travelling expenses of almost 150 Austrian and German craftsmen, a total which amounted to about $50,000. The lease from 1580 worked well enough to provide some regular rent for the society, even after Hoechstetter's death just before 14 May 1581, when he was buried in Crosthwaite church. Radagunda was buried next to her husband in 1610. 
On fragmentary evidence, Hoechstetter impresses as a reasonable and well-educated man, with a typical prospector's irrepressible enthusiasms. At first two of his sons, Emanuel (who died on 22 August 1614) with Daniel Hechstetter (as the English descendants called themselves), and then Daniel with Emanuel's son Joseph, continued, more modestly and successfully, to operate the works and mines until about 1634, when they went bankrupt. 
George Hammersley', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37558


Hoffnung, Gerard (1925-1959), cartoonist and musical humorist, was born in Grunewald, Berlin, on 22 March 1925, the only child of German-Jewish parents, Ludwig Hoffnung, a wealthy grain merchant, and his wife, Hilde, a widow, whose first husband, Schnabel, was killed in the First World War. His mother was a keen amateur musician and artist who encouraged his artistic talents. From his earliest years he was interested in the macabre -- fairy tales, practical jokes, and the comic drawings of the famous German illustrators and caricaturists. 
In the wake of the Nazi persecutions the Hoffnungs left Germany in 1938. Ludwig Hoffnung settled permanently in Israel. Gerard and his mother went to London, renting a house in Hampstead Garden Suburb which was to be Hoffnung's home for the rest of his life. In 1939 he became a pupil at Highgate School, where he was remembered for his anarchic spirit. His first cartoon was published in 'Lilliput' while he was still at school. He studied at Hornsey College of Art but was expelled and became art-master at Stamford School, Lincolnshire, in 1945 and later at Harrow School. He was already working as a freelance cartoonist and his work appeared in the London 'Evening News' (1947) and a number of British, continental, and American magazines including 'Punch', 'Strand Magazine', and 'The Tatler'. He also produced advertising work for Kia-Ora, Guinness, and other companies. He held several one-man exhibitions of his work, including those at the Little Gallery, Piccadilly (1949), and the Royal Festival Hall, London, in 1951 and 1956. 
Hoffnung developed a distinctive style which owed something to the German illustrator Wilhelm Busch. He mainly drew with a mapping pen and Indian ink, and also used watercolours and wax crayons. His illustrations in colour for Colette's libretto for Ravel's opera 'L'enfant et les sortileges' were outstanding. Much of his humour centred on the world of music, particularly the various instruments of the orchestra with which he was fascinated. (He taught himself to play the tuba.) In 1953 he published 'The Maestro', the first of a series of six little books of cartoons on musical themes which had a worldwide success. They were animated by Halas-Batchelor with music by Francis Chagrin in the television series 'Tales from Hoffnung' (1965), and were available on gramophone records, as were several of his humorous speeches and broadcasts. He broke new ground in musical humour when in 1956 he organized the first of a series of concerts of symphonic caricature at which new music, some of it by respected composers such as Malcolm Arnold, was played on ludicrous instruments or to the accompaniment of vacuum cleaners or road rammers. These 'April Fools Concerts' in Liverpool and Hoffnung Music Festivals in London became more and more elaborate and proved highly popular with the public. 
In 1950 Hoffnung began a career as a broadcaster, during the course of which he made many appearances on the radio as both raconteur and panel member. He was a brilliant improviser with a dry wit and a masterly sense of timing. An Oxford Union speech in 1958 in which he told 'The story of the bricklayer' became a classic recording. The story, involving a bricklayer's misfortunes as he attempted to lower some bricks in a barrel from the top of a building, was not especially funny, but his manner and delivery reduced his audience to hysterics. Other publications include 'Ho Ho Hoffnung' and 'Hoffnung's Acoustics' (both 1959) and a number of posthumous collections of his drawings and cartoons. He also provided illustrations for works by other writers, including J. Broughton's 'The Right Playmate' (1951). 
In appearance Hoffnung was stocky, bald, and benign. Nicolas Bentley described him as looking like a 'Teutonic Pickwick'. His manner, voice, and looks were those of a much older man and his wife was sometimes mistaken for his daughter. A man of conscience, he was a Quaker and a prison visitor. In 1952 he married Annetta Perceval, daughter of Percy Alfred Bennett, electrical contractor, of Folkestone, Kent. They had one son and one daughter. Hoffnung was only thirty-four when he died of a cerebral haemorrhage in New End Hospital, London, on 28 September 1959. He was survived by his wife. Posthumous exhibitions of his work include those at the Berlin festival (1964); the Brighton and Edinburgh festivals (1968); the Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, New York (1970); and Orleans House Gallery, Twickenham, London (1992). 
Richard Ingrams', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37559


Holford, Robert Stayner (1808-1892), art and plant collector, was born at Westonbirt, Gloucestershire, on 16 March 1808, the only child of George Peter Holford, master in chancery, of Westonbirt, and his wife, Anne, daughter of the Revd Averill Daniel of Lifford, co. Donegal. Holford graduated BA from Oriel College, Oxford, in 1829. In 1838 he inherited $1 million from his uncle, Robert Holford. 
Holford's earliest zeal was for landscape gardening. In 1829 he began the arboretum at Westonbirt, where a tract of sandy loam covering 114 acres allowed trees from almost any country in the world to be planted and raised. The increasing collection of different species of trees and plants -- skilfully grouped by season or by collections of single types of tree, and designed in glades, avenues, and drives -- caused the eventual expansion of the arboretum to 600 acres. 
Holford began to collect works of art in 1839 and became one of the most distinguished collectors of his time, with an enthusiasm for the Italian Renaissance. The diarist A. N. L. Munby described him as 'a collector with an eye for quality and the means to indulge it without stint'. No doubt in tribute to the superb quality of his illuminated manuscripts and early printed books, he referred to Holford as the 'Ideal Connoisseur'. Apart from his pictures, manuscripts, and early printed books, Holford collected old-master prints and etchings by Rembrandt, sculpture, Della Robbia ware, bronze portrait busts, maiolica, porcelain, furniture, tapestries, and gold- and silversmiths' work. 
The picture collection, made with the help of the dealer William Buchanan, was formed chiefly between 1840 and 1860 from most of the important auctions in London and from Italian collections. Holford's collection included works by Rubens, Velazquez, Justus Sustermans, Van Dyck, and Rembrandt; French and Italian landscapes by Claude, Gaspard Dughet, Nicolas Poussin, and Salvator Rosa; Dutch landscape and genre painters; the early Flemish school; and English portraits. 
In 1849 Holford purchased the freehold of the old Dorchester House, with its 100 yards of frontage to Park Lane, London: he chose Lewis Vulliamy as his architect to design the Italianate palazzo he planned for the site. He commissioned much of the interior decoration from Alfred Stevens; there was a special relationship between patron and sculptor, whereby Stevens was given a very free hand. The house, completed in 1856, was celebrated for its huge marble staircase and for the splendid series of staterooms on the 'piano nobile', designed for the reception and display of Holford's collections. Between 1863 and 1870 he rebuilt Westonbirt, again commissioning Vulliamy, but choosing an Elizabethan design. 
Holford served as Conservative MP for East Gloucestershire from 1854 to 1872 and was a JP, but he took little interest in politics. He was an original member of the Burlington Fine Arts Club. On 5 August 1854 he married Mary Anne, daughter of Lieutenant-General James Lindsay MP of Balcarres, Fife, and thus became brother-in-law to three collectors: Alexander Lindsay (twenty-fifth earl of Crawford), Robert Lindsay (Baron Wantage), and the owner of the Grosvenor Gallery, Sir Coutts Lindsay. Holford and his wife had three daughters and one son, Lieutenant-Colonel Sir George Holford (1860-1926). Holford died on 22 February 1892 at Dorchester House, London, and was buried in Westonbirt churchyard. The collection was sold after the death of his son, at Christies, London. 
Charles Sebag-Montefiore', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37560


Holland, Sir John, first baronet (1603-1701), politician, was born in October 1603 in Ashwellthorpe, Norfolk, and baptized there the following November, the first son of Sir Thomas Holland (died 1626) of Quidenham in the same county, and his first wife, Mary, daughter of Sir Thomas Knyvett of Ashwellthorpe. He matriculated from Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1620, and went on to enter the Middle Temple in 1623. In 1629 he was created a baronet without fee. On 3 August the following year he married Alathea (died 1679), widow of William Sandys, fourth Baron Sandys, and daughter of John Panton of Bryncunallt, Denbighshire. The couple had six sons and five daughters, including Catherine Holland, who later converted to Catholicism and entered the English convent, Bruges. 
Holland was elected knight of the shire for Norfolk in the spring of 1640, his father having held the seat in 1624. He claimed later that he did not seek re-election for the county in the autumn because he wanted to avoid damaging 'sidings and faction' (Keeler, 'Long Parliament', 219). His fears may have arisen in consequence of doubts about the sincerity of his professed protestantism, largely informed by his marriage to a Catholic heiress, and perhaps also by his family's ancient association with the Howard family. He had been agent to the earl of Arundel for a number of years. When the Long Parliament met, Holland sat for Castle Rising in Norfolk, the earl's pocket borough. On 9 November he made a speech in which he decried the extension of the prerogative and the resurgence of the Catholic priesthood, as well as other grievances. However, a fortnight later he was put to publicly disavowing any sympathy for Catholicism on account of his wife's beliefs and practice. Holland sought vigorously for peace from the outset of the civil wars, attempting to arrange a neutrality pact in Norfolk. He came under fire in the Commons for his reluctance to take his share of responsibility for the sequestration of delinquents. He was a commissioner for the treaty at Oxford in 1643. When the talks failed, he withdrew to the Netherlands, where he joined the rest of his family, and did not return to Westminster until December 1645. 
A parliamentary commissioner resident with the king at Holdenby in 1647, Holland long continued to believe and fervently to hope that Charles I 'was a prince under whose government we may yet be happy' ('DNB'). He was out of the country at the time of the purge of the Commons in December 1648 and absented himself from English politics until the readmission of the secluded members in 1660, whereupon he was elected to the council of state. He sought and obtained election to the convention for Castle Rising in 1660, and was considered a friend to the presbyterian interest by Lord Wharton. Returned to the Cavalier Parliament, this time for the Howard seat of Aldeburgh, he spoke against the revival of the temporal authority of episcopacy, and in favour of omitting a clause from the 'Act of Uniformity' condemning the solemn league and covenant. Thereafter he periodically got himself a name as one who consistently opposed court interests, especially when they impinged on the taxpayers of Norfolk. However, he did oppose the bill prohibiting the import of Irish cattle, which would have curtailed one of the principal sources of his own income, derived from the fattening of such cattle for the London market. His opposition to the indulgence of nonconformity also waxed and waned somewhat. But his country sympathies were normally sufficiently to the fore to put Holland on successive ministries' lists of members worth cultivating. He spoke powerfully, and much to the distaste of the court, on the cost of government and the stop of the exchequer in October 1675. In a heavy-handed attempt to warn him off from making such overt criticism, court interests let it be known that William Ashburnham had claimed to remember hearing the same speech delivered by Holland in the Long Parliament. Eventually Holland was silenced by a $200 annual pension awarded to his son for the term of his father's life. 'He never addressed the House again' (Helms and Watson, 559). 
In 1679 Holland declined to stand for Norfolk as a country candidate, on account, so it was said, of his wife's ill health; Lady Holland died in May that year. Along with the whig Sir Henry Hobart, Holland unsuccessfully opposed the court candidates for the county seats at the poll in 1685. Among those 'closeted' with James II in 1688, he told the duke of Norfolk that if he was elected to the next parliament: 'he could not (as his present judgment is) be for taking away the Penal Laws and the Tests, nor can contribute to the election of such as should; but he will live friendly with all persuasions as subjects of the same prince, and believes it to be his duty as a good Christian so to do. (Helms and Watson, 560)' He subsequently refused to serve on the newly modelled county bench, accepted the Williamite coup, and continued to act as a JP in the early 1690s. He died on 19 January 1701, the last surviving member of the Long Parliament, and was buried at Quidenham. He was survived by three sons and his five daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 37561


Holland, John Charles Francis (1897-1956), army and intelligence officer, was born in India (probably in Calcutta) on 21 November 1897, the only son and elder child of Sir Thomas Henry Holland (1868-1947), geologist, and his first wife, Frances Maud (died 1942), daughter of Charles Chapman, deputy commissioner in Oudh. Close friends called him Jo. 
Holland left Rugby School in 1914 for the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, and from there he was commissioned into the Royal Engineers on 28 July 1915. He was posted to the eastern Mediterranean, arriving too late for the Gallipoli campaign, but serving on the Salonika front for most of the rest of the First World War. He was mentioned in dispatches in 1917, and in the summer of 1918 was awarded the DFC for gallantry in action with the Royal Air Force. He was badly wounded in Dublin during the troubles of 1919-21, in which he admired the technical skills of his Irish guerrilla opponents. 
In 1922 Holland reverted from temporary major to lieutenant; he was promoted captain in 1924 and major seven years later. In 1924 he married Anne Christabel, daughter of Sir James Bennett Brunyate, of the Indian Civil Service; they had two sons and a daughter. Holland passed out from the Staff College, and held a staff captain's appointment in northern command in 1934-6. In 1938, again due for promotion but medically unfit, he took an appointment as a second-grade staff officer in the War Office to conduct research in any subject he chose. He chose irregular warfare. His branch, in which he was at first the only officer, was called GS (R). 
Holland's Irish experiences led his lively imagination well outside the normal range of military thinking at the time. Early in 1939 his branch was renamed MI R, and placed in the military intelligence directorate, though Holland concentrated rather on operations. Encouraged by A. P. Wavell, he laid the foundations of several wartime secret services, and was one of the originators of the commandos. For a few months in the summer of 1939 he worked at 2 Caxton Street, Westminster, alongside L. D. Grand, a Woolwich contemporary who ran the then inadmissible section D of the secret service. On the outbreak of war in September Holland went back to the War Office. 
Holland gathered like-minded officers round him, and dispatched each in turn to run the service for which he seemed fit: N. R. Crockatt, whose prowess he had admired at Rugby, to secure intelligence from prisoners of war; E. R. Coombe to form the inter-services security board, which handled codenames and deception as well as security; Gerald Templer to run the security of the expeditionary force; and M. R. Jefferis to invent and exploit secret gadgets. He sent Colin Gubbins to the independent companies in Norway, then to command projected stay-behind parties to damage the communications of any invading German forces, and eventually to run the Special Operations Executive (SOE). The latter was formed in July 1940 when Holland's staff, and Grand's, and a semi-secret propaganda branch of the Foreign Office were amalgamated. 
Holland thereupon went back to regimental duty, on being offered a regular lieutenant-colonel's command. By July 1943 he was back in the War Office as deputy chief engineer and a major-general. He was appointed CB in 1945, and was admitted to the American Legion of Merit and received the medal of freedom with silver palm. In 1947-8 he was chief of staff, western command; in 1949-50 he was again employed, briefly, on secret planning; and he retired in 1951. 
Holland was a shortish, burly man who went bald early; a heavy cigarette smoker; quick-tempered, but recovering fast from anger. He died at his elder son's house in Wimbledon on 17 March 1956. 
M. R. D. Foot', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37562


Holland, Sir Robert (c.1283-1328), baron, was the son of Sir Robert Holland of Upholland, Lancashire, and his wife Elizabeth, daughter of Sir William Samlesbury of Samlesbury, Lancashire. Robert Holland senior held moderately extensive estates in his county and played an active part in its government, but his son's career was to be altogether more exceptional. Through his friendship with Thomas, earl of Lancaster, Edward II's cousin and the most powerful of his earls, he rose from the middle ranks of the gentry into the upper ranks of the baronage. Their connection probably began in 1298, when Holland served Lancaster as his 'vallettus' on the Falkirk campaign. By 1305 he had been knighted. 
From 1300, if not before, Holland began to receive a steady stream of lands from Lancaster, amounting eventually to some twenty-five manors worth perhaps $550 per annum. Lancaster was also responsible for his marriage, which took place about 1308 and led to still greater gains. His wife was Maud (died 1349), one of the two daughters and coheirs of Alan de la Zouche, a prominent Leicestershire magnate, who brought to her husband, on Zouche's death in 1314, the greater part of her father's lands, worth nearly $720 a year. It was probably in consequence of this great accession of landed wealth that Holland was summoned to parliament for the first time in July 1314. At the height of his career his whole estate, including his patrimony, was probably worth rather more than $1300 a year. 
In return for all this Holland became Lancaster's chief agent and confidant. According to the 'Brut' chronicle, 'He truste more oppon him than oppon eny man alyve' ('Brut: England', 216). Chronicles and records suggest that he exercised a general supervision over all Lancaster's affairs: directing his estate officials, receiving dubiously acquired lands to which the earl wished to bar legal claims, acting as Lancaster's intermediary with the king, and supporting him in his political and military ventures. He joined in the pursuit of Piers Gaveston in 1312 and served Lancaster in Scotland in 1318. He also served the king, acting for three periods as justice of Chester and holding the usual range of local commissions. It was to the king that Holland turned during the great crisis of 1321-2, when Lancaster rebelled against Edward. This was not the result of any long-standing arrangement with Edward, for Holland had played a leading part in Lancaster's actions against the Despensers in July 1321 and had begun to raise troops for him in the revolt that followed in the winter of 1321-2. But in early March 1322, when Lancaster was retreating through the north midlands before the royal army, Holland crossed over to Edward. His treachery cost Lancaster the campaign and ultimately his life, and Holland his reputation and his freedom. His motive in deserting his lord was obvious: to save his own life in what looked likely to be -- and indeed became -- a military catastrophe. He may have calculated that in the event of defeat his own position as Lancaster's henchman would make him more vulnerable than his lord, whose blood and ancestry might have been expected (too optimistically as it turned out) to protect him. 
For the next five years Holland remained the king's captive, and only in December 1327, a year after the old reign had ended in a revolution, did Edward III order his release and the return of his lands. His restoration was short-lived. On 15 October 1328 he was murdered in Borehamwood, near Elstree, in Hertfordshire, probably by a group of Lancastrian partisans and possibly with the connivance of Henry, earl of Lancaster, Thomas's brother. He was probably buried at the Greyfriars' Church, Preston, Lancashire. The bulk of his lands descended to his eldest son, another Robert, but it was his second son, Thomas Holland, earl of Kent, who refounded the family's fortunes; he won fame in the French war, married Joan (the Fair Maid of Kent), granddaughter of Edward I, and acquired the earldom of Kent in right of his wife. 
Holland's linkage with the most powerful noble of his generation, and the scale of his consequent enrichment, made his career in some respects 'sui generis'. In another way, however, it typified one of the main routes to social advancement in the middle ages: through service in the following of a great man. 


@@@@@


doc= 37563


Holtby, Winifred (1898-1935), novelist and feminist reformer, was born at Rudston, Yorkshire, on 23 June 1898, the younger daughter of David Holtby (died 1933), a prosperous farmer, and his wife, Alice Winn (1858-1939), who served as alderman in the East Riding. An independent and precocious child, Holtby was encouraged in her literary ambitions while at Queen Margaret's School, Scarborough (1909-16). After a year as a probationer nurse in a London nursing home, she went up to Somerville College, Oxford, in October 1917, but she left in July of the following year to join the Women's Army Auxiliary Corps, and served in France until August 1919 as a hostel forewoman. 
Returning to Somerville that October, Holtby encountered in her modern history tutorials the woman who was to become her closest friend and colleague -- Vera Brittain. Initial hostility gave way to a deep understanding in which their literary talent and ambition, similarity of experience (especially in war service), and leftist social and political views allowed them to help and encourage each other creatively. Physically and temperamentally they were very different, however: Holtby tall, fair, confident, gregarious, and equable; Brittain small, dark, pretty, shy, and volatile. These differences complicated and strengthened their friendship. 
They left Oxford in 1921, with second-class degrees, and shared a flat in Doughty Street, London, while establishing parallel careers. Holtby's lively, stylish, witty articles and reviews soon gained her a high reputation as a journalist. She became a regular contributor (and from 1926 a director) of the feminist journal 'Time and Tide', and a friend of its founder and editor, Margaret Haig Thomas, Viscountess Rhondda. Joining Rhondda's Six Point Group, Holtby and Brittain quickly established themselves as influential young feminists. In her article 'Feminism divided', 1926, Holtby wrote: 'Personally, I am a feminist... because I dislike everything that feminism implies.... I want to be about the work in which my real interests lie... But while... injustice is done and opportunity denied to the great majority of women, I shall have to be a feminist.' Holtby and Brittain also joined the League of Nations Union, lecturing widely on world peace, and in 1922 toured Europe to investigate post-war conditions. Both joined the Labour Party. Both published novels in 1923 and 1924. During 1926 Holtby visited South Africa for over five months to speak on behalf of the League of Nations Union. Appalled by the racism she observed there, she worked energetically against it for the rest of her life, giving moral and financial support to the black trade union movement. On her return to London she was invited by Brittain, who was now married, to join a household soon further enlivened by two children, one of them Shirley Williams, to whom Holtby became a beloved 'aunt'. The two women had a wide circle of friends and acquaintances, many prominent as writers, feminists, and socialists. 
Extremely generous and dutiful, Holtby sacrificed much time and energy to her friends and family. Yet her literary career of less than fifteen years was notably prolific. Her first two novels -- 'Anderby Wold' (1923) and 'The Crowded Street' (1924) -- established a recurrent theme: the quest for independence, and its cost. Realistic regional novels, they incorporated satire, an element which strengthened in her next three novels, 'The Land of Green Ginger' (1927), 'Poor Caroline' (1931), and 'Mandoa, Mandoa!' (1933). Increasingly ambitious, all these novels are unpretentiously direct and witty in style, imaginative in using Holtby's own experience, and firmly focused on social and political problems. The latter two novels also moved away from Yorkshire, to London and an imagined Abyssinia respectively. Among the other seven books she published are a fine pioneering critical study of 'Virginia Woolf' (1932); 'The Astonishing Island' (1933), a satire; a feminist treatise, 'Women and a Changing Civilisation' (1934); 'Truth is not Sober' (1934), a collection of short stories; and a collection of poems, 'The Frozen Earth' (1935). A play attacking the rise of fascism, 'Take Back Your Freedom', was published posthumously, as were a further volume of short stories and two selections from her lively correspondence. 
During the last four years of her life Holtby fought gallantly against the depredations of renal sclerosis (Bright's disease). Before she completed 'Mandoa, Mandoa!' she had been warned that her time was short, and her final novel was begun in the knowledge that she might not be able to complete it. Her courage and consideration were so remarkable that even close friends had no idea, until near the end, that she was seriously ill. Equally remarkable were the ambition and determination that pushed 'South Riding' (published posthumously in March 1936 and awarded the James Tait Black memorial prize) to completion. Her final novel is also her masterpiece. Returning to a Yorkshire setting, Holtby wrote a rich regional study of social change and local government, drawing to some extent on her mother's experiences as the first woman alderman in the East Riding. Like George Eliot's 'Middlemarch', Holtby's novel weaves together a large number of characters and several plots to represent a complex society; illness and death are repeatedly present, but balanced against a characteristically vigorous optimism; and the quest for individual independence and fulfilment -- that long-established theme -- is here given its fullest and most impressive expression. 
On her deathbed in a London nursing home at 23 Devonshire Street, Marylebone, Winifred Holtby was betrothed to the man she loved, Harry Pearson. She died on 29 September 1935, and was buried in Yorkshire at Rudston churchyard on 2 October 1935, one day after a memorial service in St Martin-in-the-Fields, London. Vera Brittain's 'Testament of Friendship: the Story of Winifred Holtby' was published in 1940. 


@@@@@


doc= 37564


Hooley, Ernest Terah (1859-1947), financier, was born on 5 February 1859 in Sneinton, Nottinghamshire, the only child of Terah Hooley, lacemaker, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Peach. In his autobiography he claimed that the family had been farmers at Long Eaton, Derbyshire, since the eighteenth century. At the age of twenty-one he joined his father's lace business, and in the following year (1881) he married Annie Maria, 'nee' Winlaw, the daughter of a baker, with whom he had four daughters and three sons. His earnings in his father's business (possibly helped by an inheritance from his mother) enabled him in 1888 to buy Risley Hall in Derbyshire for $5000. In 1889 he left the lace business in search of larger fortunes and set up as a stockbroker in Nottingham. 
In an age devoid of regulations to oversee the scrupulousness of share prospectuses and flotations, Hooley discovered a talent for making large sums of money by selling off companies at inflated prices and pocketing a sizeable percentage of the proceeds. Among them was his first public flotation in 1894 -- that of an American subsidiary of Humber & Co. Ltd, cycle manufacturers -- as well as household names such as Raleigh, Singer, Swift, and above all the Dunlop Pneumatic Tyre Company, bought by Hooley and M. D. Rucker in 1896 for $3 million and promptly floated at $5 million (which was 80 per cent over-subscribed). Other celebrated companies to pass through Hooley's hands included Schweppes and Bovril (both in 1897). He also caused a stir with his purchase in 1896 and resale in segments of the Trafford Park estate in Manchester. 
Partly for reasons of image-building, Hooley moved his business to London in 1896. He cultivated members of the aristocracy and sprinkled them among his company boards to impress potential investors. He affected a lavish lifestyle, purchasing Papworth Hall in Cambridgeshire for $70,000 in 1895, and later adding several adjacent estates costing $210,000. His entertainment featured abundant wine and cigars, although he himself was a non-smoking teetotaller. 
Hooley's gilded years came to an abrupt end in June 1898, when he himself filed a petition for the first and most sensational of his four bankruptcies. The background to this was the ending of the cycle boom in the previous year. The specific causes of Hooley's failure remain obscure, owing partly to deliberate obfuscation and partly to the erratic nature of his business methods, including a total absence of accounts. He was certainly faced with claims for large commission payments arising out of his company promotions; and he alleged that his partner Martin Rucker had removed $506,000 from the business (in addition to shares) in six months. 
Bankruptcy sharply lowered Hooley's social position, but made less difference to his lifestyle, not least because before his crash he had made over to his wife both Papworth and Risley Hall and their contents. He was also allowed to continue trading, on condition that he kept his trustee supplied with a record of his financial affairs, so as to facilitate repayment of outstanding creditors. In the years 1899-1904 Hooley was involved in a series of dubious companies concerned with exploiting concessions on foreign territories. It was in relation to one of these, the Siberian Goldfield Development Company formed in May 1900, that Hooley and his associate H. J. Lawson were charged in 1904 with fraudulent share promotion. Hooley was acquitted, but Lawson received a twelve-month gaol sentence. 
Thereafter Hooley steered clear of companies for some time, concentrating on land deals. In 1911-12 he was involved almost simultaneously in three distinct sets of legal proceedings. First, his trustee, Mr Basden, charged him with contempt of court for failing to produce statements of his financial affairs over the preceding five years, and Hooley was eventually committed to Brixton prison for a month. Secondly, in October 1911 he faced a charge of obtaining money on false pretences in connection with an abortive land deal in Nottinghamshire, which ended with a twelve-month gaol sentence. Thirdly, he was declared bankrupt for the second time in 1912 on a creditor's petition. 
During the boom which followed the end of the First World War, Hooley became involved in trading shares in the cotton industry. In 1921 he and five others were charged with fraudulent misrepresentation in floating shares of Jubilee Cotton Mills Ltd in 1919-20. Hooley, as ringleader, received a three-year gaol sentence. He was also declared bankrupt for the third time in September 1921. His fourth bankruptcy followed in January 1939 on a petition of the Inland Revenue for an income-tax claim of $699 17's'. 5died 
For all his legal transgressions, Hooley was not an unattractive character: warm-hearted, dynamic, musically gifted (he played the piano and the organ), and with a contagious sense of humour. His enduring legacy was on the Papworth estate, where he left behind not merely a reputation for kindness and generosity, but a series of 'new model cottages' for farmworkers, which continued to be appreciated several decades after his death. He died on 11 February 1947, at 197 College Street, Long Eaton, Derbyshire. 
P. M. Oppenheimer', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37565


Hopkins, Gerard Manley (1844-1889), poet, was born on 28 July 1844 at 87 The Grove, Stratford, London, eldest of the nine children of Manley Hopkins (1818-1897), average adjuster in marine insurance and consul-general in London for Hawaii, and his wife, Catherine 
(Kate; 1821-1920)
, daughter of Dr John Simm Smith, a fashionable family doctor, and his wife, Maria. 
Having left school at fourteen, and having made his way in the City of London by hard work after his father's career had failed, Gerard's father Manley started his own firm of average adjusters, about the time of his eldest son's birth. Business prospered, and Gerard was brought up in a comfortable social position and home, usually with three or four servants, though he did not mention in letters his father's job and hard path to success, and it was never assumed that he would carry on the business (his nearest brother, Cyril, fulfilled that role). His lifelong silence on his father's Hawaiian connection is also remarkable. (Manley often exaggerated the importance of this largely honorary position, which had comic and embarrassing aspects.) 
Always small and delicate (at Oxford he was known as Poppy), Gerard was his mother's favourite, and was tutored by his aunts: Annie, Manley's sister, whose mawkish portrait of him, aged ten, is in the National Portrait Gallery; and Maria, Kate's sister, who encouraged his sketching, particularly of countryside and trees. Another early interest was Gothic architecture, stimulating him to focus on detail. It was a refined and lively bourgeois household, with parlour music, dramatics, humour, and poetry; Manley wrote poetry and was an avid reader who published several books and articles on insurance and a wide variety of other subjects, and passed on his mental voracity to Gerard. The family religion was conventional and domestic, moderately high-church, mainstream Anglican in its repudiation of Roman practices; there were family prayers and 'Bible' readings daily. 
In 1852 the increasingly prosperous Hopkins family moved to Oak Hill Park, Hampstead, comfortably near the countryside, the heath, with its ponds for swimming, and central London, whose cultural resources, particularly art exhibitions and churches, Gerard appreciated. Their parish church was the nearby St John's, a classical building of 1745, which Hopkins, with his Gothic prejudices, found 'dreary', and whose clergy he made fun of. After two years at a private school, Hopkins in 1854 started boarding at Highgate School, whose headmaster, Dr Dyne, emphasized classics, ancient history, and divinity in preference to modern studies; though narrow, the syllabus provided Hopkins with a good grounding in the elements of language and poetry. Another major influence at school was an unconventional younger boy, Marcus Clarke, a high-spirited and gifted writer, who passed on to Hopkins his enthusiasm for contemporary English artists, especially Frederick Walker and J. E. Millais. Hopkins started writing poetic descriptions of nature and weather effects, and poems of many types and lengths. 'The Escorial' won the school poetry prize in 1860, and shortly before he left school his 'Winter with the Gulf Stream', filled with lively but discrete images, was published in the national journal 'Once a Week'. 
Hopkins's experimentalism, stands on principle, and rebelliousness were remembered by schoolfriends, particularly his battles with the headmaster, once because for a bet he had stopped taking liquids for three weeks. Several times threatened with expulsion, in the sixth form he became a day boy to avoid further trouble, but nevertheless won prizes and the school exhibition for a university. When nineteen, at his second attempt, he gained another exhibition, to Balliol College, Oxford. 
Hopkins's moral and intellectual being was formed at Oxford University. He made deep and lasting friendships there, particularly with Robert Bridges and Mowbray Baillie, his two major correspondents in adulthood. The letters and diaries he wrote soon after his arrival in Oxford reflect his energy and breadth of interests, including frenetic socializing between studies; the voice is youthfully patronizing and self-congratulatory, in the manner of a 'Punch' social cartoonist, a livelier version of what his professional artist brothers, Arthur and Everard, became. 
Hopkins had gone up to Oxford in April 1863 intending to be a painter, although his surviving drawings suggest only an ordinary middle-class talent. He followed Ruskin's precepts of accurate and close observation of nature's details, and in his journal's highly distinctive verbal descriptions showed his intense desire to explore and record not merely the look but the behaviour of natural phenomena. Closely associated with this in his early diaries and journals was his creative apprenticeship in linguistics, building a useful vocabulary hoard while forming groups of words and etymological notes that go well beyond contemporary theories of onomatopoeia and word origins; in particular he listed similar sounding words of related meanings, and (several years before coining the term 'inscape') he was obsessed with the inscapes of individual words and the things they stood for. 
After passing responsions, the elementary undergraduate test, Hopkins spent five terms working for classical honours moderations, which focused on the detail of major texts and accuracy of language; he was placed in the first class, and in Lent term 1865 entered Oxford's chief honours school, that of 'literae humaniores', or Greats -- a pre-eminently philosophical school, with a preponderance of Plato's 'Republic' and Aristotle's 'Ethics'. Under Benjamin Jowett, his rigorous tutor for Greats, Hopkins became fluent in Latin and Greek, practised and spirited in thinking and writing about language, art, and poetry, and more careful about his own poetic style and exactness of expression. As a disciple of Ruskin and Pugin in their medievalist battle for Gothic architecture against Greek servility and lack of aesthetic and moral imagination, he was critical of several aspects of classical civilization, and never assimilated the methods of modern critical scholarship advocated by Jowett. Hopkins rejected also the radical social ideas of T. H. Green, Balliol's chief teacher of philosophy, who advocated personal involvement in political questions; to Hopkins, inward virtue was of pre-emptive importance. For one term Hopkins was coached by W. H. Pater of Brasenose, but direct influence is not obvious. 
Although Hopkins's studies deeply affected the formal and aesthetic theories and practices of his mature poems, most of his undergraduate poetry is, though competent, not distinctly personal, and is largely derived from the Romantic poets. The first poems and dramatic fragments Hopkins wrote at Oxford are bewildering in range and number, in speed of composition, and in their intermingling with his social life. This wealth of activity and interest came to be seen by Hopkins as promiscuity; he became afraid that he was a natural 'blackguard' (Hopkins, 'Letters', 139; 'Further Letters', 242), his self-indulgent life needing external control. Reacting strongly against contemporary liberalism and Darwinism, in his first fortnight at Oxford Hopkins had turned against the dangerously modern ethos of Balliol to the eminent high-churchmen Canon H. P. Liddon and Dr E. B. Pusey, to both of whom he confessed. He became familiar with ritualist doctrines and practices close to Roman Catholicism, making detailed daily notes of all his sins. 
Most of Hopkins's 'sins' show over-scrupulousness, and that he was mainly, but not exclusively, attracted by his own sex -- hardly unusual in public schools and universities of the 1860s -- though no sexual acts with other people are recorded. Throughout his life he was particularly susceptible to people's looks. His close relationships were all with men, usually students with high-church leanings. He became infatuated with a sixteen-year-old schoolboy relative of Bridges, Digby Dolben, who flamboyantly leant towards Rome; Hopkins copied out Dolben's poems and took on some of his enthusiasms, particularly those for Savonarola and the Virgin Mary, before whose picture Hopkins kissed the floor each morning. He started writing poems about and practising painful physical austerities as helpful for the soul. His confessor Liddon had forbidden contact with Dolben, but Hopkins could not help continually mentioning him to friends and writing sonnets of longing and separation. He became despondent and inert, and copied into his diary John Clare's poem 'I am! yet what I am who cares or knows', which anticipates his own sonnet of 1885, 'To Seem the Stranger'. Two years later, on Dolben's death by drowning, Hopkins wrote: 'there can very seldom have happened the loss of so much beauty (in body and mind and life)... seldom... in the whole world' (Hopkins, 'Letters', 16-17). 
Hopkins decided to give up the prospect of becoming a professional artist, as the passions would be too strongly involved. But his poetry writing continued, and several poems show stages of his conversion to Roman Catholicism: a Pre-Raphaelite picture of professional religious life ('The Habit of Perfection'), or religious doubt, asking similar questions to Tennyson's in 'In Memoriam' ('Nondum'), or self-disgust ('Trees by their Yield'), or John Henry Newman's image of the Church of England as 'The Half-Way House' between atheism and Roman Catholicism. 
Hopkins's conversion anguished his parents -- 'O Gerard, my darling boy, are you indeed gone from me?' wrote his father (Hopkins, 'Further Letters', 97) -- but, to Hopkins's surprise, they soon came to accept it, as they did later on when Gerard's sister Milicent became a high-church Anglican nun (none of his brothers retained a religious faith beyond adolescence). In 1867 Hopkins obtained first-class honours in Greats, and was offered a teaching post at the Oratory School, Birmingham, by Newman, who had received Hopkins into the Roman Catholic church, and whose spiritual autobiography, 'Apologia pro vita sua', written to gain converts of Hopkins's type, had influenced him. Hopkins was unhappy as a teacher -- the only secular job he ever had -- finding the self-discipline unpalatable, with few opportunities to continue self-education or to see Oxford friends. He decided to remedy feelings of aimlessness and the sordidness of ordinary life by becoming a professional religious. He burned his poems -- 'slaughter of the innocents', he called this act (Hopkins, 'Journals and Papers', 165) -- though he had previously sent copies of them all to Bridges, and three months later remarked with pride on a peculiar beat he had introduced into his new verse. He chose the most severely disciplined of the Counter-Reformation orders, the Society of Jesus. 
First, however, following the Romantic lead of Wordsworth and Ruskin, Hopkins took a walking holiday in Switzerland. There his uncensored journal writing achieved heights of liveliness and inventive imagery, using the new terms 'inscape' and 'instress'. His account includes human scenes with women as well as alpine descriptions, and makes one regret the controlled, comparatively limited subject range in his journal writing once he had become a Jesuit. 
The appeal of the Society of Jesus to Hopkins was its highly structured system, as manifested in St Ignatius's spiritual exercises, of conquering oneself and regulating one's life, a counter to the undergraduate guilt and insecurity he still experienced after his conversion. But a Jesuit seminary was an encompassing institution with tensions of a community life which constricted individual personality and self; normal privacy and emotional sustenance were feared. The exercises were unsuited to his temperament, which was predisposed to melancholia. Hopkins was considered by his fellow Jesuits odd, whimsical, eccentric, too delicate; few appreciated him. He was naively surprised at being forbidden to take Swinburne's 'Poems and Ballads' with him into the noviciate at Manresa House, Roehampton. 
Hopkins resolved to keep only weather notes, but fortunately, in his second year, the journal expanded considerably into natural observations, stories, and accounts of words, dreams, and visits. In September 1870 he took his vows, and moved north to the philosophate, at Stonyhurst College, in rural Lancashire. In spite of his pessimism about the wintry climate, recording and dwelling on deaths obsessively, and finding the course hard and wearisome, while everyday life was 'as dank as ditchwater' (Hopkins, 'Further Letters', 113), his journal's extended descriptions of Stonyhurst's natural surroundings record joyful experiences, particularly around its three beautiful rivers, though most show him as lonely and intense. His dull professional life contrasted with the vivid seascapes bejewelling the journals he wrote during community holidays on the Isle of Man, excitedly conveying intense discoveries and images of the textures, shapes, and colours of sea water. 'Inscape' and 'instress' frequently occur as the looked-for and perceived qualities in nature, and he was now 'flush with a new stroke of enthusiasm' (Hopkins, 'Journals and Papers', 221) about Duns Scotus, the medieval theologian who, although disapproved of by Hopkins's superiors, helped to sanction his way of perceiving and recording nature. Hopkins had 'resolved to write no more, as not belonging to my profession' (Hopkins, 'Correspondence', 14), but nevertheless wrote some Latin and two English poems, a May exercise, officially encouraged, to honour the Virgin Mary; one of them, 'Ad Mariam', closely imitates Swinburne. 
In August 1873 Hopkins was posted back to Roehampton for a year's teaching. In spite of a comparatively easy year, with exhibition visits renewing his interest in modern English painting, his teaching left him very tired and deeply cast down; however, on a summer holiday to Devon he recorded feelings of intense love for the coomb scenery around Teignmouth. 
At the end of August 1874 Hopkins travelled to a remote part of north Wales, to study theology for four years at St Beuno's College. Again he immediately fell in love with the landscape: the glens, woods, and trees of the deep Elwy valley, and the densely wooded hills and long-drawn valley of the River Clwyd, with the Snowdonian mountain range and the sea in the distance. Hopkins felt 'an instress and charm of Wales' (Hopkins, 'Journals and Papers', 258), delighted in word-painting the countryside, and began to learn Welsh, which he associated with poetry and mythology. In spite of discouragement from his rector unless he intended to convert local Welsh speakers, Hopkins enthusiastically persisted with lessons, and tried his hand at the intricacies of classical Welsh verse. 
Hopkins became fascinated by the appearance, legend, and traditions of St Winefride's Well, composed a Latin and an English poem on the saint, and planned a drama, 'St Winefred's Well' (with which he sporadically toyed for more than ten years, but never finished). However, the bleak weather, his health, and particularly his studies were sources of tension and unhappiness during his first year: he barely passed the examination. 
During Hopkins's Roehampton teaching his lectures on poetry had emphasized sound, repetition, and rhyme in its widest sense of sound-similarity. Although not understanding its detailed rules, he was now attracted by the Welsh 'cynghanedd' metrical form for its variety of binding and enriching systems, and its focus on sound. Poetry was spoken sound, not the printed word, which was only its representation; his own poetry, he always said, had to be read aloud. Something greater was imminent, and in December 1875, strongly affected by and seeing religious and symbolic implications in a newspaper account of a shipwreck in which five nuns lost their lives, Hopkins set to work at a poem on a modern Catholic martyrdom, using the Pindaric ode form. 'The Wreck of the 'Deutschland'' is an idiosyncratic shipwreck poem, using vigorous sea, storm, and narrative description, a story of the tall nun's victory against the odds, and the poet's account of the shaping of his own dramatic conversion and discovery of God's purpose behind apparently incoherent tragedy. The powerfully awkward 'sprung rhythm', vigorous language, and personal excitement counter echoes of fatalism and disenchantment in this vast experimental poem. 
Hopkins never again composed a poem of this length and ambition. The culmination and justification of his lengthy and deep poetic thinking and practice, its acceptance by his superiors would have transformed his life and future poetry, as well as giving him a new and invigorating sense of purpose in the society. But after initial encouragement the editor of 'The Month' persistently delayed publication until Hopkins resigned himself to its rejection; he told a friend that the Jesuit periodical 'dared' not print it (Hopkins, 'Correspondence', 15). Representing officially sanctioned orthodoxy, the journal's decision gave Hopkins a lasting feeling of rejection by his community, and set up a barrier between himself and authority. He returned to his old guilty feeling about his art: as his poetry making was not approved, he could not allocate more than an occasional short piece of leisure time to it. The majority of his subsequent poems were sonnets, a form that Hopkins could carry in his head while officially 'recreating'. This rejection also meant that Bridges now had the crucial role of guardian of Hopkins's poetry. 
Ironically, while composing his great ode, Hopkins was writing three minor and stilted occasional poems on his bishop's silver jubilee, one each in Latin, Welsh, and English; the last, published as part of a celebratory pamphlet, was one of the handful of his poems he ever saw in print. In spring 1877, although he found 'going over moral theology over and over again and in a hurry is the most wearisome work' and was so tired that he was 'good for nothing' (Hopkins, 'Further Letters', 143), he rejoiced in the first primroses, and wrote 'The Starlight Night' and 'God's Grandeur' for his mother's birthday. These started the great series of lyrical sonnets, which include 'The Lantern out of Doors', 'As Kingfishers Catch Fire', 'The Sea and the Skylark', 'Spring', 'The Caged Skylark', 'In the Valley of the Elwy', 'The Windhover' (his favourite poem of that year), 'Pied Beauty', and 'Hurrahing in Harvest'. 
Many of these poems from 1877 celebrate Hopkins's joyful observations of nature. Sometimes he is at his poetic best, as in the octave of 'The Windhover', where the medley of sound-devices, the personal excitement of the narrator, and the imitation of the bird's intense hovering are simultaneously perfect, or in the successful achievement of complex, passionate argument in 'The Caged Skylark', or in the fondness, enthusiasm, and sexuality of Hopkins's most ecstatic poem, 'Hurrahing in Harvest'. But sometimes there is deep rejection of and disgust with everyday life and everything man-made, or the hidden biographical comparison between the sweet peace of the Elwy household and Hopkins's customary harsh institutional surroundings. The joyful accounts of nature throw into relief his loneliness and misanthropy; his idealism was constantly undermined by disillusion. 
In July 1877 Hopkins failed his theology examination, being too Scotist for his examiners. 'Much against my inclination I shall have to leave Wales', he wrote to Bridges (Hopkins, 'Letters', 43). Not only was he unable to continue into his fourth year of theology, but he also would never reach the highest ranks and posts in the society. However he was ordained to the priesthood in September of that year, and after an operation for circumcision took his last look at Wales, the 'true Arcadia of wild beauty' (Hopkins, 'Further Letters', 370) and 'always to me a mother of Muses' (Hopkins, 'Letters', 227). 
Each September almost every Jesuit shifted to another location, in changes known as 'general post'; a basic condition of Jesuit life, the process still hurt. The saddest of his St Beuno's poems, showing Hopkins at his most vulnerable, is 'The Lantern out of Doors', which laments being deprived of people to whom he had grown attached. In his loneliness, the only counter to his daily surroundings, which appear as 'much thick and marsh air', is the presence of some man: '
whom either beauty bright 

In mould or mind... makes rare 

' He wrote to his mother: 'Ours can never be an abiding city nor any one of us know what a day may bring forth' (Hopkins, 'Further Letters', 142). 
In July 1883, after six years of his own constant removals, Hopkins wrote: 'I have long been Fortune's football and am blowing up the bladder of resolution big and buxom for another kick of her foot' (Hopkins, 'Letters', 183). Since leaving Wales he had been posted to Mount St Mary's College, near Sheffield, for seven months of secondary-school teaching, but having become 'very fond of the boys' (Hopkins, 'Further Letters', 158) had been given only a week's notice before being sent to Stonyhurst College to coach a few boys for external university degrees. After three months he was sent south to London to act as curate at Farm Street Church in Mayfair, where he remained for five months, before, in December 1878, becoming curate at St Aloysius's Church, Oxford. Ten months later he took up a similar position at St Joseph's Church, Bedford Leigh, in Lancashire. Then after only three months there he was posted as curate to St Francis Xavier's Church, Liverpool, where he stayed for one year and seven months, before going as relief temporary curate to St Joseph's, Glasgow, for two months. At the end of that period he started his year's tertianship at Roehampton, and having completed it was appointed teacher at Stonyhurst College again, where he remained for one year and four months. He travelled to Dublin to take up his professorship at the University College in February 1884, having been in eleven postings, in four countries, in eight years. 
Hopkins was pessimistic about the Mount St Mary's post before he arrived there -- 'the work is nondescript', the countryside 'not very interesting' (Hopkins, 'Further Letters', 148) -- and he found life at the college was 'as dank as ditchwater and has some of the other qualities of ditchwater'; he had been 'reduced to great weakness by diarrhoea' (Hopkins, 'Letters', 47). His muse had 'turned utterly sullen in the Sheffield smoke-ridden air' (ibid., 148), but he composed another shipwreck poem, 'The Loss of the 'Eurydice'', much simpler than 'The Wreck of the 'Deutschland'', but far less distinguished: 'The Month' again rejected it for publication. Then at Stonyhurst another Marian poem, 'The May Magnificat', was refused permission to be placed before the Virgin Mary statue. Hopkins started a friendship and correspondence with one of his former Highgate teachers, Canon R. W. Dixon, by regretting the lack of due recognition suffered by writers. At Oxford Hopkins complained of overwork, illness, and disaffection from his parishioners, but wrote several poems, including 'Henry Purcell', and two, 'Binsey Poplars' and 'Duns Scotus's Oxford', expressing modern man's insensitivity to landscape and his own deep rejection of modern religion and civilization. Many poems show Hopkins's lack of inward comfort and ease. His parish work in working-class Lancashire and Glasgow was 'very wearying to mind and body', and as a sheltered middle-class southerner he was shocked to see the ghastly cost of industrial prosperity. Liverpool was 'a most unhappy and miserable spot' (Hopkins, 'Correspondence', 42), where 'one is so fagged, so harried and gallied up and down' (Hopkins, 'Letters', 110), while Glasgow was a 'wretched place' (ibid., 135) and 'repulsive to live in' (Hopkins, 'Further Letters', 248). Even less suited to these than to his other Jesuit posts, he suffered the indignity of having his Liverpool sermons censored by his rector because of incorrect theology (Scotus was, again, partly to blame). Nevertheless in the Lancashire countryside he produced the sad but charming 'Spring and Fall: to a Young Child', and by Loch Lomond his Scottish poem 'Inversnaid'. 
Hopkins's tertianship at Roehampton was intended to enable him by withdrawal from the world to recover his primal Jesuit fervour; he completed his formal training as a Jesuit when he took the simple vows of a spiritual coadjutor in August 1882, fourteen years after he had entered the society as a novice. At Stonyhurst, where he taught university-standard classics, Hopkins was allowed time to write on academic subjects, and he planned a work on Greek lyric art, but was hampered by ignorance of contemporary classical scholarship, self-doubt, and 'a wretched state of weakness and weariness, I can't tell why, always drowzy and incapable of reading or thinking to any effect' (Hopkins, 'Letters', 168). He wrote the brooding 'Ribblesdale', 'The Leaden Echo and the Golden Echo', and three letters published in the scientific journal 'Nature', consisting mainly of skyscape descriptions. He started a friendship with Coventry Patmore, a Roman Catholic poet he already admired. 
In spite of strong opposition from the archbishop of Dublin and his successor, Hopkins early in February 1884 was elected to a fellowship of the Royal University of Ireland, and to a junior classics chair at University College, Dublin -- successor to the Catholic University of Ireland founded by Newman, and now taken over by the Irish Jesuits. It was an inauspicious appointment, Hopkins having been attacked because of his nationality, and supported by reason of his Oxford background and his salary, which was needed by the ailing college. The head of the English Jesuit province had written of his 'oddities', and an old Balliol acquaintance had supported him for his originality and 'curiously delicate perception' (White, 'Hopkins: a Literary Biography', 361), not qualities suitable for teaching and controlling students less educated and sophisticated than those he had known at Oxford. 
For his first year Hopkins taught nothing but was given continuous examining, at one time having '557 papers on hand: let those who have been thro' the like say what that means' (Hopkins, 'Correspondence', 123). By April his depression was worsening: he was 'in a great weakness' (Hopkins, 'Letters', 192) and had suffered 'a deep fit of nervous prostration... I did not know but I was dying' (ibid., 193). He started writing perhaps his most intense and terrifying poem, 'Spelt from Sibyl's Leaves', in which the doomsday portent of an oracular sunset overpowers the vulnerable aesthetic qualities of nature. 
In summer 1885 Hopkins wrote to Bridges of his 'continually jaded and harassed mind' (Hopkins, 'Letters', 221). More isolated than ever, he was seen unsympathetically and distantly by colleagues and pupils alike (see his sonnet 'To Seem the Stranger'). The label by which they diminished what they could not understand was that of a typical aesthetic Newmanite convert; his sense of humour was not recognized in Ireland, though it is apparent in almost every letter he wrote, even when at his most miserable: a Liverpool organist 'got drunk at the organ (I have now twice had this experience: it is distressing, alarming, agitating, but above all delicately comic; it brings together the bestial and the angelic elements in such a quaint entanglement... for musicians never play such clever descants as under those circumstances...)... He was a clever young fellow and thoroughly understood the properties of narrow-necked tubes. (Hopkins, 'Letters', 264)' Shy and effeminate, slight and not more than 5 feet 2 inches tall, he was sometimes mistaken for a teenager, although now in his forties (his glossy light-brown to tawny hair partly greying). His Oxford and Balliol mannerisms did not go down well in the comparatively primitive college, hostile towards Britain; unable to cope with classroom discipline, he was ragged by students. He was disgusted that two Irish archbishops backed rebellion against British government, and could not condone what he saw as disloyalty to the crown, but painfully admitted that home rule was inevitable because the Irish were ungovernable. After his death the few Dublin stories of him concerned his eccentricity: he had got a student to drag him on his back round a table to demonstrate Hector's death, and had once told a class that he regretted never having seen a naked woman. 
But to define and explore his mental disturbances Hopkins had poetry, now his sole resource. Whereas the originality of many of his pre-Dublin poems had been compromised by the required religious conclusion, the uncontrollable strength of his psychological turmoil in Ireland took him well beyond the limits of conventional religious diagnosis and terminology; and poetry itself was driven beyond commonly recognized subject and means of expression. His 'desolate' or 'terrible' sonnets of 1885, such as 'I Wake and Feel the Fell of Dark' and 'No Worst, There is None', have become classic explorations of modern psychic despair and torment, with widely known images and phrases such as 'cliffs of fall' and 'O the mind, mind has mountains'. 
Hopkins had a few friends outside Dublin, such as the Cassidys of Monasterevin, where he composed the unfinished 'On the Portrait of Two Beautiful Young People', an elegy on human beauty, which he had previously tried to justify according to his religion's precepts in the sonnet 'To what serves mortal beauty?' Besides being obsessed by Irish politics he became more jingoistic, writing three poems on military virtues, and denigrating the lack of realism in Irish myths and the woolliness of modern Irish writing and painting, although he made an interesting and humorous collection of Hiberno-English words and phrases. On holiday in 1887, Hopkins wrote two of his most idiosyncratic poems, sonnets lengthened beyond recognition. 'Harry Plowman' is to be heard, not silently read; the man is created in natural images, sound-devices connecting different senses. In the companion piece, 'Tom's Garland', expressing Hopkins's conservative social thinking, symbols clash with realistic description, obscuring the argument. 
So often in Dublin Hopkins had felt unable to 'breed one work that wakes' ('Justus tu es', l. 13), but his final group of three sonnets, composed in March and April 1889, which bewail his lack of poetic inspiration, is ironically some of his most distinguished work. Soon afterwards Hopkins caught typhoid, which developed into peritonitis, probably from the defective plumbing of the University College drains, and he died on 8 June 1889 at 85 St Stephen's Green. He was interred on 11 June in the Jesuit burial plot in the Prospect cemetery, Glasnevin, on the north side of Dublin. 
Hopkins was soon forgotten in Dublin; twelve years after his death a student of the same college who was keen on literature reported that Hopkins was 'practically unknown'. Robert Bridges, however, on whom the poet had relied to keep, treasure, and conceivably publish the poems after Hopkins's death, believed that they must be printed, and was soon planning an edition with a short memoir. Delay was caused by his respect for the private nature of the letters, by his feeling that Hopkins's melancholia should not be publicly exposed, and by fear that the public would not understand the peculiarities of the verse. He gradually introduced small groups of the poems into anthologies, but it was not until 1916 that he received the public encouragement for which he was waiting. The sensitive, handsome, and almost complete small edition, edited and largely designed by Bridges, was published at the end of 1918. Hopkins did not use his middle name, but Bridges introduced 'Manley' on the first edition title-page to distinguish him from his nephew, also Gerard Hopkins. 
The edition of 750 copies had still not sold out when, in 1930, a second edition was called for by the poetry public who were demanding new, difficult poetic voices. Advocated especially by I. A. Richards, F. R. Leavis, William Empson, and Michael Roberts, so that his poems appeared in general and modernistic anthologies, followed by university and school syllabuses, Hopkins had suddenly become a popular modern poet. It was not until the 1960s that his Victorian qualities were appreciated. In the second half of the twentieth century with both protestant and Roman Catholic faiths searching for new voices, the use of Hopkins's writings considerably increased, but there are signs that the distinctive literary qualities of his poetry, journals, and letters (he was one of the best letter writers of the nineteenth century) are being valued less, and his unorthodox characteristics hidden. As one of his biographers said, no one else writes with such strength and vivacity about the extreme human emotions of joy and pain. 


@@@@@


doc= 37566


Hoppe, Emil Otto (1878-1972), photographer, was born on 14 April 1878 in Munich, Germany, the only son and elder child of Philip Hoppe, bank director, and his wife, Marie von der Porter, pianist. Soon after his birth the family moved to Vienna, where Hoppe began his formal education which he later completed in Paris and Munich. In 1900 he moved to London to work for the Deutsche Bank. In 1903, having received a camera as a birthday gift, he embarked on his career in photography. Hoppe became a member of the Royal Photographic Society in 1907, and later in that year won $100 in a photographic competition. Encouraged, he resigned his post at the bank and, using the prize-money as capital, opened a portrait studio at 10 Margravine Gardens, Baron's Court. In 1905 Hoppe married Marion Bliersbach. They had a son, Frank ('b'. 1913), and a daughter, Marion ('b'. 1916). 
Hoppe co-founded the London Salon of Photography in 1910; in the following year he held his first one-man show. Over the next fifteen years he became one of London's most celebrated portraitists while also establishing himself as a skilled theatre and fashion photographer. In 1913 he moved into 7 Cromwell Place, South Kensington, the former home of the painter Sir John Millais, and to make an impression on his wealthy clientele, had it lavishly redecorated. Conversely, the studio which he used for twenty years was simple and plain, matching a style of portrait photography in which, to use his own words, 'character rather than flattery [was] the dominant note' (Hoppe, 15). He was soon in great demand and the frequent republication of his work earned him much in reproduction fees. Among the publications to take his work were 'Vogue', 'Vanity Fair', the 'Illustrated London News', and the 'Tatler'. 
In 1921 Hoppe photographed George V and Queen Mary at Buckingham Palace, in a style that was informal by the standards of the time. In the following year his one-man exhibition of mainly portrait photographs at the Goupil Gallery won plaudits from the critics. John Galsworthy wrote the catalogue introduction, and record audiences viewed the touring exhibition. All 221 prints from the show were purchased by a consortium of collectors under the aegis of the 'Asahi Shimbun', one of Japan's leading newspapers, and were subsequently exhibited in Tokyo and Osaka in 1923. 
Hoppe photographed numerous world leaders, including Benito Mussolini and American president Calvin Coolidge; assorted royalty, both European and Asian; and many of the century's leading artists and thinkers -- Vaslav Nijinsky, Albert Einstein, Ezra Pound, George Bernard Shaw, Rudyard Kipling, Somerset Maugham, and Thomas Hardy were among those who made up Hoppe's vibrant social and intellectual milieu. Hoppe once said of his aesthetic mission: 'To confirm the spirit behind the eyes is the test' (Hoppe, 15). 
Hoppe has been justly praised for his portraits, but his little-known topographic works by themselves would have qualified him as an innovative modernist before the term was even coined. Hoppe's dynamic views of urban environments and industrial buildings link the late pictorialist experiments of his fellow member of the art photography group Linked Ring, Alvin Langdon Coburn, with the depression-era work of Walker Evans. 
In his later years Hoppe turned his attention to landscape, travel, and news photography, capturing portraits and topographic views throughout Britain, Germany, Japan, the United States, South America, Australia, India, and Jamaica. Hoppe wrote and published extensively, producing some twenty-eight photographic books including two outstanding titles which exemplify his topographic work, 'Romantic America: Picturesque United States' (1927) and 'Deutsche Arbeit' (1930). He also ran a picture agency, which aided the dissemination of his work. 
Hoppe died in Wildhern, Hampshire, on 9 December 1972. Cecil Beaton referred to him simply as 'the Master': elsewhere, he has been cited as the most important photographer in the world during the 1920s. He was certainly a photographer of daring vision and -- from his publications, and his role in the founding of the London Salon -- a significant figure in twentieth-century photography. 


@@@@@


doc= 37567


Hornby, Frank (1863-1936), toy manufacturer, was born at 77 Copperas Hill, Liverpool, on 15 May 1863, the only son of the three children of John Hornby, provisions dealer, and his wife, Martha Thomlinson. He was educated at local council schools until he obtained employment as a shipping clerk, working with several companies until he was thirty-eight. In 1887 he married Clara Walker, daughter of William Godefroy, mariner and customs worker. They had a daughter who died at fourteen, and two sons (who both became directors of Meccano Ltd). 
Always interested in mechanical devices, experimenting in his home workshop Hornby developed the Meccano construction idea by using metal strips perforated with holes at half inch intervals and assembled with screws and nuts. Wheels, rods, cranks, and other components were added so that, with instruction manuals, boys (girls were never specified in the advertising) could build the illustrated models. Hornby obtained his first patent in 1901; the following year sets, produced in rented premises and marketed as 'Mechanics Made Easy', appeared in Liverpool toyshops. In 1908 Meccano Ltd was registered and, within five years, manufacturing plants were established in Paris, Berlin, Barcelona, and Elizabeth in New Jersey. The success of Hornby's invention was due largely to the principle of gradation from simple sets to larger ones with more complicated mechanisms. Over many years Meccano became widely used by designers to demonstrate ideas useful in mechanical research. 
In 1914 Meccano Ltd moved to a purpose-built factory at Binns Road in Liverpool which by 1928 employed over 1200 people supplying Meccano sets to agents and distributors all over the world, including the Soviet Union and China. To publicize Hornby's business, 'Meccano Magazine' was founded in 1916 and continued publication (usually monthly in up to seventeen languages) for over fifty years. 
Prior to 1914 clockwork toys had been manufactured mainly in Germany and Hornby shrewdly foresaw that, with the war over, there would be a demand for such toys made in England. In 1920 Meccano Ltd produced the first Hornby model trains, replicas of British trains with authentic colours and lettering used by the railway companies of the time. All kinds of rolling-stock, signal-boxes, stations, level-crossing gates, complementary buildings, and scenery were added to increase the realism of railway modelling. Clockwork was eventually replaced by low-voltage electric power to drive the engines and automate switching-points on the railway track. In 1933 the 'Dinky' range was introduced, with miniatures of cars, lorries, trucks, motorcycles, farm machinery, rural animals, and other models. When Hornby died at the height of his company's success, the annual output of his factories totalled millions of Meccano sets, Hornby trains, and Dinky toys, which had become household names throughout the world. By then 2000 employees were engaged at Binns Road, made up of management, designers, production workers, and marketing and advertising specialists. 
In 1931 Hornby won the House of Commons seat of Everton for the Conservative Party. It was a short and not very effective venture; he resigned before the 1935 general election because of business pressures, declining health, and failing eyesight. Hornby died on 21 September 1936 at the David Lewis Northern Hospital, Liverpool. He was survived by his wife. 
Meccano continued to be made in Liverpool until 1979, when falling sales caused the factory to be shut down. The firm was bought by Nikko, a Japanese toy manufacturer, in 2000, and Meccano sets were still being manufactured in France and Argentina. 
A. A. Warden', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37568


Horne, (Charles) Kenneth (1907-1969), comedian, was born on 27 February 1907 at Ampthill Square, London, the youngest in the family of three sons and four daughters of (Charles) Sylvester Horne (1865-1914), Congregational minister, and his wife, Katharine Maria (1870-1958), daughter of Herbert Hardy Cozens-Hardy, later first Baron Cozens-Hardy, master of the rolls. Horne was educated at St George's School, Harpenden, Hertfordshire, at the London School of Economics, and at Magdalene College, Cambridge. Though popular with contemporaries and a fine sportsman (he gained a tennis half-blue at Cambridge), he did not have a spectacular academic career, and was sent down from the university in December 1927. 
Through the influence of his uncle, Austin Pilkington, a director of the Pilkington Glass Company, Horne secured a job as a progress clerk with the Triplex Safety Glass Company in 1928. On 20 September 1930 he married Lady Mary Pelham-Clinton-Hope (1910-1982), second daughter of the eighth duke of Newcastle, but the marriage was annulled in 1933. On 5 September 1936 he married (Margaret) Joan ('b'. 1915/16), daughter of Ernest Burgess, chairman and managing director of a Birmingham firm of brass founders. In 1938 Horne enlisted in the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve. He was commissioned as acting pilot officer and posted to 911 squadron (barrage balloons). He served in the RAF throughout the war, reaching the rank of wing commander, and on demobilization in 1945 he rejoined Triplex Glass as sales director. He was divorced in the same year, and married, on 2 November 1945, Marjorie Mallinson ('b'. 1909/10), widow of Lieutenant George Ambler Thomas and daughter of Harry George Sadler, civil servant. Horne himself had no surviving children, but his third wife had a daughter from her previous marriage. His business career continued to flourish after the war and he became managing director of the British Industries Fair (1954-6) and chairman and managing director of the Chad Valley Toy Company (1956-8), among other directorships. He gave up his business interests in 1958, when he was partially incapacitated by coronary thrombosis. 
From 1940, when he made his first appearance over the airwaves as quizmaster in the BBC radio series 'Ack, Ack, Beer, Beer', Kenneth Horne was a constant broadcaster, and in 1943, by then stationed at the Air Ministry in London, he created and wrote with Squadron Leader Richard Murdoch (1907-1990) the radio series 'Much Binding in the Marsh', a take-off based on a fictitious RAF station, which ran until 1950. He was subsequently the eponymous Ken of the comedy radio series 'Beyond our Ken' (1958-64), which claimed up to 10 million listeners. 'Round the Horne' succeeded 'Beyond our Ken' in 1965, and achieved international audiences. Frequently repeated on the radio, the scripts (by Marty Feldman and Barry Took) were published in the 1970s and again in the following decade, and the BBC released recordings of the shows on cassette. Horne's rich, fruity voice and warm patrician manner made him the ideal link man and that, coupled with a mischievous sense of humour, ensured that any programme in which he was involved was the better for his presence. He was, his obituarist wrote, 'a master of the scandalous double-meaning delivered with shining innocence... [and of] the excruciating schoolboy pun' ('The Times'). He also chaired a television quiz show, 'Celebrity Challenge', and the radio programme 'Twenty Questions', and his skill in handling staff and co-directors in industry transferred successfully to his broadcasting career. His notably temperamental co-star, Kenneth Williams, paid tribute to 'his unselfish nature, his kindness, tolerance and gentleness [which] were an example to everyone' ('Kenneth Williams Diaries', 345). Kenneth Horne died on 14 February 1969 at St George's Hospital, Westminster, having suffered a second heart attack during the awards presentations of the Guild of British Film and Television Producers at the Dorchester Hotel, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 37569


Horne, (Charles) Silvester (1865-1914), Congregational minister and politician, was born in Cuckfield, Sussex, on 15 April 1865, the youngest of three sons and four children of Charles Horne (1829-1903), Congregational minister and later editor of the 'Newport Advertiser', and his wife, Harriet Simpson, daughter of the superintendent of government tobacco warehouses in Liverpool. Educated at Newport grammar school, Horne joined Newport's Congregational church, and, with the ministry in mind, went to Glasgow University (MA, 1886) and then Mansfield College, Oxford, where he took the three-year college course in theology. In 1887 he was invited to Kensington chapel, where he was ordained on 17 October 1889: determined that Horne should be its minister, Kensington waited eighteen months for him to complete his course. In August 1892 he married Katharine Maria (1870-1958), elder daughter of Sir Herbert Hardy (later first Baron) Cozens-Hardy MP, later master of the rolls. They had three sons and four daughters. 
Horne arrived at Kensington the freshest star in the nonconformist firmament; he left heir presumptive to Hugh Price Hughes and John Clifford. He galvanized his congregation, as admired for his campaigns to students or country towns as for his commemorative services. He wrote a novel, 'A Modern Heretic' (1893), as well as 'A Manual of Church Fellowship' (1893) and popular histories of the London Missionary Society (1895) and the free churches (1903). Thus he became known, and he declined repeated calls to important churches before accepting the challenge of the debt-burdened Whitefield's Tabernacle in Tottenham Court Road, London. 
Horne moved there in September 1903 to promote a mission modelled on Wesleyan central halls. The Whitefield's combination of Congregationalism and club-cum-business house for Christ, captured in its banner (a knight ascending to shining towers burdened by a broken comrade) and its motto 'No quest, no conquest', appeared to be effortless. 
In 1910, at the height of the New Theology controversy, Horne became chairman of the Congregational Union of England and Wales, his friendship with the chief protagonists preventing undue bloodletting. He was now a national figure, a passive resister, pro-Boer, and a rumbustious electioneer, fighting as a Progressive in London and being urged to fight in Birmingham. In December 1909 invitations to become their MP came from both Merthyr and Ipswich. Encouraged by friends who saw him as a nonconformist Lord Hugh Cecil (later Baron Quickswood), Horne stood for Ipswich. 
Horne sat from January 1910, the first nonconformist MP in pastoral charge since Praisegod Barebones. He gained no instant parliamentary fame, although he was a useful back-bencher; and there is some evidence that his arguments were instrumental in moving the mind of Asquith (a distant connection of Katharine Horne) towards the granting of universal suffrage. His maiden speech was on the Congo and his last was on home rule for Ireland. In between he delivered speeches on peace, colonial exploitation, and Welsh disestablishment. 
Horne, whose passion was golf, seemed forever off in a taxi to address a meeting somewhere. He attracted children and men, but women were less at ease with him. He was a poor but amusing correspondent. Oddly for so fluent a man he wrote his sermons in advance of delivery, and he also prayed with his eyes open, which added to the impact of his public prayer. In London he lived at Campden Hill Gardens and later at Ampthill Square. He built The Bluff at Sheringham and the White House at Church Stretton, whose architect, P. R. Morley Horder, collaborated with him in plans and designs for 'The Institutional Church' (1906). His youngest son was (Charles) Kenneth Horne (1907-1969), a notable radio comedian. 
By 1914 Horne was faltering, for his effortlessness was illusory. The voice which had charmed his early hearers grew hoarse. The techniques of the pulpit were too dominant for Westminster, and those of the platform worried Whitefield's. Their doubts shook him. He resigned from Whitefield's and intended to resign from parliament, and went to lecture at Yale University on 'The romance of preaching'. After Yale he travelled to Canada. He died on 2 May 1914 while standing on deck as his steamer entered Toronto harbour. His body was returned to Church Stretton for burial, where he was also commemorated by a village institute designed by Morley Horder. 
Clyde Binfield', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37570


Horne, Herbert Percy (1864-1916), architect, art collector, and art historian, was born at 10 Russell Square, London, on 18 February 1864, the son of Horace Horne (died 1894), architect, and his wife, Hannah Louisa Gibson (died 1903). After attending Miss Moore's day school in Hereford Square and Kensington grammar school, he was articled to the London architect George Vigers. 
In the early 1880s Horne began working for A. H. Mackmurdo, a very intellectual architect with strong social concerns, and in the mid-1880s they went into partnership. Thus he was probably involved from the start with the Century Guild, a loose association of architects, designers, and craftsmen set up by Mackmurdo about 1882; the artist Selwyn Image was also involved. The guild proposed to make architecture and the decorative arts 'the sphere, no longer of the tradesman, but, of the artist' (Century Guild prospectus, William Morris Gallery, K339). This was the language of William Morris and the arts and crafts movement, and Horne owed some allegiance to Morris at this stage. But he had probably already read Walter Pater's 'Studies in the History of the Renaissance', and discovered a less social, more exclusively aesthetic philosophy. 
Horne made important designs for textiles and wall-coverings for the Century Guild, but the work with which his name was most closely associated was the editing of the 'Century Guild Hobby Horse' which he shared with Mackmurdo. This finely printed quarterly magazine of art and literature ran, with gaps and a change of title, from 1884 to 1894. Its layout, from the issue of January 1888 onwards, was something of a milestone in British graphic design, presenting type, paper, and illustrations as a coherent whole. Horne, along with the engraver Emery Walker, may have been responsible for this. In the 'Hobby Horse' he published lyric poems in which the imagery is both religious and sensuous, and thoughtful, discriminating essays which manage to embrace both the rational disciplines of English classical architecture and the visionary work of William Blake. The seventeenth century was his ideal moment in English culture, Robert Herrick and Inigo Jones his heroes. Meeting him in 1888, Bernard Berenson admired the range of Horne's talents and thought he might become William Morris's successor, 'the great man of the next generation' (E. Samuels, 'Bernard Berenson', 1979, 62). 
This was Horne by day. By night he could be found in the saloon bar of The Crown in Charing Cross Road, with Lionel Johnson, Ernest Dowson, and Arthur Symons, Bohemian poets and litterateurs, or lecturing on art to the people of the East End, or escorting young dancers from the music-hall with Stewart Headlam and Selwyn Image. Headlam and Image were engaged in a peculiar Christian crusade against puritanism; Horne was perhaps naturally at home in the 'demi-monde'. He seems to have lived with his parents, from about 1880 in Bedford Park in west London, and later at 14 Cheyne Walk, Chelsea; but in the 1890s he also had chambers in King's Bench Walk, Temple, with Chippendale furniture and chiaroscuro woodcuts after Raphael and Mantegna, an aesthete's retreat. He had many mistresses during his life, but no lasting relationship, and he was, perhaps, bisexual. Dark, reticent, worldly-looking, with pale skin and disturbingly red lips, he appears in memoirs of the nineties as a figure of more weight than warmth. To Arthur Symons and Edgar Jepson he seemed cold and self-restrained; William Rothenstein noted his secretiveness. But W. B. Yeats praised his knowledge and taste; and both Arnold Dolmetsch, the pioneer of the revival of early music, and the artist Lucien Pissarro -- Frenchmen struggling to establish themselves in London -- had reason to be grateful to Horne for his early support. 
The partnership with Mackmurdo was dissolved about 1892, and most of Horne's work as an architect and designer did not extend beyond the middle of the 1890s. In the early 1890s he designed several books which combine elegance with self-conscious archaism. His most substantial building was the Chapel of the Ascension in Hyde Park Place, Bayswater Road, London, designed in 1889-90 along loosely quattrocento lines to provide wall space for the fervently evangelical paintings of Frederic Shields. (The chapel was bombed in 1940 and demolished in 1969.) These were years of transition; Horne was moving away from architecture and design towards critical writing, art-historical scholarship, and collecting and dealing in art. His imagination now dwelt more readily in fifteenth-century Italy than in seventeenth-century England. And he was seen less often in The Crown. If he made new friends, they were critics and dealers in art such as Roger Fry and Bernard Berenson. About 1894 he was asked by the publishers George Bell & Sons to write a short book on Botticelli in a popular series. He decided instead to write a long and definitive book, and as a result began to spend part of the year in Florence. 
The pull of Florence was strong. Art history took more of Horne's time in the early 1900s, and about 1904 he sold his English watercolours, including an important collection of the work of Alexander Cozens, to Edward Marsh, and moved permanently to Florence. In 1908 George Bell & Sons published his 'Alessandro Filipepi Commonly called Sandro Botticelli, Painter of Florence' in a small edition of 240 copies. It was a big, expensive book, designed by Horne with all the old, mannered elegance of the 'Hobby Horse', a narrative of Botticelli's life and work studded with lyrical descriptions of the major paintings. Like Fry, Horne was concerned with formal qualities, but also with attribution, studying characteristic details in the manner of Berenson and Giovanni Morelli. What distinguished Horne's work was the thoroughness of his archival research and the severely factual nature of his narrative. ''What is it that we really know?' is the question always in Mr. Horne's mind' wrote Roger Fry in a review ('Burlington Magazine', 13, 1908, 84). Though it was written about a hundred years ago, when English art-historical scholarship was not even in its infancy, the book survives today as one of the standard works on Botticelli, challenged only in details by subsequent research, though not always studied at first hand. For John Pope-Hennessy it was 'the best monograph in English on an Italian painter' (Pope-Hennessy, ix), while Fritz Saxl, lecturing in London in 1944 -- before the rise of Anthony Blunt -- described Horne as 'the most accomplished historian of art whom this country has ever produced' (Saxl, 332). 
Saxl spoke movingly of the passage in Horne's life from London to Florence, from a connoisseur in the mould of Walter Pater to an art historian devoted to archival research, but he suggested perhaps too movingly the single-mindedness of Horne's new life: 'Day after day he would go to the archives' (Saxl, 335). In fact, Horne lived much the same life in Florence as he had in London: he had his mistresses; he did some designing, including several distinguished typefaces; and he was busier than ever collecting and dealing in works of art, working in an edgy, unstable triangle with Roger Fry and Bernard Berenson, easing the passage of works of art from Italy to Britain and the United States. He lived by himself in lodgings on the Lung'arno degli Archibusieri, waiting to find a fine house which he could afford to buy. Eventually, in 1911, he purchased the fifteenth-century Palazzo Corsi on the corner of the via de' Benci and set about restoring it and filling it, not only with his own important collection of works of art, but also with furniture and household objects appropriate to its date. He would create a house of the quattrocento, an interior which might embody the civilizing values of the Florentine Renaissance. It would also be the last stage in the series of transformations that were his life. 
Horne did not move into the palazzo until 1915, by which time he was seriously ill and often confined to two small, plain rooms at the very top, where he was part host, part caretaker of the riches on the floors below. Aby Warburg visited him in 1915 and found him 'very ill, exceedingly noble, and divorced from everything material' (Saxl, 342). A year later, when he was clearly dying, Mary Berenson persuaded him to write a will, and he bequeathed the palazzo and its contents to the Italian state. It is now open to the public as the Museo Horne. 
Horne died, unmarried, at his palazzo in Florence, on 14 April 1916. The funeral was, according to Mary Berenson, 'rather awful, the assistance being chiefly Sods (excuse the word) and dealers,... myself and one or two Museum officials of grubby aspect' ('Mary Berenson', 208). He was buried in the Gli Allori protestant cemetery in Florence. 


@@@@@


doc= 37571


Horne, John (1848-1928), geologist, was born at Campsie, Stirlingshire, on 1 January 1848, the son of a farmer, James Horne, and his wife, Janet, 'nee' Braid. He attended Glasgow high school and Glasgow University, where he studied under Lord Kelvin, but did not graduate. He left the university at the age of nineteen to take an appointment with the geological survey, where he spent his whole working life. 
Horne's early surveying was carried out in the Silurians of the southern uplands and among the metamorphic rocks and the Old Red Sandstone country round the Moray Firth. During vacations he and other surveyors sometimes conducted independent research. For example, with his friend Benjamin Neeve Peach, Horne worked on glacial problems in northern Scotland, and he visited the Carpathians with Robert Logan Jack. Such work could be and was published outside the official channels of the survey. 
Horne's scientific partnership with Peach was one of the most successful in the annals of Scottish geology. In 1883 they were sent by the survey's director-general, Archibald Geikie, to examine the rocks of the north-west highlands, for which Geikie and Roderick Murchison had proposed a structure in the 1860s. This structure had been challenged by James Nicol, but the Murchison-Geikie view prevailed until the early 1880s when Charles Callaway and Charles Lapworth independently arrived at alternative models that were much the same. After two seasons in the field, and influenced by his findings, Peach and Horne arrived at an interpretation similar to Lapworth's, and Geikie had to make an embarrassing climb-down. The name and reputation of the survey were subsequently restored, however, by the brilliant field mapping of Peach and Horne, who worked out the complex structures in great detail. It was Horne who first changed his mind about the 'official' structure. 
Peach and Horne then had to examine the rocks of the southern uplands, where the structural interpretations offered by Geikie, partly based on the fieldwork of Jack, had also been challenged by Lapworth. In the southern uplands, as in the north-west highlands, the structures were found to be much more complex than originally realized, because of repeated reverse faulting. Two large memoirs, 'The Silurian Rocks of Britain'; volume 1, 'Scotland' (1899) and 'The Geological Structure of the North-West Highlands' (1907), gave permanent expression to the notable fieldwork of Horne and his co-workers. 
In 1901 Horne was promoted to assistant director of the geological survey with responsibility for Scotland, in which position he served with distinction until his retirement in 1911. During this period much work was done on the Scottish coalfields. After retirement Horne was active in Edinburgh intellectual life, and he collaborated with Peach on a synthetic treatise on Scottish geology. Unfortunately, this was much delayed, as a result of disagreements (at the scientific level only) between the authors as to the origin of the 'Moine Schists' of northern Scotland. The work eventually appeared posthumously in 1930. Besides tectonics, much of Horne's work was concerned with glaciation and relatively recent geological phenomena. He also published a significant paper with Edward Greenly on the metamorphic rocks of eastern Sutherland (1896). 
Horne was elected FRS (1900), and received honorary degrees from Aberdeen, St Andrews, and Edinburgh. With Peach, he was awarded the Geological Society's Murchison medal (1899), and (again with Peach) the Wollaston medal (1921). Horne presided over the geological section of the British Association (1901), and was president of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (1915-19). He was married to Anna Leyland, daughter of Henry Taylor of Pernambuco, Brazil. They had two sons and a daughter. His wife died in 1926 and Horne himself died at his home, 20 Merchiston Gardens, Edinburgh, on 30 May 1928. He was buried in Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 37572


Hornung, Ernest William (1866-1921), writer, was born on 7 June 1866 at Cleveland Villas, Marton, Middlesbrough, the eighth and last child of John Peter (formerly Johan Petrus) Hornung (1821-1886) and his wife, Harriet, 'nee' Armstrong (1824-1896). His father, of Hungarian extraction, had transferred his trading skills to England in the mid-1840s and become a wealthy iron, coal, and timber merchant. Willie, as Hornung was known in the family circle, was small, thin, and short-sighted, and suffered from severe asthma. He was immensely fond of cricket, although his skills at the game were limited. He was educated at Uppingham School for four years, but poor health obliged him to leave in 1883. Sent to New South Wales, Australia, to recuperate, he was employed as a tutor but also worked on sheep farms and gained much useful knowledge and experience. He returned to England in 1886 to find his father bankrupt and dying. 
Hornung lived for a time with his mother and sister in Twickenham, Middlesex. Abandoning hopes of being a poet, he nevertheless resolved to become a professional writer. With Australia as his favourite subject, he contributed articles and short stories to magazines and his first novel, 'A Bride from the Bush', was published in 1890. An assured, graceful comedy of manners, it was followed by seven novels with Australian settings and two collections of short stories. His books were well received and abounded in authentic Australian phraseology but freshness, adroitness of plot, and clarity of description came to be recognized as characteristic hallmarks of a Hornung novel. 
Hornung lodged in west London, became acquainted with numerous authors and artists, and lived in close proximity to Oscar Wilde for a time. Although the extent of their acquaintance is difficult to gauge, he evidently felt a close affinity with the playwright and refers to him obliquely but unmistakably in several novels. Hornung married Constance Aimee Monica Doyle (1868-1924) on 27 September 1893 and thus became the brother-in-law of Arthur Conan Doyle (1859-1930). Their relations were sometimes strained, but Conan Doyle acted as godparent to Willie and Constance's only child -- Arthur Oscar Hornung ('b'. 24 March 1895) -- and accompanied them to Rome in 1898. 
Hornung now started writing stories about A. J. Raffles -- former public schoolboy and varsity man, a cricketer by day and burglar by night. Published in 1899 as 'The Amateur Cracksman' (impishly dedicated 'To A.C.D.'), they attracted tremendous attention. Raffles is handsome, elegant, cynical, witty, and brave. He lives at The Albany, his debonair lifestyle, fondness for Sullivan cigarettes, and prowess at the wicket concealing nerves of steel. At times of crisis he copes daringly and ingeniously. His adventures are narrated by Bunny Manders, his admiring former fag and accomplice, and a homosexual relationship is hinted at. Ostensibly a collection of cautionary tales, it ends with Bunny in chains, facing eighteen months' imprisonment, and Raffles apparently drowned. But the miscreants enjoy a second innings in 'The Black Mask' (1901), although Raffles has to masquerade as an elderly invalid for much of the time and can only venture out to a very limited extent. He is killed fighting for queen and country in the South African War, thereby atoning for his sins, but the tales were so immensely popular that a third collection, 'A Thief in the Night', relating some earlier adventures (and bringing the total number of short stories to twenty-six), was published in 1905. The first two collections were meanwhile merged into one volume ('Raffles: the Amateur Cracksman') in 1906. Providing romance and excitement, and cocking a snook at authority, the books were massive best-sellers. Raffles would be portrayed on the stage by Gerald Du Maurier and on the screen by John Barrymore, Ronald Colman, and David Niven, and the stories would be a popular television series in the 1970s, but many people (including Conan Doyle) expressed grave doubt about Hornung's wisdom in writing them. In a sense, Raffles and Bunny were inverted counterparts of Holmes and Watson. But they were also fictionalized versions of Wilde and Bosie (Lord Alfred Douglas). To appreciate the clearest parallel drawn by Hornung between the man-about-town playwright who led a secret life and the man-about town cricketer who led a secret life, it must be explained that in 1820 Charles Maturin (Wilde's great-uncle) published a book called 'Melmoth the Wanderer'. When Wilde went into hiding as a semi-invalid after coming out of prison in 1897 -- fated, thereafter, to endure a shadowy existence -- he called himself Sebastian Melmoth. When Raffles went into hiding as a semi-invalid after coming back to England in 1897 -- fated, thereafter, to endure a shadowy existence -- he called himself Mr Maturin. Both Wilde and Raffles would die in 1900. 
Between 1899 and 1914 Hornung wrote 'Peccavi' (1900), an absorbing account of a disgraced clergyman's atonement, and several thrillers of varying quality -- among them 'Mr Justice Raffles' (1909), which proved a disappointment for the fans of the cracksman. He also created an Oxford-educated bushranger called Stingaree. Most of his later works showed a sad decline in quality, although 'Fathers of Men' (1912), narrating the career of a former stable boy at a fictionalized Uppingham, was regarded by many critics as a fine achievement. 'Witching Hill' (1913), about strange happenings on a new housing estate, endeavoured to break fresh ground but went almost unnoticed. Its two successors were feeble productions, bringing his novel-writing career to a lacklustre conclusion. 
Short, dark-haired, and dapper, Hornung grew a moustache in the 1890s and invariably wore large pebble glasses. He was a quiet man averse to public life, although active in the Society of Authors and a frequent speaker at his old preparatory school. A firm believer in the merits of discipline, his two greatest enthusiasms were cricket and the public school system. He warmly endorsed Sir Henry Newbolt's sentiments of 'Play up, play up, and play the game!' Cricket loomed large in his stories, and he was proud of his election to the MCC (1907); he also enjoyed lawn tennis and cycling and (later) motoring and skating. An amusing conversationalist, he joined the Reform Club in the mid-1890s and remained a member until elected to the Savile Club in 1913. 
Hornung and his wife lived in Kensington, London, for most of their married life. They took a great interest in the education of their son, Oscar, about to enter Cambridge when war broke out in August 1914, and were stunned by his death in action in July 1915. Hornung produced a little biography of him for private circulation, joined an anti-aircraft unit, and started doing voluntary YMCA work for troops home on leave. He visited the western front and his poem about a military cemetery, 'Wooden Crosses', was published in 'The Times' and subsequently as a tiny booklet in its own right. Anxious to play a more active role, he went to France for the YMCA and by Christmas 1917 was serving behind the counter in a front-line canteen in Arras. He established a lending library for the troops but in March 1918, following substantial German advances, all civilians were sent home. He wrote an account of his experiences and re-established his library in Cologne after the armistice. Returning to England in 1919, he settled down with Constance at Midway Cottage, Partridge Green, a quiet Sussex hamlet in close proximity to his brother Pitt and his family at West Grinstead. He published a slim volume of collected verse and began work on a new novel, convinced it would be the best that he had yet written. 
Held in much affection by friends and relatives, Hornung was a kind, sensitive, and conscientious man, endowed with a keen sense of humour. A fictionalized version of himself in 'Fathers of Men', 'a wild impulse burning in his eyes' (Hornung, 'Fathers of Men', 344), declares that he has not always been so 'straight' as generally supposed, but stops short of saying more. Clearly, Hornung was 'not' a sphinx without a secret. But, equally clearly, sentiments expressed by a character in 'The Camera Fiend' (1911) are his own -- 'I like a man's secrets to die with him' (Hornung, 'Camera Fiend', 268). Accompanying Constance to the south of France, he caught a chill which turned into aggravated influenza and pneumonia. He died on 22 March 1921 at St Jean de Luz and was buried in its cemetery a few feet away from his friend George Gissing. 


@@@@@


doc= 37573


Hotham, Sir Richard (1722-1799), merchant and founder of the resort of Bognor, was born in York on 5 October 1722, the youngest of five children (of whom only he and his sister survived infancy) of Joseph Hotham, gentleman, and his wife, Sarah Bradley. In 1791 Sir Richard erected a memorial to his parents at Skelton church, near York. 
Nothing is known of Hotham's early years, but at some time he established himself as a hatter and hosier in Serle Street, Lincoln's Inn, London, and later, about 1750, in the Strand, advertising his wares by circulating copper tokens in London and the provinces. About 1760 his interests extended to chartered shipping with the East India Company and he was the author of two pamphlets, 'Reflections upon East India Shipping' (1773) and 'A Candid State of Affairs Relative to the East India Shipping' (1774), which sharply criticized the company's bad management. 
In 1764 Hotham purchased Moat House Farm, Merton, which he rebuilt as Merton Place, later the home of Lord Nelson. He sold this in 1792 but retained one field of the enlarged estate, on which he built his own house, Merton Grove, at Wimbledon. He was knighted on 12 April 1769, allegedly for expressing the loyalty of Surrey to King George III during the agitation by John Wilkes, and appointed sheriff of Surrey, 1770-71. He conducted a prolonged dispute with Wimbledon vestry committee over developing a public highway to Wandsworth. 
In 1780 Hotham was elected MP for Southwark, defeating Henry Thrale and thereby provoking the contempt of Dr Samuel Johnson. He was a member of the Whig opposition and of the St Alban's tavern group, which attempted a union of parties. After narrowly losing the 1784 by-election, Hotham visited Sussex, where he embarked upon the ambitious scheme of transforming the fishing hamlet of Bognor into the select watering place of 'Hothamton'. Some 1600 acres of land were purchased and the building of several mansions and terraces commenced in January 1787. The licensing of his own private chapel was the subject of an acrimonious dispute with the vicar of South Bersted. Having created his sea-bathing resort, this enterprising and sometimes contentious individual achieved the recognition he sought: the patronage of the upper classes. Substantial debts led to the dispersal of his estates after his death, but Bognor's reputation for health and respectability continued to attract royalty and nobility. 
Hotham married on 3 December 1743, by licence at Chelsea Hospital Chapel, Frances Atkinson, of Stockton-on-Tees, with whom he had a son John, who died in 1751. She was buried on 14 August 1760 in St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, where on 7 April 1761 he married Barbara ('b'. 1733), daughter of Joseph Huddart, tradesman, and his wife Patience, 'nee' Rash. She died without issue at Brompton on 1 February 1777 and was buried a week later. Hotham had adopted, unofficially, arms similar to those of the Hotham baronetcy, to which he was not connected. George Romney painted his portrait in 1793. Romney at first declined the commission, but 'he was pleased with the cheerful adventurous disposition of that commercial Knight, whom he afterwards painted at full length in London' (Hayley, 175). Hotham died in Bognor on 13 March 1799 and was buried in the local parish churchyard of South Bersted. 
R. Iden', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37574


Howard, Charles (1630-1713), landowner and natural philosopher, was born on 13 September 1630, the fourth son in the family of nine sons and three daughters of Henry Frederick Howard, fifteenth earl of Arundel (1608-1652), and his wife, Lady Elizabeth Stuart (died 1674), daughter of Esme, earl of March and later third duke of Lennox. 
In the late 1640s and early 1650s Howard spent time in France and the Netherlands. In 1652, on the death of his father, he inherited the estate of Deepdene, near Dorking, Surrey, and thereafter he devoted much effort to its beautification, constructing an elaborate Italianate garden of the kind popular in seventeenth-century England, with terraces landscaped on a U-shaped hillside, and with appendages including a laboratory. The garden was admired by John Evelyn in 1655, while John Aubrey gave a lengthy illustrated account of the estate in his 'Perambulation of Surrey' (1673). The remains of Howard's landscaping are still to be seen at Deepdene; a further surviving relic of his horticultural activities there is provided by his herbarium, dated 1660, now at Arundel Castle. In the 1650s Howard evidently also developed an interest in industrial practices, and on 27 October 1660 he applied for a patent for a new method of tanning, the subject of a printed broadsheet, 'Brief Directions how to Tanne Leather According to a New Invention' [n.d.]. 
On 24 December 1662 Howard was elected a fellow of the Royal Society; he almost immediately began to participate in its proceedings, taking a special interest in agrarian and technological matters. Various of the committees on such topics that the society instituted in 1663 and 1664 met at his lodgings at Arundel House, notably the agricultural or georgical committee. Howard's own contribution to the latter particularly concerned kitchen gardens and winter greens. In addition, a paper by him on the cultivation of saffron was published in the society's 'Philosophical Transactions' in 1678 (a paper on his novel tanning technique had appeared there in 1674). In 1678 he applied for a patent for a new way of processing flax, which may have been related to investigations of this topic made under the society's auspices in the 1660s. 
In the early 1680s Howard was twice involved in the public arena. In 1681 he was the victim of blackmail involving Titus Oates. More importantly, Howard engaged in protracted litigation against his brother, Henry Howard, sixth duke of Norfolk, concerning the estate of Greystoke in Cumberland. His father had provided for this property to pass to Charles if his brother inherited the earldom of Arundel; but when this occurred in 1677 Henry refused to give up the estate, and Charles took the case to chancery, in 1682 obtaining a celebrated decision in his favour by Heneage Finch, first earl of Nottingham. This was challenged by his brother, however, and reversed by the lord keeper, Francis North, first Baron Guilford; the case continued after Henry's death and the succession to the dukedom of Charles's nephew, Henry. The issue was finally resolved in Charles's favour in the House of Lords in June 1685. 
In his later years Howard seems increasingly to have retired from public life. His attendance at the Royal Society dwindled after the early 1670s, and he evidently divided his time between London and Deepdene, devoting himself to horticultural, alchemical, and other pursuits. His wife, Mary, daughter of George Tattershall of Finchampstead, Berkshire, whom he had married in the early 1660s, died on 7 November 1695, and Howard himself died on 31 March 1713; both were buried in Dorking church. As laid down in the will that he had made on 29 April 1696, revising an earlier one dated 13 July 1685, in which his wife had been named as his sole heir, Howard's estates were inherited by his only surviving child, Henry Charles Howard ('b'. 18 Oct 1668); from him they descended to his son, Charles Howard, who became tenth duke of Norfolk in 1777. 
Michael Hunter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37575


Howard, David (1839-1916), chemical manufacturer, was born in Tottenham, Middlesex, the third of four sons (there were no daughters) of Robert Howard, chemical manufacturer, of Stratford, London. He studied at the Royal College of Chemistry, London, under A. W. von Hofmann, and in 1860 joined as a partner the well-established chemical manufacturing business founded by his grandfather, Luke Howard, in 1807. This firm began by manufacturing fine chemicals, especially the anti-malarial drug quinine and its derivatives, for the pharmaceutical industry. David Howard's uncle, J. E. Howard, did much original research on the chemistry of cinchona alkaloids, and he himself pursued the same line of enquiry. He became an acknowledged authority in this field, publishing a number of papers in the 'Journal of the Chemical Society' from 1871. On 4 May 1865 he married Anna Dora ('b'. 1843/4), daughter of John Jowitt of Leeds. They had two sons, both of whom became directors of Howards & Sons, the family firm. 
During the nineteenth century quinine was the firm's most profitable product, though it also manufactured many other fine chemicals, including cocaine, ether, borax, and citric acid. In 1888, the year in which the Kodak camera was launched, the Howards acquired Hopkin and Williams, of Wandsworth, who made photographic chemicals. Around the turn of the century, manufacture began to be concentrated at a new site in Ilford. In 1903 David Howard succeeded his father as chairman and there followed a period of rapid growth. In 1905 the firm acquired an interest in Bowmans of Warrington, making chemicals for the brewing industry, and in 1914 Thorium Ltd was established to make thorium nitrate for gas mantles. Two years later aspirin manufacture was commenced. 
Howard's lifelong interest in chemistry and the chemical industry was not limited to manufacture. He served on the council of the Chemical Society and was president of the Society of Chemical Industry (1886-7) and of the Institute of Chemistry (1903-6). He was much concerned with strict honesty in business transactions and was closely involved in the agitation that led to the passing of the Prevention of Corruption Act in 1900: he was subsequently chairman of the Bribery and Secret Commissions Prevention League, set up to give effect to the provisions of the act. He also served as deputy lieutenant for the county of Essex. 
Howard maintained an active interest in his company to the end of his long life. He died suddenly on 14 November 1916 at Snaresbrook railway station while travelling from his home at Devon House, Buckhurst Hill, Essex, to the Ilford factory. 
Trevor I. Williams', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37576


Howard, Louise Ernestine, Lady Howard (1880-1969), international civil servant and advocate of organic husbandry, was born on 26 December 1880 at 10 Priory Grove, Kensington, London, the youngest daughter in a family of three girls and a boy of Carl Hermann Ernst Matthaei, commission merchant, and his wife, Louise Henriette Elizabeth Sueur, musician. Of German, French, and Swiss stock, she was educated at South Hampstead high school and at Newnham College, Cambridge, where, in addition to several scholarships and prizes, she obtained firsts in both parts of the classical tripos (1903 and 1904), followed by a research fellowship. In later years she would acknowledge to Leonard and Virginia Woolf how she had been inspired at Cambridge by the teaching of the socialist and feminist Janet Case. In 1909 she became lecturer and director of studies in classics at Newnham, where she gained a reputation as a rigorous but stimulating and sympathetic teacher. In 1918 she published 'Studies in Greek Tragedy', focusing on the role of tragic accident. 
Soon after the outbreak of the First World War, Louise Matthaei testified to her idealistic internationalism in a brief essay, 'The Lover of the Nations' (1915), in which she pleaded for some attempt at a loving understanding of Germany, and for encouragement for the liberals and radicals in its universities. In a subsequent essay, 'Selfish states and moral individuals', published in the international suffragist periodical 'Ius Suffragii' on 1 October 1915, she urged the necessity for contemporaries to purge themselves of collective paranoia. Such views did not recommend themselves to a Cambridge that 'had become a hospital and a camp' (E. M. Forster, 'Goldsworthy Lowes Dickinson', 1934, 163). Anti-German feeling caused the half-German Louise Matthaei to leave her university post, and in 1918 she became an assistant to Leonard Woolf on his 'International Review'. After publishing her pro-Spartacist study 'Germany in Revolution' in 1920, she joined the agricultural section of the International Labour Organization in Geneva, having successfully sat the competitive examination. In 1924 she was promoted chief of the agricultural section and in 1935 her huge overview, 'Labour in Agriculture, an International Survey', was published by Oxford University Press. During the 1930s and 1940s she expended much energy helping German refugees from Nazism. 
In 1931 Louise Matthaei married Albert Howard (1873-1947), economic botanist to the government of India, and the widower of her elder sister Gabrielle (died 1930), who had also been a botanist. He was the son of Richard Howard, a Shropshire farmer, and was knighted for his services to the government of India in 1934. Like her sister before her, she devoted herself to furthering her husband's work. He was a passionate campaigner against the use of chemicals to restore fertility to the depleted soils of the world, being a doughty champion of organic methods instead. He argued that the plant should be studied together with its environment as a single unit and that mankind should respect the traditional wisdom gained from the trial and error of generations of peasants the world over. Together the Howards brought out 'Farming and Gardening for Health or Disease' in 1945, and in 1947 Louise Howard published 'The Earth's Green Carpet', which foreshadowed the later ecological movement's central concerns, with its chapters on 'Soil fertility and human health', 'The wheel of life', 'The growth of the plant', and 'The retreat of the forest'. Louise Howard's hope for a world without frontiers fused with her advocacy of 'a free exchange between the nations of the direct and indirect products of sunlight' (and of a fertile soil) as the birthright of all races ('Earth's Green Carpet', 9). After her husband's death in 1947 she published 'Sir Albert Howard in India' (1953) and co-founded the Albert Howard Foundation, which in 1953 merged with the Soil Association, of which she became honorary life vice-president. 
To all three of her careers, as classics don, international civil servant, and advocate of organic husbandry, Louise Matthaei Howard brought wide social sympathies, a highly cultivated mind, and a large measure of dry humour. She died at her home, 14 Blackheath Park, Blackheath, London, on 11 March 1969. She had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 37577


Howson, George (1886-1936), founder of the British Legion Poppy Factory, was born on 7 September 1886 at the rectory in Overton, Flintshire, the youngest in the family of four sons (the eldest of whom died in infancy) and one daughter of George John Howson (1854-1943), rector of Overton, and his wife, Ethel, daughter of Thomas Dealtry, vicar of Maidstone. At his christening his mother gave him a second forename, Arthur, which he did not like and never used. Descended from generations of churchmen on both sides -- his paternal grandfather, John Saul Howson, was dean of Chester; his maternal great-grandfather, Thomas Dealtry, was bishop of Madras -- Howson derived from this upbringing a strong sense of service. His eldest brother, Roger, followed his father, first to Haileybury, then to Cambridge, and later became librarian at Columbia University, New York; the next brother, Geoffrey, also went to Haileybury, and thence into the Indian army, serving in both world wars. George was educated at Loretto School, Musselburgh, and at Heriot-Watt Engineering College, Edinburgh, which formed his practical outlook. 
George Howson became assistant manager at the Melalap rubber estate in British North Borneo from 1909. As vicar of Christ Church, Salford, Howson's father had known several directors of the Manchester Rubber Co., who leased the estate and aimed to exploit the rising demand for tyres. Howson's Borneo experiences were testing. The isolation necessitated self-reliance and improvisation. Machinery had to be maintained and adapted to the task by the man on the spot. Chinese and Javanese contract labourers made a rough workforce. Howson, who confronted more than one disturbance, had little respect for the arbitrariness of his superior, a Dutchman, who was murdered in 1914. 
At that time Howson was in England on sick leave, his health weakened by malaria, dysentery, and jaundice; he was preparing to return to Borneo when European war broke out. In September he joined, as a second lieutenant, the 11th service battalion of the Hampshire regiment. He served throughout the war: at the Somme, Messines, Passchendaele, Cambrai, and in the retreat and final offensive in 1918. At Pilckem Ridge on 31 July 1917 Howson's unit was undertaking road repairs during persistent shelling. Howson, by then a captain, won the MC for 'splendid work encouraging his men and refusing to go back', despite a shrapnel wound in one arm. Howson was promoted major and remained on the army list until May 1920. On 10 September 1918 at St Paul's, Onslow Square, London, he married Jessie ('b'. 1883/4), daughter of William Gibson of Melbourne, a Scottish-Australian department-store magnate. Jessie had been studying art at Munich before the war and there met Howson's sister, Joan, also a student, who later established a stained-glass factory at Putney which provided windows for the chapter house of Westminster Abbey. Howson's marriage brought personal happiness and financial independence: Jessie inherited great wealth upon her father's death on 5 November 1918. 
After the war Howson became the founding chairman of the Disabled Society: among his co-founders was Major J. B. B. Cohen MP, who lost both legs at Ypres in 1917. They lobbied the government to improve the quality of artificial limbs, publishing their own guide. Howson's engineering expertise was invaluable; so was his recognition that the disabled faced demoralization as well as hardship unless they secured employment. Armistice day 1921 saw the first poppy day appeal, sponsored by the British Legion. Symbolizing the slaughter of the Flanders battlefields, the fabricated poppies were initially imported from France, where they were made by war victims' families. British demand outstripped French supply, and the legion was obliged to turn to domestic artificial-flower manufacturers, a trade notorious for sweated labour. Howson persuaded the legion to contract the Disabled Society to supply the 1922 armistice day appeal. Given six months to deliver, Howson wrote to his parents on 14 May 1922: 'it is a large responsibility and will be very difficult. If the experiment is successful it will be the start of an industry to employ 150 disabled men. I do not think it can be a great success but it is worth trying. I consider the attempt ought to be made if only to give the disabled their chance. I have to find a factory tomorrow and interview men. (Royal British Legion Poppy Factory archive)' Howson started production in a former collar factory off the Old Kent Road on 8 June 1922 with a workforce of five disabled men. He had not only to acquire knowledge of the artificial-flower trade but to compete, while paying full male wages, against other manufacturers who employed low-waged girls. His practical genius for ergonomics enabled him to adapt tasks to suit his workforce's restricted capacities. Over forty disabled former servicemen were employed within a month, and they produced their first million poppies within two months. By 1924, 185 people were employed, whose average disability was between 60 and 70 per cent. Preference was given to the most disabled and to those with dependants; yet the more Howson employed, the longer grew the waiting-list of applicants. In November 1924, when 27 million poppies had been produced, the prince of Wales made the first royal visit to the factory. Howson understood the value of such publicity and exploited a court connection with Lady Cynthia Colville, daughter of the marquess of Crewe, made when Howson's father was vicar of Crewe. Howson also cultivated the president of the British Legion, Earl Haig: their sons attended Stowe School, and when Haig died he left Howson his dispatch case. 
In 1925 the Disabled Society merged with the British Legion. The poppy factory became a limited company, with Howson as its chairman, moving in 1926 to new premises, an old brewery on Petersham Road, Richmond, where it remains still. The purchase was made possible only by Howson's donation of family money. The modern factory and accommodation for disabled workers and their families, built under Howson's direction, stand as monuments to his philanthropy and enterprise. This was recognized by the British Legion in 1930, when it stated that its ability to assist all former servicemen, fit as well as disabled, depended on the annual poppy day collection. Howson also struck the public imagination in 1928 by devising the field of remembrance service at Westminster Abbey, thereafter the central ceremony in the annual homage the nation pays to its war dead. Remembrance crosses and wreaths became major items in the factory's production, in addition to the poppies. 
Howson had never been in good health since Borneo. Addiction to strong Turkish cigarettes did not improve it. These he bought 10,000 at a time, and those that survived his last purchase malingered, according to his children, into the 1950s. What politics he had were of the Baldwin Conservative hue, and more by temperament than reflection. He was a straightforward patriot, who sighed when Britain went off the gold standard, believing this to mark the end of empire. Above all, he was a man of action. His deepest hatred was for indulgent idleness. The custodial use of the wealth he enjoyed through his marriage was exemplary. The man of action was also a man of natural sensitivity towards suffering. He never patronized the disabled but restored in them a zest for life and work. In public and in private Howson showed the same inventiveness and fun. At Hyde Cottage, Hambleden, his home near Henley-on-Thames, he rigged up a flying fox between trees across the lawn to amuse his children. During his final illness, on being moved from the family town house in Kensington to a nursing home, he asked the ambulance to make a detour via the poppy factory. Some 365 disabled veterans were then producing 29 million poppies annually. They evacuated the workshops to salute Howson who gathered strength to sit up and lead the singing of 'Old Soldiers Never Die' and his own version of a popular ditty, 'It Ain't Goin' to Pain No More'. He told the foreman, 'Remember, if I peg out, I go in the factory van', and as the ambulance set off, he struck up the singing of 'Are We Downhearted?' ('The Times', 30 November 1936). He died on 28 November 1936 at 5 The Boltons, South Kensington, of cancer of the pancreas; the interment at Hambleden was conducted by his father, then archdeacon and canon emeritus of Liverpool. George Howson was survived by his wife and four children, the eldest of whom, his only son, Peter ('b'. 1919), became a government minister in Australia. 


@@@@@


doc= 37578


Hubback, Eva Marian (1886-1949), social reformer and feminist, was born at 23 Oxford Square, London, on 13 April 1886, the second child and elder daughter in the family of two daughters and two sons of Sir Meyer Adam Spielman (1856-1936), stockbroker (later inspector of Home Office schools), and his wife, Gertrude Emily (1864-1949), daughter of George Raphael, banker. After St Felix School, Southwold, Eva persuaded her parents to allow her to go up to Newnham College, Cambridge, in October 1905. This was the formative time of her life intellectually -- she took a first in part two of the economics tripos in 1908 -- and emotionally, through enduring friendships formed. Her circle included Rupert Brooke, Dudley Ward, the Olivier sisters, Dorothy Layton, Ka Cox, and Shena Potter. 
In 1911, after voluntary social work for the London county council and for the suffragists, Eva Spielman married Francis William Hubback, son of John Hubback, corn merchant of Liverpool. He had been a Cambridge friend and was then lecturing in classics and economic history at Manchester University. She shared his love of strenuous holidays by the sea and in the mountains, and retained it throughout life. Two daughters and a son were born to them before Bill was killed on the western front in February 1917. Eva Hubback taught economics briefly at Newnham in 1916-17 before becoming parliamentary secretary to the suffragists, in 1919 transformed into the National Union of Societies for Equal Citizenship. She rapidly mastered the art of lobbying, working on all legislation concerning women and children, from franchise reform to divorce law. Her organizational flair complemented the charisma of Eleanor Rathbone in the campaign for family allowances. 
In 1927 Eva succeeded Barbara Wootton as principal of Morley College, which provided non-vocational adult education in Lambeth. She secured new buildings; and her recruitment of distinguished lecturers and performers from many spheres brought intellectual excitement and cultural richness. Morley became well known for its music (Sir Michael Tippett), its theatre and ballet (Rupert Doone), and its art (Eric Ravilious and Edward Bawden). Morley took up her evenings but daytime was given to voluntary work. Her initiatives led to the creation in 1930 of the Townswomen's Guilds, the founding, with Sir Ernest Simon, of the Association for Education in Citizenship (1934), and the launching of the Children's Minimum Committee (1936) to campaign for better standards of care and nutrition. She became a JP in 1939 and a London county council Labour councillor in 1946. Her work for the Eugenics Society and the Family Planning Association gave her a keen interest in population issues. Many considered she should have been a member of the royal commission on population (1946-9), but she did give evidence and published her widely read 'The Population of Britain' in 1947. Perhaps her very strengths, her enthusiasm and drive for so many causes, led to inadequate public recognition of her work. Illness and death came suddenly: it was as if, over many years, she had simply worn herself out. Eva Hubback died at Edgware General Hospital, Edgware, Middlesex, on 15 July 1949. 
Gillian Sutherland', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37579


Hughes, Elizabeth Phillips (1851-1925), college head and promoter of education in Wales, was born in Carmarthen on 22 June 1851, the eldest of three daughters and second of five children of John Hughes (1817-1897), a surgeon, and his wife, Anne (died 1900), the daughter of Philip Phillips. Elizabeth's great-grandfather Samuel Levi Phillips was one of the founders of the banks in Haverfordwest and Milford Haven, and converted from Judaism to Christianity, changing his surname from Levi to Phillips. Her father was prominent in the civic life of Carmarthen as medical officer of health, chairman of the school board and board of guardians, and president of the literary and scientific institute. Her elder brother, Hugh Price Hughes, became an eminent Methodist preacher. 
Little that is definite is known of Elizabeth's early years, except that she was said to have found learning difficult as a child and that she was sent to a private school, Hope House, in Taunton. Like her sister Frances Emily Hughes, she broke away from the family tradition of Methodism and became an Anglican. She came to the attention of Dorothea Beale, and taught at Cheltenham Ladies' College from 1877 until 1881. There she acquired the qualifications that took her in 1881 to Newnham College, Cambridge, where she got a first in the moral science tripos in 1884, and a second in history in 1885; she also helped to form the Association of Assistant Mistresses. 
On going down from Newnham, Elizabeth Hughes was appointed as the first principal of Cambridge Training College, formed by a committee including Frances Buss, Sophie Bryant, and Anne Jemima Clough with the purpose of training university women to teach in girls' secondary schools. In 1949, when the college became a recognized institution of the University of Cambridge, it was renamed Hughes Hall in her honour. The college opened with fourteen students, in cramped premises, in October 1885. Elizabeth Hughes was responsible at first for most of the teaching, and had no assistant except a resident housekeeper. By 1898 the college had been incorporated as a limited liability company; it had acquired new premises, a large lecture hall, a library of 3000 books, a museum, and a gymnasium. There was an academic staff of three besides the principal, and the nucleus of a picture collection acquired by her during her extensive travels. In her forceful evidence to the royal commission on secondary education (Bryce commission) in June 1894, she asserted the value of a theoretical knowledge of teaching and her ideal of a trained profession. She wanted men and women teachers trained together, as well as those seeking to teach in elementary and secondary schools. Her undated pamphlet 'The Education of the Majority' included a plea for middle schools for boys and girls between the ages of twelve and sixteen. 
Elizabeth Hughes was also a leading figure in education in Wales, and was an advocate of a national educational system. At the Liverpool national eisteddfod in 1884 she won a prize for her essay 'The higher education of girls in Wales', and during a conference of the Cymmrodion Society on education, in 1888, she urged that in any system of Welsh secondary education equal provision should be made for girls and boys. In 1887 she addressed the first meeting of the Association for Promoting the Education of Girls in Wales, of which she became secretary in 1898. She was the only woman member of the committee which drafted the charter for the University of Wales (1893) which, unlike Oxford and Cambridge, placed men and women on an equal footing as regards admission to degrees. In 1894, as a crown nominee, she became one of only six women on the university's court of governors. In her pamphlet 'The Educational Future of Wales' (1894) she argued for the democratic principle of education for all, and the Christian principle of excluding none on the grounds of gender or creed. 
In 1899 Elizabeth Hughes resigned as principal of the Cambridge college, pleading ill health, and went to live with her younger brother, Colonel John Arthur Hughes (1860-1938), in Barry. She had a private income. She travelled round the world, paid two visits to the United States, and for a time in 1902 taught English in Japan. She was much in demand as a speaker at educational conferences. In 1903, at the conference of the National Union of Women Workers, she criticized the exclusion of women from membership of county councils. She was subsequently co-opted to the Glamorgan county education committee. In 1914 she helped to establish the training college for women teachers in Barry; she also formed the Twentieth Century Club for women in the town. She organized the first Red Cross women's camp, and during the First World War was commandant of a Voluntary Aid Detachment hospital in Glamorgan, for which she was appointed MBE. She received an honorary LLD from the University of Wales in 1920 for her services to Welsh education. She developed an interest in Welsh literature, and took the bardic name of Merch Myrddin as a reminder of her birthplace. In spite of her fears for her health, she was remarkably energetic (she climbed the Matterhorn at the age of forty-eight). Elizabeth Hughes died at Penrheol, 2 Park Road, Barry, Glamorgan, on 19 December 1925. In appearance, she was described as 'rather short, rotund, and plain' (E. V. Hughes, 68). A medallion in Hughes Hall portrays her with short hair, an aquiline nose, and a determined chin. She was unmarried. 
G. H. L. Le May', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37580


Hughes, Thomas McKenny (1832-1917), geologist, speleologist, and archaeologist, was born in December 1832, in Aberystwyth, one of the family of three sons and five daughters of the Revd Joshua Hughes (1807-1889), afterwards bishop of St Asaph, and his wife, Margaret (died 1899), widow of Captain Gun, and daughter of Sir Thomas McKenny, first baronet, lawyer, lord mayor of Dublin, and a notable fighter for Catholic emancipation. From Llandovery College (Carmarthenshire), Hughes won a scholarship to Trinity College, Cambridge, whence he graduated BA in 1857, and proceeded MA in 1867. He had a brief career as a diplomatist in Rome in 1860-61, first as secretary to the consul, Charles Newton, and later as acting consul. Newton, who later became keeper of Greek and Roman antiquities at the British Museum, inspired in McKenny Hughes an interest in archaeology which lasted all his life. Together they carried out many archaeological expeditions in the area. 
While at Cambridge, McKenny Hughes had attended the lectures of Professor Adam Sedgwick, and he continued his geological interests with fieldwork in Italy in 1860. In 1861 he accepted an invitation from Sir Roderick Murchison to join the geological survey. Between 1861 and 1865 he developed his interests in stratigraphy of the Chalk and in Pleistocene and recent deposits in the Medway valley, and in 1865-6 he worked on drift gravels in the St Albans and Hertford areas. He was transferred to the Lake District in 1866, and worked in Westmorland, Cumberland, and the Yorkshire dales until 1873, living for much of the survey in Sedbergh. In this period, he began his work on Lower Palaeozoic stratigraphy, concentrating on the areas of Kirkby Lonsdale, Sedbergh, Dent, Shap, and Kendal, Bowness, and Tebay. During these years he was entertained by the Revd George Frederick Weston, canon of Carlisle, at Crosby Ravensworth -- he was later to marry Weston's daughter, Mary Caroline (1860-1916). 
McKenny Hughes began a regular correspondence with Sir Charles Lyell, who was then working on the revision of his 'Elements of Geology' and on 'The Student's Elements of Geology'. The debate, aroused by McKenny Hughes's fieldwork, which broke new ground in the understanding of the mountain limestone country, and in particular the connection between Upper and Lower Silurian, Coniston Flags, Upper Red Conglomerate, and Millstone Grit, was of considerable importance and caused Lyell to revise several sections. Lyell and McKenny Hughes went on many geological expeditions together, including, in 1872, an extended tour of various caves of archaeological interest in the Dordogne valley, and the famous cave at Aurignac described later by Edouard Lartet. 
McKenny Hughes and Lyell became firm friends, and Lyell subsequently supported McKenny Hughes as a candidate for the Woodwardian chair in geology at Cambridge, to which he was appointed in 1873 (succeeding Adam Sedgwick). Between them they held the chair in geology for ninety-nine years, until Hughes's death in 1917. The growth in the teaching of natural science, caused by the introduction of the Cambridge natural science tripos in 1851, had led to extensive redevelopments by the university on both the north and the south sides of Downing Street. McKenny Hughes planned a new geological museum on the south side to provide more space for the geological collections and better classrooms, and as a memorial to his predecessor. He contrived, by patience and persuasion, to plan and complete the new museum. Despite pressure from the department of zoology to merge and rearrange the exhibits McKenny Hughes succeeded in retaining the geological exhibits, with the stratigraphical arrangement which he regarded as vital to their true understanding. Over one hundred years later they remain much as he planned them. The museum was designed between 1904 and 1911 by the famous architect T. G. Jackson (1835-1924). It was opened by Edward VII and Queen Alexandra. 
During his years at Cambridge, McKenny Hughes gathered about him a staff of distinction, which included Edward Tawney, Alfred Harker, J. E. Marr, Henry Woods, F. R. C. Reed, and Gertrude L. Elles. Under his leadership the school of geology spawned a long list of well-known geologists who served in universities, geological surveys, and museums in Britain, India, South Africa, and other countries. McKenny Hughes continued his own fieldwork on Lower Palaeozoic rocks, caves, and drift deposits in Wales, and in north Yorkshire (where he took his students every year), and made many contributions to archaeology in the Cambridge area. He was elected as fellow of the Geological Society in 1862, and fellow of the Royal Society in 1889, and was made a chevalier of the Italian order of SS Maurizio e Lazzaro. In 1891 he was awarded the Lyell medal of the Geological Society. 
McKenny Hughes was a popular and gregarious man. In 1882, when university professors were permitted to marry, he returned, at the age of fifty, to Crosby Ravensworth to seek the hand of Mary Caroline Weston. She was a keen amateur archaeologist, a botanist, and a distinguished artist, and under his tuition she became a valuable geologist. Following their marriage, the couple travelled together on field excursions, and worked on the Pleistocene deposits, and on excavations in the Cambridge area. They both attended the International Geological Congress of 1891 in the USA, where they were part of a small group which visited the national parks of North America, including the Grand Canyon, into which descent was made from the north rim. Much of the journey was made on horseback, through territory still under Native American occupation. They subsequently attended the International Geological Congress in Russia in 1897, visiting sites in the Caucasus and Georgia, returning via Sevastopol, Odessa, Constantinople, Athens, Pompeii, and Rome. In the more remote areas they were accompanied by an armed guard. They had three sons: Tom, an architect (the eldest, killed in 1918 while carrying out aerial reconnaissance behind enemy lines in France), George, clerk to the Worshipful Company of Goldsmiths, and Alfred, an entomologist. McKenny Hughes died at his home, Ravensworth, Brooklands Avenue, Cambridge, on 9 June 1917, and was buried in Cambridge three days later. His published works and articles included, with J. W. Clarke, 'The Life and Letters of Adam Sedgwick' (1890) and, with Mary Caroline Hughes, 'Cambridgeshire' (1909). 


@@@@@


doc= 37581


Bury St Edmunds, Hugo of (fl. c.1130-c.1150), artist, was active at the abbey of Bury St Edmunds under abbots Anselm (1121-48) and Ording (1148-56). Documents written at the abbey record that he worked in several media. He cast a bell for the newly rebuilt abbey church. He 'painted incomparably' a large 'Bible', for which he obtained vellum from Ireland. He 'carved incomparably' a cross and figures of the Virgin and St John. For the west front of the church he made a pair of decorated bronze doors, of which it was judged that 'as he surpassed all others in other works, in this work he wonderfully surpassed himself' (Arnold, 2.289-90). Some other works may be his. A lead seal of 'c'.1150, which portrays an unnamed abbot of Bury, shows the hallmarks of his style. A wall painting of 'c'.1160 in the chapel of St Anselm at Canterbury Cathedral, which shows St Paul bitten by a viper on the island of Malta, has been attributed to Hugo, although it may be the work of a follower. 
Hugo's career at Bury probably lasted from the late 1120s until the 1150s. Talbot, the prior, and Hervey, the sacrist, who commissioned Hugo to illuminate the large 'Bible', held office between 'c'.1125 and 'c'.1136. Elias, sacrist during most of Ording's abbacy, commissioned the cross, the latest of Hugo's recorded works. The title of 'master', repeatedly applied to Hugo in the Bury 'Gesta sacristarum', implies that he was probably not a monk, but a secular artist hired by the abbey. 
Hugo's cross may be identifiable as the walrus-ivory cross at the Cloisters in New York. The first part of the 'Bible' which Hugo illuminated is preserved as MS 2, Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. This despoiled manuscript, containing the 'Old Testament' up to the book of 'Job', still preserves six large-scale pictures of biblical scenes, a decorative page of script, and forty-one decorated initials. A fragment of one leaf is all that is known to survive of the second part of the 'Bible'. 
Hugo's figure style in the 'Bible' derives from the art of the Alexis Master, who may have worked at Bury during his career. Hugo's use of double frames and panelled backgrounds also recalls that master's pictures, but Hugo's palette is richer, and his figures have greater weight and grace. His 'damp fold' technique for rendering draperies derives from Byzantine art, while the curvilinear patterns of his folds show an unprecedented degree of stylization. The style which he created strongly influenced English art for the remainder of the twelfth century, and found echoes on the continent. 
Whether or not Hugo was a wall painter, the records of his activities as carver and manuscript painter attest his versatility. His surviving work in the Bury 'Bible' shows that he was worthy of the admiration which the written sources accord him. 
Timothy Graham', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37582


Humphrys, Sir Francis Henry (1879-1971), colonial administrator and diplomatist, was born in Beatrice Street, Oswestry, Shropshire, on 24 April 1879, the eldest son of the Revd Walter Humphrys, assistant master at Oswestry grammar school, and his wife, Helen Agnes, daughter of the Revd Alfred Francis Boucher. He was educated at Shrewsbury School (1893-8), where he was captain of cricket and head of the school, and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he graduated with a third class in classical honour moderations in 1900. In the same year he joined the 2nd Worcestershire regiment as a second lieutenant and served in the South African War. 
In 1902 Humphrys began his career in the Indian political service, much of which was spent among the tribes of the North-West Frontier Province. At Peshawar on 2 April 1907 he married Gertrude Mary ('b'. 1882), daughter of Sir Harold Arthur Deane, the first chief commissioner of the North-West Frontier Province. During the First World War he was political agent with the Waziristan frontier force, and also held a temporary commission in the RAF as a pilot (1918), an experience which instilled in him a lifelong enthusiasm for flying, culminating in his being made an honorary air commodore. After the war Humphrys became political agent of the Khyber (1919), and deputy foreign secretary of the government of India (1921), a post which he held until 1922, when he was appointed British minister to Afghanistan. 
Three years before Humphrys's arrival in Kabul, King Amanullah had launched the Third Anglo-Afghan War, which ended in Afghanistan's gaining the right to control its own foreign relations. Amanullah's pursuit of his two most cherished objectives -- the modernization of his country in the shortest possible time and independence from Britain -- soon brought him into headlong conflict with Humphrys, whose previous eighteen years in India, mostly among the tribes across the frontier from Afghanistan, had not prepared him to deal with a ruler of such independence of mind. In addition Humphrys seems to have had some difficulty in adjusting to the fact that Afghanistan was no longer a dependency of British India. 
Matters came to a head in summer 1928 after Amanullah's return from an eight-month visit to Europe. He immediately announced a wide-ranging programme of social and political reforms, which appears to have aroused the wrath of the tribes. In late autumn Kabul was besieged by rebel forces, and Amanullah was eventually forced to abdicate. Early in 1929 Humphrys supervised the safe aerial evacuation of several hundred Europeans from the city (a pioneering feat of aviation in sub-zero temperatures over high mountain ranges); both he and his wife were commended for their 'courage and fortitude' in the House of Commons on 4 February, and Gertie, as she was known, was made a DBE. The extent of British involvement in the revolt remains a matter of conjecture, but Humphrys and his colleagues warmly supported the candidature of Nadir Khan, Amanullah's successor, and vigorously opposed Amanullah's attempt to stage a comeback from his retreat in Kandahar. At the time his conduct was given the mark of government approval: having already been appointed KBE in 1924 and GCVO in 1928, he was now promoted to KCMG. 
In autumn 1929 Humphrys was appointed high commissioner to the British-mandated state of Iraq. He stayed for six years, becoming the first British ambassador to the newly independent state in 1932. The decision to support Iraq's candidature for the League of Nations had been taken just before Humphrys's arrival, but some misgivings were expressed about the lack of guarantees for the Assyrian and Kurdish minorities after the transition to independence. For his part Humphrys maintained with some justice that any binding provision would not be compatible with the country's independent status. Unfortunately subsequent events, particularly the tragic fate of the Assyrians in the summer of 1933, showed the minorities' fears to have been well founded. 
In 1932 Humphrys was further promoted to GCMG, and in 1935 he left public service for a career in the City. He presided over the creation of the British Sugar Corporation, served as its chairman between 1935 and 1949, and was also chairman of a number of other companies, including the Iraq Petroleum Company (1941-50). He took a keen interest in sport throughout his life; he is said to have bowled out W. G. Grace three times while at Oxford. Photographs show a distinguished proconsular figure with a commanding presence. He died after a brief illness on 28 August 1971 at Edgecombe Nursing Home, Hamstead Marshall, near Newbury, Berkshire. He was survived by his wife, a son, and two daughters. 
Peter Sluglett', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37583


Hunt, Henry George Bonavia (1847-1917), founder of Trinity College of Music, London, was born on 30 June 1847 in Valletta, Malta, the eldest surviving son of William Hunt, former private secretary to the bishop of Jerusalem, and his second wife, Marietta Bonavia, the daughter of a Maltese doctor of Italian extraction. He was educated at King's College School, London, and studied law at the Temple in the early 1870s. On 15 August 1870 he married Louisa Madeline, the daughter of Eugene Carless, a chemical manufacturer, of Stratford. They had two sons and two daughters. On becoming choirmaster at South Hackney parish church in 1872, Hunt gathered the support of leading organists and choirmasters in London and set up an independent institution to provide better training for church musicians known as the Church Choral Society and College of Church Music. 
Meanwhile Hunt was studying music in his spare time. He matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1872 and graduated BMus in 1876. He extended the aims of the College of Church Music, and in 1875 incorporated it for the purpose 'by special licence under Act of Parliament' as Trinity College, London. He was warden from 1872 to 1892. To equip future students to sit for degrees in music made newly available at London University after 1879, he now arranged an 'arts' class at the college to prepare candidates for matriculation, while broadening the music curriculum to conform with the university's new syllabuses. Then in 1879 he sought affiliation with the University of Durham; but objections by the Royal Academy and Royal College of Music prevented his developing stronger links with either university. 
Hunt was ordained at Winchester in 1878. Following curacies at Esher in Surrey, St Philip's in Regent Street (1882-3), and St James's, Piccadilly (1884-7), he became minister of St Paul's, Kilburn, in 1887 and vicar in 1897. In all these appointments he was popular both as preacher and pastor, and became well known as a choirmaster. At St James's, Piccadilly, William Ewart Gladstone was often in the congregation, and suggested a royal chaplaincy, but by then Hunt had taken up the Kilburn appointment. He kept up his musical activities, and in 1887 graduated DMus (Trinity College, Dublin). 
Energetic and many-sided, Hunt edited or sub-edited several popular magazines and journals, including 'The Quiver' (1865-1905) and 'Cassell's Magazine' (1874-96), besides founding and, until 1876, editing a children's paper, 'Little Folks'. He also composed a little, and his works include a motet, 'The Blessed Dead', and a 'Magnificat' and 'Nunc dimittis' in B[flat]. Between 1900 and 1906 he was lecturer in music history at London University, and his 'Concise History of Music' (1878) was much used; it reached a nineteenth edition in 1915. In addition, he was chairman of Willesden school board from 1899 to 1902, and was the founder and first warden of Kilburn grammar school (1897-1904). On his induction as vicar of the parish church of St John the Evangelist, Burgess Hill, Sussex, in 1905, Hunt resigned his remaining London appointments. He died of heart failure under anaesthetic during a routine operation on 27 September 1917 in Hove. 


@@@@@


doc= 37584


Hurter, Ferdinand (1844-1898), industrial chemist, was born on 15 March 1844 in Schaffhausen, Switzerland, the only son of the two children of Tobias Hurter, bookbinder, and his wife, Anna Oechslein. He went to the 'Gymnasium' at Schaffhausen, and then, after apprenticeship with a dyer in Winterthur, he moved to Zurich to work with a silk firm. He attended the Zurich Polytechnic under G. Staedler, and then studied at Heidelberg University under R. W. Bunsen. He graduated PhD ('summa cum laude') at the age of twenty-one. 
Hurter refused a professorship in Switzerland and went instead to Manchester, armed only with a few letters of introduction. In 1867 he joined Deacon and Gaskill, alkali manufacturers at Widnes. He became chief chemist, and with Henry Deacon developed the process by which the by-product, hydrochloric acid, was converted to marketable chlorine and bleaching powder -- an important contribution to the survival of the Leblanc soda process. 
On 3 August 1871 Hurter married Hannah, daughter of R. Garnett of Farnworth; they had six children. Hurter was a pioneer in applying the disciplines of physical chemistry and thermodynamics to industrial processes. By 1880 he was recognized as an international authority on alkali manufacture. Competition from the more cost-effective ammonia-soda process forced the many Leblanc soda manufacturers to combine, and in 1891 the United Alkali Company was formed, with Hurter in charge of its research centre at Widnes. Soon afterwards he was asked to assess a new process, the production of caustic soda and chlorine by the electrolysis of brine. At a time when his health was failing, Hurter's judgement was affected by emotional loyalty to the Leblanc process, to which he had made such valuable contributions in the past, and following his advice, the company made a disastrous decision to decline the investment opportunity. 
Hurter collaborated with Vero Driffield, an engineer, in research into photography; they published many papers and were awarded the progress medal of the Royal Photographic Society in 1895. 
Hurter, who remained a Swiss citizen, was a sociable man, loved music, and played the clarinet and piano. He campaigned for free education, and for the introduction into Britain of the metric system. He was active in founding the Society of Chemical Industry, and read an important paper at the first meeting of the Liverpool section in 1881; he was its chairman in 1889-91. He died at his home, Holly Lodge, Cressington Park, Liverpool, on 12 March 1898 and was buried at Farnworth churchyard. The Hurter Laboratory of the United Alkali Company of Widnes was named in his memory, and the Society of Chemical Industry endowed the triennial Hurter memorial lecture. 
N. J. Travis', rev. ' 


