@@@@@


doc= 37585


Hutchinson, Richard (b. 1597, d. in or before 1670), colonist in America and naval administrator, was born in Alford, Lincolnshire, on 3 January 1597, the fourth child and fourth son in the family of six sons and two daughters (one of whom died young) of Edward Hutchinson, a merchant, and his wife, Susannah. Little is known of his early life. In 1621 he married Mary Hiley. They had six surviving sons and four daughters. His descendants included the earls of Donoughmore; the colonial governor and historian of Massachusetts, Thomas Hutchinson, was a collateral descendant. The commercially successful Hutchinson family emigrated to Massachusetts in 1633 and 1634. The Hutchinsons were involved in the great antinomian religious conformity controversy by which the infant colony was riven in 1636-8, Richard's sister-in-law being the religious leader Anne Hutchinson and his brother-in-law her closest ally, the Revd John Wheelwright. Richard had become a freeman -- that is, a full church member -- in 1634 but, along with others considered theologically unsound, was ordered to be disarmed in 1637, and with the rest of his family moved to the more tolerant atmosphere of Providence in 1638. He seems to have returned briefly to Massachusetts, perhaps in connection with his property there, but was back in England by 1643, in the service of the younger Sir Henry Vane, who as governor of the Massachusetts Bay colony at a precociously early age had been something of a fellow-traveller with the alleged heretics. 
Hutchinson's first official work was under the navy and customs committee of the Long Parliament; by 1645 he was acting as Vane's deputy in the very important post of navy treasurer. In view of Vane's other commitments, Hutchinson must have had practical charge of parliamentarian naval finance, although it would seem that he was only paid a salary out of the treasurer's profits. Then in 1650 Vane was voted out of the position and Hutchinson succeeded him, holding it from the beginning of 1651 until the Restoration. With the outbreak of the First Anglo-Dutch War (1652-4), the treasurership became much more lucrative, its holder being remunerated partly on a poundage basis related to naval expenditure. Hutchinson was also active in the Ironmongers' Company of London, of which he had purchased the freedom. His earlier association with Vane (who had tried to resist being replaced by his own deputy) did not prevent Hutchinson from remaining in office under the Cromwellian protectorate. Though inevitably losing office in 1660, he cleared his accounts successfully, and years later Samuel Pepys believed that the finances of the navy had never been better handled than while he was treasurer. Hutchinson seems to have resumed his part in a family transatlantic trading network; although according to tradition his losses in the great fire of London exceeded $60,000, he seems to have died a wealthy man about 1670. 
Confusingly, it was another Richard Hutchinson, of the City and later of Stepney, who was co-treasurer for sick and wounded soldiers, widows, and orphans from 1643 to 1660 and a judge for imprisoned debtors in 1653-4, and who served as co-paymaster of the navy under the treasurers in 1668-71, appearing in the latter part of Pepys's diary. The will of the former naval treasurer, the subject of this entry, was proved in April 1670, and the co-paymaster was still serving the following year and being called to account after that. 
G. E. Aylmer', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37586


Huxtable, Anthony (1808-1883), agriculturist and Church of England clergyman, was born on 30 November 1808 in Williton, Somerset, the eldest of the three sons of Anthony Huxtable, a Bristol surgeon. He was educated at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he obtained his BA in 1833. He was ordained deacon in 1833 and after being made priest in 1834 became vicar of Sutton Waldron, north-east Dorset, a small parish and one of the most backward agriculturally in that county. He was an energetic builder and engineer, and made use of innovative designs and newly available materials, such as indiarubber. He demolished the existing Saxon church and erected St Bartholomew's (1847), which was noted for the interior decorations by Owen Jones. A tractarian, whose work for the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel attracted national attention, he became archdeacon of Dorset in 1862 but resigned, through ill health, nine months later. 
Aided by the wealth of his first wife, Maria Langstone (died 1874), whom he married in 1840, and by the patronage of the first Viscount Portman, a prominent member of the Royal Agricultural Society, Huxtable rented two farms in the parish to pursue experimental scientific farming with the object of relieving the misery of farmer and labourer alike in the face of the impending repeal of the corn laws. In 1845 he published in volume six of the 'Journal of the Royal Agricultural Society of England' the results of a successful experiment in cultivating swedes to determine what would happen when the essential constituents of a plant were supplied to 'barren' land. This attracted national attention, causing Huxtable to be appointed to the chemical committee of the society, of which he was a member until 1867. His farming methods were unique in that all stock were housed and fed in sheds; there were no fences or trees. Employing a steam-engine, liquid animal and artificial manures were pumped through ceramic pipelines to delivery points in the fields and, in collaboration with the sanitation pioneer Edwin Chadwick, Huxtable also carried out experiments to test the possibilities of disposing of urban sewage by pumping it on to farm land. In 1845 Huxtable passed liquid farm manure through a bed of Dorset loam, the emerging liquid being clear and free of any offensive smell. This made a fundamental contribution to knowledge of the phenomenon of absorption and led to changes in the composition of artificial manures. It also inspired the Revd Henry Moule of Dorchester to design his patent earth closet, which enjoyed great commercial success. 
Huxtable was an effective propagandist, by the spoken or written word, for his innovative ideas for recycling waste materials and conserving resources; his principal publication, 'The 'Present Prices'' (1850), went through seven editions. Although his farms attracted many distinguished visitors, including Sir Robert Peel, he attracted great controversy, both for his support of the Dorset farm labourers and for his novel practices. This probably exacerbated his tendency to long periods of nervous exhaustion, which caused his absence from his parish while he recovered. 
Huxtable's second marriage, in 1875, was to a Yorkshire widow, Susannah Maria Gott, who outlived him. There were no children of either marriage. He died at St Leonards, Sussex, on 12 December 1883 and was buried in Sutton Waldron. 
Edward R. Ward', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37587


Inge, Sir William (c.1260-1322), lawyer and justice, was probably born in or before 1260 at or near Dunstable, Bedfordshire, the son of Thomas Inge of Dunstable, a minor local landowner active in local administration. Between 1281 and 1285 he acted as the attorney of a number of different litigants in the common bench and the exchequer, perhaps while studying law as an apprentice of the king's court. He was retained by the king as one of his serjeants between 1287 and 1293, and is to be found acting for him on the Gloucestershire eyre of 1287 and on the northern circuit eyres of 1292-3, as well as in the common bench and in the exchequer. Surviving reports show that he also acted for other litigants during the same period, both in the common bench and on eyres. In 1293 he became a regular assize justice but continued to act for private clients in the common bench until the court moved to York in 1298. By 5 April 1300 he had been knighted. 
In 1303 Inge accompanied Edward I to Scotland, and in 1305, and again in 1307, was appointed a justice of one of the trailbaston circuits. By 1303 he had also entered the service of the future Edward II, and become one of his closest and most trusted advisers. In 1305 it was only Edward's intervention that prevented him being appointed a justice in Scotland. Inge remained close to Edward II after his accession, being retained as part of the king's household, and in 1310-11 he was sent to Gascony as one of the English commissioners at the Process of Perigueux, which was intended to resolve Anglo-French differences. In Hilary term 1313 he was appointed a justice of the common bench and served in that capacity for just over three years. 
When Roger Brabazon (died 1317) retired from the chief justiceship of king's bench, Inge replaced him (at Easter term 1316). But serious allegations had already been made against him by this date. It was claimed that he had purchased the Surrey manor of Woodmansterne from its tenant while litigation about the manor was pending in the common bench before him and his colleagues. This allegation seems never to have been proved, but, in connected proceedings brought against the sheriff of Surrey, a jury found that Inge had borrowed the plaintiff's original writ from the sheriff and tampered with it. Inge was not himself a party to the latter proceedings, and the verdict came only after his dismissal from the chief justiceship (in June 1317), but it seems probable that the dismissal was connected with these charges. Inge took no further part in public life. 
Inge's first wife, Margery (1277-1310/11) (whom he married between 1298 and 1300), was one of four daughters and coheirs of Henry Grapinel, a landowner in Essex and Sussex. His second wife, Isolda (whom he married between November 1311 and March 1312), was the widow of Urian de Sancto Petro. His only surviving child at the time of his death was Joan, the daughter of his first marriage, who had married Eon la Zouche. He died shortly before 10 May 1322. 
Paul Brand', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37588


Norwich, Isaac of (c.1170-1235/6), moneylender and patron of rabbinic scholarship, was the only known son of Eliab (or Jurnet) of Norwich ('c'.1130-1197) and his wife, Muriel. His father, also a moneylender and scholarly patron, was the dominant figure in the twelfth-century Jewish community of Norwich, and was one of the half-dozen or so wealthiest Jews in England. Although Eliab suffered serious losses in 1177, in a failed consortium to lend money to the crown, and was briefly exiled from England during the 1180s, he returned from the continent in 1186 on promise of a fine of 2000 marks, and resided thereafter in Norwich until his death in 1197. 
Isaac of Norwich first appears in the records in 1194, as a partner with his father and mother in a small loan contract. Three years later, on his father's death, he paid a fine of 1000 marks to accede as heir to his father's estate. He appears to have been immediately successful. In 1199 his personal wealth amounted to more than 10 per cent of the total taxable wealth of the English Jewish community. His financial transactions extended throughout the eastern counties, and although the bulk of his fortune almost certainly came from moneylending, his six houses in Bishop's Lynn and the quay attached to his own stone house in Norwich suggest that he also had interests in trade. 
Like his father, Isaac became the leading figure in the Jewish community of Norwich, carrying on a family tradition of financial support for rabbinical study, which earned Eliab, Isaac, and Isaac's own sons Moses and Samuel the honorific title 'HaNadib' ('the Generous'). Under the family's patronage Norwich became one of the two leading centres in England for Hebrew learning in the half-century after 1190. Isaac and Samuel may have been rabbinical teachers themselves, as well as patrons of other teachers. 
Along with other prominent English Jews, in 1210 Isaac fell victim to the wholesale confiscations and imprisonments ordered by King John in connection with the Bristol tallage of that year. Isaac avoided execution by promising the king a fine of 10,000 marks, and in 1213 was transferred from Bristol to the Tower of London. But he may not have been released from the Tower until 1217, when his remaining bonds were returned to him, and he and the rest of the Jews of Norwich were given letters of royal protection. Even so, Isaac continued to come under pressure in the early years of Henry III's reign, especially from the papal legate, Pandulf (died 1226). In his last years he featured in a number of important legal cases, and also became the subject of a famous caricature drawn on a tallage roll of 1233. A rumour of his death circulated in 1230, but in fact he did not die until late 1235 or 1236. 
Isaac had two sons, Moses ('b'. before 1200) and Samuel ('b'. before 1204), and a sister, Margalita, who was active on her own account in 1201. Moses moved to London, but was dead by October 1238. Samuel, Isaac's second son, thereupon became the head of the family and the leader of the Norwich Jewish community. Moses had three sons: Abraham, who returned to London in 1252 or early 1253 but died in 1255; Isaac, who converted to Christianity in 1253 after being accused of coin-clipping; and Eliab (or Jurnet), who was also dead by 1255. All were frequent business partners with their uncle Samuel. Samuel himself had no known children, however, and with his death in 1273 the line of Eliab and Isaac of Norwich came to an end. 
Robert C. Stacey', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37589


Jackson, Humphrey (bap. 1721, d. 1801), chemist and inventor, who was baptized at Hinderwell, Yorkshire, on 28 February 1721, was the son of Thomas Jackson, later of Stockton-on-Tees, co. Durham. He was apprenticed in 1735 to a Stockton apothecary and surgeon. He later moved to London, where he set up as a chemist in Upper East Smithfield during 1743. 'Reflexions Concerning the Virtues of Tar Water' (1744), his first book, cogently argued the case for his product over the well-known medicine of George Berkeley, bishop of Cloyne. His chemical skill was further evidenced by experimental findings in 1751 in support of the famous fever powder patented by Dr Robert James and by his patent specification of 1753 (no. 680) for a very successful cordial bitter tincture. Jackson's next work, 'An Essay on Bread' (1758), defended bakers and millers against allegations concerning adulteration of bread levelled by Peter Markham and James Manning; it was the first reliable book on the chemical detection of food adulteration. In 1768 Jackson patented a method for hardening and preserving wood (no. 910), which was approved by the College of Physicians and effectively applied to several warships. It was publicized by an eight-page advertisement (1770) that described thirty-one items tested at his Great Tower Hill works, ranging from brewing implements, building components, and wooden pipes for London waterworks to twenty-five new standing gun carriages treated for the Tower of London garrison. 
Jackson obtained another patent in 1760 (no. 749), following a journey to Russia, for manufacturing isinglass from British materials at his own factory, which employed fifteen workmen. His book, 'An Essay on British Isinglass' (1765), graphically described his chemical method for producing isinglass from the air bladders of certain fishes. The Society of Arts, of which he became a member in 1760, serving on its chemistry and trade committees (1760-61), awarded him a premium in 1766 for importing American sturgeon and he informed Benjamin Franklin about a technique for making glue from this fish. Elected FRS on 19 November 1772, Jackson contributed a paper to the 'Philosophical Transactions' for 1773, stressing that over forty tons of isinglass had been processed from fish in the Great Lakes which resembled those imported expensively from Russia. Captain James Cook, on completing his second global circumnavigation, highly praised Jackson's beer concentrate, which had been used for its antiscorbutic qualities. The 'Resolution' and the 'Discovery' also carried it on Cook's last voyage. 
Jackson married three times; first, in 1743, to Elizabeth Savory (died 1748). His second marriage, in 1763, was to Mary or Maria, daughter of Benjamin Martin, public lecturer and instrument maker. She died at their home in Woolwich Common in 1784. His third marriage was to Jane (probably Chamberlain), a widow. Nothing is known of any children. 
Jackson received an MD from Aberdeen University in 1761. A freemason, he wrote a Masonic ode and song, and was treasurer of the Soul Captain's Lodge near Hermitage Bridge, at London Docks, in the 1750s. He was a JP for the Tower of London Liberty (1772), Kent (1780), and Middlesex (1783), and wrote on 27 March 1791 to William Pitt, the prime minister, detailing improvements in the impress system. When he died in Tottenham on 29 June 1801, Jackson was the owner of property there and at Woolwich, Wapping, and Tower Street. 


@@@@@


doc= 37590


Jackson, Joseph Devonsher (1783-1857), judge and politician, was born in Cork on 23 June 1783, the eldest son of Strettel Jackson of Peterborough, Cork, a prosperous carrier, and his wife, Mary Cossens. His father was a descendant of an English family which had settled in Ireland in the early seventeenth century. Jackson's early education in Cork was at the hands of the Revd Mr Lee, an evangelical clergyman of the Church of Ireland. After matriculating at Trinity College, Dublin, in 1800, the protestant tradition of his boyhood was reinforced by his tutor Arthur H. Kenney, later rector of St Olave's, Southwark. He graduated BA with honours in 1806. In 1832 he proceeded AM and in 1835 became a Cambridge MA. 
Jackson entered as a student of law in the King's Inns, Dublin, in 1803 and in the Middle Temple, London, the following year. In 1806 he was called to the Irish bar, and he took silk twenty years later. Initially attached to the Munster circuit, he was known as a zealous advocate and 'an amiable man, of courteous manners, and prepossessing appearance, with a fine forensic countenance' (Madden, 260). Although he lacked the wit, pathos, or imagination traditionally associated with distinguished advocates of the Irish bar, his scrupulous fair dealing and evangelical propensities led Hugh Percy, third duke of Northumberland, to appoint him chairman of the Londonderry quarter sessions in 1830. Service as a private in Westropp's grenadiers and membership of Hardinge's Orange lodge assured his acceptance by the Conservative establishment. 
In 1811 Jackson married Sarah Lucinda (died 1858), ninth daughter of Benjamin Clarke of Cullenswood, Dublin. In 1812 he was co-opted to the committee of the Kildare Place Society, established in 1811, where, as secretary, he strengthened the protestant influence. He gave detailed evidence in 1824-5 before the commissioners of the Irish education inquiry. 
The borough of Bandon was reputed to have the most sectarian electorate in co. Cork, and in 1835 Jackson contested it as a Conservative, winning easily then and again in 1837. In 1841 he was returned unopposed for the borough, and a year later he became one of the members for Dublin University. Success in politics led to professional advancement. In 1835 he was the third serjeant-at-law in Ireland and, shortly afterwards, second serjeant. In 1841 he was named solicitor-general and, on the death of John Leslie Foster in 1842, justice of the common pleas. He accepted the Chiltern Hundreds in September 1842. 
Variously dubbed a 'biblical barrister' and a 'scriptural tory', Jackson's parliamentary interventions were largely confined to representing Irish loyalist interests. In 1837 he spoke for nearly four hours against the introduction of the 'Irish Corporation Reform Bill', which did not pass until 1840. Thoughtful and trenchant, his prolix arguments could often be tiresome, although Thomas Babington Macaulay thought his attack on the national board system, in the first debate on the issue when Sir Robert Peel came to power in 1841, led to 'the very best parliamentary set-to between the secretary and the solicitor-general for Ireland which has ever been witnessed'. 
Jackson died at his home, Sutton House, Howth, co. Dublin, on 20 December 1857 and was interred there in St Fintan's cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 37591


Jackson, Ralph Ward (1806-1880), railway promoter and entrepreneur, was born on 7 June 1806 at Normanby Hall, near Middlesbrough, the third in the family of eight sons and one daughter of William Ward Jackson of Normanby Hall, and his wife, Susanna Louisa, daughter of E. Martin Atkins, esquire of Kingston Lisle, Berkshire. Educated at Rugby School, Jackson served articles at Preston, Lancashire. Living at Greatham Hall, Jackson practised as a solicitor in Stockton-on-Tees. Commercial speculation rather than the law fired his imagination. Exploitation of the Auckland coalfields entered a new era in 1825 with the Darlington-Stockton railway, soon extended closer to the sea at Middlesbrough, where a town arose with startling suddenness. The promoters, led by the Pease family (Edward Pease and his sons Henry and Joseph), saw Middlesbrough taking the lead over both Tyne and Wear. Their vision sparked rival ambitions in Jackson, subsequently dubbed 'a bottomless man' by Edward Pease (diary, 27 March 1857). 
Jackson's counter-strategy emerged in the Stockton and Hartlepool Railway Company (1836) and Stockton and Durham County Bank (1838). The bank was merely a device to raise capital for railway and port construction and was transferred to the National Provincial after Jackson obtained parliamentary authority to build the West Hartlepool harbour and dock in 1844. Hartlepool then comprised 6000 people-no longer a simple fishing village since dock facilities had recently brought it into the coal-export and timber-import trades; but Jackson's sights were set on the adjacent hamlet of Stranton, with a population of 350. West Hartlepool grew there. Jackson liked to recall how he chased a rabbit as the first sod was cut to begin a dock (completed in 1847). Two more docks were added in 1852 and 1856. Jackson conceived that West Hartlepool would ultimately become the equivalent of the port of Liverpool on the east coast. He planned a trans-Pennine route to link the London and North Western Railway, and he promoted bills to eclipse the Pease interest in the north-east, where a struggle to control the movement of Cleveland ironstone intensified the original rivalry over coalfields. 
Jackson's company became overextended financially, having invested in steamships and collieries as well as docks and railways. Malpractice and recklessness there were, but it would be wrong to ascribe Jackson's errors to fraudulent intent for personal profit. The agent of his downfall through protracted litigation, one Benjamin Coleman, was not motivated solely by shareholder's vigilance: he was embittered against Jackson's family and may even have been sponsored by rival railway interests, perhaps the North Eastern which subsequently absorbed Jackson's Hartlepool Company. 
In 1861 the population of Stranton-West Hartlepool was 13,600. Separated for local government purposes, the Hartlepools were united as one parliamentary constituency in 1868. Jackson became the first MP by a majority of three votes. An election petition was initiated but withdrawn. His zeal for West Hartlepool had aroused antipathies, for he was apt to think that his personal preferences and the public good were synonymous. An unedifying dispute with the incumbent of Christ Church (a church built by his company) over control of local schools showed his uncompromising bent. Jackson's family tradition in politics was whig-Liberal; now he styled himself a Conservative opposed to all rash and hasty innovations. He voted against church disestablishment in Ireland, also against the secret ballot, though for temperance reform. In parliament Jackson's principal interest was not party politics, rather the promotion of West Hartlepool. He spoke rarely, his chief intervention being in the harbours of refuge debates, to solicit government money for docks improvements. 
Jackson was not re-elected in 1874. His commercial reputation was now in shade, but Jackson was hatching speculative schemes to the last. He was never a utopian communitarian like Robert Owen. His founding of a town was the by-product of his business. Nevertheless, community building increasingly occupied his time and money, and his lasting reputation is that of an urban pioneer, the first and foremost West Hartlepool patriot. 
In 1829 Jackson married Susanna (died 1865), daughter of Charles Swainson of Cooper Hill, Lancashire. They had one son. Jackson died on 6 August 1880 in London and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 
Philip Waller', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37592


Jaggard, William (c.1568-1623), printer and bookseller, was the son of John Jaggard, a London barber-surgeon, and his wife, Bridget. On 20 August 1584 he was apprenticed for eight years from 29 September to the distinguished printer Henry Denham; his brother John was apprenticed to another printer, Richard Tottel, on 29 October. William became a freeman of the Stationers' Company on 6 December 1591. He set up shop as a publisher and on 26 August 1594 married Jayne (or Jane) Uriane 
(or Vriane; died 1625)
; a son, Isaac, was baptized on 19 April 1595; three other children, Thomas, Joan, and Alice, figure in his will. 
Jaggard's first book was registered with the Stationers' Company on 4 March 1595; he rapidly became a successful businessman. Ill feeling followed his publication in 1599 of 'The Passionate Pilgrim'. Ascribed to Shakespeare, this poetical anthology includes versions of sonnets 138 and 144, three extracts from 'Love's Labour's Lost', and other short poems, some by writers other than Shakespeare, others of unknown authorship. In a third edition of 1612 Jaggard added without authority nine poems from 'Troia Britannica' (1609) by Thomas Heywood. Heywood, in his 'Apology for Actors' (1612), protested and declared Shakespeare 'much offended with M. 'Iaggard' (that altogether unknowne to him) presumed to make so bold with his name' (sig. G4'r'- 'v'). The original title-page was replaced with one that did not mention Shakespeare's name. 
Jaggard's career prospered. He seems to have taken at least nine apprentices, the last in November 1622; one, bound in 1610, was John Shakespeare, son of a Warwick butcher. In 1601 Jaggard collaborated with Thomas Pavier to publish the only book of his own composition, a summary history of the lord mayors of London from Elizabeth's accession until 1601. In the following year he received permission to print playbills (none survive) for Worcester's Men, paying a royalty of 4's'. a month to James Roberts, who held the monopoly. In 1604 Jaggard received a lucrative royal commission to print the ten commandments for use in churches throughout the country. In the same year he set up a small printing house of his own in the Barbican. About this time he entered into partnership with Roberts, and two years later he bought and moved into Roberts's larger establishment when Roberts retired from active trade. On 17 December 1610 Jaggard became official printer to the City of London. About 1612 he became blind as a result of syphilis; an account of his treatment is preserved in the British Library (BL, Sloane MS 640). On 23 June 1613 Isaac Jaggard was admitted freeman of the company by patrimony, doubtless to help his father. 
In 1619 Jaggard was hired by Pavier (probably in association with Nathaniel Butter and Arthur Johnson) to print a quarto collection of ten plays by and attributed to Shakespeare. He had printed four volumes before the lord chamberlain attempted to stop the venture by ordering the Stationers' Company that no plays belonging to the King's Men were to be printed or reprinted without permission. Pavier and his associates, however, persuaded Jaggard to print the remaining plays with false dates so that they could be passed off as remainders of earlier editions. This fraud caused much editorial confusion until it was exposed as the result of bibliographical detective work by A. W. Pollard, Sir W. W. Greg, and others. 
Jaggard is best remembered as printer of the first folio of Shakespeare; printing was completed in late October or early November of 1623, about the time of his death. The colophon names him among those at whose charges the volume was printed, but the title-page (probably printed last) names Isaac, who on 4 November became printer to the City of London 'in the place of William Jaggard his late Father deceased' (CLRO, letter book JJ, fol. 51). Jaggard's will, made on 28 March 1623, appointed his wife, Jane, as executor and Thomas Pavier as one of the overseers of his substantial estate. It was proved on 17 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 37593


St George, James (d. 1306x9), military engineer, is first recorded as Master James, son of Master John 'cementarius', working in 1261 with his father on the castle of Yverdon for Count Peter of Savoy, earl of Richmond (died 1268); by 1265 he was chief master mason. In the 1260s and 1270s he was concerned with works throughout Savoy, notably Aosta, Chillon, and St Georges-d'Esperanche. He worked with the count's military engineer, Sir John de Masoz, knighted by Henry III after the siege of Benauges (1254). It is probable that James, and the brothers Tassin and Giles of St George, masons named in the building accounts of Saxon (Valais) in 1279/80, all sprang from the well-authenticated 'de sancto Jorio' family, originating at St Jeoire in Faucigny. But it is also possible that the surname by which he was known in England reflects his connection with the building of Count Philip of Savoy's castle of St Georges in the Viennois, which was nearing completion when Philip, who had succeeded his brother Count Peter in 1268, did homage there to his great-nephew, the as yet uncrowned Edward I, during Edward's return from crusade in 1273. Works were then also proceeding within a day's ride of St Georges at Voiron, La Cote, and St Laurent-du-Pont, visits to which might have occasioned Edward's first acquaintance with James's person and capabilities. Only for St Laurent, where the castle itself has disappeared, is there a substantial works account; in it 'tasks' are assigned 'per dominum J de Masout et Magistrum Jacobum' in the same terms as they are later authorized 'per dominum J de Bonovillario [deputy of Sir Otto Grandson] et Magistrum Jacobum' at Conwy. 
James St George first appears in English records in March 1278, when as Master James 'ingeniator' he travelled to Wales 'to ordain the works of the castles there' ('History of the King's Works', 1.320). He thus assumed control of the works begun in July 1277, probably under the ageing Master Bertram 'ingeniator' (died 1284), at Flint, Rhuddlan, Ruthin, Aberystwyth, and Builth, at each of which the ground plan had been determined and building started several months before his arrival. By the outbreak of the second Welsh war in March 1282, Rhuddlan was complete and the others well advanced. St George proceeded to Aberystwyth 'ad castrum regis ibidem construendum'; in July 1282 he ordered the demolition of the old keep at Hope. Later, as James 'machinator', he was involved with works at Ruthin and Denbigh. In January 1283 he was at the siege of the castle of Dolwyddelan, whose nodal position made its capture crucial to the English conquest of Snowdonia. 
The programme of castle building which St George now directed as 'master of the king's works in Wales' marked the climax of his career. The castle and walled town of Conwy, adjudged together to be 'incomparably the most magnificent of Edward I's Welsh fortresses' (Taylor, 'Edward I's castle building', 38), were begun in March 1283 and virtually completed by late 1287. Harlech, started in May 1283, was finished in 1289. Caernarfon was begun in June, but not completed in St George's lifetime. With its polygonal towers and decorative banding in the imperial style of Constantinople, Caernarfon was envisaged as the state capital of a future dynasty of English princes of Wales, and was designed on an altogether grander scale than its contemporaries. Its creation has been attributed to Walter of Hereford, builder of Edward's abbey of Vale Royal, who took charge when construction was resumed after damage by the Welsh in 1294. Nowhere, however, is Walter named in connection with the initial, creative campaign of the 1280s, when Caernarfon was conceived as the visible embodiment of Macsen Wledig's dream of 'a mighty castle, the fairest man ever saw' ('Mabinogion', 1.137). Realization of so special an assignment would surely be entrusted to the king's chief military architect. 
In December 1280 St George was granted letters of protection for seven years, probably the estimated time for completing the works he took over in 1278. In 1284 his responsibility for the operations launched a year earlier was put on a permanent footing with the grant of 3's'. a day for life and a future widow's pension of 1's'. 6died a day for his wife, Ambrosia, should she survive him. There is no further mention of Ambrosia in the records and possibly she is to be identified with the 'Dame Ambroise de Saint-Joire' named in 1288 among the first entrants to the Carthusian nunnery of Melan (Haute-Savoie), founded in 1282 by Beatrice de Faucigny. St George himself was appointed in 1290 to the constableship of his newly completed Harlech Castle. 
The defeat of the Welsh rising of 1294 led to the inception in 1295 of St George's last great commission, Beaumaris Castle in Anglesey, Britain's most perfect example of the concentric castle plan. The first eighteen months saw phenomenal progress, with a labour force of 3000 men, 400 of them masons, and expenditure of over $10,000. Thereafter the more urgent demands of Gascony and Scotland reduced the average yearly outlay to a mere $300. From 1298 to 1305 St George was with the king in Scotland, where he executed works at Linlithgow and Kildrummy castles; in 1304 he was probably directing engineer of the siege works at Stirling. He resumed work at Beaumaris in 1306 but died before May 1309. 
On any reckoning St George's achievement in the field of medieval military architecture was outstanding. His was the genius that enabled Edward I to raise great fortresses by threes and fours in the space of five or six summers. Unstereotyped, of striking beauty and enduring strength, the north Wales castles have survived as a unique and lasting monument to their age and their creator. 


@@@@@


doc= 37594


Jane, (John) Frederick Thomas (1865-1916), author, journalist, and illustrator, was born in Richmond, Surrey, on 6 August 1865, the eldest of four sons and three daughters of the Revd John Jane, later vicar of Upottery, Devon, and his wife, Caroline, daughter of the Revd James Frederick Todd, vicar of Liskeard. The family had a nautical ancestry: in the sixteenth century the merchant John Jane sailed with the navigator John Davis to the Arctic; Captain Henry Jane commanded HMS 'Seahorse' during the war of 1739-48. 
At Exeter School, Jane demonstrated a liking for practical jokes that was to endure for his lifetime, and also a socially unpopular talent for manufacturing explosives. His father intended him for an army career, but that and a project for farming in the colonies came to nothing; by 1885 he was living hand to mouth in Holborn as an illustrator and journalist. 
In August 1889 Jane was commissioned by 'Pictorial World' to cover a month of naval manoeuvres, preceded by an inspection of the combined fleets at Spithead by the German emperor Wilhelm II. Jane was able to sketch nearly one hundred ships, as well as paying off his mess bill by painting decorative panels in his host ship's wardroom. From then onwards, 'Fred. T. Jane' became a recognized signature on bold black and white illustrations in a number of books and magazines; so realistic was the picture in the 'Illustrated London News' of the torpedoing of the ironclad 'Blanco Encalada' in the Chilean Revolutionary War of 1891 that a legend grew that Jane had been present at the action. 
Aircraft, television, and laser holograms were recognizably foreshadowed in a series of Jane's drawings, 'Guesses at Futurity', in the 'Pall Mall Magazine', 1894-5. Jane became a successful novelist with 'Blake of the 'Rattlesnake'' (1895), followed by science-fiction titles 'The Incubated Girl' (1896), 'To Venus in Five Seconds' (1897), and 'The Violet Flame' (1899), which featured an armament with the characteristics of a nuclear weapon. Jane was married twice: first, in 1892, to Alice ('c'.1870-1908), daughter of Hamilton Beattie; they had a daughter. In 1909 he married Edith Frances Muriel ('b'. 1882), daughter of Lieutenant Henry Chase Carre RN, and the marriage produced another daughter. 
As early as 1882, inspired by the Mediterranean Fleet's bombardment of Alexandria, Jane had conceived the idea of a warship sketchbook, provisionally entitled 'Ironclads of the world'. This bore fruit in 1898 with the publication of 'Jane's All the World's Fighting Ships' (shortened to 'Jane's Fighting Ships' in 1905), with details of all major surface warships; this was to be used as a ship recognition and intelligence aid by all sides in many future naval conflicts. The edition of 1903 contained an article, ''Invincible': an ideal warship for the British navy', by Vittorio Cuniberti, which foreshadowed the main features of the dreadnought class of battleships. In 1909 the first edition was published of what became 'Jane's All the World's Aircraft'. Jane is credited with inventing the rules of a naval war game complete with scale models of warships. 
In 1906 Jane stood unsuccessfully as an independent 'navy before party' parliamentary candidate for Portsmouth. The years 1908-9 were dramatic: on the look-out for spies, Jane abducted a German who seemed to be acting suspiciously in Portsmouth, and deposited him in the duke of Bedford's animal park at Woburn. The publicity generated by this exploit produced letters denouncing other suspected spies which Jane handed to the War Office, thus assisting what was to become MI5. As a practical joke, he kidnapped by car the socialist MP Victor Grayson, who was due to address a Portsmouth meeting; a similar plan to kidnap Winston Churchill failed when travel arrangements were altered. 
To his chagrin, Jane was not appointed to any official position during the First World War, and had to be content with privately supporting naval recruiting and propaganda. Fred T. Jane died of a heart attack following severe influenza at 26 Clarence Esplanade, Southsea, on 8 March 1916, and was buried at Highland Road cemetery, Southsea, two days later. Publications carrying his name still provide authoritative data on the production of military equipment throughout the world. The word 'Jane' features in the 'Collins English Dictionary' as a noun indicating completeness and reliability. 
Robert Hutchinson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37595


Jardine, William (1784-1843), physician and merchant, was born on 24 February 1784 at Broadholm, a farm near Lochmaben, Dumfriesshire, the third son and the sixth of seven children of Andrew Jardine, farmer, and Elizabeth Johnstone. Educated in medicine at the University of Edinburgh, he obtained a diploma from the Royal College of Surgeons, Edinburgh, in March 1802. 
In that same month Jardine secured a position with the East India Company as ship's surgeon's mate aboard the 'Brunswick', bound for India. Captured by the French and shipwrecked in 1805, Jardine was repatriated that autumn and returned to the East India Company's service as ship's surgeon. 'Privilege tonnage', a benefit accorded ships' officers, allowed him a measure of cargo space for private trade. When profits from such trade far surpassed his wages as ship's surgeon, his career interests shifted. 
Returning from Canton (Guangzhou) in May 1817, Jardine gave up medicine for commerce, which he learned from Thomas Weeding, a London merchant and East India Company agent. He sailed for Bombay in 1818, and in succeeding years travelled between Bombay and Canton, as supercargo on the 'Sarah', of which he was co-owner. At Bombay in 1820, he met a fellow Scot, James Matheson, who was speculating in the opium trade. In time their names would identify the biggest British trading concern in the Far East. 
From 1820 until 1839 Jardine was resident in China. At Canton his early success, as commercial agent for opium merchants in India, led to his admission in 1825 as a full partner of Magniac & Co., and by 1826 he was controlling that firm's Canton operations. Shortly thereafter, Matheson joined him, and in 1832 Magniac & Co. was reconstituted as Jardine, Matheson & Co. 
At Canton, foreign merchants were required to conduct business only through the small group of commercial intermediaries known as the Hong merchants. However, by 1834 Jardine, Matheson & Co., known as 'the Princely Hong', was regularly operating beyond the traditional British trade with the Hong merchants of Canton, speculating in smuggled opium and piece goods. Their own fleet of ships, flying the company flag of a white diagonal cross on a blue field (Scotland's cross of St Andrew with colours reversed), were the fastest ocean-going vessels in the Far East. 
By the mid-1830s, William Jardine was the most influential British figure at Canton and was already a celebrated name in the commercial world of London. Yet he was by then past fifty and anxious to retire from China. However, his return to England was delayed for several years because of his worries about the unstable debt situation among the Hong merchants, as he felt obliged to keep close watch on the safety of his firm's assets. 
Peking ordered the opium importers to be expelled in 1836, but Jardine refused to leave. The pressure intensified and opium sales were at a standstill by 1838 when Lin Zexu was appointed imperial commissioner in Canton. Shortly before Lin's arrival, Jardine retired from Canton, in January 1839, intending a leisurely trip home via Bombay and Suez. But startling news awaited him at Naples. Lin had confiscated 20,000 cases of British-owned opium, worth $2 million. Jardine hastened to London, arriving early in September, and immediately prepared to press the foreign secretary, Palmerston, for a forceful response to Lin's actions. 
Jardine's consultations with Palmerston began late that month and extended into 1840. He advised a military and naval action involving seizure of one or more Chinese islands for British commerce. Then a negotiation could be conducted along the lines 'You take my opium -- I take your Islands in return -- we are therefore Quits, -- & thenceforth if you please let us live in friendly Communion and good fellowship' (Jardine to Palmerston, 5 Dec 1839, Broadlands Papers, MM/CH/5). Palmerston's subsequent policy adhered closely to Jardine's advice. The British expeditionary force seized Hong Kong in 1841, and the Chinese ports opened to British commerce by the treaty of Nanking (Nanjing) (1842) corresponded generally to Jardine's recommendations. 
During the period of the First Opium War (1839-42), Jardine joined the London banking firm of Magniac, Smith & Co. (renamed Magniac Jardine in 1841), which handled London affairs for British merchants in Asia; and he successfully stood for election to parliament as the whig candidate for Ashburton, Devon, a town with interests in the woollen export trade to China. In the Commons he seldom spoke, but in 1842, after the treaty of Nanking had secured Hong Kong and opened five new 'treaty ports', Palmerston, acknowledging Jardine's counsel, credited him with a major role in the success of British policy towards China. 
Jardine embodied a complex amalgam of shrewd political judgement, raw business 'savvy', and philanthropic inclinations (he contributed to the Morrison Education Society for free education in Chinese and English for Chinese youths, and he provided money for medical treatment for poor Chinese). Among the Chinese he was known as the 'Iron-Headed Rat', referring to an incident at Canton when he was struck on the head by a club and shrugged off the attack. His stern personality and disdain for idleness were reflected in his practice of keeping only one chair in his office, on which he sat while visitors stood. 
Jardine was an advocate of free trade, as the East India Company monopoly was expiring; yet he was willing to collaborate with his major rival, Lancelot Dent, to reduce the growing number of vessels competing in the opium trade along the coast. In 1835 he wrote to one of his ship captains, who was selling opium to coastal smugglers: 'If you could manage matters so as to make the Mandarins attack every one but your own party it would have good effect.' (Jardine to Capt. J. Rees, 9 March 1935, private letterbook, C4/4, Jardine Matheson Archive, Cambridge). 
Jardine saw opium as the only source of ready Chinese currency, with which to trade in silk, tea, and other items. In 1830 he described the opium trade as 'the safest and most gentlemanlike speculation I am aware of' (Jardine to R. Rolfe, 6 April 1830, private letterbook, C4/1, Jardine Matheson Archive, Cambridge); and he later argued that it was Chinese buyers, rather than British merchants, who were doing the smuggling. He told a parliamentary committee in 1840 that once the money was received and the Chinese buyer got his opium from the ships offshore, then it was the buyer's business what became of the opium. 
Jardine never married. However, his private correspondence suggests that he had once had a liaison with a Mrs Ratcliffe, who lived in Kent, and that a young woman named Matilda Jane Ratcliffe, who was provided for in his estate, may have been their daughter. Upon returning to London he joined the Oriental Club and resided at Upper Belgrave Street. 
In 1841 he purchased the estate of Lanrick in Perthshire. This property and his shares in the London and Hong Kong firms were bequeathed to his nephews. He died in Upper Belgrave Street, London, on 27 February 1843, following a prolonged, painful illness resulting from a tumour, which necessitated his confinement to a water bed in the final months of his life. He was buried on 14 April 1843 in the churchyard at Lochmaben, where his grave is marked by a tall obelisk, rivalling in size the statue of Robert the Bruce in the town centre, about a hundred yards away. 


@@@@@


doc= 37596


Jebb, Richard (1874-1953), publicist and theorist on imperial themes, was born at The Lyth, Ellesmere, Shropshire, on 16 October 1874, the second son in the family of two sons and five daughters of Arthur Trevor Jebb (1839-1894), landowner, and his wife, Eglantyne Louisa (a distant cousin), daughter of Robert Jebb of Killiney, Ireland. The philanthropists Eglantyne Jebb and Dorothy Frances Buxton, and the agricultural administrator Louisa Wilkins, were his sisters. His uncle was the classical scholar Sir Richard Jebb. His family had been landowners in Wales and Shropshire. He was educated at Marlborough College and at New College, Oxford, where he obtained second classes in classical honour moderations (1895) and 'literae humaniores' (1897). His interest in the British empire was stimulated by a schoolmaster's setting for a Latin essay prize a subject involving imperial federation. He won the prize, and made the empire his principal concern for the rest of his life. 
Jebb intended to join the Indian Civil Service, but while he was at Oxford his father and his only brother died, and he inherited the family estate, which provided him with an income for the rest of his life. On 29 September 1900 he married Margaret Ethel (died 1949), daughter of George Lewthwaite of Littlebank, Settle, with whom he had two sons and one daughter. The years 1898-1901 were spent in travel abroad, mainly in the self-governing colonies. He made many journeys on a bicycle, including a honeymoon trip the length of the north island of New Zealand. The colonial experience gave him material for his propositions about colonial nationalism, the subject which he quickly made his own. 
In 1905 Jebb published 'Studies in Colonial Nationalism', the book which brought him into public notice. A fervent follower of the tariff reform movement of Joseph Chamberlain, he began to write leaders and articles for the 'Morning Post' under the editorship of his friend Fabian Ware; in 1906 he wrote articles for it during the course of a journey through Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa. 
At the general election of January 1910 Jebb made his only attempt to enter parliament, contesting the seat of East Marylebone as a Unionist with tariff-reform beliefs; the official Unionist candidate won, with a Liberal second and Jebb third. He took no further part in party politics, confining himself to local bodies: he was a magistrate and served on the Shropshire county council from 1923 to 1934. He continued to express firm opinions in letters to newspapers, but seems to have lost faith in parliamentary institutions, even toying with fascism and social credit. In the First World War he served from 1914 to 1919 in the King's Shropshire light infantry, mostly in Britain, and in the Second World War he commanded the Ellesmere company of the Home Guard. 
Jebb's books included the two-volume 'The Imperial Conference' (1911), 'The Britannic Question' (1913), 'The Empire in Eclipse' (1926), and 'His Britannic Majesty' (1935). In May 1914 he had apparently financed a journal, the 'Britannic Review', but it did not survive the outbreak of war in August. 'The Imperial Conference' received much public notice, but the other books did not. 
Jebb's ideas were relatively simple. He saw that there was a sentiment which he called colonial nationalism, which was not merely separatism, but a complex of local feeling and attachment to Britain. Imperial federationists and the Round Table group headed by Lionel Curtis did not understand the strength of this sentiment: their proposals, not taking account of it, would therefore fail. Jebb favoured a system of alliance or partnership between Britain and what came to be known as the dominions: he approved of separate dominion navies in co-operation with the Royal Navy; he wanted tariff reform and imperial preference as means of binding the dominions more closely; and he wanted the Imperial Conference turned into a continuous body handling large defence and economic questions. Jebb died peacefully at his home, The Lyth, on 25 June 1953. 
J. D. Miller', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37597


Jekyll, Gertrude (1843-1932), artist and garden designer, was born at 2 Grafton Street, London, on 29 November 1843, and baptized at St George's, Hanover Square, the fifth of seven children and the second daughter of Edward Joseph Hill Jekyll (1804-1876), a retired captain in the Grenadier Guards, and his wife, Julia (1813-1895), the daughter of the banker Charles Hammersley. Her forebears included Joseph Jekyll (1753-1837), master in chancery and solicitor-general to the prince of Wales (later George IV); John Jekyll (1674-1732), collector of customs for the port of Boston, with an estate in Stow, Massachusetts, USA; Sir Joseph Jekyll (1662-1738), master of the rolls; Thomas Jekyll (1570-1652), secretary of the King's Bench and licensed to bear arms; and William Jekyll (1470-1539), purveyor of forage for the king's horse. This notable lineage enabled Gertrude Jekyll, in a philological duel with Logan Pearsall Smith, to revive the old word 'armigerous' and he to refer to her as an armigerous 'old Amazon' (Smith, 63-4). 
Jekyll was educated by her parents and by German and French governesses at home at Bramley House in Surrey, where the family lived from 1848 until 1868. Here she met scientists, engineers, musicians, artists, members of parliament, and archaeologists, including Michael Faraday, Felix Mendelssohn, Sir Charles Newton, Sir Henry Layard, and Sir Gilbert Lewis, many of whom she sketched. Here, too, she had her first garden, with her sister Caroline Jekyll (1837-1928), and learned practical skills in her father's workshop. In 1861 she enrolled with her friend and fellow student Susan Muir-Mackenzie at the National School of Art in South Kensington. She was taught anatomy by John Marshall, botanical drawing and ornament by Christopher Dresser, and colour harmony by Richard Redgrave. From 1865 her paintings, upon which John Ruskin commented favourably, were exhibited at the Royal Academy and the Society of Female Artists. 
In 1868 the family moved to Wargrave Hill, overlooking the River Thames in Berkshire. Although the landscape was not to her liking because it was based on chalk and not the sand of the Surrey Weald, with its woods and heathlands, Gertrude Jekyll's painting, craft, interior decoration, and gardening activities, begun at Bramley House, increased and their quality was instantly recognized. George Leslie RA, remarked on both the range and quality of her accomplishments: 'Clever and witty in conversation, active and energetic in mind and body, and possessed of artistic talents of no common order... there is hardly any useful handicraft the mysteries of which she has not mastered -- carving, modelling, house painting, carpentry, smith's works, 'repousse' work. Gilding, wood inlaying, embroidery, gardening, and all manner of herb and flower knowledge and culture, everything being carried on with perfect method and completeness. (Leslie, 35)' 

In 1869 Jekyll visited William Morris and, although not part of the arts and crafts movement, was imbued by its spirit of the unity of the arts. For her this unity was not just an artistic concept but was fundamental to her special skills in home-making, which she applied throughout her life. In his memoir Sir Herbert Baker wrote: 'her outstanding possession was the power to see, as a poet, the art and creation of home-making as a whole in relation to Life; the best simple English country life of her day, frugal, yet rich in beauty and comfort; in the building and its furnishing and their homely craftsmanship, in the garden uniting the house with surrounding nature; all in harmony and breathing the spirit of its creator. (Baker, 15-16)' Between 1867 and 1893 she visited the artist G. F. Watts, sat to him 'for arms' (F. Jekyll, 87), and asserted after one visit that she felt she had been 'in paradise' (Blunt, 207). 
Miss Jekyll's craft and garden work was sought by a growing band of clients, whether it was a window box for a mechanic in Rochdale in 1870, or in the same year the architectural drawings, details, and plantings for Phillimore's Spring at Crazies Hill, north of Wargrave in Berkshire, a tablecloth, designed and embroidered for Lord Leighton, or quilts for him and for Edward Burne-Jones. In 1871 she painted the fish casts for Frank Buckland's Economic Fish Museum. She received commissions for interior design work and execution from the duke of Westminster in 1875 and also from Lord Ducie. At Eaton Hall, newly enlarged and modernized by Alfred Waterhouse, not only did she design and partly work with members of the Royal School of Embroidery the panels for the turret doors and the tapestry in the drawing-room, but she also advised on the furnishing. In addition she designed and made the gates for the entrance to Eaton Hall and earned a reputation as an art blacksmith. Her most comprehensive interior design work was for Jacques Blumenthal, a composer of popular songs and pianist to Queen Victoria, and his wife, Leonie, at 43 Hyde Park Gate, London. Here from 1871 she designed and executed the wall decorations of orange trees and peacocks and the ceilings of orange leaves. She also designed and made the quilted curtains and carried out the inlay work and the arrangement of the furnishings. At Le Chalet, the Blumenthals' home in Switzerland, an inner circle of friends spent evenings singing some of Gertrude Jekyll's translations of songs in German to the accompaniment of the pianist Lionel Benson, whose caricatures of her as a ballerina and singer of French 'chansons' convey an unexpected aspect of her character. Through the Blumenthals, Jekyll met Barbara Bodichon, 'nee' Leigh-Smith, the artist and co-founder of Girton College, Cambridge and Bedford College, London, and the impressionist Hercules Brabazon, about whom she averred in 1906 that 'nobody has helped me more than Mr. Brabazon to understand and enjoy the beauty of colour and of many aspects concerning the fine arts' (Massingham, 107). During the winter of 1873-4, Miss Jekyll, Brabazon, and Frederic Walker stayed with Barbara Bodichon and her husband in Algiers. Watercolours of the landscapes, plants, buildings, and people in and around Algiers fill the pages of Gertrude Jekyll's albums at the Surrey History Centre in Woking, Surrey. 
Gertrude Jekyll was profoundly affected by the plants, vegetation, landscapes, and architecture of the Mediterranean, which she had first seen in 1863 and 1864 when she accompanied Charles and Mary Newton to Turkey, Rhodes, and Greece. She collected plants from countries around the Mediterranean -- Greece and Turkey in 1863-4, Italy in 1872 and 1876, and Capri in 1883 -- using a specially designed pick, and sent them back to England, where she tested them for their hardiness and utility as garden plants. From Capri she collected 'Lithospermum rosmarinifolium', 'Crocus imperati', 'Smilax aspera', a procumbent form of 'Rosmarinus officinalis', 'Rosa sempervirens', and 'Campanula fragilis'; from Switzerland, 'Primula villosa', and from the Pyrenees, 'Fritillaria pyrenaica'. Plants of Mediterranean origin became a characteristic feature of her garden designs and were grown close to the house and against garden walls that afforded some protection during the English winter. She grew many irids from the Mediterranean, including the blue and white 'Iris unguicularis' ('I. stylosa') (collected and introduced by Edwyn Arkwright), as well as aromatic shrubs such as rosemary and lavender, and, if the English climate had permitted, would have grown out of doors agaves, aloes, opuntias, and bougainvilleas, which she had seen and painted in Algeria, for their bold and striking foliage and distinctive flowers. Her sister Caroline gardened on the Mediterranean coast and created a famous garden on the Guidecca in Venice from 1884 using a rich palette of Mediterranean plants. Two of her brothers were also able gardeners: Walter (1849-1929) showed what could be done following his sister's principles of garden design using tropical and subtropical plants in his garden in the Blue Mountains in Jamaica, and Herbert (1846-1932) maintained and enriched the garden she had laid out and planted at Munstead House, Surrey, after their mother's death in 1895. 
Since 1863 Gertrude Jekyll had been collecting plants from the wild in Britain and throughout Europe, and from cottage gardens, and improving them. Many of the forms she bred were given to friends, some of whom, such as George Paul of Messrs Paul & Son, the Old Nurseries, Cheshunt, introduced them commercially and exhibited them in the Royal Horticultural Society's rooms. Miss Jekyll selected and bred more than thirty herbaceous annuals, biennials, and perennials and dwarf shrubs. Six were highly commended or received the award of merit from 1896 and continued to receive awards well after her death. For example, 'Primula' 'Munstead bunch' received a bronze Banksian medal from the Royal Horticultural Society in 1900, and 'Lavandula angustifolia' 'Munstead' in 1963. Although she took care to guard against loss by sending plants to botanic gardens, such as Kew, most have not survived. Only eight of the plants she bred are still available: 'Aquilegia vulgaris' 'Munstead white', 'Lavandula angustifolia' 'Munstead', 'Nigella damascena' 'Miss Jekyll', 'Primula' 'Munstead bunch', 'Pulmonaria angustifolia' 'Munstead blue', 'Sedum telephium' 'Munstead red', 'Vinca minor' 'Gertrude Jekyll', and 'Viola hispida' 'Jackanapes'. (The origins of the cultivar names are given in Tooley and Arnander, 130ff.) More than ten years before receiving her first awards for plant breeding Gertrude Jekyll was arranging displays of spring flowers at the Royal Horticultural Society and entering them successfully in the floral committee section to be judged; in 1885 she received a bronze medal for her display of daffodils and primroses. It came as no surprise therefore that she was one of only two women (the other was Ellen Willmott) to be awarded in 1897 the Victoria medal of honour of the Royal Horticultural Society by the president, Sir Trevor Lawrence. It was perhaps an even greater honour and pleasure for her to be referred to as the Queen of Spades by Dean Reynolds Hole, who responded on her behalf at the ceremony. 
In 1875 Miss Jekyll met William Robinson at the offices of 'The Garden' and from 1881 began contributing articles to his journal. Her obituarist attributed to Miss Jekyll and William Robinson 'not only the complete transformation of English horticultural method and design, but also that wide diffusion of knowledge and taste which has made us almost a nation of gardeners' ('The Times', 10 Dec 1932, 12). In 1876 Miss Jekyll's father died, and her mother commissioned John James Stevenson, one of the leading architects of the Queen Anne style and an adherent of the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings founded by William Morris, Philip Webb, and others, to design a home for herself and her daughter on Munstead Heath, Surrey. Gertrude Jekyll laid out the garden. It was made up from many elements, including a parterre, a pergola, a bank of Scotch briars, an alpine garden, a grove of azaleas, an auricula garden, an orchard, a hardy flower border, a reserve garden, and a kitchen garden. There were lawns running into the heath, grass walks, and rhododendron plantings. It was the precursor of the garden of her own home, Munstead Wood, built in 1895 across the lane from Munstead House. This garden broke the mould of the Victorian flower garden, and a contemporary visitor noted that it was laid out in 'quite an unconventional way' (Goldring, 191). The garden designer, author, and student of Kew, William Goldring, visited Munstead House in 1882 and described the hardy flower border: 'the brilliancy of the border... was beyond anything we had hitherto seen in the way of hardy flowers -- as different from the ordinary mixed border as night from day... The great point in this border is the grouping of the colours in broad masses, all being blended as to produce one harmonious whole. (ibid.)' Distinguished gardeners and botanists, including Dean Reynolds Hole, William Robinson, G. F. Wilson, Sir Michael Foster, F. W. Burbidge, Sir Joseph Hooker, James and Harry Mangles, Theresa Earle, Ellen Willmott, Sir Frederick Moore, the Revd C. Wolley Dod, Peter Barr, Max Leichtlin, Sir Thomas Hanbury, Dr Alexander Wallace, Mrs E. V. Boyle, Beatrix Farrand, and Edith Wharton, repaired to both Munstead House and Munstead Wood to see the gardens. Henri Correvon, the director of Le Jardin Alpin d'Acclimatation in Geneva, visited Munstead in 1894 and noted that the garden had 'deservedly attained a universal reputation for excellence' (Correvon, 167). 
Drawing on close observation of nature, plants and gardens, hard labour, and much practice, Miss Jekyll applied to the designs and plantings of gardens 'the sensitive artistry and skill of hand hitherto devoted to her painting and handcrafts' (Hussey, 23). For Gertrude Jekyll, 'the first purpose of a garden is to be a place of quiet beauty such as will give delight to the eye and repose and refreshment to the mind' (Jekyll, 'Garden design on old-fashioned lines', 383-4). Much of her inspiration for laying out ground came from nature. However, in her first book, 'Wood and Garden: Notes and Thoughts, Practical and Critical, of a Working Amateur', published in 1899, she wrote that: 'no artificial planting can equal that of Nature, but one may learn from it the great lesson of the importance of moderation and reserve, of simplicity of intention, of directness of purpose, and the inestimable value of the quality called 'breadth' in painting. For planting ground is painting a landscape with living things, and as I hold that good gardening ranks within the bounds of the fine arts, so I hold that to plant well needs an artist of no mean capacity. And his difficulties are not slight ones, for his living pictures must be right from all points, and in all lights. (Jekyll, 'Wood and Garden', 156-7)' Gertrude Jekyll's principles of gardening were enunciated earlier in 1896 in the 'Edinburgh Review', and to these she kept faith for the next thirty-five years, both in her garden at Munstead Wood and in more than 400 commissions in Great Britain (166 in Surrey alone) and in Ireland, France, Germany, Yugoslavia, and the United States of America. She subscribed neither to the formal school of landscape gardening, as exemplified in the work of Sir Reginald Blomfield and William Andrews Nesfield, nor to the free school of her friend William Robinson. She selected the best from both schools, extolling their most worthy properties. The principles of garden design that she followed comprised six articles: by forming and respecting quiet spaces of lawn, unbroken by flower beds or any encumbrance; by the simple grouping of noble types of hardy vegetation, whether their beauty be that of flower, foliage, or general aspect; by putting the right thing in the right place -- a matter which involves both technical knowledge and artistic ability; by employing restraint and proportion in the manner of numbers and/or quantity -- to use enough and not too much of any one thing at a time; by grouping plants in sequences of good colouring and with due regard to their form and stature and season of blooming, or of autumnal beauty of foliage; and by seeing how to join house to garden and garden to woodland. The book that she wrote in 1908, 'Colour in the Flower Garden', exemplifies and is the practical outcome of these principles. 
At about the same time Jekyll established, with the help of her Swiss gardener Albert Zumbach, a plant nursery at Munstead Wood. This was not only for economic reasons, to supply both plants and planting plans to her clients, but also to ensure their availability so that the right pictorial effect was realized and plant substitution, sometimes practised by her clients' gardeners, avoided. As late as 1932 she was promoting her nursery to the actress Amy Barnes-Brand in the following terms: 'I have a splendid list of good hardy plants, and bigger plants and at lower prices than the nurseries' (Tooley and Arnander, 120). The plant nursery was run by her for thirty-five years, until 1932. Each year thousands of plants were dispatched: for Sir George Sitwell's garden at Renishaw 1250 plants were sent in February and March 1910; for Roger Fry's garden at Durbins in Guildford a single consignment of plants dispatched in May 1911 numbered 600; and at the end of the year more than 3000 plants were sent to a client in Berkhamsted. After her death the nursery was run by her nephew Francis Jekyll (1882-1965) for a further nine years. 
Gertrude Jekyll's clients included friends and relatives, government departments (including the War Graves Commission), publishers (Edward Hudson), newspaper owners (Lord Northcliffe), mill owners (Sir Amos Nelson and J. T. Hemingway), bankers (Otto Falk), local authorities (for example, the borough of Godalming), university colleges (including Newnham College and Girton College, Cambridge), churches (such as St Edmund's and the Wesleyan church, Godalming), schools (Charterhouse), hospitals (King Edward VII Sanatorium, Midhurst, Sussex), and charities (the National Trust), as well as some of the most distinguished public servants in the country such as Lord Curzon, Lord Lytton, Lord Revelstoke, and Reginald McKenna. She designed flower borders in suburban gardens and reached a large popular audience through her articles in 'The Garden', 'Gardening Illustrated', the 'Daily Mail', and the 'Daily Express'. 
Most (247) of Miss Jekyll's garden designs and planting plans were commissions received directly from clients, but others (153) came from collaborations with distinguished architects, such as her friend Sir Edwin Lutyens, Sir Robert Lorimer, Oliver Hill, Sidney Barnsley, Sir Herbert Baker, Morley Horder, L. Rome Guthrie, and M. H. Baillie Scott, and provincial architects such as Walter Brierley. While most of the architects with whom she collaborated provided her with outline plans of the garden ground, with Lutyens the plans were dynamic and interactive. Lutyens regularly visited her at Munstead Wood, for which he was the architect, referring to it as 'Plazzoh' or 'Bumpstead' and to her as 'Bumps'. He provided the detailed drawings for the garden and Jekyll the planting plans that softened, enriched, and emphasized his hard ground effects. Hestercombe, Somerset (1904), is the best example of this brilliant partnership, with Jekyll's planting enhancing and complementing the lines of perspective, the changes of level, the water features, the surprise views, and the sequestered bowers of the new garden that wraps around the house, all created with the craftsmanship and natural materials that both had seen together in the vernacular architecture of Surrey. The Jekyll-Lutyens garden at Hestercombe exploits the site with glimpses of the eighteenth-century designed landscape, further enhanced by plantings of the now-drained serpentine lake margins by Miss Jekyll and long views of the Blackdown Hills to the south. The working relationship between Jekyll and Lutyens was summed up by Miss Jekyll herself in a comment to Betty Balfour: 'Bumps told Betty that the difference between working with Nedi and Lorimer was as between quicksilver and suet' (RIBA, Lutyens Papers, LuE/4/10/7 (i-) Ap 12, 1901). 
The gardens Miss Jekyll designed have to a great extent been lost, although some -- such as her own garden at Munstead (1882); Hestercombe (1904); Lindisfarne Castle, Holy Island, Northumberland (1911); the Old Manor House, Upton Grey, near Winchfield in Hampshire (1908); and the Old Glebe House, Woodbury, Connecticut, USA (1926) -- have been restored. The rich record she kept in plans, letters, writings, and photographs she took to illustrate articles and books (and six volumes of annotated photographs in the College of Environmental Design, University of California) permit, however, a glimpse of her genius as 'the greatest 'artist' in horticulture and garden planting' (Hussey, 23). 
Gertrude Jekyll wrote fourteen books, three of which were published by Longmans and the rest by Country Life, but her prodigious output of articles (more than 1138) in the gardening journals from 1881 to 1932, on a wide range of topics and illustrated with her photographs from Munstead House and Munstead Wood, bears witness to her desire to communicate ideas and information based on observation and practice to a large and interested public. A series of articles on flowers and plants in the house formed the basis of 'Flower Decoration in the House' (1907), and the series on garden and woodland in the 'Guardian Newspaper' served as the basis for the first book she wrote, 'Wood and Garden' (1899). 
These articles and books contain apposite and economical notes on the cultural requirements and pictorial effects of individual plants or plant associations. Plants tested successfully for their hardiness, such as 'Romneya coulteri' and 'Carpenteria california', are often described. Gertrude Jekyll was probably the first to flower successfully out of doors the giant lily, 'Cardiocrinum giganteum' ('Lilium giganteum'). She was responsible for introducing the giant hogweed, 'Heracleum mantegazzianum', in woodland plantings around Britain, and between 1911 and 1932 she wrote several articles about this proscribed plant, which she described thus: 'this grand plant has an appearance of greater refinement and beauty... and the mien of a specially proud and sumptuous plant' (Jekyll, 'Bog gardens', 670), as well as including it in planting plans such as those for Blagdon in Northumberland. There were articles on gardens that she and others had designed, such as Millmead, Surrey; Sandbourne, Worcestershire; Frant Court, Kent; and Warley, Essex, and articles on women as gardeners. Descriptions of tools she had designed included picks, trowels, labels, and the rolling steps. There were unexpected articles on railway gardening, gardening on corrugated iron, the rot pit, and the topiary cat cut in yew at Munstead Wood. She collected tools and old articles of cottage furniture and equipment throughout west Surrey, which were subsequently donated to Guildford Museum, and she wrote about them and the life and ways of country folk in 'Old West Surrey' (1904). During her lifetime, the books she wrote were often reprinted and continued to be sought. In the 1970s and 1980s they were reissued, and they continue to be a source of inspiration. 
In 1920 Sir Edwin Lutyens persuaded Gertrude Jekyll to sit for her portrait to William Nicholson. She agreed provided it was not during the hours of daylight. So she was painted by lamplight while she rested, and during the daylight hours William Nicholson painted her Balmoral boots. Of her portrait, now in the National Portrait Gallery, she referred to herself as a 'passive auxiliary' and wished 'it could have represented a more beautiful object' (F. Jekyll, 188). 
The painting of her (men's) Balmoral boots is in the Tate collection; the boots had been bought by Gertrude Jekyll in Paris in 1883, at the time she had acquired a pair for William Robinson, and remained in continual use for almost fifty years, repaired and patched. In 1900 she wrote: 'no carpenter likes a new plane; no house painter likes a new brush. It is the same with clothes; the familiar ease can only come of use and better acquaintance. I suppose no horse likes a new collar; I am quite sure I do not like new boots. (Jekyll, 'Home and Garden', 119)' Gertrude Jekyll's ideas on gardening and planting have been remarkably persistent, spanning many years in three centuries. Her ideas do not rely on fashion, but are based on practice and experience communicated in English that was 'direct, simple and discriminating' (Hussey, 23). In July 1904 she admitted to Edwin Lutyens that 'she gloried at the idea of the children being in the studio and would give up all her garden for paddling!!' (RIBA, LuE, 28 July 1904). Fortunately she did not, and the fruits of a long, talented, creative, and industrious life as an artist, gardener, and craftsman are manifest in her paintings, garden designs, photographs, books, and journal articles. 
Gertrude Jekyll received few awards. Following the Victoria medal of honour in 1897, the Royal Horticultural Society awarded her the Veitch gold medal in 1929, and in the same year she received from the Massachusetts Horticultural Society the George Robert White medal of honor. She died at Munstead Wood on 8 December 1932 and was buried in the churchyard of St John the Baptist, Busbridge, Surrey, on 12 December. She was unmarried. As she stood at the open door of Munstead Wood in 1932 Logan Pearsall Smith recalled her as 'some ancient, incredibly aristocratic rhinoceros gazing gravely out from amid a tangle of river reeds' (Smith, 64). In his life of Lutyens, Christopher Hussey described her as 'earthy and practical and determined... short, stout, myopic, downright... a frightening, but kind, wise old lady' (p. 23). 


@@@@@


doc= 37598


Jenkins, Claude (1877-1959), historian and Church of England clergyman, claimed to have been born on 26 May 1877 (his birth certificate counter-claimed 24 May) in Handsworth, Staffordshire, the eldest son of Oswald Jenkins, cashier and later land agent, and his wife, Sarah, daughter of William Palmer. He was a foundation scholar at King Edward's School, Birmingham, and was elected to a classical exhibition at New College, Oxford, in 1896. He obtained second classes in classical honour moderations (1898), 'literae humaniores' (1900), and theology (1901), and was awarded a Liddon exhibition in 1900 and a Denyer and Johnson scholarship in 1902. After studying palaeography with Robinson Ellis, he assisted C. H. Turner with a projected edition of Eusebius; his research in France and Italy yielded his edition of catena fragments of Origen ('Journal of Theological Studies', 9/34, January 1908, 231-47; 9/35, April 1908, 353-72; 9/36, July 1908, 500-14). For a year he taught at Magdalen College School, and after ordination in 1903 became curate of St Martin-in-the-Fields and assistant chaplain at Charing Cross Hospital. His abilities impressed A. C. Headlam, principal of King's College, London, who secured lectureships in ecclesiastical history (1905-11) and patristics (1911-18) for him and made him sub-editor (1903-18) and later joint editor (1921-7) of the 'Church Quarterly Review'. 
In 1910, with Headlam's support, Jenkins became librarian of Lambeth Palace Library, where he extended the foundations of his immense erudition. Constitutionally disinclined to surrender preferment, being, as he once observed, 'of a modest if not of a retiring disposition' (private information), he remained librarian until 1952. He was chaplain to Archbishop Randall Davidson from 1911 and helped to revise the coronation service, but was not closely involved in church affairs. In 1918 he became professor of ecclesiastical history at King's, where he wished to integrate historical studies with the collections at Lambeth, and in 1931 professor of ecclesiastical history at London University. He was canon of Canterbury from 1929 to 1934, when he was appointed regius professor of ecclesiastical history and canon of Christ Church, Oxford. He published little except a few articles and reviews, notably his devastating critique of A. S. Barnes's 'Bishop Barlow and Anglican Orders' (1922) ('Journal of Theological Studies', 24/93, 1922, 1-32). His learning, which was perhaps too diffuse, was that of the antiquarian rather than the historian. 
At Christ Church Jenkins's eccentricities, which became celebrated, recalled an earlier generation. With his low-crowned hat and antiquated clerical costume, his broad scholarship and unenthusiastic divinity, his uncompromising insistence on ancient rights (especially in chapter), his belief that land and 'the funds' were the only proper investment for the college and industrial shares a new form of the South Sea Bubble, he seemed to have stepped out of the eighteenth century. In term he usually lectured continuously three mornings a week, often to an audience of one, an ancient alarm clock reminding him to change the subject, perhaps from the Paston letters to the puritans or from Greek epigraphy to the Oxford Movement. He was very discursive: his lectures on Augustine, the date of whose birth he was still discussing at the end of term, contrived to include a list of books on the law of tort. Similarly his sermons were memorable less for their theology than for digressions ranging from the price of second-hand books to a dramatic reading from 'Macbeth'. In the late 1950s the congregation was startled to be apostrophized with the words, 'Those of you who remember the siege of Mafeking' (private information). His only luxury was the purchase of books, which filled his canonical lodgings almost to the point of impenetrability -- even the bath contained the files of the 'Church Quarterly Review' -- but his library was unsystematic and lacked bibliographical distinction. 
Often exasperating to colleagues, he was always courteous and never bore personal rancour. He delighted in the young and was assiduous in attendance at the Oxford Union, where he was senior librarian. In private life he was very generous, and gave a large sum anonymously to St Edmund Hall, the first $10,000 characteristically arriving in a dirty used envelope. He led a remarkably frugal existence but his idiosyncrasies, which embraced the recycling of cigar butts, were from preference rather than parsimony. Said to have an equal aversion to women and cats, he left most of his library to a women's college, St Anne's. To Christ Church senior common room he bequeathed a fund for the purchase of snuff, of which he was inordinately fond. He died at 1 Clarence Road, Tunbridge Wells, on 17 January 1959 while on holiday. 
E. G. W. Bill', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37599


Jenks, Clarence Wilfred (1909-1973), international lawyer and director-general of the International Labour Organization, was born on 7 March 1909 in Bootle, Lancashire, the son of Richard Jenks, an officer in the merchant navy, and his wife, Alice Sophia Craig. Jenks's father was lost at sea when Jenks was eleven and he effectively became head of the family. This early assumption of responsibility could explain his positive, energetic, and constructive outlook as well as the close relationship he maintained with his mother for the rest of her life. 
Jenks's early education was in state schools in Liverpool. In 1926 he won an open scholarship to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where, from the outset, he showed that strong interest in history, politics, international relations, and law which was to characterize his whole career. He became treasurer of the British Universities League of Nations Society as well as chairman of the Cambridge University League of Nations Union. He was twice awarded a scholarship at the Institute of International Studies at Geneva, a city in which he was to spend much of his life. In 1930 he was elected president of the Cambridge Union. He was called to the bar by Gray's Inn in 1936. 
In 1949 Jenks married Jane Louise Broverman, a daughter of Frederick S. Broverman of New York, who provided him with a tranquil home and unfailing social support. They had two sons, Craig and Bruce, both of whom inherited their father's international interests and outlook. 
Jenks combined what amounted to virtually two separate, albeit closely linked, careers. In formal terms he spent the whole of his working life as an official of the International Labour Office -- the secretariat of the International Labour Organization (ILO) -- which he entered immediately on obtaining his law degree at Cambridge. He was soon made a permanent member of the legal staff and gradually advanced until he reached the position of principal legal adviser. 
The work of the ILO, perhaps more than that of any other international organization, is reflected in legal texts: conventions regulating a wide range of matters affecting conditions of labour; reports of committees, including those scrutinizing, and even adjudicating on, the performance by members of their convention obligations; and resolutions of the general conference. In the preparation of these documents Jenks's skills were much in demand. His contribution went beyond mere technical drafting. It embraced the imaginative formulation and active negotiation of policy solutions to the many new problems confronting the organization. His knowledge of the constitutional aspects of international institutions was unrivalled. At the end of the Second World War he was the principal architect of the revision of the ILO constitution and his help was widely sought in structuring the family of United Nations specialized agencies that emerged at that time. 
Eventually Jenks's special standing, going beyond that accorded to a distinguished and experienced lawyer, was recognized by his appointment first as assistant director-general, then as deputy director-general. In 1970 he became director-general, a post he held until his death in 1973. 
Jenks's creative work in the ILO was illuminated by an almost passionate devotion to his vision of the objectives and higher good of the organization. He saw in the protection of the interests of all workers (a category he interpreted very broadly) a major component of the rapidly developing field of the international protection of human rights. His insistence on the independence of the international public service and his firm adherence to principle brought him early in his period as director-general into such direct conflict with the United States that for a while that country withdrew its support from the organization. In 1973 he vigorously, and successfully, opposed an initiative in the general conference which would have had Israel condemned for alleged breaches of its obligations of membership without the protection of prior judicial process. 
Despite the intensity and demands of his official commitments, but without detracting from his performance of them, Jenks also established himself as one of the most prominent and prolific writers on international law of his time. He sought to give permanent academic expression not only to points of international law arising in the course of his official work, but also to many other matters of major importance in the international legal field. His book-length article in 1945 entitled 'Some constitutional problems of international organization' ('British Yearbook of International Law', 22) was for long the unrivalled source of instruction on that subject for professionals and academics alike. He also wrote on legal subjects related to the ILO, such as the international protection of trade union rights and law, freedom, and welfare. He demonstrated his foresight and speculative ability by producing in 1965 a volume on space law so early in the development of space activities that some thought him almost unduly imaginative. Although he did not have much direct involvement in international adjudication, he published in 1964 a major study on that subject, 'The Prospects of International Adjudication'. 
Jenks was greatly sought after as a lecturer, but the rapid and intense manner of his delivery made little allowance for the frailty of his audiences who could not always fully grasp the significance of what they were hearing. During the period when he was assistant director-general of the ILO he declined to allow himself to be considered for almost certain election to one of the world's most prestigious chairs of international law. By reason, as he put it, 'of public duty and international public spirit by which I have felt bound', he could not, 'consistently with the proper discharge of duties arising from past years, leave [his] present post on [his] own initiative at a time as difficult, but as potentially fruitful, as that through which we are now passing' (private letter, Jenks archive). 
Jenks was a member of the Institut de Droit International, during the 1973 session of which in Rome he died of a heart attack on 9 October. He was buried in Geneva on 15 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 37600


Jennings, (Frank) Humphrey Sinkler (1907-1950), film-maker, painter, and writer, was born at The Gazebo, Walberswick, Suffolk, on 19 August 1907, the elder of two sons of Frank Jennings (1877- 'c'.1950), an architect, and of his wife, Mildred Jessie Hall (1881- 'c'.1950), a painter and shopkeeper. In 1916 he went to the Perse School, Cambridge, at that time a progressive institution where the classicist Dr W. H. D. Rouse was headmaster and Caldwell Cook, author of 'The Play Way', was an inspiring teacher of English and drama. Jennings soon excelled both at work and at games and showed promise as an actor, set designer, and poet. In 1926 he won a scholarship from Pembroke College, Cambridge, to read for the English tripos, which was still in its early days. His undergraduate years were busy and set the pattern for a varied working life. He painted a great deal, designed sets for many theatrical productions, including the first British performances of Stravinsky's 'The Soldier's Tale' and Honneger's 'King David', and, with his fellow undergraduates Jacob Bronowski and William Empson, founded and wrote for 'Experiment', a student magazine of unusual distinction. Despite these and many other distractions he studied assiduously, particularly in sixteenth-century literature and art, and managed to take a first in part one of the tripos (1928) and a first with distinction in part two (1929). 
On 19 October 1929, after a brief courtship, Jennings married Cicely Cooper ('b'. 1908), the daughter of Richard Synge Cooper, a civil engineer; their first daughter, Mary-Lou, was born in September 1933 and their second, Charlotte, in August 1935. Under the direction of I. A. Richards, then an influential English don, Jennings began work on a doctoral thesis about the poetry of Thomas Gray, a former student of Pembroke. This was never completed though Richards thought his research 'a very remarkable combination of elaborate erudition with speculative daring' (private information) and T. S. Eliot offered to publish a shortened version of one chapter in the 'Criterion'. The only tangible evidence of Jennings's postgraduate labours was his edition of the 1593 quarto of Shakespeare's 'Venus and Adonis', published in a small edition by the Experiment Press in 1930. Chronically short of money Jennings was often forced to interrupt his studies to take short-term employment and worked as a schoolteacher in Salisbury, as a textile designer in Paris, and as a set designer at the Festival Theatre in Cambridge. Finally, in 1934, he joined the General Post Office film unit (later renamed the Crown Film Unit), which gave him his first training as an editor and director. 
For the next five years Jennings earned his living making short documentaries, both for the Post Office and for independent production companies, where he was able to experiment with the new colour processes Gasparcolor and Dufaycolor. The greater part of his always restless energies, however, was given to his usual extra-curricular activities of painting, writing (including an angry essay on theatre for 'The Arts Today', edited by Geoffrey Grigson), and various forms of private research. For a short period he became a leading figure of the British surrealist movement, and, with Roland Penrose, Herbert Read, and others, organized the famous International Surrealist Exhibition of June 1936, at which his collage 'Minotaur', an unflattering portrait of Lord Kitchener, proved to be one of the most notorious exhibits. With David Gascoyne he translated a collection of poems by the French surrealist Benjamin Peret, 'Remove your Hat' (1936). Though brief Jennings's spell as a surrealist had lasting consequences. His many years of work on 'Pandaemonium', an epic anthology of texts illuminating the industrial revolution as seen by contemporary witnesses, began with a short article for the surrealist journal 'London Bulletin' in 1938, while his contributions to Mass-Observation, the pioneering project in domestic anthropology which he founded early in 1937 with Tom Harrisson and Charles Madge, also showed marked surrealist tendencies. His principal publication while involved in the movement was 'May the Twelfth: Mass-Observation Day Surveys 1937', a collage account of George VI's coronation, co-edited with Madge for Faber and Faber. 
Jennings's first distinctive film, 'Spare Time' (1939), has sometimes been mistakenly identified as a product of Mass-Observation. In fact it marked Jennings's full-time return to the General Post Office film unit, where he remained until after the war, but the misattribution is understandable since the film -- a rapid series of vignettes, cut to the music of brass bands, kazoos, and other amateur performances, and almost wordless, save for a terse commentary by Laurie Lee -- depicted the leisure activities of working-class men, women, and children in much the same spirit as a Mass-Observation day report: deadpan, inquisitive, alert to idiosyncrasy and humour. Some of Jennings's colleagues found it condescending though it now appears far less so than many documentaries of the period and can stand comparison with certain essays of George Orwell as a remarkably sympathetic enquiry into popular culture. Like Orwell, too, Jennings was an unconventional member of the non-communist left and once defined his politics as 'those of William Cobbett' (Jackson, 232). 
In collaboration with his gifted if cantankerous editor Stewart McAllister, whose contribution tended to be unjustly overlooked before Dai Vaughan's biography of McAllister, 'Portrait of an Invisible Man' (1983), redressed the balance, Jennings developed the techniques of 'Spare Time' in the films he made during the Second World War. In these documentaries Jennings drew on his several vocations as painter, poet, historian, and sociologist and brought each skill to a new pitch of refinement and passion. Though their fascination as a record of the home front and their efficacy as propaganda can hardly be overstated (they were among the films which helped bring the United States into the war), they are also works of outstanding eloquence, complexity, and emotional force; in brief, works of art. At least three of them -- 'Listen to Britain' (1942), 'Fires were Started' (1943), and 'A Diary for Timothy' (1945) -- are now agreed to be masterpieces. Several contributors to 'Sight and Sound''s international poll of directors and critics in 1992 nominated one of these titles in their list of the ten best films ever made. 
Critics have been less kind to the four films Jennings made after the war -- 'A Defeated People' (1945), 'The Cumberland Story' (1947), 'The Dim Little Island' (1949), and 'Family Portrait' (1950) -- finding them at best unimaginative, at worst complacent, and animated by a sentimental patriotism that is almost a caricature of the ardent love of his native country which fired Jennings's greatest efforts. Such at least was the limiting judgement of the film director Lindsay Anderson, whose otherwise admiring essay of 1954, 'Only connect', did much to keep Jennings's reputation alive through periods of neglect. Anderson called Jennings 'the only real poet the British cinema has yet produced' and few have seriously challenged the verdict (Jennings, 53). Yet there is little biographical evidence to support the view that Jennings was a spent force. He continued to work tirelessly at accumulating texts on science and industry for 'Pandaemonium' (some of which bore fruit in 'Family Portrait'), he completed dozens of paintings, and he wrote erudite, searching articles for the 'Times Literary Supplement' and other publications. He seems to have been particularly stimulated by a visit in 1947 to Burma, where he went to look into the possibilities of a feature based on a novel by H. E. Bates, 'The Purple Plain' (1947). Neither this nor any of the other features he prepared for his main post-war employer, Wessex Films, ever went into production. It is possible, as some sceptics have suggested, that he would never have thrived in the world of features although certain sequences in his dramatized documentaries 'The Silent Village' (1943) and 'Fires were Started' show that he was quite as comfortable with the prose of fictional narrative as with the more associative poetry of his personal form of documentary. The critic David Thomson, one of Jennings's most articulate advocates, suggests that Jennings had it in him to grow into Britain's Bunuel. 
Though he is still not widely known outside specialist circles Jennings's reputation has grown with the years and his work has been brought back to a broader public on several occasions, notably by Robert Vas's 'Omnibus' documentary for BBC television in 1970, by a well-received exhibition of paintings and films at London's Riverside Studios in 1982, and by the publication in 1985 of an abbreviated version of 'Pandaemonium', edited by Mary-Lou Jennings and Charles Madge, which was greeted by surprised and enthusiastic reviews on both sides of the Atlantic. His wartime films are regularly screened and discovered by new generations, at the National Film Theatre. 
Jennings was appointed OBE, in 1946, for his contributions to sustaining morale at home and for publicizing the British cause abroad; he was promptly 'excommunicated' by one of the surviving surrealist factions. He died, on 24 September 1950, on the Greek island of Poros, after falling from a cliff while scouting locations for a film about health services in Europe. He was buried in the protestant cemetery in Athens. 


@@@@@


doc= 37601


Jermyn, Sir Thomas (bap. 1573, d. 1644/5), soldier and courtier, was baptized on 12 February 1573 at Rushbrooke, Suffolk, the eldest son of Sir Robert Jermyn (1538/9-1614) of Rushbrooke Hall, a leading puritan and administrator in the county, and his wife, Judith (died 1614), daughter of Sir George Blagg. Admitted a fellow-commoner at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1585, he should not be confused with his cousin Thomas Jermyn (died 1617) of Depden, MP for Sudbury in 1589. 
In 1585 Jermyn's father joined the expedition to the Low Countries of Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, and Jermyn himself became a military follower of Leicester's stepson Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex. In September 1591 he was one of twenty-four young men whom Essex knighted in the Rouen expedition. He was with Essex in his Cadiz expedition in 1596, in Ireland in early 1597, and around the Azores in the summer and autumn of 1597. In January 1599 he raised levies in Suffolk for Ireland, and he was in Connaught by April. Early in 1600 he married Catherine, daughter of Henry Killegrew of Hanworth, Middlesex, with whom he had one daughter and four sons, including Thomas Jermyn and Henry Jermyn (later first earl of St Albans). After his marriage Sir Thomas lived in Hanworth, but the tragic accidental death of his daughter, Elizabeth, from eating a piece of bread baited with rat poison may have impelled his move from Hanworth after 1605. 
Jermyn avoided involvement in Essex's abortive 1601 rising. In March 1604 he was returned MP for Andover; in 1614 he succeeded to Rushbrooke Hall and, with this new dignity, was elected MP for Suffolk. From January 1621 until the Long Parliament he was repeatedly returned MP for Bury St Edmunds. In 1616 he presented William Bedell as rector of Horringer, Suffolk, probably having known him as preacher of St Mary's, Bury St Edmunds; later he was the means of Bedell's promotion to an Irish bishopric. Court service now replaced his military career. In July 1616, on the embassy of James, Lord Hay (later first earl of Carlisle), in marriage negotiations between Princess Christina and Prince Charles, he suffered a serious accidental fall which left him in France for some months after the embassy. In 1623 he was deputy lieutenant in Cambridgeshire, and in 1625, a colonel of the Suffolk regiments defending the coasts. In July 1628 he became vice-chamberlain to Queen Henrietta Maria, and on 30 March 1629 he was unsuccessfully seeking the comptrollership of the household. On 22 December 1631 he became non-resident governor of Jersey, and through the 1630s he sat on several administrative commissions. In January 1639 he finally achieved his comptrollership of the king's household. His busyness in seeking profitable office suggests little sympathy for the austere ideals of 'thorough': a privy councillor throughout the decade, he had no scruples in gathering a clutch of reversions for his young sons Thomas and Henry, which inhibited the king's freedom of appointment in legal, financial, and administrative offices. The younger Thomas rose through various appointments to become in 1638 groom of the bedchamber to Prince Charles, and Henry became the queen's master of the horse. 
The death of the lord lieutenant of Suffolk, Theophilus Howard, second earl of Suffolk, on 3 June 1640 brought Jermyn joint appointment as lord lieutenant with James Howard, the third earl; he succeeded in quelling troop unrest at Beccles and Bungay in July 1640, and during the summer was also appointed deputy lieutenant in Cornwall. In 1640 he surrendered his comptrollership to Sir Peter Wyche, reportedly for $2000 compensation. He was returned to the Long Parliament for Bury with his son Thomas; however, in 1642 the younger Thomas openly joined the king at Oxford while Henry fled abroad. 
Jermyn showed his alarm at parliament's proceedings by retiring home, pleading ill health. Political anxieties may have been reinforced by domestic concerns. Following the death of his first wife, he had recently married again, on 17 March 1642; his second wife was Mary (died 1679), daughter of Edmund Barber of Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, and widow of Thomas Newton of Edgefield, Norfolk, with whom he was to have a son and a daughter. The House of Commons summoned him to attend in August, and in October Rushbrooke was searched for arms; in mid-November he was again summoned, accused of sending the king money and discouraging the Bury townsmen from contributing on the 'propositions' (making a notionally voluntary loan to parliament). After offering 100 marks on the propositions he was allowed to return home, but soon disabled from sitting. In January 1644, assessed at $1000, he pleaded for a mitigation; his lack of money may have been due to personal extravagance at court as much as to political troubles. 
Jermyn, at home both on the battlefield and at court, may be seen as a curiously neat transitional figure between his austere and deeply religious father and his extrovertly cavalier sons; his friendship with Bedell suggests a mainstream protestant piety unaffected by the Laudian theological revolution. 
Jermyn died, presumably at Rushbrooke, about the beginning of 1645; he was buried in Rushbrooke (where his monument remains) on 7 January 1645. 


@@@@@


doc= 37602


Smith, Frederick John Jervis- (1848-1911), physicist, was born on 2 April 1848 in Taunton, Somerset, the only child of Frederick Jeremiah Smith, prebendary of Wells, a wealthy philanthropist and educational reformer, and his wife, Anne, daughter of John Glover, gentleman, of Taunton. He was educated privately and, from 1868, at Pembroke College, Oxford, where he read classics but was awarded only a pass degree, graduating BA in 1872. After a time at Wells Theological College he was ordained deacon in 1877 and became his father's curate at St John's Church, Bishop's Hull, near Taunton. He was ordained priest in 1880. He married, in 1874, Annie Eyton, the second daughter of Thomas Taylor, physician, of Taunton, formerly of Adelaide. They had one son. 
Smith's main interest was mechanics, his natural talent in which was encouraged by the engineer W. E. Metford. His first patent was taken out in 1875; he constructed dynamometers which won a medal at the 1878 Paris Exhibition, and in 1879 he invented the liquid microphone. Although succeeding his father as vicar of St John's in 1885, he resigned two years later to pursue a scientific career. He had been invited to establish a mechanical laboratory at Trinity College, Oxford, where he became Millard lecturer in experimental mechanics (and later engineering) in October 1885. Equipped at Smith's own expense, the Millard Laboratory opened in January 1886. Smith's course, based on that taught in London by Alexander B. W. Kennedy, was open to the entire university, a fact recognized in 1888 when he was made university lecturer in mechanics. 
Smith's own research flourished in its new setting, generating eleven patent applications in the years 1888-99. One speciality was the measurement of high-speed events, such as explosions and gunshots, using his tram chronograph, invented in 1888. This led to his appointment by the home secretary to a commission on explosions of compressed gas cylinders (1895-6). In 1897 he used the chronograph to measure the speed of a vehicle in an Oxford street, and presented the results in court. He also experimented with photography, and did significant early work with X-rays from 1896, and with radio waves from 1897. 
On 14 February 1897, on the centenary of the great naval victory of his distant kinsman Admiral John Jervis, earl of St Vincent, Smith changed his name by deed poll to Jervis-Smith. After failing to be appointed to Oxford's new chair of electrical physics in 1900, he worked to achieve similar recognition for engineering. In 1905 a diploma was created, and in 1907 the university finally decided to establish a chair of engineering science. It was not, however, intended for Jervis-Smith, and in April 1908 he retired. 
In retirement Jervis-Smith continued his experiments and compiled a book, 'Dynamometers' (1915), which was completed posthumously by his friend C. V. Boys. Jervis-Smith's other interests were world travel, anthropology, and music; he was an accomplished organist and pianist. He held the medal of the Royal Humane Society for saving a person from drowning. He was elected FRS in 1894, and in 1898 received an honorary MA from the University of Adelaide. After six months of illness Jervis-Smith died at his home, Battramsley House, near Boldre, Hampshire, on 23 August 1911. He was survived by his wife. 
A. V. Simcock', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37603


Jessop, William (bap. 1603, d. 1675), government official and politician, was baptized in Stafford on 22 September 1603, the son of Thomas Jessoppe, and his wife, Margery. He moved to London, becoming a law clerk and then confidential man of business to Robert Rich, second earl of Warwick. Jessop served as secretary or chief clerk to the Providence Island Company from 1631 to 1641, and to the Saybrook plantation trustees; his command of shorthand (then known as secret writing) must have been a valuable qualification. In 1640 he was on familiar terms with John Pym, his colleague as treasurer of the Providence Island Company. With the outbreak of civil war in 1642 he moved into both military and naval administration. When his patron ceased to be parliament's lord admiral, with the passage of the self-denying ordinance in 1645, Jessop stayed on as secretary to the admiralty commissioners, holding this post until the demise of the Rump Parliament in 1653. Through his service under the war treasurers in 1642, Jessop had also become man of business to Robert Devereux, third earl of Essex, and served conscientiously as an executor of the former lord general's encumbered estate after his death in 1646. 
Jessop had considerable scruples about taking the engagement, the oath of loyalty to the republic; the abolition of the House of Lords seems to have upset him more than the 1649 regicide and abolition of the monarchy. He may have found service under the protectorate more congenial than that of the Commonwealth; in 1653-4 he moved from the navy to the central executive, becoming assistant secretary and then clerk of Oliver Cromwell's council and treasurer of the protector's contingencies. He also served on numerous other committees and commissions. In the 1659 parliament he sat for his old home town; in one of his two recorded speeches he had to justify having arrested a leading Fifth Monarchy man on the orders of the late lord protector. His Cromwellian sympathies were no doubt strengthened by the marriage of the protector's younger daughter to the earl of Warwick's grandson early in 1658, and not surprisingly he left public life altogether with the restoration of the Commonwealth in 1659. This and his aristocratic connections served him well at the Restoration. He was assistant clerk of the parliaments in the Convention of 1660, a witness against the regicides, and briefly employed under the navy commissioners. Due either to age or to lack of an appropriate patron, he held no central office again until 1668-9, when he was secretary to the public accounts committee, the body charged with investigating whether financial malpractice had contributed to the naval disaster at the end of the Second Anglo-Dutch War. Jessop held two offices in the duchy of Lancaster without a break, from the 1650s until his death. 
Jessop married first Margaret Edwin, and second Mary Cox, widow and sister-in-law of a politically moderate parliamentarian colonel. His daughter by his first wife, and only child, married into the Hulton family of Lancashire, which accounts for the survival of his papers in the county record office at Preston and in the British Library. He died in London, at his house in Holborn, in March 1675. His efficiency and discretion are as evident from the record as is his dislike of political extremism. 


@@@@@


doc= 37604


Jessop, William (1746-1814), civil engineer, was the son of Josias Jessop, quartermaster at the naval dockyard, Devonport, and his wife, Elizabeth Foot. The eldest of three sons and one daughter, he was born at the Foots' home in Plymouth Dock on 23 January 1746. In 1756 his father was engaged to assist John Smeaton (1724-1792) in the reconstruction of the lighthouse on Eddystone Rock, some 15 miles off Plymouth, the previous structure having burnt down at the end of 1755. Smeaton came to rely heavily on Jessop senior, who took charge of the yard at Millbay where the masonry for the new lighthouse was assembled and shaped. The work was completed in 1759, and in that year Smeaton took on the young Jessop as an apprentice, to serve a 'clerkship' with a view to becoming his draughtsman and assistant. 
Jessop had been educated at Devonport, where he had shown a talent for French and mathematics, as well as some progress in the classics and mechanical ability. However, when he joined Smeaton he moved to Austhorpe Lodge, the Smeaton family home near Leeds, from where the engineer directed his rapidly expanding engineering practice. Smeaton did more than anybody to lay the foundations of the British engineering profession, so it was of considerable significance for Jessop that he spent his formative years in the service of this pioneer, first as an apprentice, until 1767, and then as his assistant, until 1772. In these capacities he obtained wide experience in engineering work on river navigations, canals, harbour works, and land drainage projects, which enabled him to become, on Smeaton's retirement from active engineering, the outstanding man in his profession. At the time of the 'canal mania' in the 1790s, it was rightly said of him that with his experience and abilities he was looked upon as 'the first engineer of the kingdom' (Hadfield and Skempton, preface). 
Jessop was a resourceful but cautious engineer, with a pragmatic approach to problems for which he preferred simple affordable solutions, so that he tended to avoid costly spectacular constructions such as aqueducts and long tunnels. These qualities put him in great demand by canal promoters in the 1790s. He was among the first engineers to appreciate the value of cast iron as a constructional material, recommending its use in the monumental Pontcysyllte aqueduct on the Ellesmere Canal, completed in 1805, and he acquired an interest as a founding partner in the Butterley Ironworks Company, Derbyshire. He also pioneered the use of iron railways in situations where canals were uneconomic, building the Surrey iron railway which opened in 1803. In the last part of his career, Jessop became much involved in harbour improvement projects, including the West India docks in London -- one of the first systems of enclosed docks -- and the Bristol docks, where his imaginative scheme for redirecting the tidal waters of the River Avon enabled the old river course through the city centre to be enclosed as the 'Floating Harbour'. Soon after setting up in business on his own in 1772 Jessop was enrolled by Smeaton in the Society of Civil Engineers which was the first professional institution of engineers, and he came to take a prominent role in its activities. 
Jessop married Sarah (died 1816), the daughter of John Sawyer of Haddlesey, on 3 February 1777, and a few years later -- certainly by March 1784 -- the couple were persuaded to make their home at Newark, convenient for work with the Trent Navigation, and for the Great North Road to London. Jessop was soon elected an alderman of Newark and served twice as mayor, in 1790-91 and 1803-4. Jessop and his wife had seven sons, four of whom followed him into the engineering profession, and one daughter. He was a man of simple tastes, ready to encourage younger engineers without becoming jealous of their success or that of colleagues, and he always showed concern for the safety of workmen on his projects. In 1805 the family moved to Butterley Hall in Derbyshire. Jessop died there on 18 November 1814, of paralysis after several years of declining health; he was buried in Pentrich churchyard, Derbyshire, on the 22nd. 


@@@@@


doc= 37605


Jesty, Benjamin (bap. 1736, d. 1816), farmer and vaccinator, was born in Yetminster, Dorset, and baptized there on 19 August 1736, the youngest of at least four sons of Robert Jesty, butcher. Little else is known of his early life. In March 1770 he married Elizabeth Notley (1740-1824) in Longburton, 4 miles north-east of Yetminster. The marital home was established at Upbury Farm, adjoining Yetminster churchyard, and the couple had four sons and three daughters. 
It was known in the dairy-farming areas of south-west England that milkmaids, and others who contracted the relatively mild and non-infectious disease of cowpox through handling udders of infected cows, obtained immunity from smallpox, and in 1765 the Medical Society of London received from a Dr Fewster (possibly John Fewster) a paper entitled 'Cow pox and its ability to prevent smallpox'. In 1774 smallpox was widespread throughout England, with epidemics in countless towns and villages, including Yetminster. Jesty's servants Ann Notley and Mary Reade, who, like him, had been infected with cowpox, had nursed smallpox patients without themselves catching the disease. Worried for his family's safety in the epidemic, Jesty resolved to provide immunity by giving his wife and two elder sons cowpox. Finding a suitable cow in neighbouring Chetnole, he used a needle to transfer the pox matter and, copying the technique used by inoculators, infected his wife and sons by scratching their arms. The boys had local reactions and quickly recovered but his wife's arm became very inflamed and for a time her condition gave cause for concern. Thus took place the earliest known vaccinations, though the treatment was thought of as inoculation with cowpox until the term vaccination (from the Latin 'vacca' for cow) was coined in 1802. 
Jesty's experiment was met by hostility in the neighbourhood; he was labelled inhuman, and 'hooted at, reviled and pelted whenever he attended markets in the neighbourhood'. The introduction of an animal disease into a human body was thought disgusting and some even 'feared their metamorphosis into horned beasts'. But the treatment's efficacy was several times demonstrated in the years which followed, when Jesty's two elder sons, exposed to smallpox, failed to catch the disease. 
Interest in the prophylactic powers of cowpox virus grew and in May 1796 Edward Jenner began his series of vaccination experiments. About 1797 Jesty became tenant at Downshay Manor Farm in Worth Matravers where, encouraged by Andrew Bell, rector of neighbouring Swanage from 1801, he conducted more vaccinations. Following Jenner's reward of $10,000 from the House of Commons in June 1802 for discovering and promoting vaccination, Bell took up Jesty's cause and in August 1803 wrote to George Pearson, founder of the Vaccine Pock Institute, describing in detail the 1774 vaccinations. In 1805 Jesty gave his evidence in London at the institute's invitation, when he was presented with a long testimonial and pair of gold mounted lancets. The institute also commissioned his portrait from Michael William Sharp. 
Jesty died in Worth Matravers on 16 April 1816 and was buried in the parish churchyard. His widow, Elizabeth, died on 8 January 1824 and was buried alongside him. 
J. R. Smith', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37606


Lovetot, Sir John de (b. in or before 1236, d. 1294), administrator and justice, was a younger son of the Richard de Lovetot (died 1235), who was lord of one-third of the Huntingdonshire barony of Southoe, and his wife, Christine, who survived him. John cannot therefore have been born later than 1236. He was probably the John de Lovetot who acted as bailiff of the escheated honour of Peverel of Nottingham from 1258 to 1260 or 1261, while in 1263-4 he was one of four men who administered the county of Yorkshire in opposition to its royalist sheriff. In the late 1260s he was an under-sheriff in Norfolk, and in the early 1270s successively steward of Norwich Cathedral priory and in the service of Robert de Vere, earl of Oxford, again possibly as his steward. By 1269 he had been knighted. 
Lovetot may have owed his entry into royal service to Robert Tiptoft or Tibetot (died 1298), whom he represented when Tiptoft went on crusade with the future Edward I in 1270. He had certainly entered Edward's service by 1274, when he was appointed joint custodian of the vacant see of Durham. Lovetot was appointed a justice of the common bench in Easter term 1275, and the formal records of the court show him serving as a justice continuously until the end of 1289. He is, however, known to have been sent abroad by the king on at least eight different occasions during these years, both on diplomatic missions and on commissions concerning the administration of Ponthieu, in northern France, and these overseas journeys caused him to miss part or all of several law terms. Lovetot was also active during the same period as an assize and gaol delivery justice, and managed to find time to fulfil duties as one of the trusted servants of Edward's wife, Queen Eleanor. 
Lovetot was disgraced early in 1290 with his judicial colleagues, for failing to prevent the chief justice of the court, Thomas Weyland (died 1298), from altering the record of a case heard in the court. Between June 1290 and October 1293 he paid the fine of $1000 that had secured his release from the Tower of London. In 1293 he was committed to the Tower for a second time, perhaps for misconduct in the service of Queen Eleanor, and only released for a second fine of 1000 marks. 
John de Lovetot's first wife, Margaret, was the daughter of Robert d'Eyville and his wife, Denise. They were certainly married by 1268 and she died in the late 1280s. His second wife, Joan, daughter of William of Standon, had previously been married to Bartholomew de Briaunzon. This marriage probably took place in 1290 or 1291. Lovetot had at least four sons and three daughters, probably all with his first wife. He died shortly before 5 November 1294. In 1301 his son and heir, also John, alleged that Lovetot had been murdered at the instigation of Walter Langton, bishop of Coventry (died 1321). The younger John claimed that Langton had been conducting an adulterous relationship with his stepmother, Joan, who died about August 1302, but although proceedings continued until 1303, he was unable to prove his allegations. 
Paul Brand', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37607


Fordham, John (c.1340-1425), administrator and bishop of Ely, was born in Fordham, Cambridgeshire, to a family of no obvious distinction. His only certain kinsman, John Kirkby, worked for him in later years, as did John Fordham, who was a squire ('scutifer'), and Thomas Fordham. Employed first by Edward III, he rose under Edward, the Black Prince, and became the latter's secretary in 1375 and an executor of his will in 1376. From 1 January 1377 he was receiver and keeper of the privy seal to the Black Prince's young son, Richard, prince of Wales, and on the latter's accession to the throne, Fordham at once (on 26 June 1377) became keeper of the king's privy seal. At that time this office was doubtless regarded as less significant than under an adult king, and Fordham was no politician, but proximity to the boy king and his household soon proved more important than had been intended. The insurgents in London in 1381 called for Fordham's death, but in the event he suffered no more than damage to his house and wine cellar. 
Fordham could sustain this, for the royal household had brazenly looked after its own. Having secured the deanship of Wells in 1379 by royal request, and the prestigious archdeaconry of Canterbury in 1380-81, Fordham secured election on 30 May 1381 to the mighty see of Durham. The temporalities were restored on 23 October, and on 12 December he resigned the privy seal (as was conventional). He was consecrated at Lambeth on 5 January 1382. Fordham went north in the summer and stayed there. Problems over the Anglo-Scottish border he could not avoid, but, that apart, his days in royal service seemed done. However, Richard II and his government were lurching towards an angry showdown with their critics. With the crisis already well in motion, the beleaguered king recalled his family's loyal servant to become treasurer of the realm on 17 January 1386. 
This was a hapless task, and inevitably Fordham could not survive the general onslaught on the chief ministers in the Wonderful Parliament. He resigned on 24 October 1386 with the rest. Even so, he remained with the king in 1387 as Richard prowled the midlands seeking to regain control. When the opposition took to arms to break the king's affinity, Fordham was among those banished from court. Still, he was not arrested or forced to flee, and could attend the Merciless Parliament in February 1388 without fear of being among those indicted. In March he was ordered with other northern lords to hasten to defend the border against Scottish invasion. There, like others, he left the Percys to suffer from their rashness at the battle of Otterburn. Already though, on 3 April, he had been translated by the pope (at the opposition's request) to Ely, as part of an unprecedented political reshuffle of the episcopate. Yet, if Durham had special strategic and political features that made Fordham unacceptable there in the eyes of the crown's opponents and of key northern lords, Ely was notoriously the rich neo-sinecure of English bishoprics, and for Fordham a homecoming. He took to it at once after the bull arrived in September 1388. Probably he was not sorry, and never wanted to be recalled to secular politics again. 
Fordham attended parliaments fairly regularly until late in life, and once (in 1406) agreed to help settle Baltic trade disputes. That apart, he came to live almost permanently at his episcopal manor of Downham. His longevity exasperated contenders for episcopacy, particularly his perennial ability to fail then rally. His will, dated 3 October 1425, is an attractive picture of an old man at peace in a little world of cathedral, household, and staff, for all of whom he made careful provision in a modest, surprisingly austere account. It would seem natural that from the outside world only Edward III, the Black Prince, and Richard II entered his final thoughts. Even at the end he clung to life for seven weeks more. He died on 18 November 1425 and was buried, as he requested, not in the nave but in the lady chapel of Ely. 
R. G. Davies', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37608


Mettingham, John of (d. 1301), justice, makes his first appearance in surviving records in 1270, when he brought an action of trespass in the common bench as rector of Shotley in Suffolk. He was probably already a clerk of Gilbert of Preston (died 1274), the chief justice of that court, and his service to Preston may date back to at least 1265. After Preston's death he received appointment as one of the regular justices of the newly established assize circuits in 1274. When arrangements were made in the summer of 1278 to create two permanent circuits of the general eyre he was one of the justices appointed to the 'northern' circuit. He sat as a junior justice on every eyre of that circuit until 1288. He became chief justice of the circuit for the Dorset eyre of 1288. Mettingham seems to have been assigned special responsibility for hearing 'quo warranto' and related pleas on his eyre circuit, but this was certainly not the only business that he heard. Extant reports and other evidence show that he also sat in on the hearing of ordinary civil litigation in at least five counties. 
From 1285 onwards Mettingham was also (like most of his colleagues) assigned to take assizes during vacations in one of the newly reorganized assize circuits. Mettingham was fortunate to escape conviction during the so-called 'state trials' of 1289-93. When one complainant alleged that Mettingham had been sitting in the common bench while the complainant had had his proper challenges to jurors refused, the auditors of complaints simply accepted his statement that he had been sitting on the bench not as a justice but as a well-wisher of the complainant's opponent (the prior of Sempringham). In a series of other cases from eyres where Mettingham had been one of the justices, the auditors accepted his 'record' that he had not been sitting in the court when the case concerned was decided. By the time these cases were heard Mettingham had replaced the disgraced Thomas of Weyland (died 1298) as chief justice of the common bench, a post he held from the beginning of 1290 until the time of his death. During this period, as the surviving reports show, Mettingham was clearly the major figure in his court, though this dominance came increasingly to be shared from the mid-1290s with his colleague William Bereford (died 1326). 
John of Mettingham was a beneficed clergyman and seems to have left no children. He died between the end of Trinity term and 19 September 1301, when Ralph Hengham (died 1311) replaced him as chief justice of the common bench. 


@@@@@


doc= 37609


Pontoise, John de (c.1240-1304), bishop of Winchester, was apparently an Englishman, though the family no doubt derived from Pontoise. At some stage during his early career he and his mother, Joan, were granted the manor of Eastington on the Isle of Purbeck, Dorset, by the priory of Christ Church, Twynham, to be held for their lifetimes. He probably studied at Oxford, though the evidence is indirect: his executors endowed 200 marks to establish a loan chest for the masters and scholars and, no doubt because he was a benefactor, his obit was to be observed by the university. Certainly he trained at Bologna and was a doctor of civil law by 'c'.1270, when he was invited to lecture on civil law for a year by the city of Modena in northern Italy. He was already beneficed in the diocese of York, for in 1264 he had obtained a papal dispensation to hold the rectory of Welwick in Holderness with two other benefices with cure of souls. It is interesting that he should have first obtained benefices in the north; in the late thirteenth century very many royal clerks were beneficed in the province of York, and it is clear that he was in the king's service by 1262, acting as a proctor for Henry III in the French court. 
Pontoise became a canon of Exeter Cathedral in May 1274 and archdeacon of Exeter in December, obtaining also the rectory of Tawstock, diocese of Exeter, in 1275. He was soon in demand as a proctor in Rome, where he must have spent much of his time, acting for the clergy of the province of Canterbury and also for the bishop of Exeter in 1277, and for John Peckham, archbishop of Canterbury, between 1279 and 1282. He was a papal chaplain by 1281, and, following two disputed elections to the bishopric of Winchester, he was appointed by papal provision to this see on 9 June 1282. He was consecrated by the cardinal-bishop of Ostia and Velletri before 15 June, returned to England to profess obedience to the archbishop of Canterbury on 1 August, was granted the temporalities of the bishopric on 11 August, and was enthroned in his cathedral church in September. 
At first Pontoise's relations as bishop with Edward I were tense (partly no doubt because the king had wanted the extremely wealthy bishopric of Winchester for his chancellor, Robert Burnell), and he began his career of high office in the English church in close alliance with the archbishop of Canterbury, John Peckham. But matters soon changed, for he was to become one of the king's leading and most active councillors and diplomats: on royal service in Paris in 1285, with the king in Gascony in 1287-9, presiding with Burnell and others over the trial of royal ministers following the return from Gascony, negotiating for peace in France and Rome in 1296-8 and in France in 1299, back in Rome and Paris in 1300-01, and in Paris again in 1303. His legal training and knowledge of the workings of the Roman curia were put tirelessly at the service of the crown. His work for both king and pope marked him out, along with the bishop of Lincoln, for the unpopular role of chief assessor and collector of the famous papal taxes initiated in 1291/2 for the king's planned but unexecuted crusade. 
Despite all this external activity Pontoise spent long periods of time in his diocese, active in every facet of ecclesiastical administration, as is revealed by his register, the first to survive for the diocese of Winchester. There is no lack of evidence here for his concern for the welfare of his cathedral church and of the monasteries and churches of his diocese; but this occasionally confused register suggests, even so, a bishop with political and financial interests that extended beyond routine local and parochial concerns, for it includes many documents that show his close interest in international political developments. He stands in contrast to those prelates of his day, often trained in theology, who shunned close involvement in secular government, and even openly opposed royal policies. He had, for example, little in common with Robert Winchelsey, Peckham's successor at Canterbury, the champion of ecclesiastical liberties in the face, as he saw it, of the encroachments of the crown. His aloofness from Winchelsey was demonstrated by the rare exemption of his diocese from the jurisdiction of the archbishop, obtained from Pope Boniface VIII in 1297. As a man of affairs and political influence it is not surprising that he had his opponents. An anonymous memorandum sent to Rome just after his death accused him of storing up great wealth, and even of having profited from the neglect of the episcopal estates, accusations that cannot be substantiated though they may not have been complete fabrications. Pontoise died on 4 December 1304 at his manor at Wolvesey, close to his newly founded college dedicated to St Elizabeth of Hungary, and was buried on the north side of the choir of his cathedral church. 
J. H. Denton', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37610


John, Gwendolen Mary (1876-1939), painter, was born on 22 June 1876 at 7 Victoria Place, Haverfordwest, Pembrokeshire, the elder daughter and the second of the four children of Edwin William John (1847-1938), solicitor, and his wife, Augusta Smith (1848-1884), an amateur artist and daughter of Thomas Smith, plumber, of Brighton and his wife, Mary. The artist Augustus John (1878-1961) was her younger brother. 
Gwen's early childhood was spent at Haverfordwest, and after her mother's death when Gwen was eight, the family moved to the small resort town of Tenby, Pembrokeshire, where they lived at 32 Victoria Street. She was educated first at home by governesses and subsequently at Miss Wilson's academy in Tenby and Miss Philpott's educational establishment in London. The household in Tenby was a sombre one, and all four John children escaped its repressions at their earliest opportunity, Gwen John in 1895 by going to London to attend the Slade School of Fine Art, then the most progressive art school in Britain. She studied there for three years with Frederick Brown and Henry Tonks, winning a certificate for figure drawing (1896-7) and the Melvill Nettleship prize for figure composition (1897-8). Among her fellow students were Ambrose McEvoy, Ursula Tyrwhitt, Ida Nettleship (who later became Augustus John's wife), Gwen Salmond (later Mrs Matthew Smith), and, most gifted of all, her brother Augustus who, though younger, had preceded her to the Slade. Her lifelong tendency to form intense and smothering sentimental attachments to both men and women, by their very nature doomed to failure, became apparent at this time. Seemingly meek and self-effacing, she was in fact strong-willed and fiercely passionate. In appearance she was slight and pale, her brown hair carefully restrained, her dark eyes solemn and watchful; however (as may be seen in her self-portraits of about 1900 in the National Portrait Gallery and 'c'.1900-03 in the Tate collection), the firm set of her slightly receding chin hinted at her intransigent nature. 
On leaving the Slade, Gwen John went to Paris in September 1898 and studied for several months at the Academie Carmen with James McNeill Whistler, who admired her 'fine sense of tone' (A. John, 'Chiaroscuro: Fragments of Autobiography: First Series', 1952, 66). And it was there, Augustus thought, that she 'acquired that methodicity which she was to develop to a point of elaboration undreamt of by her master' (ibid., 250). In January 1899 she returned to London where, for the next four years, she lived what she later called a 'subterranean' existence in various dismal rooms in Bloomsbury and Bayswater. She commented at that time: 'People are like shadows to me & I am like a shadow'; 'as to being happy... when a picture is done whatever it is it might as well not be as far as the artist is concerned -- & all the time he has taken to do it it has only given him a few seconds pleasure' (John to Michael Salaman, n.d., 1902, Aberystwyth, NL Wales). During this period she had an unhappy love affair with the painter (Arthur) Ambrose McEvoy (1878-1927). 
Gwen John exhibited for the first time in the spring of 1900 at the New English Art Club, an organization with strong connections to the Slade, and she continued to show there twice yearly until 1903. In March 1903 she and Augustus had a joint exhibition at Carfax & Co., London; she had already acquired a reputation for working extremely slowly, and contributed only three pictures to her brother's forty-five. Her early art reflects her training at the Slade. The paintings are usually faintly Victorian genre scenes of women in interiors; executed in sombre earth colors, they are small and highly finished, for example, 'Interior with Figures' (1898-9, National Gallery of Victoria, Melbourne) and 'Portrait of Mrs Atkinson' (probably 'c'.1897-1898, Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York). Her drawings of that time are mostly assured, slightly restrained studies of women, for example, 'Winifred John in a Large Hat' ('c'.1895-1898, National Museum and Gallery of Wales, Cardiff) -- not unlike Augustus's work. 
In the autumn of 1903 Gwen John made a walking tour through France with Dorelia McNeill, later Augustus's lifelong companion. After stopping for several months in Toulouse, they arrived in Paris in February 1904; Gwen was never to leave. From this time she consciously distanced herself from her family and background, declaring England 'quite a foreign country'. For the next decade she lived in a series of modest residences in Montparnasse, several of them the subjects of her paintings, as in 'A Corner of the Artist's Room in Paris' (1907-9, Sheffield City Art Galleries). She had a small number of friends, usually women, though one was the German poet Rainer Maria Rilke. Her requirements were few, and she earned a meagre living as an artist's model, most notably for Auguste Rodin (1840-1917), whom she met in 1904 and for whose unfinished monument to Whistler she posed. Although an unhappy liaison with Rodin consumed much of her attention during the next several years -- ''Everything' interests me more than painting. I am quite frightened at my coldness towards painting which gets worse & worse', she wrote (John to Tyrwhitt, 4 Feb 1910?, Aberystwyth, NL Wales) -- she did finish at least a dozen paintings, among them several of her best-known works, such as 'Girl Reading at the Window' (1911, Museum of Modern Art, New York), and many drawings, including the famous series of her tortoiseshell cat ('c'.1905-1908) and the eloquent wash drawings of Chloe Boughton-Leigh (for example, 'Bust of a Woman', 'c'.1910, Albright-Knox Art Gallery, Buffalo, New York) and of 'a lady' (for example, 'Portrait of a Lady', 'c'.1910, the Swindon collection of twentieth-century art, Swindon borough council). She also continued to exhibit at the New English Art Club (1908-11). 
As her love affair with Rodin drew to a close, Gwen John focused increasingly on her art, and the next decade was a highly productive one. Her brother Augustus introduced John Quinn, the distinguished American lawyer and collector, to her work and from 1911 Quinn provided her with a stipend and purchased any picture she offered. He ultimately acquired about a dozen paintings and scores of drawings. Equally valuable was Quinn's emotional support, which he provided from the start, though the two did not actually meet until 1921. He encouraged her to view exhibitions and enlarged her acquaintanceship by introducing her to his friends, including Picasso, Braque, Matisse, Andre Dunoyer de Segonzac, Constantin Brancusi, Maud Gonne, Henri-Pierre Roche, and Augusta, Lady Gregory. Jeanne Robert Foster, Quinn's companion, became a close friend. Her relationship with Quinn lasted until his death in 1924 and coincided with her period of greatest artistic productivity, for which he was surely at least in part responsible. 
In January 1911 Gwen John took rooms at 29 rue Terre Neuve in Meudon, the Paris suburb in which Rodin lived. There she began instruction in Roman Catholicism and was received into that church, probably early in 1913. She was commissioned by the nuns of the local chapter of the Soeurs de Charite Dominicaines de la Presentation de la Sainte Vierge de Tours to paint a series of portraits of their founder, Mere Marie Poussepin, six of which are now known (mid-1910s, one in the National Museum and Gallery of Wales, Cardiff). She executed hundreds of watercolours of church interiors, often populated by those nuns and their charges, the little girls of the Orphelinat St Joseph, all typically viewed from the rear. As she wrote, 'I am in love with the atmosphere of Meudon Church and the people who go to church here have a charm for me (especially when I don't speak to them)' (John to Jeanne Robert Foster, 22 Feb 1925, priv. coll.). She remained in Paris during the First World War, though she made frequent trips to the coast of Brittany, where she did a series of spontaneously executed and profoundly moving drawings of local children, including 'Study of a Child' (late 1910s, Tate collection). Because of war restrictions, she ceased exhibiting in London, but showed in New York at the Armory show (1913) and at the Penguin Club (1918). 
Apart from a few still lifes, interiors, and landscapes, the paintings of Gwen John's artistic maturity are all female portraits, most often of a model known only as 'the convalescent', usually of a monumental figure isolated or before an uncomplicated background, as in, for example, 'Young Woman Holding a Black Cat' (late 1910s, early 1920s, Tate collection). The artist viewed the impassive sitter not as an individual but as 'an affair of volumes' (John to Tyrwhitt, n.d., 1936, Aberystwyth, NL Wales). These pictures are relatively small (the largest no more than about 35 by 26 in.), their compositions rigorously simplified. The surfaces are fresco-like, the pigment dry and chalky, and the palette severely restricted. Multiple versions of each subject were painted, often with only minor variations. 
The early 1920s were years of achievement and satisfaction for Gwen John. 'I am quite in my work now', she told Quinn, '& think of nothing else. I paint till it is dark... and then I have supper and then I read about an hour and think of my painting.... I like this life very much' (John to Quinn, 17 March 1922, New York Public Library). She displayed strong confidence in her work: 'I was very pleased and proud of my 'Mere Poussepin'. I thought it the best picture there, but I liked the Seurat landscape' (ibid., 9 May 1922); and, discussing an exhibition of Cezanne's watercolours, she observed: 'These are very good, but I prefer my own' ('Gwen John Memorial Exhibition', 3). She exhibited in the Paris salons of 1919 to 1925 and at the Sculptors' Gallery in New York in 1922. In 1920 she met the poet Arthur Symons, of whom she made drawings. John Quinn's death in 1924 closed this happy period and brought genuine financial insecurity. She painted less and, without Quinn's encouragement, was less eager to exhibit. However, in 1926 she had the largest show of her lifetime, at the New Chenil Galleries in London, and received considerable public attention. By 1930 she was represented in various public collections, including the Tate Gallery in London, the Manchester City Art Gallery, the Hugh Lane Municipal Gallery of Modern Art in Dublin, the Albright-Knox Art Gallery in Buffalo, and the Art Institute of Chicago. In her later years Gwen John became increasingly solitary. She did maintain certain old friendships, and she formed one last obsessive attachment, to Vera Oumancoff, sister-in-law of the eminent neo-Thomist philosopher Jacques Maritain, and her neighbour in Meudon. This attachment was entirely one-sided and was ended by Vera about 1930, when she could no longer tolerate the painter's immoderate attentions. 
By about 1930 Gwen John had ceased painting, though for several more years she made small, colourful, increasingly abstract watercolours; there is no evidence that she did anything at all after about 1933. She occasionally exhibited earlier work (at the Carnegie Institute, Pittsburgh, in 1930; the Deffett Francis Art Gallery, Swansea, in 1935; and at the national eisteddfod in Fishguard, Pembrokeshire, in 1936). She purchased a derelict shack and a patch of ground at 8 rue Babie, Meudon, to which she moved in 1932; there she lived surrounded by her cats, often sleeping in her garden. Her last years are somewhat mysterious. She became increasingly withdrawn and displayed total disregard for her own well-being; Maynard Walker, who visited John in 1937, described her as living 'like a feminine St Gerome' (Walker to Edwin John, 6 May 1946, Aberystwyth, NL Wales). Her reclusiveness was intentional, for she considered her weaknesses to be: '1. sitting before people listening to them in an idiotic way. 2. undergoing their influence -- being what they expect -- demande. 3. by fear flattering them. 4. being too much touched -- valuing too much their signs of friendship, or rather responding too thoughtlessly. 5. Thinking too often of people. (MS note, 26 April [1932], Gwen John MSS, Aberystwyth, NL Wales)' She still made occasional trips to Brittany; on the last of these, she fell ill and died, unmarried, in Dieppe on 18 September 1939 in the Hospice de Dieppe; her certificate does not specify a cause of death. 
Since the first major retrospective exhibition after her death, which was held at Matthiesen Ltd in London in 1946, Gwen John's reputation has steadily grown, and she has become one of the most deeply loved of British artists; her following is large and passionately devoted to her art. Much of her work has now entered the public domain: more than one-third of her paintings are now in public collections; over a thousand of her drawings belong to the National Museum and Gallery of Wales in Cardiff; and most of her letters and papers are preserved in various public collections. There are substantial holdings, both public and private, in the United States as well as in Britain. John Quinn's collection was dispersed after his death in a famous auction of 1927; most of the works by Gwen John which he owned remained in America. Many more were acquired by American collectors at the Matthiesen retrospective. There have been numerous exhibitions of her work on both sides of the Atlantic. 
For many years Gwen John was chiefly identified as Augustus John's sister. He once wrote: 'Fifty years after my death I shall be remembered as Gwen John's brother' (M. Holroyd, 'Augustus John: a Biography', 1974, 61). Although his prediction has not come to pass, her stature as an artist is now most certainly greater than his. She has become, in particular, a feminist heroine. However, in truth she was far less constrained by her gender than most women of her time or, in fact, later. As a girl, she was kept at home while her younger brother was permitted to attend an art school in Tenby but from the time she went to London to enter the Slade she lived as independently as she wished. Because of her unhappy love affair with Rodin, she is often viewed as a victim, but she was in reality obdurately self-willed. She once said: 'I think if we are to do beautiful pictures we ought to be free from family conventions & ties.... I think the family has had its day. We don't go to Heaven in families now but one by one' (John to Tyrwhitt, n.d., 'c'.1910, Aberystwyth, NL Wales), and she lived by that conviction. 
Gwen John's art is consistently described as 'private', 'quiet', 'reticent'. She herself said: 'As to whether I have anything worth expressing... I may never have anything to express except this desire for a more interior life' (John to Tyrwhitt, 4 Sept 1912?, Aberystwyth, NL Wales). Her art, apparently modest and unassuming, evokes from the viewer a powerful emotional response out of all proportion to its reticence. Augustus John said that her pictures were 'almost painfully charged with feeling' (perceptively adding that his own were 'painfully empty of it' (W. Rothenstein, 'Men and Memories: Recollections of William Rothenstein: 1900-1922', 1934, 65). It would be a mistake to exaggerate her importance as an artist. She was not a major historical force who influenced those after her. Although perhaps a minor master, she was surely an enduring one, possessed of genius. Gwen John herself was confident of her place. She described it, typically, with both self-deprecation and serene assurance: 'As to me, I cannot imagine why my vision will have some value in the world -- and yet I know it will -- I think I will count because I am patient and recueille' (John to Tyrwhitt, n.d., Aberystwyth, NL Wales). 


@@@@@


doc= 37611


Johnson, Bertha Jane (1846-1927), promoter of women's higher education, was born at 3 New Street, Charing Cross, London, on 20 January 1846, the third of four children of the Irish physician Robert Bentley Todd FRS (1809-1860), professor of physiology at King's College, London, and his wife, Elizabeth Hart. Dr Todd was a pioneering advocate of nursing education and it was a home 'where there was very much the tradition of equal advantages and opportunities for girls and boys, men and women' ('The Ship', December 1921, 35). The two elder girls were the first pupils at Elizabeth Sewell's school on the Isle of Wight, but Bertha was educated at home, sharing a tutor and drill lessons with her younger brother James before he went to Eton College. Her own talents were in the arts. Taught by a musical aunt, she became an accomplished pianist. She was among the early women students at the Slade School of Art and several of her paintings were exhibited at the Royal Academy. 
On 16 April 1873 Bertha Todd married an Eton contemporary of James's, the Revd Arthur Henry Johnson (1845-1927), the second son of Captain George John Johnson of the Grenadier Guards. Johnson, now chaplain of All Souls College and, over the years, lecturer in modern history at several Oxford colleges, was a keen sportsman, naturalist, and gardener -- once described as a 'country gentleman in Holy Orders' (Goldman, 33). He shared with Bertha qualities of vitality and charm and a gift for friendship and hospitality that gave them a prominent place in university society. 
The introduction of women students into an ancient residential university, already pioneered at Cambridge by Henry Sidgwick and Emily Davies, was a challenge that appealed to the 'young married Oxford' of the 1870s. The birth of the Johnsons' two sons, Robert Arthur and George Wilfrid, did not prevent Bertha from serving on the committees that ran lecture courses for ladies from 1874, setting up the more ambitious Association for Promoting the Higher Education of Women in Oxford (AEW) in 1878, and founding the Anglican hostel Lady Margaret Hall, which opened, together with the undenominational Somerville Hall, in 1879. The success of these women's societies, not formally recognized by the university until 1910, depended on voluntary support from dons and their wives. Assisted by her husband, who delivered the first lecture in the series of 1874 and tutored women students until 1922, Bertha Johnson made it her life's work. She was secretary to Lady Margaret Hall from 1880 to 1914, and at first in effect domestic bursar, overseeing the economical running of the household. As lady secretary to the AEW (1883-94) she organized tuition for rapidly growing numbers of women students, and supervised those who were not attached to a hall but lived at home or with 'hostesses' in the city. Her encouragement also played a part in the success of two further Anglican women's halls, St Hugh's, opened in 1886 by Elizabeth Wordsworth, and St Hilda's, founded by Dorothea Beale in 1893. But the welfare of 'home students', as they were known after 1889, became her particular concern. In 1894 she was appointed by the AEW as their principal. In 1910, when a delegacy for women students was set up and home students came under the control of the university, she became as principal of the Society of Oxford Home-Students (SOHS) the first woman with a senior university appointment. She held this post -- always, at her own insistence, without payment -- until she retired at seventy-five in 1921. In 1920, when women were admitted to membership of the university, she was the first of the five women principals to receive the MA by decree. 
Mrs Johnson came to be regarded as a conservative figure in the movement for women's education even by many Oxford friends and admirers. A unionist in her politics and a lifelong devotee of the fashions of the 1870s -- Liberty gowns and William Morris wallpapers -- she could be tenacious in resisting changes to the regime adopted in the early days for women students. She attached importance to careful chaperonage, and to the AEW's role in arranging the teaching of women by men dons; she thought women should follow courses specially devised for the individual rather than the curriculum of the male undergraduates. Her resignation as the AEW's lady secretary in 1894 was the outcome of a clash with the council and principal of Somerville, who challenged her control of tuition arrangements as the hall developed into a college with its own staff of women tutors. With her husband she became in 1895-6 an influential opponent of a bid to secure the admission of women to the Oxford BA degree. In this debate there were arguments that appealed to other supporters of the AEW (and to Henry and Eleanor Sidgwick at Cambridge) against subjecting women to the rigid requirements of the degree course, including compulsory Latin and Greek. But in 1897 Mrs Johnson was the only woman educationist to support a proposal -- made by opponents of degrees for women at Oxford and Cambridge and viewed with dismay by the established women's societies -- for a separate degree-awarding university for women. Speaking as the mother of two undergraduate sons (Robert was president of the Oxford Union in 1897), she defended this scheme above all on the grounds that even well-wishers of women's higher education opposed the idea of co-education. 'University men are not willing that women should share fully in the life of the Universities.... It may be right or it may be wrong, but the fact remains that we are no more liked now than when we began... [To] bring highly educated girls into disfavour with the majority of highly educated young men, may be found to be a dangerous thing for our nation. ('University Degrees for Women: Report of a Conference Convened by the Governors of Royal Holloway College', 4 Dec 1897, 52-3, Bertha Johnson MSS)' Bertha Johnson was not among the Oxford women who followed Mrs Humphry Ward in opposing women's suffrage -- in 1894 she chaired a drawing-room meeting in support of a suffrage petition -- and family pressures evidently helped to shape her views on the place of women in Oxford. But she was no egalitarian -- 'The imitation of men by women has always seemed to me to be a poor thing' (speech to women students' debating society, 1 Dec 1895, Bertha Johnson MSS). Nor was she much moved by the argument that an Oxford degree would be valuable to the professional woman. Her own career exemplified instead the opportunities that opened within the voluntary sector to upper-middle-class women of her generation. She became Headington's first woman poor-law guardian, president of the Oxford Working Women's Provident Society, and vice-president of the Oxford Charity Organization Society committee, and was an active and sympathetic workhouse and district visitor until the end of her life. She also served (1903-22) as a co-opted member of Oxfordshire county council's education committee. The SOHS was run from the Johnsons' comfortable and attractive home -- first at 8 Merton Street, then at 5 South Parks Road -- and her defence of the home student was always based on the conviction that there were 'considerations that make home life, even when the home is not our own, better for young women than College life' ('The Ship', December 1921, 19). 
By the early twentieth century, the SOHS was a diverse and growing society which included mature students, Roman Catholics based in a hostel run by nuns at Cherwell Edge, and increasing numbers of foreigners. The home students -- seen by some critics as a threat to the university's policy of discouraging social contacts between male undergraduates and women, and by others as missing out on the college experience -- gained some protection from Bertha Johnson's quietly autocratic regime, and appreciated her warm interest in individual students, past and present. The SOHS acquired its own common room in Ship Street (bought and presented by Arthur Johnson), and adopted as its motto that of Mrs Johnson's family, 'Faire sans dire'. Twenty-five years after her death the society became Oxford's fifth women's college: St Anne's. 
Despite Arthur Johnson's loyal support for her work, it cannot be assumed that there were no family tensions. Annie Rogers, the AEW's lady secretary from 1894, commented privately, 'If Mrs Johnson had been only a gentle and amiable person, I don't think she could ever have held her own against Mr. Johnson who was not very sympathetic with women's education' (Rogers to Butler, 27 Aug 1927, Rogers MSS). This fair, bespectacled woman with striking features and presence, fought her battles in middle life with 'a bit of temper' (ibid.), and remained formidable to the last. 'Her direct look, the power in her voice, the calm of her manner, her stately erect bearing were but the outward signs of a character of unnatural strength and self control' ('Oxford Chronicle', 6 May 1927, 3). 'With all her simplicity and friendliness', wrote her obituarist in the 'Oxford Magazine', she had yet something of the 'great lady' (12 May 1927, 475). There were grandchildren, and her sons achieved professional success: Robert was knighted as deputy master of the Royal Mint and George became headmaster of Alleyne's School, Stevenage. But an obituarist claimed that in old age 'nothing gave her more pleasure than reminiscences of the old students' ('Oxford Chronicle', 6 May 1927, 3). Bertha Johnson died of influenza at home in South Parks Road, Oxford, on 24 April 1927, less than three months after the death of her husband on 31 January, and was buried on 27 April with him in Holywell cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 37612


Johnson, Richard (bap. 1755, d. 1827), Church of England clergyman and colonial chaplain, was the son of John Johnson of Welton, Yorkshire, where he was baptized in March 1755. He was educated at the Kingston upon Hull grammar school and engaged in farming and teaching until he went up to Magdalene College, Cambridge, in January 1780. He gained his BA there in 1784. Made deacon by the bishop of Winchester on 21 December 1783, he was ordained priest by the bishop of Oxford on 31 October 1784. From 1784 to 1785 Johnson was curate of Bere, Hampshire. On 24 October 1786 he was appointed as 'chaplain to the settlement' at New South Wales. His appointment was influenced by the Eclectic Society, of which John Newton and William Wilberforce were members. 
An evangelical of great piety and a man of gentle character and inflexible integrity, Johnson was charged with a mission beyond the powers of most, because he was to be custodian of the morals of the infant settlement but he had also to conform to the pragmatism of Arthur Phillip, the first governor of New South Wales. Phillip's yardstick was survival. To the degree that religion and morality assisted that end he tolerated the role of Johnson. 
Accompanied by his wife, whom he had married shortly before sailing, Johnson arrived with the first fleet and celebrated the first Anglican service under 'a great tree' at Sydney Cove on 3 February 1788. He took as his text 'What shall I render unto the Lord for all His benefits toward me' ('Psalm 116':12), which probably aroused a chill response in his convict hearers. 
Johnson threw himself unsparingly into his daily tasks, whether celebrating divine service, catechizing, marrying, baptizing, burying, or attending frequent executions. To and fro, from Sydney to Parramatta he devoted himself to the spiritual and physical welfare of the convicts. He went down into the foetid holds of the 'sick ships' of the Second Fleet, where hundreds lay dying or ill. 
Francis Grose, acting governor following Phillip's departure, regarded Johnson as 'one of the people called Methodists... a very troublesome, discontented character' (Cable, 2.18) and obstructed his work in all possible ways. Grose was unable to prevent him erecting a pleasing but modest church in 1793, which Johnson paid for in rum. The church was burnt down in 1798. Johnson was the first to extend his apostolate to the Aboriginal people: he took an Aborigine into his own home and gave the first of his two children, a daughter born in 1790, the Aboriginal name Milbah. A son was born in 1792. His ecumenical spirit was such that when two Spanish vessels visited Sydney in 1793 he 'outdid himself in his sociable gestures, particularly toward our chaplain fathers approaching them with a kindness and humility and a simplicity that was truly evangelical' ('The Spanish at Port Jackson', 30-32). His main relief was farming, which he engaged in with considerable proficiency. 
Johnson returned to Britain in 1800, leaving 'as a mere skeleton', said his successor Samuel Marsden. He served firstly as a curate in Essex and then as rector of the combined parishes of St Antholin and St John the Baptist in London. He was also the perpetual curate of Ingham, Norfolk, from 1817. His 'An Address to the Inhabitants of the Colonies Established at New South Wales and Norfolk Island', published in London in 1794, was an early item of Australian literature. He died in London on 13 March 1827, and was survived by his wife. 
John N. Molony', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37613


Jones, Agnes Elizabeth (1832-1868), nurse, was born on 10 November 1832 in Cambridge, the elder daughter of Major Joseph Jones (1795-1850) of Londonderry and his wife, Elizabeth Smyth. Agnes Jones was the niece of John Lawrence, first Baron Lawrence, viceroy of India and friend of Florence Nightingale. Major Jones, who served with the 12th regiment of foot, was promoted lieutenant-colonel in 1835. The regiment was posted to Mauritius in 1837, and the family spent six years there, until 1843 when Jones retired, as a lieutenant-colonel, and the family returned to the family home at Fahan, co. Donegal. Apart from two years at Miss Ainsworth's school at Avonbank, Stratford upon Avon (1848-50), Agnes Jones was educated at home. Following Lieutenant-Colonel Jones's death in 1850 the family moved to Dublin, and for three years Agnes Jones taught at the local ragged school, and visited the sick. 
While on a six-month continental holiday with her family, in 1853, she spent a week at Kaiserswerth, near Dusseldorf, in Germany, where the Lutheran pastor Fliedner had founded an institution for ex-women prisoners in 1833, which had grown to include a hospital, an orphanage, a lunatic asylum, and two schools, run by a community of deaconesses. 
Inspired by the work of Florence Nightingale in the Crimea, Agnes Jones was determined to become a nurse, and eventually, in 1860, she overcame her mother's opposition and embarked on eight months' training at Kaiserswerth. She was dissuaded by Pastor Fliedner from volunteering to go to the Syrian mission, and at his suggestion she finished training as a hospital sister and returned to England hoping to work for Florence Nightingale. On her return in April 1861 she took charge of the new Parker Street dormitory for girls, in London, run by the Bible Women's Mission, but this was cut short by the need for her to go to Rome to nurse her sister, who had been taken ill. In 1862 she became a Nightingale probationer at St Thomas's Hospital, London. After one year's training there, where she was Florence Nightingale's 'best and dearest pupil', she worked as a sister at the Great Northern Hospital for the first six months of 1864. 
In April 1865, after months of hesitation, Agnes Jones, accompanied by twelve Nightingale nurses, went to Liverpool as lady superintendent of the Liverpool workhouse infirmary at Brownlow Hill. In 1864 William Rathbone, a wealthy shipowner and philanthropist, and a member of the Liverpool vestry, had offered to pay for a matron and trained nurses for three years, as an experiment, to be supplied by the Nightingale Fund, and Florence Nightingale had nominated Agnes Jones. Previously there had been no trained nurses in poor-law institutions, nursing being done by the paupers themselves, and there was widespread sickness among workhouse inmates. She began work in charge of the male wards only, but in 1867 her authority was extended to all the wards, and the vestry decided to make the new system permanent, and to pay for it. Brownlow Hill was the first workhouse to have its own training school for nurses. At first, her uncompromising attitude led to clashes with the governor, George Carr, but, after intervention by Florence Nightingale, relations improved. She was greatly overworked, with between 1300 and 1500 patients, several hundred more than the number of beds, and only fifty nurses. She had only four hours sleep a night. 
Agnes Jones's intense religious fervour, which had led her into nursing in the first place, caused Florence Nightingale some anxiety. She took 'Bible'-reading classes among her nurses, and tried to lead sinners to repentance, and Florence Nightingale was afraid this might damage the reputation of workhouse nursing. After Agnes Jones's death her two aunts, Georgina and Esther Smyth, wrote to Florence Nightingale with stories of miracles performed by her. Agnes Jones was very beautiful -- Florence Nightingale described her as 'pretty and young and rich and witty, ideal in her beauty as a Louis XIV shepherdess' -- and although partially deaf she was an excellent administrator, and determined to establish the principle that she, as lady superintendent, and not a doctor or the workhouse governor, should be in charge of the nursing. 
Agnes Jones died of typhus fever in the Liverpool workhouse infirmary on 19 February 1868. She was buried at Fahan church, co. Donegal. Florence Nightingale wrote about her work in 'Good Words' in 1868 under the title 'Una and the Lion', without mentioning her name. Una was Agnes Jones, and the lion represented the paupers she had to nurse. This eulogy was designed as a recruiting appeal for women to train as hospital nurses. Although the Liverpool scheme collapsed shortly after her death, as she had trained no successor and there was no one suitable to replace her, she had proved the importance of professional workhouse nursing. Within ten years of her death pauper assistants were no longer used in workhouse infirmaries, and in 1879 the Workhouse Infirmary Nursing Association was formed. A memorial erected to Agnes Jones in the Liverpool workhouse was later moved to the city's Walton Hospital. Liverpool Cathedral has a memorial window dedicated to her. 


@@@@@


doc= 37614


Jones, Mary (1707-1778), poet, was born on 8 March 1707 in Oxford, the second of four children of Oliver Jones, cooper, of St Aldates, and his second wife, one of the daughters (probably Mary) of Thomas Penn, a yeoman of South Newington near Banbury. Two younger brothers died in infancy; her elder brother, Oliver, became chanter and senior chaplain of Christ Church. 
Jones learned French and Italian and was able to translate from Italian by the age of sixteen. She may have spent some years as a governess, since by 1730 she had formed friendships with an aristocratic circle including two women of Queen Caroline's household: Martha Lovelace, who in 1739 married Lord Henry Beauclerk and later became housekeeper at Windsor Castle, and Mrs Charlotte Clayton ('Stella' in Jones's verse), who became Lady Sundon in 1735. Jones regularly visited Martha at New Lodge, Windsor, and Charlotte at nearby Fern Hill. In contrast to these wealthy friends, she lived for most of her adult life modestly with her brother. 
Information on Jones's life is mostly drawn from her 'Miscellanies in Prose and Verse'. She began writing verses 'at a very early age' with no view to publication. In April 1742 she found to her surprise that her ballad 'The Lass of the Hill' was published in London, and about the same time her verses on the death of Lord Aubrey Beauclerk were printed, regardless of permission, by his widow. Jones comments: 'this... one gets by letting one's friends enjoy the pleasing secrets of one's writing.' 
About 1745 Jones published 'A Letter to Dr Pitt', a prose mock complaint to her neighbour at the condition of the boundary fence, with much play on the need of his medical skills to repair its 'paroxysms' and 'epilepsies'. She was now becoming reconciled to publication, and in 1748 was preparing a collection of her letters and poems. 'Miscellanies in Prose and Verse' was published in 1750, with 1400 subscribers, 'for the sake of a relation, grown old and helpless... whom she had no other methods of effectually assisting'. The volume was well received; extracts were published in the 'London Magazine' throughout 1752. Sixteen poems appeared in 'Poems by Eminent Ladies' in 1755. 
Jones's literary acquaintance included Samuel Johnson, who called her 'the Chantress' (Boswell, 'Life', 1.322). Thomas Warton remembered her as 'a most sensible, agreeable and amiable woman' (ibid.). Her poetry is well crafted and witty, her subjects typically epitaphs, mild moral counsel, and light satire. She was much influenced by Pope: 'If Mr Pope could contrive to write without a Genius, I don't know anyone so likely to hit off my manner.' Lonsdale (p. 156) regards her as 'one of the most intelligent and amusing women writers of her period'. 
Jones lived in Oxford all her life, her final address being 16 Fish Street. At her death she was postmistress of Oxford. She died in Oxford on 10 February 1778, and was buried there four days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 37615


Jones, Robert (c.1564-1615), Jesuit, who employed a variety of aliases, was born in the diocese of St Asaph, either near Chirk or in Oswestry. On 20 August 1581 he arrived at the English College then situated in Rheims. On 3 September 1582 he was sent to the English College in Rome where he was accepted on 6 November. On 26 May 1583 he entered the Jesuit noviciate in Rome. He completed his philosophical and theological training at the Roman College and was ordained at an unknown date in the early 1590s. About the same time he was appointed to the philosophical faculty of the Roman College: copies of student notes from his lectures can be found in various European archives. On 11 October 1594 Claudio Acquaviva, father general of the Society of Jesus, sent Jones to the English mission and by 25 February 1595, Jones was in London. Little is known about his activities in the 1590s save that he laboured in Wales and along the marches with periodic visits to London. Somewhere outside London he was professed of the four vows on 18 October 1603. 
By the accession of King James, Jones had established an organization of recusant Welsh gentry, Welsh secular priests, and Jesuits. From a centre in Monmouthshire the network extended along the marches. Official government reports claimed that Jones himself frequented the Lacons and the Draycotts of Painsley (Shropshire), the Morgans of Llantarnam, and the Griffiths of Cwm near Monmouth, and celebrated mass weekly at the Darren on the Herefordshire border. In 1604 he sent students to Valladolid and Douai from Shropshire, Worcestershire, Herefordshire, and Monmouthshire. In 1605 Sir Herbert Croft, high sheriff of Herefordshire, warned London that recusants under Jesuit influence would take up arms against the king, accusing Jones of being the instigator. Despite the increased surveillance and vigilance as a result of the fury unleashed by the Gunpowder Plot, Jones eluded capture. He was considered the most likely candidate to succeed Henry Garnet as superior of the Jesuit mission after the latter's execution on 3 May 1606, but he asked to be excused. 
More severe legislation followed the plot. To avoid financial disaster the ex-Jesuit Thomas Wright urged Catholics to attend churches, according to Jones, 'not to hear service, but to hear sermons' -- which, unfortunately, happened to be commonly held during services (Foley, 4.372). To stop the spread of such error Jones asked the Jesuit Robert Persons to lobby the Catholic church for a clear, forceful condemnation of these views. 
Some time in the early 1600s Jones received into the Roman church Lady Frances Somerset, daughter of Edward Somerset, the fourth earl of Worcester, who, in 1596, had married Jones's patron William Morgan of Llantarnam. Through her Jones gained admission into the Worcester household at Raglan Castle. Eventually Jones reconciled Frances's sisters and her brother Henry Somerset, the earl's son and heir. By January 1609 the Somersets and the Morgans were the principal Catholics under Jones's direction. 
Despite Jones's earlier reluctance Acquaviva named him superior of the English Jesuit mission on 28 March 1609. In letters to Jesuits on the mission Jones consistently stressed the importance of prayer, mutual support, and especially poverty, as Jesuits strove to follow a religious life in a hostile environment. He urged Acquaviva to send only 'truly discreet, prudent, mortified, humble and patient' Jesuits to the mission (Foley, 4.385-6). 
In 1609 Jones submitted an English translation of an unnamed treatise 'de potestate papae' but Acquaviva denied permission for its publication. It is not clear from the correspondence whether Jones was the translator or simply submitting to censors the translation of another. His Italian account of the execution of Roger Cadualadr at Leominster in 1610 attempted to claim the secular priest as a Jesuit ally in the current tension between Jesuits and secular clergy in England. 
Described as tall, broad faced, with a high forehead and large eyes, Jones relinquished not the office itself but its exercise to Michael Walpole on 24 November 1613 presumably for reasons of health. Two successive accidents within a short period as he hastened through the night to baptize a baby resulted in his death on 20 August 1615. 


@@@@@


doc= 37616


Jones, Thomas Gwynn (1871-1949), poet and scholar, was born on 10 October 1871 at Gwyndy-uchaf, Betws-yn-Rhos, Denbighshire, the eldest of the four children of Isaac Jones (1842-1929), farmer, poet, and lay preacher, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Roberts (1845-1896). At birth he was given the name Thomas, but adopted Gwynn as a second name in his early twenties and thereafter went by the name T. Gwynn Jones. 
After elementary education in country schools and a little private tuition Gwynn Jones's early attempts to prepare for Oxford entrance came to nought when he fell ill on the eve of the matriculation examination. The autodidact in him overcame this set-back, and when ultimately he obtained a university chair he did so unencumbered by a day spent in a seat of higher learning. Between 1891 and 1909 he was a journalist in north Wales and Liverpool, working mainly for Welsh-language weekly newspapers, including 'Baner ac Amserau Cymru' in Denbigh and 'Yr Herald Cymraeg' and 'Papur Pawb' in Caernarfon. On 8 June 1899 he married Margaret Jane 
(Megan; 1872-1963)
, the daughter of Thomas and Anne Davies of Denbigh: they had a daughter and two sons. After wintering in Egypt on medical advice in 1905-6 he returned briefly to journalism until, in 1909, he became a cataloguer at the new National Library of Wales in Aberystwyth. In 1913 he was appointed reader in Welsh literature at the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, and in 1919 was promoted to the Gregynog chair of Welsh literature, remaining in that post until he retired in 1937. Gwynn Jones's late entry to academic life was fostered by supporters such as Sir John Williams, the national library's principal benefactor, and the influential scholar and critic Sir John Morris-Jones, his academic guru. 
Gwynn Jones was a prolific writer of exceptional energy and versatility. His scholarly works include an introduction to 'Dwyfol gan Dante', a translation of Dante's 'Divina commedia' by Daniel Rees, his sympathetic editor in Caernarfon (1903); 'Bardism and romance' (1914); 'Llenyddiaeth y Cymry' (1915); 'Llenyddiaeth Gymraeg y bedwaredd ganrif ar bymtheg' (1920); 'Gwaith Tudur Aled' (2 vols., 1926); and 'Welsh Folklore and Folk Custom' (1930). He wrote acclaimed biographies of two men who had a profound influence upon him. The first, published in 1912, was of Emrys ap Iwan (the Revd Robert Ambrose Jones), a forthright critic and writer on religious and political matters, who had encouraged him to study early Welsh literature and kindled his interest in European languages. The second biography appeared in 1913, and took as its subject Thomas Gee, owner and campaigning editor of 'Baner ac Amserau Cymru' in Denbigh and mentor of the young Lloyd George, who had given him his start in journalism. 
Gwynn Jones also turned his linguistic and literary gifts to translating works from English, Irish, and languages of mainland Europe. They include 'Macbeth' (1902 and 1942), translations from Irish in 'Peth nas Lleddir' (1921) and 'Awen y Gwyddyl' (1922), works by Ibsen and von Hofmannsthal, and, notably, 'Faust' (1922). With H. J. Rose he translated a selection of Greek and Latin epigrams (1927). In 1940 the Gregynog Press published 'Visions of the Sleeping Bard', his translation into English of Ellis Wynne's prose masterpiece. During his years in journalism he produced fifteen novels in serial form, of which four subsequently appeared as books, 'John Homer' (1923) and 'Lona' (1923) being the best-known. His winter in Egypt provided material for a travel book, 'Y Mor canoldir a'r Aifft' (1912). Collections of his essays appeared in 'Traethodau' (1910), 'Cymeriadau' (1933), 'Beirniadaeth a Myfyrdod' (1935), 'Astudiaethau' (1936), and 'Dyddgwaith' (1937). 
Despite these substantial achievements it is as a poet that Gwynn Jones is remembered by the Welsh people. He was generally recognized as the leading poet of his generation, and is one of the major figures of Welsh poetry from its beginnings to the present day. Part of Gwynn Jones's genius lay in his remarkable complexity -- a Romantic who said profound things about the tragedy of his own times; a poet of 'pure bitterness' and of lyrical nostalgia; in prosody a conservative and an innovator; a pacifist 'with the emphasis on the fist'; a semi-detached believer; a melancholiac with a sense of humour. 
The classical diction and economy of medieval Welsh poetry captivated Gwynn Jones, and their imprint is clear in his later work. He was a consummate master of the strict metres and of 'cynghanedd' (alliteration and sometimes internal rhyme in a line of verse). Most of his major poems are dramatic narratives which draw upon Celtic legend, although he adapted the stories freely, grafting on inventions of his own and exploiting their timelessness to relate them to his own day. He came to prominence in 1902 when, still a struggling journalist, he won the first of his two national eisteddfod chairs for his ode 'Ymadawiad Arthur' ('The passing of Arthur'), which captured the spirit of an age of national reawakening. There followed a majestic sequence of mythological poems -- 'Gwlad y bryniau' (1909), 'Tir na n'og' (1916), 'Madog' (1918), 'Broseliawnd' (1922), 'Anatiomaros' (1925), 'Argoed' (1927), and 'Cynddilig' (1935) -- which chart the transition from his early optimism to bitter disillusionment, a process hastened by his reaction to the First World War and to contemporary cultural and moral disintegration. He devised new metres, dispensing with rhyme but retaining 'cynghanedd' until, finally, metre gave way to 'vers libre'. Although Gwynn Jones saw contradictions in his poems, and said that it was 'idle to seek in them either teaching or philosophy', their recurring themes are the tragedy of simple societies and the personal dilemmas of their heroes under the threat of oppression, and the quest for Arcadia (famously Ynys Afallon in 'Ymadawiad Arthur'). They appear in one or more of his six volumes of verse -- 'Gwlad y gan a chaniadau eraill' (1902), 'Ymadawiad Arthur a chaniadau ereill' (1910), 'Detholiad o ganiadau' (1926), 'Manion' (1932), 'Caniadau' (1934), and 'Y dwymyn' (1944). Most of the poems in 'Y dwymyn', stark and full of foreboding, first appeared pseudonymously in the 1930s, when their style and content caused a stir. They mark his final weaning from Afallon. 
Some have suggested that Gwynn Jones's search for his Afallon led him to an ivory tower far from the social realism found in later poets. But he was no cloistered scholar: his early socialism and years in journalism taught him something of the world, and he had seen what the industrial age had done to traditional society. His poems, he said, were 'an attempt to recount experiences': his Afallon allegorically suggests his condemnation of the unbearable present. The stories, the majestic diction with its archaisms, the effortless mastery of 'cynghanedd', and the vivid evocation of nature and scenes of human action combine to make some of the most artistically satisfying passages in Welsh literature. But at the same time his symbolism precisely suggests the old world's loss of innocence and the corrosive materialism of the new. 
When he retired in 1937 Gwynn Jones was appointed CBE. Both the University of Wales and the National University of Ireland conferred upon him the honorary degree of DLitt. He was granted the medal of the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion in 1939, and in 1944 received the traditional tribute of the Welsh people in the form of an illuminated address and generous testimonial. He died at his home, Willow Lawn, at Caradog Road in Aberystwyth, on 7 March 1949, and was buried on 10 March in the town's public cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 37617


Jones, Thomas Wharton (1808-1891), physiologist and ophthalmic surgeon, was born in St Andrews, Fife, on 9 January 1808, the second of three sons (there were also three daughters) of Richard Jones (died 1821), sometime secretary of customs for Scotland, and his wife, Margaret Cockburn of Ayton Mains, Berwickshire. Through his maternal grandmother Jones fancied he could trace a distinguished ancestry back to the Norman conquest, but he grew up in straitened circumstances, and money remained a problem throughout his life. After early education in Stirling, Dalmeny, and Musselburgh, he enrolled in arts classes at Edinburgh University in 1822. After switching to medicine, he distinguished himself, and qualified LRCS in 1827. Jones's appointment as demonstrator in the extramural anatomy school of Robert Knox coincided with the scandal of William Burke and William Hare, and Jones left Edinburgh for Glasgow in 1829. There his interests in ophthalmology and embryology were cultivated. About 1835 he moved to a practice in Cork; after an extended tour of continental universities, he settled in London in 1838. 
Never a particularly successful medical practitioner, Jones brought a sound scientific reputation with him. In May 1841 he was appointed lecturer in physiology at Charing Cross Hospital medical school. He had been elected FRS in 1840 and became FRCS in 1844. From 1851 to 1881 he was professor of ophthalmic medicine and surgery at University College, London, and although he influenced the earliest microscopical investigations of Joseph Lister, he never took much part in college life. Eventually he became an object of derision among medical students, who called him 'Mummy Jones'. For many years he lived with his mother. 
Jones's scientific work was mostly microscopical, and included important observations on the blood circulation through capillaries, the mammalian ovum, the pathophysiology of inflammation, and the nature of the white blood corpuscles. Much of this was summarized in his 'State of the blood and blood-vessels in inflammation, as ascertained by experiments, injections, and observations under the microscope', his Astley Cooper prize essay ('Guy's Hospital Reports', 1850). His 'Failure of Sight from Railway and other Injuries of the Spine and Head' (1869) was a speculative attempt to apply his theories of inflammation to clinical problems. 
Jones was a competent eye surgeon, and his 'Manual of the Principles and Practice of Ophthalmic Medicine and Surgery' (1847) reached its third edition in 1865. He published in addition shorter primers aimed at medical students and general practitioners. His views on the nature of astigmatism were important and he improved the treatment of acute glaucoma. After Hermann von Helmholtz introduced his ophthalmoscope, Jones became adept at using it, though he had earlier failed to recognize the significance of an ophthalmoscope devised by Charles Babbage. 
Jones was a religious man who published a treatise on natural theology and was hostile to the evolutionary work of Charles Darwin. He was saved in old age from extreme poverty by a private subscription and, on the recommendation of T. H. Huxley, a civil-list pension. This permitted him to retire in 1881 and to settle at Swiss Cottage, Ventnor, Isle of Wight, where he died, unmarried, on 7 November 1891. 
W. F. Bynum', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37618


Josselin, Ralph (1617-1683), Church of England clergyman and diarist, was born on 26 January 1617 at Roxwell in Essex, the first son and third child of John Josselin (died 1636), farmer, and his wife, who was probably called Anne. 
Josselin's early education was at Bishop's Stortford. By his own account he was an eager pupil, with a special love of books and histories, both secular and biblical. From his early days, he claimed, he showed a desire to become a clergyman. He loved to hear ministers preach and afterwards to imitate them -- 'acting in corners' ('Diary', 1) -- and to walk home solitarily to meditate on the sermon. His mother died in 1624 when he was not yet eight and when Josselin was in his early teens his father -- an unsuccessful farmer -- married again. Josselin seems not to have got on with his stepmother and in 1633 he was sent to Jesus College, Cambridge. Despite interruptions to his studies caused by lack of money, he received his BA in 1636-7 (and his MA in 1640). His father died in 1636. Having toyed with thoughts of becoming either a farmer or a lawyer, Josselin decided on a career in the church, and spent the next three years trying to support himself in a succession of posts as schoolteacher and curate. In March 1641 he became vicar of the parish of Earls Colne, Essex, where he was to spend the rest of his life. 
Josselin described himself as, at birth, 'the seed of the righteous' ('Diary', 1). His own record of his passage into the ministry makes clear his religious identity as a puritan. He disapproved of the religious changes introduced by Charles I's archbishop, 'that great stickler for all outward pomp' (ibid., 31) William Laud, changes that were making their mark on the Cambridge he attended. At his ordination in February 1640 Josselin refused to bow towards the altar. Having been encouraged to enter the church by John Borodale, vicar at his father's parish and himself a man questioned for his nonconformity, he was well suited to be minister at Earls Colne. This was a parish which had acquired a reputation for nonconformity under Thomas Shepard, who had been forced to flee to New England, and under its godly patrons and lords of the manor, the Harlakenden family, with whom Josselin was to form a very close relationship. 
Josselin's arrival at Earls Colne coincided with the beginnings of parliament's attack on the Caroline church, and his long tenure with the prolonged period of instability precipitated by the failure to agree on the structure of a reformed church and later the growth of nonconformity following the reimposition of Anglican uniformity at the Restoration. His diary provides an intimate picture of the hopes and fears that these changes brought to a deeply religious man. 
Josselin welcomed the religious freedom parliament's reforms brought, signing the 1642 petition to parliament from Essex in support of further reform. He rejected the 'heavy burden' of the prayer-book service and he ensured that at the earliest opportunity the parish swept away idolatrous imagery from the church. But thereafter he was caught between his desire, in accordance with his strict Calvinist beliefs, to exclude from the sacrament of the communion those who were not in the company of God's saints, and his pressing concern to promote throughout his parish a moral reformation that required regular and universal church attendance. In the absence of an effective national church he found himself also worried by those separatists who regarded liberty as an invitation to form their own churches and to worship after their own fashion. 
In the early 1640s Josselin found comfort in his ability to meet together regularly with a select group of his honest and godly neighbours in voluntary prayer and discussion. By 1647 this had come to be formalized in what Josselin termed 'the society'. There are repeated references in the diary to its meetings, especially for the period from 1647 to 1657. With his patrons the Harlakendens and other leading families active in the meetings, it provided Josselin with significant spiritual assistance throughout the turbulent days of civil war, revolution, and Restoration. Josselin needed support since he faced challenges in his ministry from both spiritual enthusiasm and what he termed spiritual apathy. By 1647 he was noting in his diary that his 'congregacion growes very thinne' ('Diary', 93), but this had less to do with spiritual apathy than with the spiritual antipathy that Josselin faced from some of the parish. For, although it is clear from his diary that Josselin was an effective and active preacher, receiving invitations to preach elsewhere in the county and at Paul's Cross in London, his policies within Earls Colne made him unpopular with a section of the parish. (It may be significant that the only time Josselin recorded preaching to a full church, with parishioners outside the church forced to listen through the windows, was in a dream.) Like other godly ministers Josselin was anxious to suppress popular festivities. These were occasions of sin in the eyes of the godly, what Josselin himself attacked as 'the jollity and vanity of the time that custome hath wedded us unto' (ibid., 30). That Josselin used the pulpit to attack such practices, intervening personally on one occasion to scatter the youth at play on the green, probably did little for his popularity. But an important consequence of his readiness to find spiritual support in the more select gathering of 'the society' probably had a larger role to play. Josselin's worries that universal communion might mean that those who lacked evidence of grace and salvation would endanger the purity of the sacrament had led him to abandon communion in the early 1640s. It is clear that this decision caused him considerable soul-searching. When communion was restored early in 1651 his moving entry in his diary provides powerful testimony of the importance of the sacrament to the godly. But when communion was restored, it was done only after considerable discussion with other members of Josselin's immediate religious circle, and the restrictions placed on those who could receive effectively made it a closed communion available to only a minority of parishioners. Reintroduction led to a period of prolonged worry for Josselin as to what would happen if parishioners presented themselves for communion who were thought unworthy. 
Josselin's consciousness of what he termed confusions and disorders in parish and country help to explain his recognition of the need for a national church and his support for a presbyterian church settlement. Josselin was an eager signatory of the solemn league and covenant and confided in his diary his disappointment that parliament did not ensure its full implementation. He was one of the signatories to the 1648 petition in support of the church settlement proposed by the Westminster assembly, 'A testimony of the ministers in the province of Essex to the truth of Jesus Christ and to the solemn league and covenant, as also against the errors, heresies and blasphemies of these times and of the toleration of them'. He discussed the establishment of parochial classes with Matthew Newcomen and he was named as minister for Earls Colne in the proposed presbyterian church settlement for Essex. But in his practice, as in the petition he signed, Josselin was prepared to allow for the tender consciences of dissenting brethren. He was hostile, however, to those who wished to separate altogether from the church. Almost from the start of his ministry he was troubled by separatists within the parish; while this led to another source of anxiety in the diary, it later became something of a preoccupation with the emergence of the Quakers in the 1650s. 
With the failure of a national settlement, entries in Josselin's diary reveal the intensity with which he, in association with other ministers and with his immediate religious circle, debated both matters of faith and church government. Confronted by enormous changes both in the kingdom and abroad, from 1647 Josselin began to exhibit in the diary an active belief in millenarianism, recording and seeking to interpret both his and his children's dreams, as well as major episodes in the Europe-wide battle between Catholics and protestants and rumours of the return of the Jews to England, as evidence for the imminence of Christ's second coming. 
After the Restoration, Josselin -- to his continuing surprise and puzzlement -- was allowed to continue as vicar of Earls Colne, while all around him his fellow godly ministers were expelled. Although references to 'the society' cease after 1662, it is clear that Josselin still had a circle of godly friends with whom he could pray and seek advice. It is also clear that he continued quietly to resist the reintroduction of an Anglican liturgy. He only reintroduced the prayer book communion service into the parish in 1665 after being summoned before the church courts the previous year, in what was to be the first of several appearances for his unwillingness to conform. But when communion was restored, Josselin recorded only a small number of communicants -- usually less than twenty in a parish where several hundred were eligible. These well-known figures have led some historians to use Josselin as a witness to growing plebeian indifference, but they suggest perhaps that Josselin and his godly circle may have continued to exercise -- albeit informally -- restrictions on eligibility. 
Ralph Josselin's main claim to fame lies in the detailed diary he kept. This diary, one of the richest and most important to survive for the seventeenth century, has suffered various vicissitudes. It was lost or stolen in the nineteenth century and recovered by a chance purchase for 6died by the Victorian novelist Mrs Oliphant. A scholarly edition prepared for the Camden Society in the first decade of the twentieth century omitted almost three-quarters of the original with the justification that only the repetitive 'many entries of no interest whatever' had been excised. The Josselin that emerged from this edition of the diary was very much the public man, whose comments on the great religious and political issues of his day were what most merited attention. He was a moderate parliamentarian, active in electioneering and petitioning and worried by the emergence of more radical groups like the Levellers, and served for a brief spell as a chaplain in the parliamentarian army and assisted locally with the implementation of measures for the reform of the church and augmentation of livings; he suffered plundering by royalist troops for his active organization of the defence of the village in 1648 at the siege of Colchester. Although unhappy at the king's execution, he retained his support for what he called the 'honest party' even after the Restoration. Josselin's well-informed comments on political events both in England and on the continent (on which he made an annual end-of-year report in his diary) reflect the social depth to political knowledge in mid-seventeenth-century England. 
Renewed examination of the manuscript diary in the 1960s disclosed how much had been excluded. It revealed the possibilities for a rich and intimate portrait of the man and the social, cultural, and mental worlds he inhabited. Such was the quality of the evidence that Josselin became perhaps the first man in British history whose biography formed the subject for 'an essay in historical anthropology' (Macfarlane), and this in turn led to a pioneering large-scale study of his parish of Earls Colne. Finally, a complete edition of the diary appeared in 1976. 
After a retrospective of his early life in its early pages, the diary offers a detailed (and for the core years often daily) account of Josselin's life. The picture that emerges allows the reader to see Josselin properly in context, to sympathize with much that seems familiar in his life, and to puzzle over much that is foreign and strange. Married and family life feature strongly. He writes of falling in love and marrying a wife -- Jane ('c'.1621-1693), daughter of Thomas Constable of Olney, Buckinghamshire, whom he married on 28 October 1640 and with whom he was to spend all but a few months of the forty-three years of their marriage living and working together. He writes with pride and affection of his relations with his children and of his evident concern to see them settled, but with irritation when relationships with them (or his wife) did not go the way he planned or expected. He writes movingly of their illnesses and deaths; two of his ten children died soon after birth, and one -- his beloved Mary -- in early childhood. A sense of loss and sensitivity to the psychological needs of the survivors clearly informed the counselling he offered in a funeral sermon of 1652, his only published sermon. But in seeking explanations for why God took away his ten-day-old son Ralph, Josselin opens a window on to another world when he finds the explanation in a punishment for his playing too much chess. As his references to a monstrous birth and parishioners who had seen the devil reveal, for all the intimate familiarity of his family life, Josselin inhabited a very different mental world. 
The Josselin of the restored diary is a man himself vulnerable to the threats posed by illness, anxiously and endlessly noting the condition of his urine or the recurring problems he had with an infected navel. He was a man who needed to combine his pastoral duties, his scholarship, and his love of books (of which he was a frequent purchaser) with the need to secure a living. A worry over money is a constant theme. Earls Colne as a living never quite lived up to his expectations and this led to hard negotiations with his parishioners on whose tithes and voluntary (but, for many in the parish, often reluctant) donations he much depended, and it prompted threats and thoughts of moving to other livings, which were scotched by the renewed generosity of his patrons, the Harlakendens. A generous bequest from a wealthy parishioner helped to establish him as a farmer from the mid-1640s. 
Frequent references to the weather and state of the harvest are but the most common of the many other topics noted in Josselin's detailed diary. But his references to the weather reveal a deeper significance, one that clearly informed the purpose of his diary-keeping. He saw in the weather, especially that causing a run of poor harvests in the later 1640s and coinciding with the greatest period of religious and political uncertainty, worrying evidence of divine displeasure. Running through the diary is a concern to understand the ways of God in relation to events in his world and in his own life, and to the question of his own salvation. As frequent entries make clear, Josselin subscribed to a providentialist reading of the world as one in which God intervened directly in the lives of individuals and the societies in which they lived, punishing sin and rewarding right living. Keeping a diary allowed Josselin to reflect on evidence of divine interventions -- general through sword, famine, and plague and particular in the manifold mercies that he and his family enjoyed in escaping illness or accident. For all its rich detail of a past life, the primary purpose of Josselin's diary-keeping reflected the rigorous self-inspection by which the godly were expected to live their lives. Thus, when he survived a bee sting on the nose, Josselin was moved to record the incident in his diary, noting unselfconsciously that 'divine providence reaches to the lowest things' ('Diary', 19). 
Josselin died in August 1683, and was buried at Earls Colne on 30 August. By the time of his death he had secured a comfortable material existence. But even to the end, his diary, maintained until the month before his death, reveals a man trying to fulfil his parochial duties, continually concerned with his children's lives, receptive to political news (particularly of the fate of godly dissenters), and still, amid entries increasingly caught up with documenting his failing health, continuing to note, 'God good to me' ('Diary', 645). 


@@@@@


doc= 37619


Jourdain, (Emily) Margaret (1876-1951), historian of English furniture and decoration, was born on 15 August 1876 in Derwent, Derbyshire, the eighth of ten children of the Revd Francis Jourdain (1834-1898) and his wife, Emily, daughter of Charles Clay, a Manchester surgeon. As the hard-up daughter of a hard-up country parson, surrounded by caustic and highly competitive siblings, Margaret grew up sardonic, independent, and unorthodox. She rejected Christianity at an early age, declaring firmly to her governess, 'I don't want to hear any more about that poor man' (Spurling, 'Ivy when Young', 1.260). 
Margaret shared her scholarly approach with her eldest brother, Francis Charles Robert Jourdain -- himself a comparable pioneer in the field of ornithology -- and her refusal to acknowledge sexual restrictions with her eldest sister, Eleanor Frances Jourdain, principal of St Hugh's College, Oxford (and author, with C. A. E. Moberly, of 'An Adventure', 1911). Another brother was Philip Edward Bertrand Jourdain, historian of mathematics and logic. Margaret herself read classics at Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford, left with a third-class degree in 1897, and afterwards earned a precarious living as editor, translator, and book reviewer. Her chief patron was Lord Alfred Douglas, who, as editor of 'The Academy', published her collection of prose poems, 'An Outdoor Breviary', in 1909. 
But literary ambition was overtaken by a growing interest in the still virtually unexplored history of interior decoration and furnishing. In the early years of the century Margaret began writing up her researches in a steady stream of articles covering the field from chintzes to Chinese wallpapers, stumpwork to samplers, tea caddies, knife cases, card tables, and cradles. It was her knowledgeable and authoritative contributions that helped transform 'Country Life' from a relatively lightweight, romantic magazine into what Walter Runciman called 'the keeper of the architectural conscience of the nation' (Spurling, 'Secrets of a Woman's Heart', 90). She spearheaded a shift in taste away from Victorian ostentation, fussiness, and clutter to an earlier simplicity and severity. In 'Furniture in England from 1660 to 1760' (1914), together with its companion volume on decoration, she was the first to rediscover English Palladian design, to insist on the importance of historical context, and to rehabilitate the virtually forgotten William Kent (her monograph, 'The Work of William Kent', appeared in 1948). 
Margaret Jourdain published her first two furniture books under the name of the fashionable interior decorator Francis Lenygon, and her 'Decorative Arts in England (1760-1880)' under the name of a Birmingham coach builder called H. H. Mulliner. Both men profited from her literary abilities, providing her in return with a practical expertise that she could have got nowhere else. In the furniture world she had, in the words of Ralph Edwards, keeper of the Victoria and Albert Museum's woodwork department, 'few rivals and no superiors' (private information). Edwards was one of a whole generation of young men, trained by Margaret in the 1920s and 1930s, who went on to fill major posts in the national museums, the National Trust, and the great London auction houses. Younger women whose careers blossomed under her guidance included Joan Evans, Freya Stark, and Ivy Compton-Burnett. 
Margaret Jourdain set up house in 1919 with Ivy Compton-Burnett, who published the first of her singular novels six years later. Contemporaries maintained that Ivy owed much as a novelist to Margaret's dry, deflationary wit and profoundly sceptical intelligence. Margaret's own books remained erudite, austerely factual, and frequently first in the field. She was one of ten contributors to the three-volume 'Dictionary of English Furniture' (1924-7), edited by Edwards and Percy Macquoid, and her 'Georgian Cabinet-Makers' (1944), written with Edwards, gave long overdue recognition to designers other than Thomas Chippendale, George Hepplewhite, and Thomas Sheraton. 
Margaret Jourdain in her prime inspired terror, awe, and in some bold spirits affection. Squat, broad, and plain, she wore dashing plumed hats, lace jabots, feather boas, and a Georgian spyglass on a gold chain. Teatime anecdotes from the hospitable table she and Ivy kept at their flat in South Kensington have passed into London literary legend. Margaret never married for the same reasons as the character in one of Ivy Compton-Burnett's novels, who said, when asked if she would not have liked a full, normal life, 'No. I don't want the things it would be full of' (I. Compton-Burnett, 'Parents and Children', 1972, 86). Margaret Jourdain died from heart failure on 6 April 1951 in Charing Cross Hospital, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 37620


Joy, David (1825-1903), engineer and inventor, was born on 3 March 1825 in Leeds, one of the five sons of Edward Joy, oil-mill owner of Leeds, and his wife, Ruth. He showed keen interest in machinery from his early days and made ship and engine models, including a charcoal-fired model locomotive which ran at the Leeds exhibition in 1838. In 1840 he went to Wesley College, Sheffield, where he studied engineering drawing and read in particular Thomas Tredgold's 'The Steam Engine' (1st edn, 1827). 
Joy entered his father's seed-crushing and oil-refining works in 1841. He then started an apprenticeship with Fenton, Murray, and Jackson, locomotive builders. When this firm closed down in 1843 he transferred to the locomotive drawing office of the railway foundry works, Leeds, of Shepherd and Todd, where he became acting chief draughtsman. Here in 1847 he designed the famous Jenny Lind 2-2-2 type express locomotive for the London, Brighton, and South Coast Railway. Tested on the Midland Railway in the following year, one of these machines averaged 56 m.p.h. for 65 miles. This type had considerable influence on locomotive design for many years. In 1850 Joy and Edward Wilson patented twin boilers working in parallel within the same casing. 
In 1850 Joy became superintendent of the Ambergate, Nottingham, Boston, and Eastern Junction Railway and in 1853 of the Oxford, Worcester, and Wolverhampton, both of which were operated under contract by E. B. Wilson & Co. Here all his skill and experience were fully stretched in keeping the service running despite frequent breakdowns of second-hand and unsatisfactory locomotives. Returning to the railway foundry in 1855, he was involved in the building of the 'farm engine' of Robert Willis, the forerunner of the tractor and road locomotive, and in 1857 built a double expansion marine engine with innovative features. In 1859 he became manager of De Bergue's, bridge builders of Manchester, and took out patents for an improved steam hammer, whose manufacture was started in his own Cleveland engine works in Middlesbrough. 
In 1874 Joy went to the Barrow Shipbuilding Company as manager of the water-tube boiler department, becoming secretary in 1876. In 1879, following several years' work, he patented his radial valve gear, of simple and compact design, to give improved steam distribution in locomotive and marine engines. This was applied in 1880 to a new London and North Western Railway (LNWR) design of 0-6-0 freight locomotive. Well over 3000 locomotives of the LNWR, Lancashire and Yorkshire, and other railways were fitted with Joy's valve gear, which was also applied by Maudslay & Co. to marine engines, where a saving of 25 per cent in space and weight was achieved. 
In 1867 Joy married Kate, daughter of C. F. Humbert of Watford. They had three sons and two daughters. In 1882 Joy, with his sons, set up an engineering consultancy practice in Westminster to continue and develop applications of his inventions, which included a revolving gun and an organ blower. Among his many inventions one of the most important, for which he was awarded a gold medal at the 1885 inventions exhibition, was the conjugating mechanism enabling the three valves of a triple-expansion marine engine to be driven by only two sets of valve gear. Thirty years later this principle was applied by others to locomotives, and over 3000 were so equipped in Britain, Germany, and elsewhere. He was a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers, of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, and of the Institution of Naval Architects in England and in the USA. 
Joy died at his home, 118 Broadhurst Gardens, Hampstead, London, on 14 March 1903. He was survived by his wife. 
George W. Carpenter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37621


Joyce, William Brooke (1906-1946), fascist and propaganda broadcaster, was born on 24 April 1906 at 1377 Herkimer Street, Brooklyn, New York, USA, the first of three sons of Michael Francis Joyce (1869/70-1941), builder and contractor, originally of co. Mayo, Ireland, but naturalized as an American citizen in 1894, and his wife, Gertrude Emily Brooke (died 1944), of Shaw, Lancashire. The family returned to Ireland in 1909, where Joyce was educated in Roman Catholic schools, including the Jesuit St Ignatius Loyola College. The Joyces were, however, ardent loyalists, and Joyce later claimed to have fought as a boy alongside the Black and Tans. 
In December 1921 the family moved to England, where Joyce enlisted, first, in the British army (from which he was discharged when found to be under age), and then the London University Officers' Training Corps (when, to facilitate his application, his father falsely claimed that the family were British citizens). He studied at Battersea Polytechnic (1922-3), then at Birkbeck College, University of London, where he graduated with a first-class honours degree in English in June 1927. On 30 April 1927 he married Hazel Katherine Barr at Chelsea register office. They had two daughters, but the marriage was dissolved in 1937. 
While at Birkbeck, and still in his teens, Joyce became heavily involved in extreme right-wing politics. From 1923 to 1925 he was a member of the British Fascisti (and first came to the notice of special branch), and during an affray between fascists and communists at Lambeth during the general election of 1924 received the razor slash that permanently marked his face: the scar extended from his right ear to the corner of his mouth. Although he joined the Conservative Party in 1928, Joyce joined Sir Oswald Mosley's British Union of Fascists (BUF) in 1933, and became area administrator for the home counties, then director of propaganda and Mosley's deputy leader, with a reputation as a ferocious orator. In 1934 he obtained a British passport, after falsely declaring his birthplace to be Galway, Ireland. He married Margaret Cairns White (1911-1972), another active BUF member, at Kensington register office on 13 February 1937. However, Joyce and Mosley fell out (Joyce considered Mosley insufficiently antisemitic), and shortly after standing as a BUF candidate in Shoreditch in the London county council elections of March 1937 (when he received fourteen per cent of the vote) Joyce set up his own party, the National Socialist League (NSL), which called for Britain to unite with Hitler's Germany against the 'twin Jewish manifestations' of Bolshevism and international finance. Margaret Joyce became the NSL's assistant treasurer. Fearing certain detention should war come, the Joyces travelled on 26 August 1939 to Berlin, and on 18 September Joyce began broadcasting in the Reichsrundfunk's English-language service, initially as a newsreader. Within a few years he had become Germany's principal English-language broadcaster. 
The original Lord Haw-Haw (a name coined by Jonah Barrington of the 'Daily Express' in September 1939) was almost certainly one Wolff Mittler, the Reichsrundfunk's chief English-language broadcaster in the early part of the war, though the name was also applied to several other broadcasters, including Norman Baillie Stewart. Although Joyce's accent ('some sort of hybrid between a Yankee twang and an Irish brogue', according to J. W. Hall (Hall, 1)) differed markedly from Mittler's stilted aristocratic manner, his distinctive sardonic tones and call-sign ('Jairmany calling') made him the most instantly recognizable of German propagandists to Britain and the nickname stuck to him. By May 1940 he was using it himself on air and his true identity had been revealed in the British press. His broadcasts from Zeesen, Bremen, and especially Hamburg rapidly made him a celebrity of sorts in Britain, inspiring, for instance, a popular song ('Lord Haw-Haw, the Humbug of Hamburg') and a musical revue starring Max Miller, and they concerned the British government sufficiently to commission a BBC listener research report in December 1939. It found that two-thirds of the British public listened to Joyce at least occasionally -- although apparently more out of curiosity than defeatism. Although listening appeared to decline from mid-1940, public fascination with the broadcasts continued, and apocryphal 'Haw-Haw rumours' (for instance, that Joyce had correctly predicted local air raids, or demonstrated a sinisterly precise knowledge of town clocks) persisted throughout the war. Despite little evidence that these broadcasts did undermine British morale as intended, Goebbels himself rated Joyce's wartime propaganda contribution highly. In June 1942 Joyce was promoted to chief commentator in the English-language service, with his own programme, 'Views on the News'. In September 1944 he was awarded Nazi Germany's war merit cross first class. 
While in Germany Joyce also published a propaganda tract, 'Twilight over England' (1940), wrote extensively for the 'black' propaganda stations the New British Broadcasting Station and the Workers' Challenge Station, and was active in recruiting other broadcasters from among British prisoners of war. Margaret Joyce also worked for German English-language radio, writing women's features and from November 1940 to May 1942 broadcasting (as 'Lady Haw-Haw') weekly talks aimed at British women. After being granted German nationality in September 1940, the two were divorced in August 1941 (he citing adultery, she cruelty), but they remarried at the Berlin-Charlottenburg register office on 11 February 1942. 
Joyce's final broadcast was from Hamburg on 30 April 1945. He and his wife went into hiding near the Danish border, but he was shot and arrested on 28 May 1945 after a British soldier recognized his voice. Although Joyce had never legitimately held British nationality, he was tried on three counts of treason at the central criminal court, London, on 17-19 September 1945, with the prosecution (led by Sir William Hartley Shawcross) arguing that his youthful claims of British citizenship and, above all, his fraudulent holding of a British passport from 1933 to 1940 were sufficient proof in law that he had placed himself 'under the protection of the British crown' and thus owed the crown allegiance in return. After direction to this effect from the trial judge, Mr Justice Tucker, and with Joyce refusing to give evidence, the jury took just twenty-three minutes to convict him of the third count, that he had 'adhered to the King's enemies' by broadcasting for them between 18 September 1939 and 2 July 1940 (the date his British passport expired). Despite some disquiet in legal and other circles, appeals to the High Court and the House of Lords were dismissed (the latter with one dissentient), and Joyce was executed by hanging on 3 January 1946 at Wandsworth prison, London, one of only three people to be convicted by a British court of treason after the war and of only two to be executed (the other being John Amery). Margaret Joyce was detained in military custody for some months but was not prosecuted, and later moved to Ireland. She died in 1972. 


@@@@@


doc= 37622


Judde, Sir Andrew (c.1492-1558), merchant, was the third son of John Judde (died 1493), gentleman, of Tonbridge, Kent, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Valentine Chiche and great-niece of Archbishop Henry Chichele. He was apprenticed in 1509 to John Buknell, a skinner of London and merchant of the staple of Calais, and took up his freedom as a member of the Skinners' Company in 1520 (he was master in 1533 and five times thereafter). Judde married three times: first, in 1523, Mary, daughter of Sir Thomas Mirfyn, himself a skinner and lord mayor of London in 1518; second, by 1542, Agnes, about whom nothing is known; and third, in 1552, Mary, daughter of Thomas Mathews of Colchester and wealthy widow of another skinner, Thomas Langton. Three children survived from the first marriage, John, Richard, and Alice, who married Thomas Smythe (1522-1591) the customs official, and one daughter from the third, Martha, who married Robert Golding in Essex. 
Judde profited initially from exports of English wool through Calais, and he remained heavily involved there: he was mayor of the staple in 1552, 1555 (when he entertained King Philip of Spain in the city), and 1558. But he also had interests in the cloth trade; he dealt in lead, alum, and bullion; he lent money, arranged loans for the crown, and bought and sold former monastic land; he was a promoter of early voyages to Russia and west Africa, and a founder member of the Russia Company. It is highly unlikely that he himself travelled to Muscovy and Guinea, as a later epitaph alleged (though he had an elephant's head displayed as a curiosity in his house), but he was certainly one of the richest and most prominent of overseas merchants in early Tudor London. 
Judde was also a public figure of some note, being alderman from 1541 and lord mayor in 1550-51, when he had to deal with the problems caused by dearth and by the 1551 'calling down' of the coinage. 'Judde's Law', regulating the estates and marriages of orphan children of freemen of London, was passed during his mayoralty. He was knighted on 15 February 1551. He was a member of commercial deputations to the council, one of the City elite who gave nominal assent to the accession of Lady Jane Grey by signing the letters patent of 1553 in her favour, and then one of those organizing the defence of London in 1554 on behalf of Queen Mary against rebels led by Sir Thomas Wyatt. Nothing is known of his religious inclinations, but, like his friend Sir Thomas White, he had many charitable interests. He was treasurer of St Bartholomew's Hospital when it was remodelled in 1547, and surveyor-general of all the London hospitals in 1557-8. At the end of his mayoralty he founded six almshouses at St Helen's, Bishopsgate, with the Skinners as trustees, and in May 1553 he obtained letters patent for the erection of a free school, Tonbridge School, again with the Skinners' Company as trustees. The founder stressed the importance of instruction in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew; the school was built by the time of Judde's death and endowed with property worth $60 3's'. 8died a year. Its first master was John Proctor, fellow of All Souls, Chichele's foundation, and author of the account of Wyatt's rebellion which notes Judde's part in the defence of London Bridge. Sir Thomas Smythe (c.1558-1625), Judde's grandson, was a later benefactor of Tonbridge School. Judde died on 4 September 1558, leaving lands in Kent, Surrey, and Hertfordshire worth $141 p.a. to his widow, with reversion to John and Richard. He was buried in St Helen's, Bishopsgate, London. 
Paul Slack', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37623


Karno, Fred (1866-1941), comedian, was born on 26 March 1866 at Paul Street, Exeter, the eldest of the six sons and the seven children of John Westcott, cabinet-maker and french polisher of Exeter, and his wife, Emily Bowden, also of Exeter. He had a perfunctory elementary education in Exeter and Nottingham. He began as a circus acrobat and gymnast as one of the Three Carnoes with Bob Sewell and Ted Tysall. This became the Karno Trio, from which he took his stage name in the 1880s. By the 1890s he had developed his flair for low comedy, and established himself as an entrepreneur of often 'speechless' sketches. From Karno's Fun Factory in Camberwell he sent forth teams of comedians to perform his endless series of slapstick mini-shows as set pieces on music-hall bills. He had an early success with 'Jail Birds', while other favourites were 'The Football Match', starring Harry Weldon as Stiffy the goalkeeper, and 'Karno's Komics'. However, the cameo which won everlasting fame was 'Mumming Birds', first performed in 1904 at the Star Music Hall, Bermondsey. This is reputed to be the funniest burlesque of music-hall there has been, and, with its stage within a stage, it ran in one form or another for thirty years. 
In 1913 Karno expended a huge part of the fortune he had gathered on buying Tagg's Island on the Thames in Hampton and there built his 'Karsino' at a cost of $70,000. The outbreak of the First World War ruined all chance of its success -- he had hoped to sell it after two years to the Lyons company -- and he never quite recovered financially or professionally. He ran an off-licence in the latter part of his life. 
Karno's 'army' gave either a solid start or valuable experience to dozens of comedians. Charles Chaplin was spotted as a film prospect when with a Karno company, while other famous names associated with him include Stan Jefferson (Laurel, of Laurel and Hardy), Fred Kitchen (of the famous catchphrase, 'Meredith, we're in') Will Hay, Sandy Powell, Wee Georgie Wood, and Max Miller. Immortalized by the soldiery in the First World War, Fred Karno's army lives on as a descriptor of chaotic organization. To a famous hymn tune the troops irreverently sang: 'We are Fred Karno's army, Fred Karno's infantry; we cannot fight, we cannot shoot, so what damn good are we?' 
Karno married Edith (1867/8-1926/7), theatre assistant and daughter of John Cuthbert, journeyman rope manufacturer of Stockport, in Lambeth, on 15 January 1889. They had eight children, of whom six died in extreme infancy and only two sons, Frederick Arthur and Leslie, survived. On 16 June 1927, after the death of his first wife, whom he had treated with some cruelty, he married his long-time mistress, Marie Theresa Laura, daughter of Thomas William Moore of London, theatrical manager and co-founder of the Moore and Burgess Minstrels. Fred Karno died on 17 September 1941 at his home, 24 Wharfedale Road, Parkstone, Dorset. 


@@@@@


doc= 37624


Keenan, Sir Patrick Joseph (1826-1894), educationist and educational administrator, was born, probably in Dublin, the son of John Keenan of Phibsborough, Dublin, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Patrick Sherlock of Dublin. He had at least one sister. He was educated at Ratoath national school, Meath, and trained as a teaching monitor at the Central Model Schools of the Board of National Education, Marlborough Street, Dublin. In 1845 he was appointed headmaster of the Central Model Schools and in 1848 a district inspector of the national board. He rose through the ranks to become head inspector (1855), chief of inspection (1859), and resident commissioner of national education (1871-94). 
Keenan's knowledge and experience of Irish education were widely recognized. He was both the child of the national education system and its architect. In 1857 he published a pamphlet 'Model Schools -- a Sketch of their Nature and Objects', and in 1868 was called as a leading witness to the royal commission on primary education (Ireland). As a Catholic and exemplar civil servant he acted as adviser to and mediator between the government and the Catholic church authorities. He was an acknowledged expert in the system of 'payment by results' which was introduced into Irish national schools in 1872, and as such was appointed by the British government to report on the education system of Trinidad in 1869 and that of Malta in 1878. In both colonies his Irish experience of the problems of language and religion in education proved invaluable. 
Among Keenan's main achievements as resident commissioner were: the passing of the 'Intermediate Education Act' (1878) which established a system of payment by results for secondary schools, based on success in public examinations; the recognition of the Irish language as an 'extra' subject (for result fees) in national schools from 1879; the provision of state grants for denominational teacher training colleges; and the introduction of compulsory free education by the 1892 'Irish Education Act'. He also gained popularity with national schoolteachers by his official recognition of their newly formed union -- the Irish National Teachers' Organization. He gave evidence on Irish education to both the royal commission on technical instruction (1881-4) and the royal commission on the workings of the Elementary Education Act (England and Wales) (1886-8). 
Keenan married Elizabeth Agnes, daughter of Michael Quin JP of Waterville, co. Limerick, in 1860. They had a son and a daughter. In his later years he suffered ill health and his work was curtailed. He was appointed CB (1871), KCMG (1881), a member of the Royal Irish Academy, and JP for co. Dublin; in 1885 he was sworn of the privy council. He was president of the education department of the social science congress held in Dublin in 1881. Keenan died at Delville, Glasnevin, near Dublin, on 1 November 1894 and was buried at Glasnevin cemetery. 
S. M. Parkes', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37625


Kell, Sir Vernon George Waldegrave (1873-1942), intelligence officer, was born on 21 November 1873 at the barracks, South Town, Matford, Suffolk, the only son of Major Waldegrave Charles Vernon Kell of the South Staffordshire regiment and his wife, Georgiana Augusta Konarska. Kell's skill as a linguist led at first to thoughts of the diplomatic service, but in 1892 he entered the Royal Military College at Sandhurst and two years later joined his father's old regiment. Here he continued his study of languages, qualifying as an interpreter in French and German and, after studying in Moscow in 1898, in Russian. In 1900 he married Constance Rawdon Scott, whose drive and ambition were in marked contrast to his natural reserve. He was afterwards posted to Shanghai to learn Chinese, but he became caught up in the Boxer uprising and was unable to qualify as a Chinese interpreter until 1903. He then returned to London to a post in the German intelligence section of the War Office, but in 1905 he transferred to the Far Eastern section, and in 1907 moved to the committee of imperial defence (CID), where he was involved in writing the official history of the Russo-Japanese War. 
In 1909 the CID was asked to investigate the danger of German espionage and, influenced by widespread fears of invasion, recommended the establishment of a new Secret Service Bureau. Kell agreed to retire from the army to become its military representative, although, as his wife recalled, he was warned by his friends 'that he would find himself thrown over, if he were to make the slightest slip' (Kell). His chronic asthma and limited budget kept him from active enquiries, but he began the methodical collection of suspicious reports, and gradually gained the confidence of a select group of chief constables and government officials. Kell was convinced that the German army was already planning invasion, and arranged for the secret registration of more than 30,000 resident aliens, who he was convinced formed the basis of a network of military agents and saboteurs. He also detected a small group of German naval agents who were seeking technical information about the Royal Navy, and marked them down for arrest on the outbreak of war. This was the total extent of German espionage in Britain, but the efficient destruction of this network in August 1914 was overshadowed by Kell's redoubled efforts to locate the non-existent army of German saboteurs who he was convinced were still at large. 
During the war Kell's counter-espionage department, rechristened MI5, brought thirty-one German agents to trial, but its principal work remained the hunt for wider and more subtle conspiracies. When full conscription was introduced in May 1916 Kell accepted that the British peace movement had now to be 'classed as pro-German' and MI5 began the intensive surveillance of more than 5000 individuals (memo by Major V. Ferguson, 14 June 1916, TNA: PRO, HO 45/10801/307402, file 75). By October 1917 its registry contained almost 40,000 personal files, and 1 million cross-index cards, and its principal work had become the collection and analysis of information on a vast range of innocent individuals and organizations. Kell was appointed CB in 1917 and KBE in 1919. 
By the end of the war in November 1918 Kell had a staff of 850 and an annual budget of $100,000 devoted to this work, but the intelligence reorganization of 1919 saw many of MI5's responsibilities transferred to the special branch of Scotland Yard. Kell's budget was cut to $35,000, his staff was reduced to just thirty, and his duties were confined to counter-espionage and the combating of communism within the armed forces. Over the next six years he fought a running battle with the special branch and MI6, the foreign intelligence service, simply to preserve the existence of his unit. 
The post-war 'red scare' seemed ideal for MI5, as it demanded the cross-checking of vast numbers of suspects, and apparently confirmed that democracy required strengthening from outside by determined men such as Kell. However, financial constraints prevented MI5 from recruiting young staff and forced Kell to rely heavily on personal links with business and political organizations, often on the far right. Yet he continued to inspire loyalty in his hand-picked staff, and with their help managed to double the size of his bizarre 'precautionary index', which by February 1925 included more than 25,000 supposedly dangerous individuals, carefully classified by blood, by racial interests, and by sympathy and friendship. MI5's official historian considered it 'a tribute to Sir Vernon Kell's personality that the organisation was kept in being under such conditions', and gradually his obsessive search for disloyalty gained official backing (Curry, 66). In October 1931 MI5, now known as the 'security service', was given responsibility for investigating communism throughout the United Kingdom, using staff transferred from the special branch and MI6, and in 1934 it also gained the task of investigating fascism. This produced a rapid increase in MI5's resources and, although in 1935 Kell's staff numbered just over ninety, within four years it had grown to 330, with an annual budget of more than $90,000 and a secret registry containing some 250,000 personal files. 
Unfortunately MI5's obsessive indexing of possible suspects revealed almost nothing about actual secret service operations in Britain, and on the outbreak of war in September 1939 its ramshackle registry was overwhelmed by requests for security clearance. Kell, whose health had begun to fail, no longer enjoyed the confidence of senior officials, and when Winston Churchill became prime minister in May 1940 he dismissed both Kell and his deputy, Eric Holt-Wilson. Constance Kell informed MI5 staff that 'your precious Winston has sacked the General' (West, 153), and insult was added to injury through the granting of an ungenerous pension. 
According to Sir Dick White, Kell was 'a calm, modest and patient man, which made it seem obvious that fly-fishing was his chosen hobby' ('DNB'). He retired to a small rented cottage, Stonepits, Emberton, Olney, in Buckinghamshire, where he died on 27 March 1942; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 37626


Kelly, Isabella (bap. 1759, d. 1857), poet and novelist, was born at Cairnburgh Castle and baptized on 4 May 1759, the youngest of the three daughters of William Fordyce of Aberdeen, and his wife, Elizabeth Fraser (died 1785), niece of Alexander Fraser, Lord Strichen. Her grandfather William Fordyce of Anchorthies was a figure of scandal: a successful merchant and sometime baillie of Aberdeen, he was eventually convicted for his part in a kidnapping ring. Her parents were both cut off by their wealthy families, following a clandestine marriage in the early 1750s. Her father served with the Royal Marines, was promoted to captain by 1761, and later became groom of the bedchamber to George III, though in time he fell from favour at court. 
In December 1789 Isabella married Robert Hawke Kelly, the son of Colonel Robert Kelly of the East India Company. The younger Kelly had served in Madras before his marriage, and he apparently died there by 1807 with the rank of major. In 1794 Isabella Kelly published her first book, a 'Collection of Poems and Fables', although if her claim that '[s]everal of the pieces' in it 'were written before... her fourteenth year' (p. iii) is true, she had started writing much earlier. Kelly had by that time suffered 'a variety of domestic calamities' (ibid.), including -- if the poems are read autobiographically -- marital unhappiness, possible desertion by her husband, and the death of a child. 
In an attempt to support her surviving children, Kelly began writing Gothic fiction, publishing her first novel, 'Madeline', in 1794, and writing nine more between 1795 and 1811. The novels, which are full of both Gothic paraphernalia and fashionable sentiment, were moderately successful; the 'Critical Review' thought 'Madeline' 'entitled to a decent rank in the circulating libraries' (Kelly, 'Abbey of St Asaph', viii), and Kelly's later work received some aristocratic patronage. In addition to her fiction, Kelly wrote educational books, including a French grammar for children, and a rather eccentric collection of miscellaneous information, 'Instructive Anecdotes for Youth' (1819), which is dated from the King's Road, Chelsea. 
Kelly received financial support from Monk Lewis, who paid for the education and upbringing of her elder son, the spendthrift William Henry Martin Dillon Kelly ('b'. 1795); the latter assumed the name William Horace Keppell and became an actor in North America. She also spent some time as a governess to the Lonsdale family. On 22 May 1809 she married a wealthy merchant, Joseph Hedgeland, with whom she had a daughter. Her husband lost money in commercial speculations and died in January 1812, aged thirty-seven. In 1819 her son Sir Fitzroy Kelly (1796-1880) entered Lincoln's Inn and subsequently enjoyed a distinguished legal career. Her last book, 'A Memoir of the Late Mrs. Henrietta Fordyce', was published anonymously in 1823, perhaps in an attempt to silence rumours that she had taken advantage of a generous elderly relative. She received grants from the Royal Literary Fund in 1828 and 1830. Said to have been ninety years old in 1849, she died at 20 Chapel Street, Belgrave Square, London, on 25 June 1857 and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 37627


Kelsall, Charles (1782-1857), traveller and architect, was baptized on 1 August 1782 at Greenwich, Kent, the son of Thomas Kelsall, a member of the council of the East India Company and his wife, Sarah. He was educated at Eton College and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he became a fellow-commoner in 1800. He left in 1803 without taking a degree and spent three years in a Wiltshire militia regiment. In subsequently adopting the life of a travelling scholar, he was doubtless influenced by the academic study of Greece being undertaken about 1800 by a remarkable group of Cambridge scholars. He first visited Sicily while he was still an undergraduate, and it was on a second visit to the island in 1808-9 that he wrote the first of his many privately published books, a translation of Cicero's 'The Last Two Pleadings... Against Caius Verres' (1812). He unexpectedly appended to this a 'Post script containing remarks on the state of modern Sicily' in which his sympathy with contemporary trends in secular rationalist thought led him to argue that Sicily was in need of drastic modernization along liberal and democratic lines. 
Kelsall adopted the cause of Greek independence in 'A Letter from Athens Addressed to a Friend in England', a lengthy poem published in 1812, the same year as 'Childe Harold' by Lord Byron. In a footnote he held up the Greek Doric style as the model for a reformed modern architecture. In idealist language derived from J. J. Winckelmann, he praised Doric for its permanence and longevity, recording 'the rapid progress of the present age to the attainment of true taste in architecture'. He admired recent Greek revival buildings in St Petersburg, Berlin, Trieste, London, and Cambridge, but reserved his greatest praise for Paris, where 'grecian architecture triumphs' and was consequently 'a better school for young architects than either Rome or Venice'. 
Kelsall designed buildings in various styles, including Grecian, of which he published engravings by Henry Moses and other artists in 'Phantasm of an University' (1814), a book which has something in common with Claude-Nicolas Ledoux's 'L'architecture consideree sous le rapport de l'art, des moeurs, et de la legislation' (1804), with the proposals of Thomas Jefferson for the University of Virginia, and with the founding of London University. Kelsall argued for the fundamental reform, academically and architecturally, of Oxford and Cambridge, urging them to 'Take at last measures to keep peace with the improvements made in the present age, in all the departments of science and art.' Denying that 'universal science is centred in mathematics, in the classics', he proposed as fields of study civil policy and languages, fine arts, agriculture and manufactures, natural philosophy, moral philosophy, and mathematics. The course would be followed by a world tour. The university buildings were themselves instructive, incorporating all the 'orders to be seen in the ruins of Greece and Italy' as well as English medieval styles. 
In his 'Classical Excursion from Rome to Arpino' (1820) Kelsall published designs for a monument to Cicero in the Amalthea at Arpino. In 1841 he acquired a villa called Knightons in Hythe, Hampshire, which he renamed the Villa Amalthea, setting up busts of poets and scholars in the garden. His 'Remarks Touching Geography Especially that of the British Isles' (1822) proposed the introduction of Napoleonic departments, while his 'Horae viaticae' (1836) included a novel about a radical reforming pope. Kelsall also published 'Esquisse de mes travaux, de mes voyages, et de mes opinions' (1830). On his death at Nice on 3 January 1857 he left his books and manuscripts to Morden College, Blackheath, London, where a building was designed to house them by Philip Hardwick. 
David Watkin', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37628


Kempe, Sir Alfred Bray (1849-1922), lawyer and mathematician, was born on 6 July 1849 in Kensington, London, the fourth of five children of Prebendary John Edward Kempe, rector of St James's, Piccadilly (1853-95), and his wife, Harriet, daughter of the Revd Robert Serrell Wood. The electrical engineer Harry Robert Kempe (1852-1935) was his brother. He was educated at St Paul's School, London, where he was Camden exhibitioner, and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was twenty-second wrangler in mathematics in 1872. 
On leaving Cambridge, Kempe embarked on a legal career, becoming a barrister of the Inner Temple and practising on the western circuit in 1873. He quickly established a reputation for clarity of mind and scrupulous fairness. From 1881 to 1883 he was secretary of the royal commission on the ecclesiastical courts, and came to be respected as a recognized authority on ecclesiastical law. He was appointed to six diocesan chancellorships, Newcastle, Southwell, St Albans, Peterborough, Chichester, and finally London in 1912. He received an honorary doctorate of civil laws from Durham University in 1908, and in the following year was elected a bencher of the Middle Temple. 
Throughout his life Kempe sustained a passionate interest in mathematics, writing his first paper in 1872, the year in which he received his degree. His mathematical contributions, although few in number, were highly regarded by his contemporaries and he was elected fellow of the Royal Society on 2 June 1881 and was president of the London Mathematical Society from 1892 to 1894. His first mathematical paper concerned the solution of equations by mechanical means. This work arose from his interest in kinematics, and in particular from the construction of mechanical linkages for drawing various curves, a subject stimulated by Peaucellier's discovery of a linkage that traces a straight line. He presented some popular lectures on the subject in Kensington, which led in 1877 to the publication of a celebrated memoir entitled 'How to Draw a Straight Line'. 
Kempe's best-known paper is probably his incorrect solution in 1879 of the map colour theorem, that the countries of any map can be coloured with just four colours so that neighbouring countries are differently coloured; this paper was commissioned by James Joseph Sylvester for his newly founded 'American Journal of Mathematics'. Although Kempe's solution proved to be deficient, as demonstrated by Percy Heawood in 1890, it contained important ideas that were to resurface in the eventual solution by Kenneth Appel and Wolfgang Haken in 1976. Another of his mathematical writings was 'A memoir introductory to a general theory of mathematical form', published in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' in 1886. This work on the fundamental nature of mathematics, together with its successor in the 'Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society' in 1890 relating the logical theory of classes to the geometrical theory of points, led to a set theory (now called multisets) more general than that of George Cantor, and contains a novel use of tree diagrams to represent mathematical form; it was to influence particularly the American philosopher C. S. Peirce. Such considerations enabled Kempe to fill some lacunae in W. K. Clifford's posthumous papers on the theory of algebraic invariants; indeed, in many ways he can be regarded as Clifford's mathematical successor. 
In 1898 Kempe was elected treasurer and a vice-president of the Royal Society, posts he held with distinction for twenty-one years. He played a major role in the administration of the British National Antarctic Expedition of 1901-4, and Mount Kempe and Kempe glacier in South Victoria Land are named after him. He was also involved in the establishment and building of the National Physical Laboratory, a massive project undertaken by the Royal Society in 1902, and with the eventual transference of its control to the state in 1918. Much of the credit for the early development and success of this institution is due to Kempe. His legal expertise, his clearness of judgement in administrative matters, and his conciliatory nature in matters of dispute proved to be of immense value in negotiations between the Royal Society and other parties, particularly in his frequent disputes with government agencies over funding. He was knighted in 1912 in recognition of his contributions to the society. 
Kempe was married twice: first in 1877 to Mary, daughter of the oculist Sir William Bowman, who died in 1893 leaving no children, and second in 1897 to Alice Ida Meadows, daughter of Judge Meadows White, who survived him and with whom he had two sons and a daughter. His main relaxations were in mountain walking and music. He was a keen alpinist and visited Switzerland over forty times to admire the scenery and enjoy the alpine flora. As a musician he was blessed with a fine counter-tenor voice, singing with the Bach Choir and the Moray Minstrels (a men's glee club) and occasionally helping the Westminster Abbey choir at evening services. 
Kempe's health broke down in 1917, possibly due to the immense strain caused by his many duties, and in 1919 he felt compelled to resign the treasurership of the Royal Society, while remaining on the council. Eventually, pneumonia overtook him, and he died peacefully at his home, 50 Sussex Gardens, Hyde Park, London, on 21 April 1922. 


@@@@@


doc= 37629


Kempe, Charles Eamer (1837-1907), artist in stained-glass and church decoration, was born on 29 June 1837 at Ovingdean Hall, Sussex, the fifth son and seventh and last child of Nathaniel Kemp JP, who died when his son was six, and his second wife, Augusta Caroline, the daughter of Sir John Eamer, a former lord mayor of London. Kempe (he added the 'e' in the 1860s) was educated at Rugby School, and Pembroke College, Oxford (MA 1862). 
A severe stammer prevented his taking holy orders, and Kempe determined to devote his Anglo-Catholic fervour to the cause of ecclesiastical art. He gained practical experience and made designs for embroidery and furniture in the office of the young G. F. Bodley, son of the Kemp family physician, and a leading figure in the later phase of the Gothic revival in architecture. He studied briefly in the London stained-glass studios of Clayton and Bell, and in 1866 set up his own business in stained-glass and church decoration. Three years later he received his first major commission, to decorate Bodley's new church of St John, Tue Brook, Liverpool. 
Thereafter Kempe's business prospered, and his work graces many cathedrals, including those in Wells, Lichfield, Southwark, Winchester, Durham, Gloucester, Canterbury, and York Minster. Of his many foreign commissions one of the most prestigious was the window ordered in 1877 by Princess Alice, grand-duchess of Hesse and by Rhine, for the royal mausoleum in Darmstadt, in commemoration of the death of her young son. 
In 1875 Kempe bought an Elizabethan house, Old Place, Lindfield, Sussex, which he greatly enlarged and decorated lavishly with his growing collection of furniture and works of art. Although he is often characterized as retiring and eccentric, he entertained distinguished visitors in style, and studio staff were frequently welcomed to Old Place and treated with considerable generosity. 
Never more than competent as a draughtsman himself, Kempe was adept at selecting and training young designers and craftsmen to carry out schemes under his direction. His early work was inspired by English fifteenth-century glass, and he was a pioneer in his appreciation of late medieval styles. By 1880 he was turning to German models, and as business increased (he is believed to have employed as many as a hundred men) production became stereotyped. In 1882 the eighteen-year-old (John) Ninian Comper was Kempe's pupil and already anticipated the view of most subsequent critics with his preference for Kempe's early work. 
Kempe died, unmarried, at his home, 28 Nottingham Place, London, on 29 April 1907, and was buried in the family vault at Ovingdean. The business passed to his cousin, Walter E. Tower, and the weak derivatives of the Kempe formula produced until the studio's demise in 1934 did little to advance Kempe's reputation. Yet his role in the advancement of late nineteenth-century art and architecture was an important one. His adaptations of late Gothic and northern Renaissance styles were influential and had many admirers. That he had established an alternative path to Pre-Raphaelite styles was recognized by W. Owen Chadwick, who suggested in 'The Victorian Church' (1966) that 'the art of stained glass reached its zenith, not with the innovations of William Morris and Edward Burne-Jones, but in the tractarian artist, Charles Eamer Kempe'. 
Martin Harrison', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37630


Kempe, Harry Robert (1852-1935), electrical engineer and journal editor, was born at 12 Addison Terrace, Kensington, London, on 1 March 1852. He was the youngest in the family of four sons and one daughter of the Revd John Edward Kempe, later rector of St James's, Piccadilly (1853-95), prebendary of St Paul's, and chaplain-in-ordinary to Queen Victoria (1864-1901), and his wife, Harriet, daughter of the Revd R. Wood, of Osmington House, Dorset. One of his older brothers was Alfred Bray Kempe, an ecclesiastical lawyer. He was educated at Westminster School (1865-7) and at King's College, London (1867-70), where he studied applied science, but took no degree. His autobiographical reminiscences mention two years spent in the laboratory of Sir Charles Wheatstone. He worked for three years with Sir Samuel Canning, engineer-in-chief of the Telegraph Construction and Maintenance Company, and was involved with the laying of the Malta-Gibraltar cable in 1870. He also had a working association with the civil engineer Robert Sabine, one of the pioneers of transatlantic telegraphy. 
Kempe moved to Southampton to work with William H. Preece, divisional engineer in the postal telegraph department, on 1 April 1872. Preece was appointed electrician to the postmaster-general in 1877 and Kempe was subsequently transferred to London on 2 March 1878 to act as his assistant. On 8 July 1880 he married Helen Catherine (died 1932), daughter of Major-General Byng of the Madras light infantry. They had one daughter. 
During the 1890s Kempe worked on inductive telegraphy, which was particularly important for communication with lighthouses and lightships. He was responsible for many telegraph and telephone services used by the Post Office (including sending keys, and postal pneumatic extensions) and his design of the Dover-Calais cable for the London-Paris telephone was an acknowledged success. He succeeded Preece, becoming principal technical officer on 15 March 1900 and electrician on 1 August 1907, a position from which he retired in 1913. During the First World War he was examiner to the inventions committee of the Air Ministry. 
While still living with his family in London in 1871, he was among the first associate members of the newly formed Society of Telegraph Engineers (later the Institution of Electrical Engineers). From 1872 onwards he contributed student articles to the 'Telegraphic Journal', which later became the 'Electrical Review'. He became the editor and one of the proprietors, retaining full control of the journal until 1931. His major written works include 'A Handbook of Electrical Testing' (1876), 'Alternating Currents' (1916), 'The Electrical Engineers' Pocket-Book' (1890), and a contribution on telephony and telegraphy for the eleventh edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. His 'Engineer's Year-Book', first produced with W. Hannaford-Smith, was a major achievement and a project which he steered for thirty-six years. 
Kempe lived for many years at Lavethan, Brockham, Betchworth, Surrey, and died there on 10 April 1935. He was buried on 15 April 1935 at Brockham church. 
D. de Cogan', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37631


Kennett, Brackley (c.1713-1782), wine merchant and local politician, was born in Putney, Surrey, the son of John 'Kinnick', a waterman in Putney. Little is known about his business career, but it is likely that he began working on the rougher side of the tavern trade. He emerged as a wine merchant in Pall Mall; respectability and civic office came by way of his membership of the Vintners' Company, of which he was master in 1768. He was sheriff of the City of London in 1765-6, and was elected alderman of Cornhill ward in 1767. He was elected lord mayor in 1779, and was thus in office during the Gordon riots of 1780, when a campaign by Lord George Gordon for the repeal of the 'Catholic Relief Act' of 1778 led to a week of mob rule. 
The lord mayor's ineffectiveness was unfavourably portrayed by Charles Dickens in 'Barnaby Rudge' (1841). The evidence is partial, but it seems that Kennett was timid to the point of indifference. When he was asked on 3 June to protect the Catholics in Moorfields, he is said to have replied: 'You do not know anything of the business. I have orders to employ the military if necessary, but I must be cautious what I do lest I bring the mob to my house. I can assure you that there are very great people at the bottom of the riot' (Castro, 51). Next day, when the mob was destroying the Catholic chapel in Moorfields, he apparently turned a deaf ear to requests for orders from the soldiers and the fire officers in attendance; and when the rioters' work was done he uttered the mildest of rebukes: 'That's pretty well, gentlemen, for one day; I hope you will now go to your own homes' (ibid., 52). On 5 June he is said to have ignored a request from a Catholic merchant for protection for his family in the Mansion House; and he stirred himself only when the Bank of England was reported to be in the mob's sights. 
Kennett was charged with criminal neglect of duty, and his case was tried before Lord Mansfield in March 1781. After a little hesitation on the part of the jury, he was found guilty. Another charge, relating to the release of some rioters apprehended during an attack on a prison, was dropped. Kennett died on 12 May 1782 with his sentence for neglect of duty, and a suit for defamation brought by Thomas Howard, third earl of Effingham (whom Kennett had alleged to have been one of the rioters), still outstanding. The possibility of suicide cannot be ruled out. His first marriage was to Frances Boure. He was survived by his second wife, Hannah, and two sons. Two girls took his surname, but were either illegitimate or adopted. He was buried in Putney church. 


@@@@@


doc= 37632


Keppel, Alice Frederica (1868-1947), mistress of King Edward VII, was born at Woolwich Dockyard on 29 April 1868, the youngest of the nine children (eight daughters and one son) of William Edmonstone (1810-1888), naval commodore (later admiral), superintendent of Woolwich Dockyard, and later fourth baronet, of Duntreath Castle, Stirlingshire, and his wife, Mary Elizabeth, 'nee' Parsons (died 1902). Educated at home, Alice early on showed evidence of the beauty, tact, and vivacity for which she was to become renowned. On 1 June 1891 she married George Keppel (1865-1947), third son of William Coutts Keppel, seventh earl of Albemarle. There were two children: Violet Trefusis (1894-1972), who later won notoriety for her turbulent love affair with Victoria ('Vita') Sackville-West, and Sonia Rosemary (1900-1986). 
Early in 1898 the twenty-nine-year-old Alice Keppel met -- and soon became the mistress of -- the fifty-six-year-old Albert Edward, prince of Wales ['see 'Edward VII]. His accession to the throne in 1901 as King Edward VII in no way diminished her role; not only did she maintain her position as 'maitresse en titre' but she became one of the leading personalities of the Edwardian court, in which environment her daughters were effectively brought up. Throughout the ten years of Edward VII's reign, Mrs Keppel, as she was generally known, was an accepted, respected, and highly visible member of the royal entourage. She often travelled abroad with the court -- notably to the king's favourite resort of Biarritz -- and remained, in the widely used phrase, 'la favorita'. Her ability to keep the notoriously impatient monarch amused was greatly appreciated in royal and government circles. Baron Hardinge of Penhurst, at that time the permanent under-secretary at the Foreign Office, later paid tribute to her 'excellent influence', notably on occasions when the king was in disagreement with his department: '... I was able, through her, to advise the king with a view to the policy of Government being accepted... It would have been difficult to have found any other lady who would have filled the part of friend to King Edward with the same loyalty and discretion. (Souhami, 10)' She herself disclaimed the role of royal confidante on constitutional matters; the duchess of Marlborough ascribed the durability of her relationship with the king to shared interests; 'she invariably knew the choicest scandal, the price of stock, the latest political move' (Aronson, 212). She was also an adept card player. Other contemporaries attested to her ability to amuse without malice and to the absence of snobbery from her character; she was, however, fascinated with the power of money and financially astute. She cultivated people like the financier Sir Ernest Cassel and is known to have enriched herself by the sale of shares presented to her by her royal lover. 
The widely believed story that as King Edward VII lay dying, his wife, Queen Alexandra, magnanimously sent for Mrs Keppel to take leave of him, is inaccurate. It was much against the will of the queen -- who had tolerated the affair in public, but was less forgiving in private -- that Alice Keppel saw the dying king, at her own insistence. On being asked to leave the death chamber, she made an embarrassing scene and had to be escorted out; Viscount Esher coldly described it as 'a painful and rather theatrical exhibition... [which] ought never to have happened' (Souhami, 91). Afterwards, in an effort to safeguard her position, Alice claimed that the queen had summoned her, and promised to look after her in the future. During the First World War, in which her husband saw active service, Alice Keppel divided her time between entertaining in her London home, at 16 Grosvenor Street, and staying in various country houses. She also helped her friend Lady Sarah Wilson run a hospital for wounded soldiers in Boulogne. In the mid-1920s the Keppels sold their London house and bought the Villa dell'Ombrellino, Bellosguardo, Florence. Celebrated as the ex-mistress of Edward VII, as an international 'grande dame', and as a matchless hostess, Alice Keppel reigned like a queen over Florentine society. During the Second World War the Keppels established themselves at the Ritz Hotel in London. At the end of the war they returned to the Villa dell'Ombrellino where Alice died of liver disease on 11 September 1947. She was buried in a protestant cemetery, I Allori, Florence. Obituaries made discreet reference to her friendship with the king and queen; 'The Times' recorded her passing as marking the end of an era, noting obliquely that 'discretion was perhaps her long suit'. George Keppel survived her by little more than two months, while her devoted daughter Violet wrote that she had 'lost everything... any little success I may have is dedicated to her' (Souhami, 290). 


@@@@@


doc= 37633


Keyes, Sidney Arthur Kilworth (1922-1943), poet, was born on 27 May 1922 at The Homestead, West Hill, Dartford, Kent, the only child of Captain Reginald Keyes of the Queen's Own Royal West Kent regiment, a flour miller by trade, and his second wife, Edith Mary (died 1922), daughter of the Revd Arthur Blackburn, rector of St Paul's, Bradford. Because his mother died from peritonitis when he was only six weeks old, Keyes was brought up in Dartford by his paternal grandparents, and his grandfather, Sidney Kilworth Keyes, a wealthy farmer, dominated his childhood. On the death of his grandfather in 1938 Keyes was inspired to write his first serious poem, 'Elegy'. Keyes's childhood was lonely and isolated. Because he was frail it was thought unwise to allow him to mix with other children, and in consequence he became an avid reader. At the age of nine he was eventually sent to a preparatory school in Dartford. When he was eleven he attended Dartford grammar school, and three years later he went to Tonbridge School, where his main interests centred on literature and the natural world. By the time he left Tonbridge in July 1940 Keyes had written more than seventy poems, discovered in a manuscript book shortly after the war; many are inevitably juvenilia, but 'Nefertiti', written when he was seventeen, marks an advance towards maturity, and his poem 'The Buzzard', the last to be written at Tonbridge, is probably his most accomplished schoolboy work. 
Keyes entered Queen's College, Oxford, in October 1940, on a history scholarship. His poetry from this period displays an 'astonishing fluency' (Press, 273); one of his early Oxford poems, 'Remember your Lovers', was written in an examination hall, after he had finished one of his papers early. (He later came to dislike the poem for its 'lush sensuality' (ibid., 273)). It was during his Oxford years that he embarked on a fruitful friendship with the future winner of the queen's gold medal for poetry, John Heath-Stubbs. Heath-Stubbs, whose own childhood had been marred by insensitivity to his progressive blindness, instinctively responded to the darker images of Keyes's own imagination. He understood very well Keyes's desire to investigate through poetry the subjects of pain and death, and his feeling of being in far closer communion with William Blake, William Wordsworth, and Johann Schiller than with any living contemporaries. Keyes was also influenced by artists such as El Greco, and by masters of the macabre, such as Goya, Beddoes, and Rouault. In particular, Keyes had come to identify with the Romantic movement, and it was Heath-Stubbs who was able to broaden Keyes's base by tracing for him the origins of Romanticism in primitive legends through the medieval to the Augustan poets. It was Heath-Stubbs, too, who helped Keyes to perfect his poetic technique, which had tended to trail behind the complexity and variety of his ideas. 
Keyes became editor of 'Cherwell', the Oxford student newspaper. In 1941, with Michael Meyer, he edited 'Eight Oxford Poets'. He was awarded a first class in part one of the history examination (1941). He had been writing on average a poem a week, and by the end of 1941 he had enough poems to form a first volume, 'The Iron Laurel', but he withheld publication until 1942 in order to include 'The Foreign Gate', a long poem in which, for the first time in his work, Death appears as a real presence. Keyes joined the army in April 1942, and was sent to the officer cadet training unit at Dunbar. During his time there, he composed some of his finest poetry, including the two linked poems, 'Dido's Lament for Aeneas' and 'Rome Remember'. It was also at this time that he wrote 'North Sea', a heartfelt epitaph on his unreciprocated love for Milein Cosman, a refugee from Dusseldorf, who had come to Oxford when the Slade School moved there from London. In September 1942 Keyes was commissioned as a second lieutenant in his father's old regiment. He sailed for Algiers in March 1943 and during the last days of the Tunisian campaign he saw a mere fortnight's active service. He was killed near Sidi Abdullah, north Africa, on 29 April 1943, and was buried in the military cemetery at Massicault. The military historian James Lucas, who served in Tunisia as Keyes's runner, remembered him as 'a gallant Christian gentleman who sacrificed himself for the men under his command'. He was twenty when he died. 
A second, posthumous, collection of Sidney Keyes's poems, 'The Cruel Solstice', was published in 1943 and won the Hawthornden prize. His collected poems were edited in 1945 by Michael Meyer, who has recalled that, although Sidney Keyes was inclined to be taciturn in a large gathering or among strangers, to his friends he was witty and delightful company. Notwithstanding Keyes's extreme youth, his output was prodigious and far-ranging, and, with Keith Douglas and Alun Lewis, he must be regarded as one of the outstanding poets of the Second World War, so much of his work having been inspired, before his brief sortie into battle, by an internal preparation for death. 
Michael De-la-Noy', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37634


Kilvert, (Robert) Francis (1840-1879), diarist, was born in Hardenhuish, Wiltshire, on 3 December 1840, the second child and elder son in a family of four daughters and two sons of the Revd Robert Kilvert, rector of Hardenhuish, and his wife, Thermuthis Coleman. He was educated privately at a small school run by his father at Hardenhuish rectory, and latterly at Claverton Lodge School, Bath, run by his uncle Francis Kilvert. He went up as a commoner to Wadham College, Oxford, in 1858, and took fourth-class honours in law and modern history in 1862. He was ordained deacon in 1863 and priest in 1864, served for two years as his father's curate in Langley Burrell, Wiltshire, and then went as curate to the Revd R. L. Venables in Clyro, Radnorshire. He stayed in Clyro until 1872, then returned to a further curacy under his father in Langley Burrell until 1876, when he was appointed vicar of St Harmon, Radnorshire. There he stayed for little more than a year, being appointed vicar of Bredwardine, Herefordshire, at the end of 1877. He was a popular and energetic country clergyman who wrote conventional verse and made a collection of Radnorshire folklore, some of which was published in local newspapers. 
Kilvert kept diaries from the beginning of 1870 until his death, but he remained totally unknown to the general public until the publication of a selection from these diaries in a three-volume edition, edited by William Plomer, in 1938-40. Some of the manuscript diaries had already been destroyed by his widow. They appear to have dealt with the courtship of Kilvert and his wife, and with two previous romantic attachments of Kilvert's. In the 1950s the Kilvert descendants agreed that Mrs Essex Hope, Kilvert's niece, who had custody of the diaries, should burn all except three early ones. She told Jeremy Sandford, who had written radio talks and a radio play about Kilvert, that the family was not happy with some of the matter in the diaries. The surviving three diaries have been published in their entirety, two by the National Library of Wales (1982 and 1989) and one by Alison Hodge (1989). Only a few small fragments survive of the rest of the text. 
The diary quickly achieved remarkable popularity, and has been republished in numerous editions. It depicts the periods of Kilvert's life as a curate in Clyro and Langley Burrell, and is a picture of the life of mid-Victorian rural society seen by a sensitive member of the gentry. Kilvert, who was very conscientious in the discharge of his pastoral duties, was acquainted with an unusually broad spectrum of village society, and proved himself a sharp, compassionate, and sometimes humorous observer. 
Although Kilvert's judgements are generally conventional and his tastes often sentimental, there are many passages where the prose rises to poetic heights of description. A great lover of the works of William Wordsworth and of his sister, Dorothy Wordsworth, who also kept a journal, Kilvert was keenly aware of the beauties of nature, and some of his descriptions of the Wye valley and the Welsh border are classics of landscape writing. There are some memorable set pieces, such as the climb up Cadair Idris, when a shaken Kilvert thought of Moses on Sinai. A week later he wrote of an angel satyr walking the Clyro hills. He loved the Greek classics, and on his walks he believed that he witnessed the Christian and mythic tales blend in a harmonious whole. In a ruined church near Garth, for instance, he thought of owls roosting and satyrs dancing. He walked miles in all weathers, visiting schools and parishioners, and places or people who took his fancy. In 1874 he paid a memorable visit to the Revd William Barnes, whom he called the 'great idyllic poet of England'. He described him as 'half-hermit, half-enchanter', and although he laughed at the humorous poems, he really preferred the pathetic ones. 
The diary reflected the two aspects of Kilvert's character, displaying the sociable, well-liked, responsible young curate, always welcome at parties, and the poet who needed his solitary walks to admire and wonder at the power and splendour of the world God had made. 
The public events of Kilvert's time left little mark on the border country, and, apart from accounts of occasional visits to London and Oxford and of a holiday in Cornwall, which is one of the diary's 'tours de force', Kilvert's record hardly strays beyond rural Radnorshire and Wiltshire. He paid at least two visits to France and Switzerland, but neither of these is covered by the diary. In 1878 he was offered the English chaplaincy at Cannes, but refused it (against his doctor's advice, for Kilvert was often ill). The more intimate details of his personal life are, however, fully exhibited in the diary. He had no gift for self-analysis, but recorded his propensity for falling in love, just as he recorded in voluptuous detail the sight of the young girls whom he taught in school. Nor was his widow embarrassed by his frankness, for she did not remove those passages. It took readers of a later century to recognize their fundamentally erotic nature. The diary, both a record and a release for Kilvert, took perseverance to complete after a day's work. But he succeeded in turning his diary's limitations -- its narrow range of vision and the naivety of his own judgements -- into advantages, to give it a vividness and a simplicity shared by few similar journals, making it both a major document of Victorian rural life and a minor but moving work of literature. 
Kilvert's closest friend was Anthony Mayhew, a fellow of Wadham College. They spent holidays together, and Kilvert stayed with Mayhew when he revisited Oxford. Mayhew was the only person permitted to read Kilvert's diary, and he enjoyed the character studies of unusual personages. When the pair were on holiday in Paris, Mayhew introduced to Kilvert Elizabeth Anne Rowland, the daughter of John Rowland of Wootton, near Woodstock. Three years later, on 26 August 1879, she became Kilvert's wife. He had long wished to be married and have children of his own, but as an impoverished curate had been forced to wait until his late thirties. Tragically Kilvert died at Bredwardine vicarage of peritonitis on 23 September 1879, ten days after returning from the honeymoon. The marriage was childless; his widow survived him until 1911, but did not remarry. She returned to Wootton and pursued a life of charitable work in the village. 
In 1948 the Kilvert Society was formed in Hereford on the initiative of William Plomer and a Hereford businessman who was a great admirer of Kilvert. Its aims were 'to foster an interest in the Rev. Francis Kilvert, his work, his diary, and the country he loved'. The society has issued a number of publications. 
On 16 March 1870, prompted by the sound of a bird singing unseen, Kilvert had written that the words of a good man might live long after he was silent and out of sight, and he quoted: 'He being dead yet speaketh.' Those five words were carved above his grave at Bredwardine, and, for the modern reader, reflect his justified hope that his diary would be read after his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 37635


Kimber, William (1872-1961), morris dancer and musician, was born on 8 September 1872 at Huggett's Cottage, Old Road, Headington Quarry, Oxford, eldest of the four sons and two daughters of William Kimber (1849-1931), builder, and his wife, Sophia Ann (1850-1931), 'nee' Kimber, smocker, of The Manor, Horspath, Oxfordshire. His father had been a member of the Headington Quarry morris dancers until the team became inactive shortly after the jubilee fete in Oxford in 1887; this was also when Kimber had first danced. About the same time Kimber, who had left school in 1882 to work as a bird-scarer, was apprenticed to the building trade. 
Kimber might have remained simply a builder had it not been for two events. The first was that the antiquary Percy Manning persuaded the Headington Quarry team to re-form for a display in Oxford in March 1899. Kimber was not a member of that team, but it continued to perform thereafter, sometimes with him. One performance was at Sandfield Cottage, Headington. Kimber had done building work there at Easter, and had mentioned the morris to Mrs Birch, the owner, promising that the team would call. On seeing the dancing, Mrs Birch enjoined them to visit whenever they danced. That winter, Kimber and his fellows were laid off work because of the poor weather, and decided to dance, unseasonally, to earn money. On Boxing day 1899, they danced at Sandfield Cottage, where Mrs Birch's son-in-law, Cecil Sharp, saw them. Intrigued, he asked Kimber, who was playing concertina (learned by ear from his father) for the dancers, to return the next day. Sharp noted down five tunes from Kimber, who was amazed to hear Sharp play them back to him immediately. This key moment marked the start of Sharp's folk-music collecting, but Kimber was not affected until Mary Neal asked Sharp in 1905 about folk-dances for her Esperance Girls' Club. He gave her Kimber's address; she sought him out and brought him to London to teach the dances. A public performance by the girls in April 1906 initiated a great wave of enthusiasm for morris dancing. Sharp, together with Esperance's musical director Herbert MacIlwaine, published the first collection of dances in 1907, and began lecturing on the subject, using Kimber as demonstrator. As Neal unearthed more former dancers, disputes about authenticity and authority arose. Neal found other dancers from Headington Quarry, and claimed Kimber was inaccurate. In a tense meeting in Headington in 1910, Sharp interrogated Kimber's father and other old dancers to satisfy himself on the authenticity of Kimber's dancing. In all the disputes Kimber promised to 'stick to [Sharp] like a leech'. In later years he always insisted that no matter what he might say, do, or play, if it contradicted Sharp's books then Sharp was right and he wrong. The two relied on each other; as Kimber put it, Sharp could not dance and Kimber could not lecture. While most morris-dancing informants were old men, Kimber was in his athletic prime, 'like a Greek statue... his grace and movements are absolutely classic' ('Musical Times', March 1911). His dancing for Sharp often resulted in his losing his job, but he always found fresh employment. After Sharp's death in 1924 Kimber said that he had never failed Sharp, not only at demonstrations, but also in collecting, where he often accompanied Sharp and helped him to reconstruct dances described by former dancers. 
Kimber used his skills to train several morris teams around Oxford, including the Oxford police in 1923. He also introduced generations of Headington Quarry children to morris dancing at the local school. He started fresh teams in Headington Quarry itself in 1911-14, again in 1921 (lasting until the mid-1930s), and in 1948 (which side had had an unbroken existence more than half a century later). Kimber's son Fred was a member of the two last; Kimber had married Florence (1869-1917), daughter of Thomas Henry Cripps, railway labourer, in 1894, with whom he had two sons and six daughters. She died in 1917, and on 5 June 1920 he married Bessie Clark ('b'. 1882/3), widow, daughter of William Joseph Kethro, stonemason of Oxford, thereby acquiring a stepdaughter. In his later years he lived in the house he had built, Merryville (from his nickname, Merry), in St Anne's Road, Headington. Though arthritis took its toll -- his last dance was at the Royal Albert Hall in 1930 -- he continued to play the concertina for dancing until his death, using the instrument given to him after a performance before the Worshipful Company of Musicians in 1909. His style of playing was ideal for dancing: bright, brisk, with full chords where necessary for emphasis in the dance. After he stopped dancing, his playing became increasingly fast, sometimes to the frustration of his dancers. Most of the extant recordings were made in this period, and do not show him at his peak. 
William Kimber died on 26 December 1961 at his Headington home, exactly sixty-two years after his encounter with Sharp, collapsing from heart failure on going outside to fetch coal. He was buried on 30 December at Headington Quarry parish church, his coffin borne by six of his morris dancers in full regalia. Because of his early and enduring relationship with Sharp, dances from Headington Quarry formed the backbone of morris teaching for half a century, and the fact that so many performed, or enjoyed watching, morris dances throughout the twentieth century was in no small measure due to him. 


@@@@@


doc= 37636


Kinloch, George, of Kinloch (1775-1833), politician, was born on 30 April 1775 in Dundee, the younger son (there were no daughters) of Captain George Oliphant Kinloch of the 53rd regiment of foot, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Colonel John Balneavis. Captain Kinloch had inherited the estate of Kinloch in Strathmore from his younger brother, John, who had purchased it from the proceeds of a fortune made as a sugar planter in Jamaica, and had died in 1770. Captain Kinloch himself died in 1775 and his widow in 1782. 
John, their elder son, was a permanent invalid, and for the sake of his health the boys were sent abroad to France and Italy. John died in Nice in 1789, and George returned to Scotland in 1791. He studied at Edinburgh University during 1791-2 but did not graduate. He became laird of the Kinloch estate on his twenty-first birthday in 1796. In the same year he married his cousin Helen, daughter of John and Joanna Smyth, and between 1797 and 1805 they had six daughters and two sons. 
In 1797, as part of his duties as a young laird, Kinloch was appointed to command the Coupar Angus company of the volunteers, territorials who were recruited to meet the danger of a possible French invasion, but in Scotland confined their activities to suppressing riots aroused by the 'Militia Acts' and the press-gangs. Eleven years later, in 1808, Kinloch decided that he was opposed to the maintenance of a standing army in time of peace and resigned his commission. In 1812 he attacked the war in Spain: 'we have been fighting for a worthless king, an insolent nobility and a useless clergy'. In addition to his burgeoning radicalism, he was a progressive landlord, and the only landlord of consequence in Scotland who supported the radical reform movement in the early nineteenth century. He took his part in local politics as a JP and was active in working for the development of Dundee harbour as a member of the Dundee Harbour Board. In 1817 he spoke in Dundee in support of annual parliaments and universal suffrage. 
As a result of the Peterloo massacre in Manchester in August 1819, Kinloch, who from his youth in France had held liberal views, became actively opposed to the oppressive measures enforced by the authorities acting under the orders of the tory government. He agreed to preside over a public meeting of the people of Dundee to be held on 10 November 1819 to protest against 'the unprovoked, cruel and cowardly attack made on the people of Manchester' and 'to suggest the means most likely to lead to a reform of abuses'. The meeting was held as advertised and Kinloch addressed it in a wordy speech in which, after pleading with his audience to keep the peace, he criticized the government for excessive taxation, and declaimed: 'In short, the whole of our misfortune as a nation, the whole of our misery, the whole of our distress, can be clearly traced to the circumstances of the people being deprived of their share of the British Constitution by not having a voice in the election of persons to represent them in the House of Commons.' The speech was reported in the 'Dundee Advertiser'. 
Two weeks after the meeting Kinloch was astounded to be confronted with a warrant for his arrest on a charge of sedition, issued on the authority of the Home Office in London. He was allowed bail, but after consulting his lawyers, Henry Cockburn and Francis Jeffrey, he was convinced that it was highly probable that he would be convicted for sedition and sent to Botany Bay. He decided that he had no alternative but to flee abroad. He reached Paris on 24 December, two days after having been declared an outlaw in the High Court. 
For the next three years (1820-22) Kinloch lived in exile in France. In January 1822 Robert Peel became home secretary and in October the leader of the Peterloo riot was released from prison. Hoping that, in the changed climate of opinion in England, he would soon be granted a pardon, Kinloch returned secretly to London, where for some time he remained under cover until early in 1823, when he made a clandestine return to Scotland. Then, in May 1823, the hoped-for pardon arrived and he was able to resume a normal life at Kinloch. 
Dundee was one of the new constituencies created by the 1832 'Reform Act'. Kinloch stood as the whig candidate in the election that followed, and in December of that year was elected the first MP for the borough. He took his seat in the house in February 1833, but did not enjoy his position for long as, in the following month, he caught a chill and died in London on 28 March 1833. 


@@@@@


doc= 37637


Kitchin, Thomas (1719-1784), cartographer and engraver, was born in the parish of St Olave, Southwark, most probably on 4 August 1719, apparently the eldest of several children of Thomas Kitchin, hat dyer, and his wife, Mary Birr, whom he married in 1716. 
Kitchin was apprenticed to the map engraver Emanuel Bowen on 6 December 1732. He finished his time in 1739 and on 25 December that year married his master's daughter, Sarah. Despite the family connection with his former master Kitchin was at work independently from at least 1741. From 1746, when he was made free of the Merchant Taylors' Company, he took on apprentices in his expanding firm. His early production includes John Elphinstone's map of Scotland (1746), used before Culloden, the first pocket atlas of Scotland, 'Geographia Scotiae' (1748-9), and 'The Small English Atlas' (1749), co-published with Thomas Jefferys, another of Bowen's apprentices. The 'Large English Atlas' (serially produced with Bowen between 1749 and 1760) was the most important county atlas since Elizabethan times and the first real attempt to cover the whole country at large scale. In 1755 Kitchin engraved the great John Mitchell map of North America, used at the peace treaties of Paris and Versailles, and the standard map until the end of the century. 
Originally based in Clerkenwell, by late 1755 Kitchin was established at The Star (no. 59), Holborn Hill, opposite Ely House, running a substantial business producing all kinds of engraved material, even including portraits and caricatures. Further county atlases appeared in the 1760s. Larger individual works were Andrew Armstrong's survey of Northumberland (1769), awarded a 50 guinea prize by the Society of Arts, the twelve-sheet road map 'England and Wales' (1770), and Bernhard Ratzer's elegant plans of New York (1769-70). From 1773 Kitchin appears in the 'Royal Kalendar' as hydrographer to the king. Eventually retiring from Holborn to St Albans, Kitchin continued map making to the end of his life. Prolific and reliable, he produced countless maps for travel books and geographies, and the 170 maps he produced for the 'London Magazine' alone (1747-83) would prove sufficient companion for the entire history of his time. 
As an engraver, Kitchin showed a fine technical facility, the lettering clean and assured and the etched decoration from his workshop among the most impressive of all English rococo work. He is also known as an amateur painter. Clues to his personal life are meagre. An early publication, 'The English Orpheus', a collection of drinking songs of about 1743, is light-hearted, especially where it appears to poke fun at Kitchin's Welsh master. The well-written 'Traveller's Guide' (1783) has both wry humour and relaxed confidence. He was extremely active in the Baptist community and served as deacon of his chapel. His will, which requests burial 'with as little expense as may be', shows a more than conventional piety. 
Kitchin married his second wife, Jane (1719/20-1789), daughter of the Baptist minister Joseph Burroughs, on 27 May 1762. To the latter he left a comfortable estate. His son of the first marriage, Thomas Bowen Kitchin, apprenticed to his father in 1754 and also hydrographer to the king, had already inherited the stock-in-trade. Kitchin died in St Albans on 23 June 1784 and was buried in St Albans Abbey on 29 June. A memorial inscription in St Albans Abbey has not survived. 
Laurence Worms', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37638


Kitson, James (1807-1885), ironmaster and locomotive builder, was born in Leeds on 27 October 1807, the eldest of six children of a licensed victualler and his wife. He may be the James Kitson who was baptized in Leeds on 3 January 1808, the son of William Kitson. He was educated at local schools and at the Leeds Mechanics' Institution and Literary Society, where he was a diligent student in drawing and mathematics. On 20 September 1828 he married Ann, daughter of John Newton, owner of a painting and decorating firm. They had four sons and two daughters. 
Encouraged by his studies of 'A Practical Treatise on Rail-Roads', by Nicholas Wood, Kitson quickly realized the great potential future of steam locomotive traction and in 1837 he joined Charles Todd, who had been apprenticed to James Fenton of the locomotive builders Fenton, Murray, and Jackson, and David Laird, a farmer and financier, in establishing Todd, Kitson, and Laird at the Railway foundry in Leeds, manufacturers of machinery and locomotives. 
In 1838 six locomotives were built for the Liverpool and Manchester Railway. In 1839 Kitson and Laird withdrew from this partnership and established the Airedale foundry, also in Leeds, whose first locomotives were built for the North Midland Railway in 1840. David Laird withdrew in 1842 and the firm was reconstituted as Kitson, Thompson, and Hewitson. Large numbers of locomotives were built for home and overseas railways. Among these was the 0-6-0 type (1849) with inside cylinders and frames, for the Leeds and Thirsk Railway, a design which established the standard for freight locomotives in Britain over many decades. The first export locomotives (for the Orleans-Bordeaux railway) were built in 1846, followed by those for the Kiel-Altona line in 1848, and many more for India, Australia, South Africa, South America, and elsewhere. 
Kitson's great organizing ability, technical ingenuity, and grasp of industrial developments formed the mainspring of these activities. In 1854 he felt it desirable to acquire a source of good Yorkshire iron for the Airedale foundry and established the Monk Bridge ironworks nearby, which was managed by his sons Frederick William and James Kitson (later first Baron Airedale), the former having previously been principal locomotive designer at Airedale. After the retirement of Isaac Thompson in 1858 and the death of William Hewitson in 1863 the Kitson family took complete control of the firm, and later James Kitson, junior, and the third son, John Hawthorn, who managed the Airedale foundry from 1863, became partners with their father. 
Kitson's first wife died and on 24 January 1868 he married Elizabeth, daughter of the Revd John E. Scroope Hutchinson, vicar of East Stoke, Nottinghamshire. They had two sons and two daughters. Kitson retired from the business in 1876, but was a man of wide interests and many activities outside his industrial work. Very musical and with a fine voice, in his youth he had built an organ in an outhouse of his father's premises. Later he became chairman of the orchestral committee for the Leeds music festival. He was also chairman of the Leeds Northern Railway and later a director of the North Eastern Railway. He was vice-chairman and later chairman of the Yorkshire Banking Company. An alderman of Leeds in 1858-68, he was mayor in 1860-61, as well as being a magistrate for Leeds borough and for the West Riding of Yorkshire. Kitson died at Elmet Hall, Roundhay, Leeds, on 30 June 1885. 
George W. Carpenter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37639


Knott, Cargill Gilston (1856-1922), physicist and seismologist, was born on 30 June 1856 in Valleyfield, Midlothian, the sixth son in the family of seven sons and one daughter of Pelham Knott (1818-1864), clerk in a paper mill and later paper (commission) agent of Penicuik, and his wife, Helen Macintyre (1817-1894), daughter of Patrick McOmish, writer of Edinburgh, and his wife, Elizabeth Arrott. The family, though originally English, had been settled in Scotland for several generations. Maternally, Knott was descended from the brother of Donald Cargill the Martyr. Following the death of his father Knott was brought up by an aunt and uncle in Edinburgh and he attended Arbroath high school (1864-72). He went on to Edinburgh University in October 1872. After gaining his BSc in 1876 he became a research assistant to P. G. Tait, professor of natural philosophy. Knott worked in his laboratory -- an ill-equipped attic -- until 1883, after obtaining his DSc with a thesis on researches in contact electricity in 1879. 
In 1883 Knott travelled to Japan to succeed J. A. Ewing as professor of physics in the Imperial College of Engineering (later the Imperial University of Japan). In June 1885 at the British legation in Tokyo he married Mary (formerly Jane) Gray Dixon (1860-1934), eldest daughter of the Revd James Main Dixon, minister of Free Martyrs Church, Paisley, and his wife, Jane Gray; they had one son and three daughters. In Tokyo Knott worked closely with J. Milne, T. Gray, and F. Omori to develop the new science of seismology. He applied Fourier analysis to investigate annual periodicity of earthquake shocks (1886) and developed a theory to explain the reflection and refraction of earthquake waves at the boundary between rock and water (1888). In 1887 he and A. Tanakadate conducted the first magnetic survey of Japan, for which Knott had the unusual distinction of being decorated by the emperor in 1891 with the order of the Rising Sun (class 4). On his return to Scotland that same year Knott was appointed lecturer in mathematics and in 1892 reader in applied mathematics at Edinburgh University. 
In 1899 Knott extended his earlier theory to wave behaviour at the interface between two different types of rock. This work laid the foundation for the later unravelling of the interior structure of the earth through observation of the behaviour of seismic waves as they are transmitted through it from distant earthquakes. 
Knott became a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1880 and its general secretary in 1912, and was a principal founder of the Edinburgh Mathematical Society. He was Thompson lecturer, United Free Church college, Aberdeen, in 1905-6 and 1913-14. His 113 publications include the books: 'Electricity and Magnetism' (1893), 'The Physics of Earthquake Phenomena' (1908), and the 'Life and Scientific Work of Peter Guthrie Tait' (1911). He received the Keith prize of the Royal Society of Edinburgh for work on the magnetic properties of iron and nickel in 1897. He held an honorary LLD of the University of St Andrews (1916) and was elected FRS in 1920. 
His contemporaries remembered Knott as kindly, painstaking, cheerful, and imperturbably good-natured. He enjoyed golf and chess and held office in the United Free Church of Scotland. Knott died of aortic heart disease on 26 October 1922 at 42 Upper Gray Street, Edinburgh, where he had lived since 1891. He was buried on 28 October at Newington cemetery, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 37641


Knox, (Alfred) Dillwyn (1884-1943), classical scholar and cryptographer, was born on 23 July 1884 in Oxford, the fourth of six children (four sons and two daughters) of the Revd Edmund Arbuthnott Knox (1847-1937), a tutor at Merton College (later bishop of Manchester), and his first wife, Ellen Penelope (1854-1892), daughter of Thomas Valpy French, bishop of Lahore. By any standards his family was remarkable, with the evangelical father and Dillwyn's three brothers: Edmund George Valpy Knox (Evoe), for seventeen years editor of 'Punch', Wilfred Lawrence Knox, an Anglo-Catholic priest, and Ronald Arbuthnott Knox, Roman Catholic priest and translator of the 'Bible'. Three years after the death of Ellen Knox in 1892 Edmund Knox remarried. Dilly, as he was called, went to Summer Fields School, Oxford, at the age of eleven and after a year was first in his election to Eton College. He went to King's College, Cambridge, in 1903 as a scholar. He obtained a first class in part one (1906) and a second (division one) in part two (1907) of the classical tripos. A friend of Lytton Strachey and J. Maynard Keynes, he was not an Apostle himself, although his name was put forward for election to the society. He was greatly influenced by Walter Headlam and inspired by his great love and knowledge of Greek literature. 
When Knox became a fellow of King's in 1909, he inherited the then deceased Headlam's work on Herodas and applied himself to the fragmentary texts of the Herodas papyri in the British Museum. The inconsequential and bawdy mimes proved difficult to unravel but Knox was determined to succeed, exercising on them the scholarship combined with inspired guesswork which was to be his forte in his future career. Like his brothers, he was addicted to puzzles and a devotee of Charles L. Dodgson (Lewis Carroll). The sort of question he was apt to ask, 'Which way does a clock go round?', was pure Carroll. 
Soon after the First World War broke out Knox was asked to join ID 25, the department of naval intelligence known as Room 40, as a cryptographer. By 1917 he had succeeded in breaking much of the German admirals' flag code, detecting, with his ear for metre, lines of poetry in the repeated bigrams of a message, which provided a crib. Instead of returning to Cambridge, he decided to continue working in Room 40, renamed the Government Code and Cypher School. On 21 July 1920 he married his former secretary, Olive Margaret Rickman ('b'. 1884), daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Roddam John Roddam; they had two sons. He finally managed to get the Headlam-Knox Herodas published in 1922. Following German intervention in Spain he solved the Spanish military code and collaborated with the French on Italian naval codes used in Abyssinia. 
Immediately before Hitler's invasion of Poland, Knox went with A. G. Denniston, the head of the Government Code and Cypher School, to a secret base at Pyry, where he was shown a reconstruction of the Enigma cipher machine, which was used by the Germans. The Polish replica moved the breaking of Enigma on from a theoretical exercise to a practical one and Knox always gave the Poles credit for the part they played. His own section, Intelligence Services Knox (ISK), which worked in 'the cottage' at Bletchley Park, achieved some notable cryptographic successes, including breaking the Italian naval code which enabled the Matapan signals to be read in March 1941. Although absorbed to the point of stuffing his pipe with sandwiches when obsessed with puzzle-solving, it would be wrong to see Knox's code-breaking as a detached intellectual exercise. It was he who insisted that, in order not to compromise Ultra (the breaking of the German high command codes), there should be an immediate press release that aerial reconnaissance had made possible the important naval victory off Cape Matapan in southern Greece (1941). Although ill with cancer, he worked tirelessly on breaking the Abwehr (a German secret service) traffic. A typical short cut was the successful assumption that some indicators set up by the operators in the four machine windows were not random but girls' names or four-letter dirty German words. 
Knox worked from his bed to the last, only getting up and dressing in order to receive the CMG (1943) from the palace emissary appropriately. He died on 27 February 1943 at his home, Courns Wood House, Hughenden, near High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire. 
Mavis Batey', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37642


Knyvet, Sir Henry (1537?-1598), soldier and member of parliament, was the first son of Sir Henry Knyvet (died 1546?) and his wife, Anne, daughter of Sir Christopher Pickering. In 1563 he married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir James Stumpe of Charlton, near Malmesbury, Wiltshire. She died in 1585, and he subsequently (by 1595) married Mary, daughter of Sir John Sydenham. Knyvet's grandfather Sir Thomas Knyvet was master of the horse to Henry VIII, and his father a gentleman of the privy chamber and soldier. 
In 1560 Knyvet became a gentleman pensioner to Queen Elizabeth I. This connection, and the links he sustained with prominent men in Wiltshire, helped to ensure his position among the office-holding gentry, despite enmities fostered by land disputes persisting throughout the 1560s and 1570s. He was a justice of the peace, served as sheriff of the county, and became a deputy lieutenant in 1585. He was knighted in 1574. In 1587 either Knyvet or a member of his family served in the Netherlands, suggesting protestant sympathies. Knyvet was instructed to raise 2000 Wiltshire men towards the national defences when the Armada threatened in 1588, and his contribution to county military affairs was much valued. 
In parliament Knyvet represented either Wootton Bassett or Malmesbury from 1571 to 1597, but he never became knight of the shire. Though considered by one observer to have been a bore, he seems to have done valuable service on a number of committees, many of them dealing with bills concerning arms and defences. In later years relations with court and council were more strained. By January 1593 an incident involving a royal servant coming to serve process on a member of his household had resulted in two spells in prison. In March he probably did his credit no good in the House of Commons when he appears to have argued that proceedings in the subsidy bill should be kept secret, even from the queen herself. 
The army was a major part of Knyvet's life. He was wounded at the siege of Leith in 1560 and nine years later he stood against the northern rising, subsequently advising on the defence of the northern border. His 'Defence of the Realm', written in 1596, was prompted by the fall of Calais to the Spanish. Like many before and since he was concerned about the ability of England to resist an invader, should the navy fail as first line of defence. His concern about the organization of the militia was timely, but his intended reliance on the longbow was hardly forward-looking. 
Knyvet provides an interesting illustration of the problems faced by the crown in raising revenue. At his death he owed the queen $4000 from rents on forest land in his care as sub-warden, but there was a suggestion that he settled lands on his daughters so as to deprive the queen of her due. Yet in parliament in 1593 he had apparently spoken of the need to maximize yields from royal assets in order to finance the strong army which he thought so important. Knyvet died at Charlton, Wiltshire on 14 June 1598. There is a fine monumental effigy of him with Elizabeth, his first wife, in the church at Charlton, where he was buried on 25 July 1598. He had two sons and four daughters; three of his daughters with Elizabeth, including the eldest, Katherine ['see 'Howard, Katherine], married into families holding the earldoms of Suffolk, Lincoln, and Rutland. 
T. E. Hartley', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37643


Konig, Karl (1902-1966), paediatrician and educationist, was born on 25 September 1902 in Vienna, Austria, the only child of Aron Ber (Adolf) Konig, shoe shop owner, of Vienna, and his wife, Bertha Fischer, whose father was a dressmaker in Iglau, Austria. He was educated at secondary school in Vienna and at the University of Vienna, where he graduated in medicine in 1927. His medical special interests were embryology, paediatrics, and homoeopathy. These, combined with a particular interest in curative education for children with mental and physical handicaps, he developed over the next eleven years in the course of attachments to children's hospitals and homes in Austria, Switzerland, and Silesia (in Germany at that time), and, by 1936, in private practice in Vienna. In 1929 he married Tilla, daughter of Ludwig Maasberg, cloth merchant of Gnadenfrei, Silesia; they had two sons and two daughters. 
Following the Nazi annexation of Austria in 1938, Konig went to London, then to north-east Scotland. When war broke out he had to endure four months' internment as an enemy alien. In late 1940 he established at the estate of Camphill, near Aberdeen, a small residential school for children in need of special care. He was joined there by a succession of members of a group of young Viennese associates, fellow exiles from Europe, who were attracted by Konig's vision of therapeutic residential communities where children with learning difficulties and behaviour problems arising from organic disorders and emotional disturbances could receive a broad education to the fullest extent that their individual capabilities would allow, within a caring, sharing, self-governing, Christian 'family' setting. 
Konig had from student days interested himself deeply in the life and works of Rudolf Steiner (1861-1925), the Austrian philosopher and founder of anthroposophy. Steiner's insights into the nature of human handicap, within his concept of the true spiritual nature of all people, inspired Konig and his unremunerated co-workers to plan practical implementation of many novel concepts of teaching, learning, and healing for young people with handicaps -- up to the age of about nineteen. 
But Konig's interest in schools spread predictably to provision for disabled people beyond school age. By 1955 he had founded, on an estate at Botton in Yorkshire, the first of many Camphill village communities, with emphasis again on the importance of the individual, on living with total dignity in 'family' households, on the provision of workshops for the making of marketable goods, and on cultural, artistic, and spiritual activities in generous measure. 
That both kinds of Camphill therapeutic communities, schools and villages, increased in number in several countries both in and after Konig's lifetime -- by 1987 there were over seventy centres in eighteen countries -- was testimony to their success in answering a need, albeit continuously in pioneering mode and therefore not without mistakes. It was testimony also to the founder's vision, dynamic personality, and restless energy. Konig was small in stature, could be testy, and was impatient of any blocking of his plans. He had massive difficulties to overcome, concerned with funding, the medical profession, and not least the rough reception he got in wartime in what, in a letter written two weeks before he died, he called the 'human desert in the North of Scotland'. But in all his face-to-face contacts with disabled people -- and with worried parents -- he radiated a great warmth of strong, friendly reassurance. The many lectures he gave throughout his life were delivered, noteless, in an attractive broken English that spellbound his audiences. In 1963 he received the gold medal of the Tutzinger star at Tutzing, Germany. Konig died in Uberlingen, Lake Constance, Germany, on 27 March 1966. 
Harold Watt', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37644


Koops, Matthias (fl. 1789-1805), paper manufacturer, was born in Pomerania, the son of Matthias and Katharine Dorothea Koops, both also of Pomerania. Very little is known of his early life, though he stated that he had 'for several years served in different distinguished military characters, under the late Emperor of Germany, and King of Prussia'. By 1789 Koops was in England. On 12 September his marriage to Elizabeth Jane Austin (died 1815) took place in London. His application for naturalization was accepted on 1 April 1790 and in June, as a merchant of Edmonton, Koops was made bankrupt. He eventually capitalized on his knowledge of Europe by publishing in 1796 both a set of five maps of the Rhine, Meuse, and Scheldt, and a survey entitled 'A Developement of the Views and Designs of the French Nation', which sought to warn the English of certain French activities. In the following year Koops set up the Minerva Universal Insurance Office in Pall Mall, Westminster. This enterprise lasted less than a year. 
Koops then became interested in the long-standing problem of making paper from materials other than linen and cotton. His work on it led him to prove that paper made from straw, wood, and recycled waste paper could be produced commercially; this achievement earns him a place in the history of paper making. By 1800 Koops had experience of manufacturing from waste paper at Neckinger mill in Bermondsey, and in 1800-01 three patents were granted to him: one for extracting inks from printed and written paper before pulping, and the other two for making paper fit for printing from straw, hay, thistles, waste, and refuse of hemp and flax. In 1800 his 'Historical Account of the Substances which have been Used to Describe Events' was printed on straw paper. 
Having proved the possibility of making good paper from such materials, Koops set up a company, the Straw Paper Manufactory, raised over $70,000 by issue of shares, and in 1801 erected a paper-making mill at Millbank in Westminster. Contractors for the machinery included John Rennie, the engineer, and the firm of Boulton and Watt. This paper mill was easily the largest in the country. The enterprise, however, was over-ambitious and under-capitalized. Koops himself was the principal shareholder in the venture and on the strength of this offered to satisfy his creditors. His failure to discharge his bankruptcy by 1802 compelled Koops's creditors to issue a writ, 'inter alia', for seizure of the Straw Paper Manufactory's assets, and in the end its proprietors could not keep the enterprise solvent. The Millbank paper mill and its equipment were eventually offered for sale by auction in October 1804, thereby ending the possibility of England challenging the European paper industry by using more easily available materials for making paper. Koops himself, optimistic to the end, is last heard of in 1805 soliciting subscriptions for his river maps; his widow died in 1815. 
R. J. Goulden', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37645


Laidler, (Gavin) Graham (1908-1940), cartoonist, was born in Newcastle upon Tyne on 4 July 1908, the only son and younger child of George Gavin Laidler, owner of a painting and decorating business, and his wife, Kathleen, 'nee' Crosby. He was educated at Newcastle upon Tyne preparatory school and later at Trinity College, Glenalmond, Perthshire. His father died when he was thirteen and his family moved south, eventually settling in the village of Jordans, Buckinghamshire. He started drawing cartoons when still a schoolboy and was determined to earn his living in that way. But in 1926, as a result of family pressure, he enrolled at the London School of Architecture. 
Laidler became seriously ill shortly after taking his first job in a surveyor's office. A tubercular kidney was diagnosed and he was advised to give up office work and to spend his winters abroad. He concentrated on drawing cartoons and in 1932 had his first acceptance from 'Punch', the beginning of a partnership which established him as a major comic artist and one of the most original talents in the long history of the magazine. His exceptional talent was eventually recognized by the editor, E. V. Knox, who placed him under an exclusive contract, an almost unprecedented arrangement. His cartoons, done under the name Pont, were in the 'Punch' tradition of George Du Maurier and Frank Reynolds, poking fun at the middle classes. But his drawings were remarkable for their acuteness of observation and their complete lack of sentimentality, qualities which placed them in a different league. He excelled at grumpy antisocial males, harassed mothers, and their stony-faced domestic servants. His most successful series, called 'The British Character' (later published as 'The British Character Studied and Revealed', 1938, with an introduction by E. M. Delafield), included a number of his most memorable drawings, with such titles as 'Weakness for Old Beams', 'Strong Tendency to Become Doggy', and 'Love of Travelling Alone' (a bowler-hatted man who has covered the seats of his railway compartment with his umbrella and briefcase). 
Laidler, who became an associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects, came into his own at the outbreak of war in 1939. Another book, 'The British Carry on' (1940), portrayed the atmosphere of the phoney war and the national response to the threat of invasion. Examples of this are his fierce-looking lady (to a heavily armed German soldier advancing over the lawn): 'How 'dare' you come in here!'; or a placid scene in a country pub where the radio on the bar is tuned to the German propaganda station: 'Meanwhile, in Britain, the entire population, faced by the threat of an invasion has been flung into a state of complete panic.' These cartoons have frequently been used to illustrate the social history of that period. 
Laidler was a tall, good-looking man, quiet and observant, who remained cheerful in spite of his illness. He was remembered with great affection by all who knew him in the course of his short life. He travelled widely, usually for reasons of health, which gave him an opportunity to observe the habits of British tourists. He died, unmarried, of polio on 23 November 1940 at the County Hospital, Hillingdon, near Uxbridge, Middlesex, at the age of thirty-two. During his brief career he had drawn over 400 cartoons, enough to furnish the material for five books, two of which were published posthumously. 
Richard Ingrams', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37646


Lambe, Walter (fl. 1476-1504), composer, is of unknown origins. Nor is anything known for certain about his education; there is no compelling reason to concur with speculation that the composer may be identifiable with the boy of this name who, having been born in Salisbury in 1450 or 1451, was elected a king's scholar of Eton College on 8 July 1467. The composer first occurs during 1476-7, as a lay clerk of the choir of Holy Trinity collegiate church, Arundel. On 5 January 1479 he was entered on the payroll, and on 13 February formally admitted, as a lay clerk of the choir of St George's Chapel, Windsor. During the autumn of 1479 he was appointed in addition to the office of master of the choristers, and he continued to occupy both posts until his departure between 1 October 1484 and 30 September 1485. In fact, he returned to Arundel, where he was once again a lay clerk during 1490-91; eventually, however, he returned to his former lay clerkship at Windsor on 1 July 1492. The rationale behind this curious career pattern is not at all evident. He was not reappointed as master of the choristers, but continued in employment as a lay clerk at least until 30 September 1504; because of loss of documentation at Windsor, his career beyond that date cannot be traced, and his date of death is unknown. 
Lambe's surviving compositions comprise one setting of the 'Magnificat' and seven Marian votive antiphons. All this music is preserved in the Eton choirbook, compiled 'c'.1502-1505 for use by the choir of Eton College chapel['see 'Composers of the Eton choirbook]. A further four pieces, listed in the index, have been lost from the manuscript; indeed, only John Browne was represented by a greater number of compositions, and certainly Lambe's work was well known and widely circulated. The text of 'Stella celi' is an invocation for deliverance from plague, and may have been written in the summer of 1479, when an outbreak assailed the staff of St George's; beyond this, no chronology for his work can be suggested. Lambe emerges as among the two or three most accomplished representatives of that generation of composers who brought to maturity the uniquely English manner of late fifteenth-century composition. He wrote with equal assurance both for ensembles of men's voices and for full choir in up to six parts; his work is extended in scale, virtuosic in the demands which it makes on its performers, and no less imaginative in melodic invention than in the sonorities drawn from his ensemble. 
Roger Bowers', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37647


Landor, (Arnold) Henry Savage (1867-1924), explorer and artist, was born on 2 June 1867 in Florence, Italy, the second of the three sons (there was also a daughter) of Charles Savage Landor (1825-1917) and his wife, Esmeralda Armida Piselli. His grandfather was the author Walter Savage Landor (1775-1864). He was educated at the Liceo Dante and the Istituto Tecnico, Florence, and studied portrait painting in Paris, which he abandoned in 1888 to travel round the world. He supported himself by painting the portraits of the distinguished people he met on the way, and in Japan he went off alone to live among the aboriginal Ainu. His books 'Alone with the Hairy Ainu' (1893) and 'Corea, or, Cho-sen, the Land of the Morning Calm' (1895) were well received and in 1896 he undertook a scientific expedition to Tibet, where he was captured and tortured. The book about his experiences, 'In the Forbidden Land' (1898), was translated into all the major European languages, though his scientific data were seen to be of less importance. 
In 1899 Landor climbed Mount Lumpa in Nepal and in 1900 he joined the allied march on Peking (Beijing) during the Boxer uprising. He undertook further expeditions between 1903 and 1911 over little-explored territory. He traversed the deserts of Persia and Baluchistan by camel, crossed central Africa at its widest point (which he later described in 'Across Wildest Africa', 1907), and explored the Mato Grosso of Brazil, where his men mutinied and made two attempts on his life. The party found its way back to civilization in a starving condition on an improvised raft. These experiences he recorded in 'Across Unknown South America' (1913). In the Philippines he visited headhunters in Luzon and discovered the white-skinned Mansaka people in Mindanao (described in 'The Gems of the East', 1904). During the First World War he toured the western front and submitted designs for improved armoured cars, motorcycles, and airships, and a device for destroying barbed-wire entanglements. He had experimented with flying machines as early as 1893. 
Landor's want of training and his impatience to press on with all speed made him an unreliable surveyor, and there were those who impugned the veracity of his hair-raising escapes; but in energy and resourcefulness, and in courage and power of endurance, he was the equal of any of the previous generation of great explorers. He scorned special equipment and was said to have appeared on a mountain or in a jungle as he would in Bond Street. His contempt for ropes and nailed boots nearly cost him his life on several occasions while mountaineering. As a painter he had the facility to produce a likeness in a single one-hour sitting, and the numerous illustrations he made for his books are competent. A bronze bust he did of his father shows real ability. 
Landor was elected a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society in 1892, and a member of the Royal Institution in 1897. He died, unmarried, at his home at via Farina 10 in Florence on 26 December 1924 after being knocked down by a motor vehicle in London. 
T. C. Farmbrough', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37648


Lane, William (1745/6-1814), publisher, was probably born in Whitechapel, London, the son of John Lane, poulterer, and his wife, Mary. He became a liveryman of the Poulterers' Company in 1767, and in the same year was admitted into the Honourable Artillery Company, in which he was to achieve some eminence. He began his bookselling activities about 1770 from his father's shop, but had moved to 13 Aldgate High Street by the end of 1773; it was at this time that his first publications came out, among them the 'Ladies' Museum' (1773-1814), and that he began to explore the possibilities of circulating libraries. 
While retaining an interest in the artillery company (he had been elected to the office of adjutant in 1772 and in 1774 was the first captain of the Red regiment of trained bands), he resigned as adjutant in 1775 in order to concentrate on his business. He transferred to the Stationers' Company in 1777, becoming a liveryman in 1776 at the time of his move to 33 Leadenhall Street. About 1784 he set up a press there, and founded an ambitious system of circulating libraries; to anyone wishing to found such a library he offered a stock of books, a catalogue, and instructions. He was a pioneer in establishing circulating libraries in country districts; earlier they had been confined to major towns and watering-places. Also, as a means of diffusing his own publications, this time through advertisement, he was among the backers in 1788 of the first evening daily, the 'Star and Evening Advertiser'; it created a precedent in offering a copy service to others. Lane's partnership with the printer of the 'Star', Peter Stuart, was curtailed in 1789 at the time of the 'Regency Bill', when Stuart allegedly printed anti-Pitt propaganda; in revenge, Stuart began a short-lived rival to the 'Star' in which Lane was pilloried as a 'scribbling poulterer' and his paper as the 'Dog Star'. Lane's 'Star' continued until 1831, when it was absorbed by 'The Albion'. 
In 1790 Lane adopted for his business the title Minerva Press. It was under this imprint that the light romantic novels were issued which constituted the staple fare of Lane's circulating libraries. Often written by women (including Agnes Maria Bennett and Elizabeth Meeke), and intended for a female readership, the novels are characterized by a blend of sentiment and sensationalism with elements of the fashionable Gothic, such as the popular 'The Children of the Abbey' (1796) by Regina Maria Roche; a number of them were translations from the French. The Minerva Press became synonymous with cheap fiction and into the nineteenth century the name 'meant little more than a convenient epithet of contempt' (Blakey, 1). (In recent analyses 'notorious presses' such as Minerva are held responsible for the 'constant criticism and mockery aimed at fiction by educated people in the period who saw in it an undermining of traditional classical culture' (Todd, 219-20).) 
Nevertheless by the end of the eighteenth century Lane had become wealthy by profits from them and from military activities. By 1791 he had risen to the rank of lieutenant-colonel in the White regiment and first captain of the West London regiment in 1794. In his business Lane formed separate departments in printing, and in publishing and bookselling. In 1801 he took Anthony King Newman as his partner in publishing. In 1803 the company was trading as Lane, Newman & Co. When war with France was renewed in the same year his publication of 'The Soldier's Companion' secured him a considerable fortune. Minerva books were circulating internationally. Lane retired from business at some time between 1803 and 1808 and settled in Brighton. He was replaced by John Darling in 1809. 
Lane married twice; his second wife, Phoebe ('bap'. 1770), was the daughter of Lewis Shepheard of Richmond, Surrey. Lane died on 29 January 1814 at 3 Gloucester Place, Brighton, aged sixty-eight. He had no children. He was buried in his wife's family vault at Richmond parish church on 9 February 1814. Acquaintances credited Lane with 'strong mental powers... energy and spirit' (Blakey, 25). The development of the library system remains his most significant achievement. 


@@@@@


doc= 37649


Langdon, Thomas (d. 1638), land surveyor, was certainly practising by 1589 and possibly a year or two earlier. He had a brother, Vallence, who briefly assisted him, a sister, who married Thomas Patchet, and a relative of the same name, who was living in Lambeth in 1638. He was educated at New College, Oxford, and proceeded to the degree of BCL in July 1599, having become MA and studied civil law for three years. He probably learned his surveying skills from the land surveyor Thomas Clerke, to whom he was assistant by 1589, and possibly in 1587, and continued as such until Clerke's death in 1602. 
Langdon's career as one of the leading land surveyors and map makers of his time spanned about thirty years, and flourished as landowners were coming to appreciate the value of maps both as tools of estate management and as decorative objects of prestige. Several Oxford colleges were taking greater interest in their estates and their profitable management, and Langdon surveyed land all over England for them. He succeeded his former master as surveyor to the estates of All Souls College, Oxford, and continued in the college's employment until 1605. In 1600-01 he was paid for surveying for New College, in 1602 he mapped the Cambridgeshire estates of Merton College, and in 1607 he surveyed an estate in Leicestershire for Brasenose College. Corpus Christi College employed him too, from 1605 to 1607, in 1609, and from 1615 to 1616; in his third period of working for the college he was assisted by a pupil, Henry Wilcocke. Langdon was employed not only by Oxford colleges but also by private individuals, including Sir Thomas Cecil and Sir John Byron. His last known employment as a surveyor was by the London Charterhouse, whose estates in Cambridgeshire and Wiltshire he surveyed from 1616 to 1618. Langdon's maps, drawn of estates in about fifteen counties, are distinctive and their embellishments with Elizabethan strap-work ornamentation show his skills as an artist and draughtsman. 
Langdon had become curate of Tithby, Nottinghamshire, probably in 1603, and remained there for the rest of his life. He married Joan Sharples on 3 February 1606 in Langar, Nottinghamshire. Their daughter Rosamund (died 1633) married George Darker (died 1658) at St Peter's Church, Nottingham, on 3 July 1630. By his will, made on 1 March 1638 and proved on 11 October 1638, Langdon left bequests to his wife and granddaughter and his surveying instruments to his son-in-law, who may therefore have been his apprentice or assistant. 
Sarah Bendall', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37650


Down, John Langdon Haydon Langdon- (1828-1896), physician and expert in mental science, was born in Torpoint, Cornwall, on 18 November 1828, the youngest of seven children (three daughters and four sons) of Joseph Almond Down (died 1853), apothecary, and his wife, Hanna Haydon; his eldest sister's descendants included Walter Langdon Brown, J. Maynard (later Baron) Keynes, and Geoffrey Keynes. Down was educated at local schools, including the Devonport Classical and Mathematical School, from 1839 to 1842, and became an apprentice to his father. He also attended a local literary and scientific institution. In 1846 he went to London to work in the laboratory of the Pharmaceutical Society, where he helped Michael Faraday with his work on gases. A breakdown in his health forced him home. During this period he lectured at mechanics' institutes and wrote a prize-winning essay: 'The wisdom and beneficence of the creator as displayed in the compensation between the animal and vegetable kingdoms'. 
After the death of his father in 1853 Down decided to move from chemistry to the more lucrative field of medicine, and became a student at the London Hospital (MRCS and LSA, 1856), where he won many prizes. In 1858 he took the London MB and was appointed medical superintendent at the Earlswood Asylum for Idiots in Redhill, Surrey, maintaining a lectureship in comparative anatomy at the London Hospital. In 1859 he took the MD and the MRCP and was appointed assistant physician to the London Hospital; he became FRCP in 1869. In 1868 Down retired from Earlswood to establish a private home for mentally handicapped people at Normansfield, Hampton Wick, which he ran with the assistance of his wife, Mary (died 1900), daughter of Philip Crellin, outfitter, of London, whom he had married in 1860. They had three sons and a daughter. Down remained at Normansfield for the rest of his career, while maintaining a consultant position at the London Hospital and a private Harley Street practice, and established himself as the leading British expert on idiocy. Normansfield proved a great success: it pioneered education training and grew to hold 200 residents by the time of Down's death, attracting foreign visitors, and hosting medical meetings in its beautiful grounds. As a model it showed the need for specialized institutional care for idiocy. 
Down was vice-president and a Lettsomian lecturer of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society, a member of the Anthropological Institute, the Medico-Psychological Association, and the Neurological, Clinical, and Pathological societies, and a founder member of the Thames valley branch of the British Medical Association. In politics he was a Liberal and a supporter of women's education. In 1884 he was made a JP for London, Westminster, and Middlesex, and in 1889 he became an alderman of Middlesex county council. His handsome appearance, high principles, and genial manner won him a powerful influence over his patients and the real affection of his colleagues. 
Down's appointment as medical superintendent at Earlswood, so soon after qualification, was based on his outstanding promise as a student. With his qualities of zeal, right-mindedness, and an eminently practical turn of mind, he promised to cast new light on the causes of idiocy. His background in comparative anatomy and outpatient care of women influenced his research at Earlswood. He published papers on maternal health, tuberculosis, obstetrics, and birth order as causes of idiocy, and on the anatomy of the mouth, teeth, and skull. He is best-known for recognizing the 'Mongol' as a distinct type of idiot in his 1866 paper, 'Observations on an ethnic classification of idiots' ('London Hospital Reports', 3, 1866, 259-62). His theory was that these idiots (and others -- the 'Malay' and 'Negroid' types, for instance) were products of racial degeneration. This supported the idea that all races were simply variations within a unified mankind, and was intended to counter the polygenist theories which had supported slavery in the American Civil War. The theory of Mongolian origins was dismissed in the early twentieth century, but the idea of a distinct type persisted and was generally given the name Down's syndrome. Many of Down's most important findings were published in his only major publication, 'On some of the Mental Affections of Childhood and Youth' (1887). 
Langdon-Down (he had changed his name by deed poll) died suddenly on 7 October 1896 at Normansfield. He was survived by his wife, and by his sons Reginald and Percival, who carried on his work there, as did his grandson. He was cremated at Woking on 10 October and a memorial service was held for him at St Thomas's, Portman Square, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 37651


Langley, Sir Geoffrey (c.1200-1274), administrator and landowner, was the son of Walter de Langley, minor knight with property at Siddington in Gloucestershire and at Pinley near Coventry, and his wife, Emma de Lacy (died in or before 1222). He was probably of age by 1222, which suggests a date of birth about 1200, and first appears in royal service in 1233-4 as constable of St Briavels, Gloucestershire. He joined the royal curia, and was appointed knight-deputy to the earl marshal and marshal of the household. 
The Gascon campaign of 1242-3 proved a turning point in Langley's career. On his return he was given custody of the honour of Arundel. From late 1244 to early 1250 he was associated with the general forest eyre conducted under the headship of Robert Passelewe (died 1252). On 4 March 1250 he was made chief justice of the forest on both sides of the Trent, an office which he exercised for two and a half years until 25 October 1252. As a forest justice he earned some notoriety. According to Matthew Paris, Langley had gained a reputation for parsimony while marshal of the household. Now he was to be particularly zealous in the interests of the king. Langley's northern eyre was a very lucrative one, and undoubtedly caused murmurings. 
By 1252 Langley was at the height of his power and high in royal esteem, being a particular favourite of the queen. A member of the council, he functioned as a guardian of the king's young daughter, Margaret, queen of Scots, during 1252-3, but made himself unpopular in Scotland and was removed. Then in March 1254 he took responsibility for the English and Welsh lands of the young Prince Edward. This proved to be a disaster, however, for he provoked the Welsh rising of November 1256. Paris says that he conducted himself here in a typically high-handed manner, while the Dunstable annalist writes of him as trying to bring Wales under English law, and ordering the introduction into that country of shires and hundreds, while boasting before the king and queen that he had the Welsh in the palm of his hand. Out of favour with the king, he was eventually pardoned on 14 February 1258. In 1262 he was one of the auditors investigating the accounts of Prince Edward's bailiffs. He was unpopular, however, with the opposition baronage, and was among those royalists whose lands were pillaged in the spring of 1263. 
Although Langley inherited some property, and acquired other estates through marriage, it was his service to the crown that raised his family's fortunes. He added to the estates received directly from the crown by acquiring the estates of landowners indebted to Jewish moneylenders. He paid considerable attention to the improvement and consolidation of his estates. At its height his income from land must have been at least $200 per annum. In addition he was able to acquire an heiress and her estates for his eldest son, Walter. Langley was married twice, first to Christine, of unknown parentage, and second to Matilda, daughter of Robert of Brightwell. He died in 1274, by 22 September; he was buried, as were Matilda and his son Walter, in the church of the Franciscans in Coventry. The division of his estates between the two branches of his family, based in Warwickshire and Gloucestershire respectively, helps to explain why the Langleys failed to rise further, as Geoffrey's own career might well have suggested. 
Peter Coss', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37652


Langtry, Lillie (1853-1929), actress, was born on 13 October 1853 at St Saviour's rectory, Jersey, the only daughter and sixth of the seven children of William Corbet Le Breton (1815-1888), dean of Jersey, and his wife, Emilie Davis Martin. Educated at home, she developed into a socially ambitious and remarkably beautiful young woman. In 1874 she married Edward Langtry, son of a Belfast shipowner. Within three years the couple were established in London, where Lillie became celebrated, not only as a 'professional beauty' -- a society woman whose photographic likenesses were on sale to the public -- but as the mistress of Albert Edward, prince of Wales ['see 'Edward VII]. Between 1877 and 1880 she enjoyed a period of heady social success. Her portrait was painted by most leading artists of the day; the best-known is 'A Jersey Lily' by John Everett Millais, in the possession of the Societe Jersiaise in Jersey. 
Towards the end of her three-year liaison with the prince of Wales, Lillie met Prince Louis of Battenberg (1854-1921) ['see 'Mountbatten, Louis Alexander]. In Paris, in March 1881, she gave birth to their daughter, who was christened Jeanne-Marie, with the surname of Langtry. The birth of this child coincided with the bankruptcy of Edward Langtry and the breakup of Lillie's marriage. Despite the continued support of the prince of Wales, she was ostracized by society, though she maintained a well-publicized friendship with W. E. Gladstone. 
Exceptionally resilient, Lillie embarked on a new career -- as an actress. Her appearance in a charity performance led to an offer to join the Bancrofts' company at the Haymarket Theatre. She made her professional debut as Kate Hardcastle in 'She Stoops to Conquer' on 15 December 1881. Appreciating that it was her notoriety, as the former mistress of the prince of Wales, that was attracting audiences, Lillie soon founded her own company. Between 1882 and 1889 she divided her time between tours of the United States, where she owned a ranch in California, and appearances on various London stages. Although never more than a competent actress, she was an extremely decorative and popular one, at her best in plays about upper-class society. In 1889 she returned permanently to England. To her career as an actress, the always practical Lillie now added another: that of a highly successful racehorse owner; she won the Cesarewitch twice, with Merman and Yutoi. 
In 1899, two years after Edward Langtry had died in destitution, Lillie married Hugo Gerald (1871-1940), the eldest son of Sir Henry de Bathe, fourth baronet. On the death of her father-in-law in 1907, Lillie became Lady De Bathe. 
After the failure of her attempt to establish a company at the Imperial Theatre, Westminster, Lillie resumed touring. After the First World War she bought a villa, Le Lys, in Monaco. In 1925 she published a highly selective book of memoirs. She died -- by no means destitute -- in Monte Carlo on 12 February 1929 and was buried in St Saviour's churchyard, Jersey. 
Theo Aronson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37653


Lanier, Emilia (bap. 1569, d. 1645), poet, was baptized in St Botolph without Bishopsgate, London, on 27 January 1569, daughter of Baptista Bassano (d. 1576) ['see under 'Bassano, Alvise], court musician, and his 'reputed wife', Margaret Johnson (died 1587). The Bassanos were a family of Italian Jews, emigres from Venice who came to be musicians and instrument makers at court in 1531. Giovanni Baptista Bassano lived near the Charterhouse but Emilia was brought up by Susan, dowager countess of Kent, whom she addresses as the 'noble guide of my ungoverned dayes'. Although we know nothing specific of her education, Emilia writes that the countess was 'directed' by a mother famed for her furtherance of protestant and humanist learning, Catharine Bertie, dowager duchess of Suffolk, and we may suppose that more than usual attention was paid to her reading. 
We learn from a visit Emilia made to Simon Forman, astrologer, in 1597 that she had been a favourite at the court of Elizabeth, had become mistress of Henry Carey, first Baron Hunsdon (1526-1596), and had been 'maintained in great pomp' until 1592, when, having become pregnant, she was married to Captain Alphonso Lanier (died 1613) of the other leading family of court musicians, the Laniers, who moved to London from Rouen in 1561. 
Though Emilia Lanier's outstanding achievement is undoubtedly the composition of the first original poetry by a woman to be published in the seventeenth century -- a volume of religious verse entitled 'Salve Deus rex Judaeorum' (1611) -- she has become notorious as a result of attempts to identify her as the 'dark lady' of Shakespeare's 'Sonnets' (1609), on the conjectural grounds of her racial colouring, musical ability, and promiscuity. Although there is insufficient evidence to establish the identification it illustrates a tendency that, interestingly, her own poetry strives to overcome -- that is, the tendency to read a woman's emergence into the sphere of public discourse as a form of indecency, signalling promiscuity. The central poem of her volume, which celebrates the 'worthy mind' of her patron Margaret, dowager countess of Cumberland, is remarkable for managing to avoid identifying female virtue with chastity, articulating in its place a feminine mastery of those dialectical skills that constituted the humanist ideal of masculine virtue. The volume concludes with the first country-house poem published in English, an encomium of an estate at Cookham occupied by the countess, in which the passing of the seasons suggests the ephemerality of patronage relations; the walks bear 'summer Liveries', and the prospect of hills and vales appears to 'preferre some strange unlook'd for sute' only as long as their mistress is in residence. 
The ambiguity of an elegy that laments the loss of constancy in relations between household and patron, yet offers itself in the public market place as a suit for favour, aptly characterizes the circumstances of Emilia Lanier's life, for court musicians were at once household servants and courtiers, suitors for office. As well as inheriting stipends and liveries Bassanos and Laniers competed among themselves for patents and privileges. From the first Emilia occupied the position of a precariously privileged dependant, and complained of 'hard fortune', her father having died when she was a child, leaving a 'miserable' estate. Though she brought a substantial dowry in money and jewels to Alphonso Lanier this was soon exhausted by his service in hope of preferment under Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex. He did, however, receive in 1612 (delayed from 1603) a lucrative patent for the weighing of hay and straw but on his death in 1613 Emilia surrendered the patent to an enterprising brother-in-law, Innocent Lanier. 
Consequently Emilia Lanier was again in financial difficulties, in 1617, when she unsuccessfully attempted to set up a school in St Giles-in-the-Fields for the education of children of the nobility. When her son Henry, another court musician, died in 1633 his widow petitioned to get their four-year-old son, Henry, trained in music 'as soon as he shall be capable thereof'. In the meantime Emilia Lanier tried to provide means for this grandson and his sister, Mary, by claiming in chancery heritable rights in the patent for the weighing of hay and straw. The privy council finally ruled in her favour in 1637. Emilia Lanier was buried in St James's, Clerkenwell, Middlesex, on 3 April 1645. 
Lorna Hutson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37654


Lapworth, Arthur (1872-1941), chemist, was born on 10 October 1872 in Galashiels, Selkirkshire, the elder son in the family of two sons and one daughter of Charles Lapworth (1842-1920), professor of geology at the University of Birmingham, and his wife, Janet, daughter of Walter Sanderson of Galashiels. He went to school in St Andrews and to King Edward VI's School, Birmingham, and graduated in 1893 from Mason College, Birmingham. He then studied chemistry at the City and Guilds Central Technical College under F. S. Kipping, who became his friend. His studies laid the foundations for his later researches on camphor and the mechanism of aromatic substitution. He took a DSc at London University in 1895. 
Lapworth's academic career began as lecturer in chemistry at the School of Pharmacy in Bloomsbury; in 1900 he moved to the Goldsmiths' Company's institute at New Cross as head of the chemistry department. In the same year he married, in Bridgwater, Somerset, Kathleen Florence, youngest daughter of William Thomas Holland JP. There were no children. Kathleen's two elder sisters married the chemists F. S. Kipping and W. H. Perkin respectively. In 1909 he was appointed senior lecturer in inorganic and physical chemistry at the University of Manchester, where he succeeded W. H. Perkin as professor of organic chemistry in 1913 and became Sir Samuel Hall professor of inorganic and physical chemistry and director of the laboratories in 1922, appointments which show his remarkable versatility. 
At Manchester, Lapworth studied the molecular constitution of camphor and its derivatives; his researches suggested new interpretations of organic reaction mechanisms employing the migration of double bonds within organic molecules, and the formation of organic ions and chemical equilibria. His ideas were eagerly taken up by his assistant, Robert Robinson, who made use of them in developing his own electronic theories. The two men remained friends until Lapworth's death. Lapworth discovered new reactions and introduced improved preparative techniques. His classification of organic reagents as 'anionic' and 'cationic' paved the way for the electronic theory of organic reactions, but as the electronic formulations of C. K. Ingold were simpler these were generally adopted and Lapworth's pioneering work was largely forgotten until the late 1940s. Elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1910, Lapworth served on its council (1927-9) and was awarded the Davy medal (1931). He received honorary LLD degrees from Birmingham and St Andrews; on retirement in 1935 he was made emeritus professor at Manchester. 
Lapworth was retiring, generous, especially to his students, and sincere, though he had a sharp wit. He ran his department with firmness and wisdom; in controversy he was always courteous. He loved radio, the cinema, and the theatre and had a wide knowledge of classical music, playing the violin, cello, and viola at Perkin's musical parties in Manchester. He was a member of the council of the Manchester College of Music for many years. Carpentry, microscopy, astronomy, geology, mountaineering, golf, and fishing were among his hobbies; he was an authority on British mosses and was interested in ornithology. 
Lapworth died at Sandown Nursing Home, 55 Palatine Road, Withington, Manchester, on 5 April 1941. He was survived by his wife. 
N. G. Coley', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37655


Lapworth, Charles (1842-1920), geologist, was born on 20 September 1842, in Faringdon, Berkshire, the second son of a shopkeeper, James Lapworth (1813-1889), and his wife, Martha Butler (1815x19-1890). The family soon moved to a farm near Buckland in the Vale of the White Horse, and Lapworth was educated at Buckland national school, famous for its environmental approach to education. Following a period as a pupil-teacher he went, in 1862, to Culham Teacher Training College, gaining a first-class certificate in 1864. 
Lapworth's first teaching post was as master of St Peter's Episcopalian School in Galashiels. In 1869 he married Janet, daughter of Walter Sanderson, a civic leader and industrialist of Galashiels. They had four children, three sons, one of whom died in infancy, and a daughter. One son, Arthur Lapworth, became a professor of chemistry at Manchester University and fellow of the Royal Society, the second a well-known water engineer. Both his second son and daughter studied geology. It was in Galashiels that, as a hobby, he began the geological work which eventually led to the clarification and understanding of the structure of the southern uplands of Scotland. After collecting fossils in local rocks formerly thought unfossiliferous, Lapworth by 1870 had established the value of graptolites in identifying outcrops throughout the whole region. By 1872 he had begun correlating these outcrops, and as a result rejected the succession and comparatively simple structure favoured by the geological survey. Using graptolites as zonal fossils for the first time, he mapped the shale sequences in minute detail. He established the correct sequence of beds, and through this, the complex structure of the southern uplands as a series of isoclinal folds. He was also able to correlate rocks from the southern uplands with similar black shales in Scandinavia and elsewhere in Europe. His work resulted in the rejection of the theory of 'Colonies', put forward by Joachim Barrande, and enabled the older Palaeozoic rocks to be classified and correlated in as great a detail as younger rocks. During this work he established a new methodology for the geologic mapping of any area, which involved minute and exact observation and recording on maps of large scale. Often he had to enlarge and draw these base maps himself. From his work in Scotland, and also that in Wales, Lapworth was able to redefine the divisions of the Lower Palaeozoic sub-era on the basis of distinctive faunas. He proposed the Ordovician period to separate the Cambrian from the Silurian, thus resolving the controversy between Adam Sedgwick and Sir Roderick Murchison over their classification. 
During the later part of his researches in southern Scotland, Lapworth had moved, in 1875, to Madras College, St Andrews, as an English teacher. However, following publication of his early major works, especially the Moffat series, in 1881 he was appointed as the first professor of geology at Mason College (later the University of Birmingham). He held this post until his retirement in 1913. On arrival in Birmingham, Lapworth began work on the mapping of the north-west highlands of Scotland, where, with the application of his detailed mapping techniques and his knowledge of tectonics, he was able to determine the structural relationship of the Lower Palaeozoic rocks to the Precambrian, and establish the presence of the Moine thrust plane. He was one of the earliest workers in Britain to apply the theories on alpine tectonics of Esher von der Linth and Albert Heim to British geology. Such was his workload that in 1883, during the final stages of the work on the north-west highlands, he suffered a major breakdown. His findings, of major tectonic movements, were confirmed by the officers of the geological survey in the memoir published on the area. His later work on fold theory, which stemmed from this and earlier fieldwork, was ahead of its time, but stimulated many other workers in this field. 
Between 1901 and 1918 Lapworth edited the classic monograph, 'British Graptolites', for which he also wrote the introduction. In total, he published sixty-nine papers: his early publications were based on the geology of specific localities in southern Scotland; later ones were wider in their geographical scope, and were increasingly concerned with the fossil content of the rocks, and the use made of this in determining the structure, and biostratigraphy. Eventually, papers were published that were specifically palaeontological, dealing with various aspects of the graptolites worldwide. Work on tectonics resulted in his papers on the north-west highlands, and thereafter on fold theory on a global scale. 
Lapworth was always concerned with the economic implications of any geological studies and many of his publications reflect this. When in Birmingham he undertook a great deal of consultancy work, notably on water supply and building materials. Always conscious of the importance of geological education, he wrote and lectured throughout his professional life. He built up a large and successful department, and was an inspiring teacher, both in the lecture room and in the field. He was elected a fellow of the Geological Society in 1872, served on its council in 1894, and was its president in 1902. He was awarded the society's Lyell fund in 1882 and in 1884, the Bigsby medal in 1887, and the Wollaston medal, its highest award, in 1899. Lapworth was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1888 and a member of its council in 1895, and in 1891 was awarded its royal medal. He was president of Section C of the British Association in 1892. In 1905 he received the Wilde medal of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, and he was awarded honorary LLDs by the universities of Aberdeen (1883) and Glasgow (1912). After an illness lasting several months, Lapworth died at his home, 38 Calthorpe Road, Edgbaston, on 13 March 1920. He was buried at the Lodge Hill cemetery, Birmingham. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 37656


Larkin, James (1874-1947), labour leader in Ireland, was born on 4 February 1874 at 41 Combermere Street, Toxteth Park, Liverpool, the second of the six children of James Larkin (1845-1887), a forge labourer, and his wife, Mary Ann McNulty (1842-1911). His parents were part of that vast exodus from Ireland who took their place at the bottom of the English social pyramid. James Larkin, therefore, was brought up in poverty, received only a few years' formal schooling, watched his father die of tuberculosis in 1887, and was thrown on to a brutal labour market. He joined the Toxteth branch of the Independent Labour Party in 1892, and was converted to socialism. In summer 1893 he stowed away to escape unemployment and to find adventure, but returned to Liverpool the following year to take his place again among that vast army of casuals who prowled the docks in search of a day's work. He eventually found regular work as a docker, and was soon promoted to dock foreman. By 1903 he was earning $3 10's'. a week and decided to marry. He had been keeping company for some time with Elizabeth Brown, whose father managed a working-class restaurant in Liverpool and was a Baptist lay preacher. Larkin courted Elizabeth by taking her to socialist meetings and speaking engagements, though she never expressed any real interest in socialism. They were married on 8 September 1903 in a civil ceremony in Liverpool, and eventually had four sons. 
When his men went out on strike in summer 1905 Larkin joined them and became their leader. Though the strike was lost he was asked to become a full-time organizer for the National Union of Dock Labourers. He quickly organized in the Scottish ports, and was then assigned to the more difficult task of doing the same in Ireland. Soon after his arrival in 1907 Larkin was involved in a series of strikes in Belfast, Cork, and Dublin, which the executive of the National Union was reluctant to support. Larkin then broke with the National Union and founded the Irish Transport and General Workers' Union late in 1908; he was the union's secretary and edited its paper, the 'Irish Worker and People's Advocate'. Larkin's imprisonment on a charge of embezzlement of strike funds did not prevent the union from rapidly gaining in numbers and strength: by 1913 it was the largest and most militant union in Ireland. The building of the Transport Union, which laid the foundations of the Irish labour movement, was undoubtedly much assisted by Larkin's oratorical skills and charisma, and was the most creative achievement of his long life. Larkin believed that it was a union's responsibility to do more than merely wring better wages, hours, and conditions from reluctant employers. For him, the union was a revolutionary instrument through which he could effect not only economic change, but also a profound social transformation in Irish society. 
During summer 1913 Larkin decided to consolidate his formidable power base in Dublin by challenging the financier William Martin Murphy, whom he had demonized for several years as Dublin's arch-capitalist. Larkin began by organizing among the workers of Murphy's Dublin United Transway Company, and declared a strike in August 1913 in response to victimization. Murphy retaliated by organizing a Dublin Employers' Federation of some 400 strong, who locked out union members and those who refused to pledge never to join. The upshot was an epic struggle that lasted six months and involved 20,000 workers, during which Larkin was once more briefly imprisoned. The Dublin workers were able to sustain themselves only because of massive support from the British labour movement, which contributed $150,000 in money and food. In the midst of the lock-out Larkin launched a crusade in Britain to induce the British labour leadership to declare a general strike in support of the Dublin workers. The British Trades Union Congress met in London early in December 1913 to consider the matter, but after an acrimonious debate rejected the Larkinite proposal by more than ten to one. In February 1914 the workers were finally obliged to surrender, and returned to work on the employers' terms. The Transport Union was decimated in numbers and financially ruined, but this did not prevent Larkin from assuming the presidency of the Irish Trades Union Congress. The struggle also had the effect of making him an international figure: by 1914 'Larkin' and 'Larkinism' had become household words in Britain, and in America too, the left wing had taken him up as a prime example of a socialist of the meat-eating and syndicalist variety. Even Lenin had been impressed by Larkin's revolutionary posture in 1913. With the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 Larkin cemented his international reputation as a revolutionary socialist by immediately and unequivocally denouncing it as a capitalist plot. 
In order to raise the funds necessary to rebuild the Irish Transport and General Workers' Union, Larkin decided to visit America, leaving the union in the hands of his deputy, James Connolly. He sailed for the United States in late October 1914 and expected to be away for only a short time, but in the event it was nearly nine years before he finally returned to Ireland. While in America, Larkin was by turns a lecturer, a union organizer, a German secret agent, an Irish propagandist, a socialist agitator, a founder of the American Communist Party, and finally a 'martyred' political prisoner who served nearly three years in prison. Two overriding themes, however, gave some coherence and consistency to what otherwise seem disparate activities. The first was his implacable opposition to the First World War, and the second was his enthusiastic acceptance of the Russian revolution in November 1917. Both these stands, especially after the United States entered the war in April 1917, were very unpopular, and when the celebrated 'red scare' followed hard on the heels of the end of the war Larkin was arrested on the charge of criminal anarchy in late 1919. He was then tried, convicted, and sentenced to five to ten years in prison. 
Shortly after he was pardoned by Governor Alfred E. Smith early in 1923 in the interests of free speech Larkin was deported to Ireland. On his return home in May 1923 he found that the successful war against the British had degenerated into a fratricidal civil war, and he immediately called for peace. Within a month of his return, however, a fierce struggle for power broke out in the Transport Union, which soon extended to the Irish labour movement as a whole. The eventual result was that Larkin was suspended as general secretary of the union and finally expelled. He then founded the Workers' Union of Ireland, but was able to carry with him only a remnant of the Transport Union, mainly those members based in Dublin. Larkin's power and influence in the Irish labour movement were also greatly impaired by his open and continued support for Soviet communism. In summer 1924 he visited Moscow to attend the Fifth Congress of the Third International, or Comintern, and was elected to represent Ireland on the twenty-five-member executive council which governed that body between congresses. He was elected a member of the Dail in 1926, but was unable to take his seat because he was an undischarged bankrupt. He was again elected to the Dail and served in 1937-8, and 1943-4. After 1928 he began to drift out of the communist orbit, though he never repudiated his earlier affiliations. With the advent of the great depression in 1929 Larkin's power and influence were further impaired on both the trade union and political sides of the labour movement. Though his political fortunes revived slightly in the 1940s, when he managed to secure the dilution of anti-trade union legislation sponsored by De Valera, he remained a marginal figure in Irish politics until he died in Meath Street Hospital, Dublin, on 30 January 1947. He was buried in Glasnevin cemetery on 2 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 37657


Larkin, William (c.1580-1619), portrait painter, is first recorded on 17 July 1606 when he was awarded the freedom of the City of London by redemption in the Company of Painter-Stainers. Further documentary evidence of his life and work is scanty, but because his will is listed with those in the parish of St Sepulchre, just outside the walls of the City, it has been suggested that his father may have been William Larkin, the host of The Rose inn in that parish. A brother, Richard, and his son, Benjamin, are mentioned in the will. 
The fact that Larkin did not obtain his freedom to trade in London in the usual way -- by patrimony or after serving an apprenticeship -- is unexplained. Freedom by redemption was usually awarded to craftsmen coming from elsewhere, but the evidence of Larkin's painting style points to training in one of the London studios. In any event by 1606 he had certainly attracted patronage at the highest level: his sponsors for freedom of the City were Lady Arabella Stuart, third in line to the throne, and her future father-in-law, Edward Seymour, earl of Hertford. 
In 1609 or 1610 Larkin painted the only picture which can as yet be linked to documentary evidence: a portrait of Edward Herbert, first Baron Herbert of Cherbury, which survives with its pair, of Sir Thomas Lucy (1585-1640; Charlecote Park, Warwickshire). According to an anecdote told in Herbert's autobiography, copies of the portrait were made for the queen, for Richard Sackville, the third earl of Dorset, and in miniature by Isaac Oliver, for Lady Aeres (a copy at University College, Oxford, may be one of these). In 1613 Larkin painted the third earl of Dorset and his brother, Sir Edward Sackville, later fourth earl, and shortly afterwards he or his studio was responsible for seven portraits of ladies connected with the Suffolk family. (This series is now in the collection of English Heritage.) The Rutland papers record two payments to Larkin, both of the considerable sum of $30: in 1617 for an unspecified picture, and in 1619 for a portrait of Lady Katherine Manners, who was to marry George Villiers, marquess of Buckingham, in the following year (a portrait of Buckingham in the National Portrait Gallery, London, is attributed to Larkin on stylistic and technical grounds). In the summer of 1618 Lady Anne Clifford sat to Larkin (a bust-length portrait still at Knole, Kent, may be a copy of the original). Three portraits by Larkin are listed in a seventeenth-century inventory of pictures at Claydon House, Buckinghamshire: Lady Sussex; Frances Howard, countess of Somerset; and Anne Turner, her accomplice in the murder of Sir Thomas Overbury. 
Larkin represents the end of the tradition in which a painter was regarded as an anonymous craftsman, like a possible relation, Thomas Larkin, the king's locksmith. His paintings echo the elaborate concoctions of late sixteenth-century European court portraiture, a style soon to be swept away by the tide of the baroque brought to England from Flanders by Rubens and Anthony Van Dyck. 
All that is known of Larkin's domestic life derives from the parish registers of St Ann Blackfriars, where between 1612 and 1615 the baptisms and burials of three of his children are recorded, and from his will, in which he mentioned his wife and young daughter, both named Mary. There is no suggestion of worldly success, although the sums paid for his work compared well with those paid to his contemporaries, and his estate is referred to simply as 'goods and chattels and debts'. Larkin died in 1619, between 10 April when he signed his will and 14 May when it was proved. 


@@@@@


doc= 37658


Laughton, Charles (1899-1962), actor, was born on 1 July 1899 at the Victoria Hotel, Scarborough, the eldest of the three sons (there were no daughters) of Robert Laughton, a prosperous hotelier, and his wife, Elizabeth Conlon. He spent a childhood largely tormented by a glandular problem which made him constantly overweight and therefore unpopular at school and indeed at home, where his early determination to become an actor met severe parental opposition. 
Brought up as a Catholic, Laughton was educated at Stonyhurst College, where even one of his few schoolfriends described him as 'the ungainliest of boys with a huge head'. He was sent, against his wishes, to study the hotel trade at Claridge's in London before being called up at the end of the First World War, but he was rapidly invalided out of the army after being gassed on the western front in 1918. 
On returning to his parents in Scarborough, Laughton continued to train in hotel management until in 1925 he at last defied the family and enrolled as a drama student at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art in London, where two years later he won the gold medal and was immediately given his start in the professional theatre by one of his teachers, the Russian director Theodore Komisarjevsky. His earliest stage roles at Barnes and the Everyman in Hampstead in 1926 were in classic Russian plays, but in 1928, at the Little Theatre in London, he first made his name in the type of role which was to become his hallmark: that of the neurotic, greedy, sinister villain in 'A Man with Red Hair', by Hugh Walpole. From there Laughton progressed to two more familiar roles, Poirot and Pickwick, before scoring another big success as the Chicago gangster loosely modelled on Al Capone in 'On the Spot' (1930), by Edgar Wallace. He made his New York debut in 1931 as the squalid murderer in 'Payment Deferred' before accepting a Hollywood offer, which took him to California for 'The Old Dark House' (1932) and his first Nero in 'The Sign of the Cross' (1932). 
It was back in England for Alexander Korda in 1933 that Laughton made his screen name in 'The Private Life of Henry VIII' at the start of a sequence of major cinema biographies -- 'The Barretts of Wimpole Street' (1934), 'Mutiny on the Bounty' (1935), 'Rembrandt' (1936), and the unfinished 'I, Claudius' (1936) -- which were to see him at the very peak of his reflective, anguished talent for larger-than-life monsters of reality. 
In 1933 Laughton joined the Old Vic Company for an impressive range of stage work ('Henry VIII' again, 'The Cherry Orchard', 'Macbeth', 'Measure for Measure', 'The Tempest'), and in 1936 he was the first English actor ever to be invited to appear at the Comedie Francaise in Paris, where he played Moliere's 'Le medecin malgre lui'. He then settled in California, where, despite occasional returns to the theatre (notably in the first production of Bertolt Brecht's 'The Life of Galileo' in 1947, which he also adapted), he focused mainly on such films as 'Jamaica Inn' (1939), 'The Hunchback of Notre Dame' (1939), 'Witness for the Prosecution' (1957), 'Spartacus' (1960), and 'Advise and Consent' (1962), returning only rarely to Britain and only notably for David Lean's 'Hobson's Choice' in 1954. 
In the following year Laughton made his only picture as director, 'Night of the Hunter', with Robert Mitchum, which is now regarded as one of the best 'films noirs' ever made in Hollywood; but then, as if aware that his time was running out and his film career waning, he returned to Britain to make one last West End appearance in 'The Party' (1958), for which he discovered the actor Albert Finney straight from drama school. 
The following summer Laughton went to Stratford upon Avon in a remarkably starry season which also featured Paul Robeson, Edith Evans, Laurence Olivier, and Sam Wanamaker, working for such directors as Tony Richardson, Glen Byam Shaw, and the man who was immediately to succeed Shaw at Stratford and create the Royal Shakespeare Company, Peter Hall. Laughton played Bottom in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' (Finney and Vanessa Redgrave were among the young lovers) and Lear in 'King Lear', but it was already apparent that he was having trouble with his memory, and he never again appeared on stage or in Britain. 
'With Charles', said Laughton's first great producer, Alexander Korda, 'acting was a kind of childbirth; what he needed was a midwife, not a director', and it is arguable that the performances that might have been, such as the abortive 'I, Claudius', were almost as important as those he actually gave. Of those performances he did give, it is the biographical (Rembrandt, Henry VIII, Captain Bligh of the 'Bounty') that stay in the memory, as well as those in which he was able to convey some aspect of the double life he had always been forced to lead on account of his homosexuality. Back in 1929, on 10 February, he had married the 'Bride of Frankenstein' actress Elsa Lanchester (1902-1986), herself also always more attracted to her own sex, and although they remained married until his death it was inevitably a relationship of convenience to them both, rather than of lifelong happiness for either. Elsa was the daughter of James Sullivan, an Irish worker in a black-lead factory, and his wife Edith Lanchester, an active member of the Social Democratic Federation. They had no children, but remained united by a shared belief in social revolution and the desire to push out the barriers of pre-war Hollywood tolerance as far as they could safely be pushed without ruin to either career or immigrant status. 
Throughout this long marriage, Laughton's homosexuality undoubtedly caused him great unhappiness, and if there was any one key to his always theatrical greatness on screen it was perhaps this lifelong sense of being a misfit, uneasy in his own skin, and forever on the outside of social, sexual, and familial demands on his upbringing and conditioning. An American citizen from 1950, Laughton died at his Hollywood home on 15 December 1962; some years later, the Scarborough hotel that had been the root of his family fortune was washed away to sea in a cliff collapse. 'You don't direct Laughton in a picture,' noted Alfred Hitchcock, 'all you can do is referee it.' 
Sheridan Morley', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37659


Laurel, Stan (1890-1965), comedian, was born at his grandfather's house in Argyll Street, Ulverston, Lancashire, on 16 June 1890, the second son in the family of four sons and one daughter of Arthur Jefferson, known as A. J., of Bishop Auckland, theatre manager, and his wife, Margaret (Madge) Metcalfe, actress, of Ulverston. He attended schools in Bishop Auckland, Gainford, and Glasgow, after which his family connections helped him to gain entry to the music-hall as a 'boy' comedian. His first appearance was in 1906 at the Scotia Music-Hall, Glasgow, which his father managed. In 1907 he joined the Fred Karno company, where his greatest success was as Jimmy the Fearless in a sketch of that name. It was while touring the United States with Karno in 1912 that he tried his luck in American vaudeville, often in a duo with his common-law wife, Mae Dahlberg, who suggested his stage name, Stan Laurel, although he did not adopt it legally until 1934. In 1915 he saw the opportunities for music-hall pantomimists in the silent movies, and sought a mixed fortune in films and on the stage. He lived in the USA from this period. 
Laurel became acquainted with Oliver 'Babe' Hardy in the early 1920s, but it was in 1927, under the auspices of the Hal Roach studio, that they were first paired with any success, in 'Slipping Wives'. From that point they were to make over a hundred films together, some thirty of them silent, and almost all of them produced by Roach. Their best work was probably between 1929 and 1935, when they were engaged in creating coherent and sparse twenty-minute cameos. 'The Music Box' (1932), involving the delivery of a piano to a house at the top of a steep incline, is usually regarded as their finest short film; it is certainly the most famous. Among their feature films, 'Sons of the Desert' (1933), involving a Chicago convention and a mythical voyage to Honolulu, 'Way out West' (1936), featuring the duet 'On the Trail of the Lonesome Pine', 'Block-Heads' (1938), and 'The Flying Deuces' (1939), with the pair joining the foreign legion, are among the best remembered. The Laurel and Hardy set piece was the ordinary situation from which sprang a spiral of disaster. Their usual guise was as everyday American hen-pecked husbands or companions, but over the years they did adopt other roles such as First World War soldiers or pilots. Whatever the location, they were soon engulfed in difficulties. Nervy, flustered, even tearful, Stan Laurel, 'the thin one', exacerbated these accumulating troubles, to the growing chagrin of 'the fat one', the ever earnest Oliver Hardy, culminating in his cry of 'Another nice mess you've gotten me into'. Laurel, in effect, made two contributions to the partnership: as Hardy was quick to concede, Laurel was the creator and rigorous controller of their comedy, as well as a member of what was widely recognized as the best comic double act of its time. An important reason for this was their eschewal of the conventional 'straight' man, two-dimensional and irritable. Each developed a detailed and complete persona of his own. The endearing bathos and crassness of Laurel found an admirable foil in the elephantine smugness of his rotund partner. Their last film, 'Atoll K', was made in 1952. Laurel and Hardy travelled extensively during the Second World War, entertaining troops, and made a variety tour of Britain in 1947, opening at the London Palladium. Oliver Hardy died in 1957, ending one of the most successful comic partnerships in history. 
Stan Laurel won a special Academy award in 1960 for 'creative pioneering' on film. Much more serious and committed than his genial partner, he had devoted much time and energy to his peculiar art form. His devotion to his work might account for the chaos of his private relationships: his marital toils were convoluted and confusingly reported. The nearest to an exact listing would be to record that he was married to Lois Neilson in 1926 (with whom he had a son who died in infancy and a daughter); to (Virginia) Ruth Rogers in 1935 (after a possibly illegal ceremony in Mexico the previous year); to Illeana Shuvalova in 1938; to Ruth Rogers again in 1941; and to Ida Kitaeva Raphael, who survived him, in 1946. Stan Laurel died on 23 February 1965 in Santa Monica, California, USA, and was buried at Forest Lawn, Los Angeles. 


@@@@@


doc= 37660


Brok, Laurence del (c.1210-1274), lawyer and justice, was probably born in or before 1210 in Buckinghamshire. His first appearance in the records is in 1231, when he was appointed to act as an attorney in a Buckinghamshire case. By the late 1230s he had become one of a small group of professional lawyers practising in the common bench in Westminster. Such men spoke in court on behalf of litigants and also stood surety for them when required. They also performed similar functions for litigants in the eyre when the common bench was not in session. 
In 1247 Laurence del Brok became the first professional lawyer to be retained by the king. Thereafter he received an annual salary of $20 each year until 1262, and can be traced acting for the king in litigation until 1263. The main focus of his activity on the king's behalf during this period was the court of king's bench, but he can be found speaking for the king in the common bench as well. It is unclear whether or not he also continued acting for other litigants. From 1250 onwards he received a number of 'ad hoc' commissions to act as a royal justice, and was regularly commissioned to act as a gaol delivery justice at Newgate and elsewhere. He sat as one of the justices of king's bench in Easter term 1271, but never became a regular justice of the court. 
Laurence del Brok began acquiring property on a small scale in 1236, and over the course of his lifetime he spent well over $1000 on property acquisitions. The inquisition post mortem held after his death shows him in possession of lands worth over $60 a year. These are probably undervalued. Moreover the inquisition excludes both holdings in Middlesex that he had passed to his younger son in 1271, and the lands he is known to have acquired in Oxfordshire and Cambridgeshire, and which are later found in the possession of his family. How the acquisitions were financed is less clear. He is known to have been in receipt of pensions from at least three institutional clients (the abbeys of Glastonbury and Ramsey and the priory of Durham), and probably received similar pensions from many other individuals and institutions. At the very end of his life there was also a suggestion that he was in receipt of bribes for the release of prisoners at Newgate, though this allegation seems not to have been proved. 
Brok's first wife was Millicent, daughter of Robert Malet. He married her in 1242 or 1243, and she was the mother of his eldest son and heir, Hugh. He had married his second wife, Maud, by no later than Michaelmas term 1245. Maud was the mother of his second son, William. Laurence del Brok probably died a few days before 25 December 1274. 
Paul Brand', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37661


Lawrence, Geoffrey, third Baron Trevethin and first Baron Oaksey (1880-1971), judge, was born in London on 2 December 1880, the youngest in the family of three sons and one daughter of Sir Alfred Tristram Lawrence (later first Baron Trevethin) (1843-1936), lord chief justice of England in 1921-2, and his first cousin Jessie Elizabeth (died 1931), daughter of George Lawrence. 
After Haileybury College where he was senior to C. R. Attlee, Lawrence went to New College, Oxford. He received a third class in 'literae humaniores' in 1903. Lawrence was called to the bar at the Inner Temple in 1906 (bencher 1932, treasurer 1955), and had a steady unspectacular career with such positions as counsel to the Jockey Club, chairman of Wiltshire quarter sessions, and recorder of Oxford. From 1928 to 1932 he was attorney-general to the prince of Wales. In 1925 he took silk, and in April 1932 he was appointed a judge of the King's Bench Division, being appointed a lord justice of appeal in 1944. He was sworn of the privy council in 1944, and was elected an honorary fellow of New College in the same year. In April 1947 he was appointed a lord of appeal in ordinary, having already been granted in January a hereditary peerage in recognition of his work at the international tribunal at Nuremberg (1945-6). In 1947 Oxford awarded him the honorary degree of DCL. 
Lawrence's work at Nuremberg was of an international significance which surpassed anything he had done as a puisne judge or was to do as a law lord. The twenty-one defendants were accused of enormous wrongdoing before and during the Second World War in an indictment which took two days to read and 218 days to try before a tribunal composed of two judges from each of the four victorious countries. The documentation was vast, and the prosecuting teams of unequal strength, the British under Sir David Maxwell Fyfe being the strongest. Lawrence was elected British president, and discharged his difficult task with a calmness, courtesy, and firmness which won universal approval, even from the defendants, the soldiers among whom thought that their problems were appreciated by one who had been made DSO as a gunner officer in the First World War. Praise was also given by the British alternate judge, Sir Norman Birkett, who was secretly resentful that he had not been chosen for the post. He was passed over not because of Attlee's undisguised preference for products of Haileybury, but because the Foreign Office insisted on a more senior judge. After Nuremberg, Oaksey, as he became, found it difficult to adjust to the work of a law lord. His brief judgments were conscientiously prepared, but his heart did not seem to be in the job. 
In appearance Oaksey was a sturdy figure, slightly below middle height, prematurely bald, with the fresh complexion and unhurried manner of an English gentleman who was interested in country life. He could sometimes be induced to talk about his presidency of the Guernsey Cattle Society, but never about his presidency of the international tribunal. After exactly twenty-five years on the bench, Oaksey retired in April 1957. In June 1959 he inherited from a brother his father's barony of Trevethin, but he continued to be styled Oaksey. 
On 22 December 1921 Lawrence married Marjorie Frances Alice (1898-1984), youngest daughter of Commander Charles Napier Robinson RN; they had one son and three daughters. Oaksey died in Oaksey, Malmesbury, Wiltshire, on 28 August 1971 and was succeeded in both baronies by his son, John Geoffrey Tristram Lawrence (1929-2012). 
R. F. V. Heuston', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37662


Lees, Florence Sarah (1840-1922), nurse, was born in Blandford, Dorset, on 31 March 1840, the eldest daughter in the family of three daughters and three sons of Henry Lees, physician, and his wife, Sarah Matilda (1802-1883), daughter of John Phythian, surgeon, and widow of William Adams of Winchcombe, Gloucestershire, surgeon, with whom she had a son. Henry Lees deserted the family, who were rescued from imminent penury by the son of Sarah Matilda Lees's first marriage, Edward Charles Adams (1827-1819), fellow, tutor, and dean of Worcester College, Oxford. He brought up his half-sisters, and had them educated, sending Florence to school in London. In 1864 the family moved to St Leonards, where Florence helped her mother in visiting the sick, an activity that probably dated from their time in Oxford. In 1866 she went to the Nightingale school at St Thomas's Hospital, London, as an observer for four months, as her mother would not allow her to be a probationer. During the following year she visited Germany and studied at the Kaiserswerth institute under Pastor Fliedner, subsequently visiting and studying in hospitals in Europe. 
At the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War Florence Lees volunteered for military nursing, and the crown princess of Germany, Queen Victoria's eldest daughter, put her in charge of a hospital at Marange, and later at Homburg. For her services she was awarded the cross of the German order of merit. After the war she studied in the United States and was impressed by the ideas of Palmer Howard, who maintained that nurses should be educated in the manner of medical students and pay for their training. Florence Lees argued, with some justification, that the current nurse training, even at St Thomas's, was deficient and did not give a systematic, planned education and that it failed to attract educated ladies looking for a worthwhile career. This was anathema to Florence Nightingale, who pointed out that 'the object was to encourage ladies to work'. Nightingale was also fearful of producing what she called 'medical women'. She maintained that 'the less knowledge of medicine that the matron has the better (1) because it does not improve her sanitary practice (2) because it would make her miserable and intolerable to doctors' (Cope, 121). The nurse must not only nurse, she must promote sanitary science, a subject in which she thought doctors were deficient. Later she did modify her views on medical lectures though she was always ambivalent as to whether the nurse should be the doctor's assistant or an autonomous practitioner. However, she was at one with Florence Lees in arguing against William Rathbone and the Liverpool concept of district nurses as welfare workers supervised by a ladies voluntary committee, insisting that the district nurse must have a higher training and be accountable to a superintendent who was herself a highly trained nurse. 
In 1874 Florence Lees was asked to make a survey of the hospitals and nursing practices in London to see if a scheme such as hers would be viable. This she did almost single-handed, leaving a useful picture of the nursing situation in London at that time. As a result, with the help of the order of St John, the Metropolitan and National Nursing Association was founded to provide trained nursing for London with its headquarters in Bloomsbury and Miss Lees as the superintendent. After much controversy she converted the committee to the idea of a district nursing service as a corps of trained, educated women under the superintendence of a highly trained nurse. For this reason Florence Lees can be considered the founder of modern district nursing. 
On 16 September 1879 Florence Lees married the Revd Dacre Craven (died 1922), son of Major Charles Cooley Craven. It was a happy marriage: Dacre Craven supported her work and became the secretary to the home in Bloomsbury Square. They had two sons, the empress of Germany and Florence Nightingale being godparents to the elder, who committed suicide in 1928; the younger was killed in 1917. In 1887 Florence Craven, backed by the empress, and together with Florence Nightingale and William Rathbone, persuaded Queen Victoria to devote most of the women's jubilee offering to establish a national district nursing service. Using the Metropolitan and National Nursing Association as a model thus was established Queen Victoria's Jubilee Institute for Nurses (later the Queen's Nursing Institute): the queen's nurses. Mrs Craven served on the council and advised on training and in 1889 published 'Guide to District Nurses and Home Nursing', which became the vade-mecum for district nurses for many years. She was awarded the jubilee medal and the cross of St John of Jerusalem and remained, together with her husband, closely associated with district nursing until they retired to Essex in 1918. 
Florence Craven died on 19 October 1922 at her home, 3 East Terrace, Walton on the Naze, Essex, two months after her husband, saying that she could not live without him. She was buried at Walton on the Naze, where there is a fine brass memorial to the Craven family in the parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 37663


Leftwich, William (1770-1843), confectioner and ice merchant, was born in Aldford, near Chester, in 1770, the son of William Leftwich (1743/4-1809) and his wife, Martha Barns (1732/3-1818). He was descended from an old family of local landowners, the Leftwich family of Leftwich Hall, Cheshire. 
Leftwich moved to London and set himself up as a wholesale confectioner, with outlets in Fleet Street and Kingston upon Thames. He became increasingly frustrated by his inability to preserve food, especially dairy products, during hot summer months. In the early nineteenth century ice was used for this purpose only in a most limited way, on a few country estates and in the area around Barking, where it was collected from the marshes most winters. Leftwich seems to have been among the first to realize that the widespread use of ice for preserving food would be both highly beneficial and immensely profitable. Accordingly, he chartered a vessel to go from Great Yarmouth to Norway early in 1822, returning in May of that year with a cargo of 300 tons of ice. Confirmation that importing ice was not then regular practice comes from the uncertainty of customs officers in London as to what import duties to levy; they delayed so long in coming to a conclusion that Leftwich feared his cargo might melt. When it was eventually landed and sold at auction there was widespread interest in this novelty, as well as sufficient demand from fishmongers and pastry-cooks for Leftwich apparently to realize a considerable profit. 
In this action Leftwich was well ahead of his time, as Norwegian ice later became widely used for refrigeration. In particular, the advent of the railways ensured that fresh fish, meat, and dairy produce could be speedily transported to urban centres. Previously most food had become unfit for human consumption after forty-eight hours: henceforth the use of ice extended its 'shelf life', and undoubtedly contributed to contemporary improvements in diet and food hygiene. 
It was probably similar concerns which led to Leftwich's interest in adequate water supplies. In 1825 he used an artesian tube to sink what was then the largest well known in the country, 80 feet deep and 30 feet wide. Other wells followed, and Leftwich seems to have prospered. He died on 17 November 1843, at his home at 43 Cumberland Market, Regent's Park, London. He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. Almost nothing is known of his family life, but there were fourteen people with the name Leftwich buried in three graves in Kensal Green cemetery between 1841 and 1904, seven of them, including William, in the same grave between 1841 and 1851. His son Thomas registered his death. 
D. E. Mathew', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37664


Lehmann, Rudolph Chambers (1856-1929), journalist and oarsman, was born in Ecclesall, Sheffield, on 3 January 1856, the eldest in the family of three sons and one daughter of Frederick Lehmann, businessman, and his wife Nina, daughter of Robert Chambers (1802-1871), the Edinburgh publisher. The artist Rudolf Lehmann (1819-1905) was his great-uncle. He was educated at Highgate School and Trinity College, Cambridge, taking a second class in the classical tripos (1878). He was president of the union (1876), a noted boxer, captain of first Trinity boat club, and twice rowed in the university trial eights. On coming down he was called to the bar in 1880 (Inner Temple) but soon abandoned legal practice. An ample private income allowed him time to indulge his tastes for writing, politics, and rowing. 
At Cambridge, Lehmann had founded 'Granta', which he continued to edit for some years after leaving university. Much of his prose and verse, light-hearted in nature but containing some good pieces on rowing, appeared in 'Punch', of whose table he was a member for thirty years from 1890. Less happy were his efforts during the late 1890s to revive 'The Speaker' as an organ for radical ideas, and his editorship of the ailing 'Daily News' from 1901 to 1902. He did not find the day-to-day life of a professional journalist congenial. 
A public-spirited man, Lehmann was high sheriff of Buckinghamshire during 1901-2 and he was long active in the affairs of the National Liberal Federation. He unsuccessfully contested parliamentary seats in Cheltenham in 1885, Central Hull in 1886, and Cambridge town in 1892 before being elected in 1906 for the Harborough division of Leicestershire. He had opposed the South African War, and South African issues were one of his major concerns as an MP. He retained his seat in January 1910 but declined to stand again the following December. Deteriorating health and financial worries, following careless judgements by his stockbroker in 1907, contributed to this decision. His name was on the list of H. H. Asquith, had the prime minister been forced to create new Liberal peers in 1911. 
Sport, more especially rowing, was his constant pleasure. An inspiring coach, he was in considerable demand by both Oxford and Cambridge for their boat race crews throughout the 1890s. He captained Leander in 1894 and 1895 and was elected a steward of Henley royal regatta in 1898. Secretary of the Amateur Rowing Association from 1893 to 1901, he tried unsuccessfully to widen its narrow definition of an amateur. He coached abroad on a number of occasions, always refusing any kind of payment, even for his expenses, and his three visits to Harvard between 1896 and 1898 were rewarded by an honorary degree. Nevertheless he was suspicious of international competition, especially the Olympic movement, fearing it would turn what was intended to be pleasure into too serious a business. 
Talented but without driving ambition, Lehmann was during his last years handicapped by Parkinson's disease. But his gift of friendship remained, reinforced by his marriage in 1898 to Alice Marie (died 1956), daughter of Harrison Davis, of old New England puritan stock. Of their four children (one son and three daughters), three subsequently distinguished themselves -- Beatrix as an actress, (Rudolph) John Lehmann (1907-1987) as a man of letters, and Rosamond Nina Lehmann (1901-1990) as a novelist. Lehmann died on 22 January 1929 at Fieldhead, the house he had built at Bourne End, Buckinghamshire. 
Eric Halladay', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37665


Lehzen, (Johanna Clara) Louise, Baroness Lehzen in the Hanoverian nobility (1784-1870), royal governess, was born on 3 October 1784 in Hanover, among the younger of the seven daughters and two sons of Joachim Friedrich Lehzen, a Lutheran pastor, and his wife, Melusine Palm, daughter of a clergyman. Joachim Lehzen had known the disgraced Queen Caroline Matilda of Denmark during her exile in Celle. After serving in the von Marenholtz family, in December 1819 Louise Lehzen came to England to become the governess of Princess Feodore, daughter from her first marriage of the duchess of Kent; earlier in the same year the duchess had given birth to another daughter, who would become Queen Victoria. 
In 1824 Lehzen was appointed governess to Victoria, as well as to her half-sister, remaining as lady in attendance and Victoria's constant companion after her education was placed in other hands. From 1830 she held no official position at court, hampered by her lowly social origins, despite the Hanoverian barony which was conferred on her by George IV in 1827. More important was the intense dislike of Sir John Conroy, comptroller of the household of the duchess of Kent. Seeking to establish himself as Victoria's chief counsellor, against the day of her accession, he viewed the baroness as a rival and sought to have her removed from the household. But she was firmly entrenched in Victoria's affections, and, moreover, was regarded by George IV and William IV as a bulwark against the ambitions of Conroy; she retained her position. In Victoria's eyes she was 'the 'most affectionate, devoted, attached', and 'disinterested' friend I have' ('Girlhood', ed. Esher, 1.138). 
After Victoria's accession, Lehzen remained her constant attendant; the duchess of Kent had little access to her daughter, but Lehzen occupied an adjoining bedroom with a connecting door, withdrawing during political audiences and returning immediately afterwards. She also enjoyed considerable control over the queen's expenditure: her signature was required to authorize the payment of all tradesmen's bills. Her influence was criticized, especially by those hostile to German influence at court, as was her penchant for gossip, characteristics which made her a ready scapegoat in the Lady Flora Hastings scandal. More importantly, fear of losing Lehzen was one of the causes of Victoria's intransigence during the 'bedchamber' crisis of 1839. 
The arrival of Prince Albert in 1840 ended Victoria's dependence on Lehzen. Albert, determined that his wife should rely on him alone, came early into conflict with her attachment to the baroness. By 1842, he was describing her as 'A crazy, stupid intriguer, obsessed with the lust of power, who regards herself as a demi-God, and anyone who refuses to recognise her as such is a criminal' (Hudson, 184), and actively sought to wean Victoria from her dependence on her former governess. In September 1842 Lehzen was persuaded to retire, with an annual pension of $8000. She returned to Germany, settling in Buckeburg with her sister (who died three months later). She remained there with her mementos of the queen, whom she saw briefly in 1862, and died there, unmarried, on 9 September 1870. She was buried in the Jetenburger cemetery at Buckeburg, where Victoria erected a memorial to her. 
Lacking the sophistication to survive in a royal court, and apparently without personal ambition, Lehzen had none the less been a formative influence of Victoria's character. As an educator, she had not imparted a great deal of information to the young princess, but provided a clear set of moral imperatives and encouraged in them the strength of will which had enabled her to foil the plans of Conroy. Perhaps remembering the unfortunate Queen Caroline Matilda, she wrote that she could 'pardon 'wickedness' in a Queen, but not 'weakness'' (Hudson, 19). 


@@@@@


doc= 37666


Le Queux, William Tufnell (1864-1927), author and self-publicist, was born on 2 July 1864 at 5 Mina Terrace, Southwark, London, the eldest son of a Frenchman, William Le Queux 
(or Lequeux; 'c'.1823-1890)
, draper's assistant, and his English wife, Henrietta Marie ('b'. 1837), daughter of Thomas Henson, clock and watch maker. The 1871 census reported an apparently impecunious household, with one illiterate general servant girl and two lodgers. Le Queux's own accounts of his life are unreliable, and little is known definitely. He claimed to have been educated privately in London and at Pegli, near Genoa, to have studied art in Paris until 1884, and to have travelled and worked on the continent. He also claimed to have been a journalist in Paris, and to have been encouraged by Zola to write novels. In the 1880s he did work as a journalist in England on various local papers and on 'The Globe', but he left it in 1893 and devoted himself principally to writing fiction, though still contributing intermittently to newspapers. 
Le Queux's first novel was 'Guilty Bonds' (1890), a melodrama about Russian nihilists. He was a prolific writer who, in addition to short stories and articles, averaged over five novels a year, a total of more than two hundred. He wrote, rapidly and carelessly, melodramatic thrillers of crime and love, with enticing titles such as 'A Secret Sin', 'The Indiscretions of a Lady's Maid', 'Sins of the City', and 'Wiles of the Wicked'. He was proudly 'cosmopolitan', and many of his novels were set in continental and other exotic locations, with a knowingness of hotels and casinos, and a smattering of French and Italian phrases. His hero was usually a well-born, wealthy clubman: travelled, worldly, and somewhat cynical. His heroine was young, beautiful, well dressed, and usually mysterious and under the influence of the villain. His villains were wicked, often foreign, and ingenious. Their crimes included murder by bizarre methods: explosive bon-bons, a cobra in bed, and -- in 'The Death Doctor' (1912), his most repulsive fiction -- tetanus in soap and rabies in ointment, and attempted murder by an electrified statue. He became one of the most popular novelists, whose extensive and varied readership reportedly included Queen Alexandra and A. J. Balfour, and did include the young Dennis Wheatley and Graham Greene. Indicative of his popularity, in 1898 he was among the highest paid fiction writers at 12 guineas per thousand words, the same rate as Thomas Hardy and H. G. Wells. 
Most influential and controversial of Le Queux's fiction were his tales of invasion and of espionage. G. T. Chesney's 'The Battle of Dorking' (1871) had established the popular genre of future-war fiction, and in 1893 Alfred Harmsworth commissioned from the little-known Le Queux a serial, 'The Poisoned Bullet', which was published in 'Answers', and then in book form as 'The Great War in England in 1897' (1894). A tale of surprise French invasion, it warned of British vulnerability and military unpreparedness. In the period of defence anxiety following the South African War, Le Queux joined the National Service League. From about 1905 he was a self-proclaimed patriot and a Germanophobe defence publicist, one of those condemned by their opponents as 'scaremongers'. He was active in Roger Pocock's Legion of Frontiersmen. In 1906 Le Queux, advised by Lord Roberts and H. W. Wilson, wrote for Lord Northcliffe's 'Daily Mail' -- the largest-circulation daily paper -- a sensational serial of German invasion, 'The invasion of 1910', later published in book form. It warned of British vulnerability and German atrocities, and urged the introduction of compulsory military training as demanded by Lord Roberts and the National Service League. Much publicized, denounced, and satirized, it became Le Queux's best-known work. 
From the 1890s Le Queux wrote fiction warning of French, Russian, and later German spies in Britain. In 1909 his sensational serial 'Spies of the Kaiser' appeared in D. C. Thompson's 'Weekly News', then was expanded into the book 'Spies of the Kaiser: Plotting the Downfall of England'. This aroused much concern, and readers wrote to Le Queux reporting alleged spies. He passed the letters to Lieutenant-Colonel J. E. Edmonds of MO5 who used them, with other evidence, some from Le Queux, to convince the committee of imperial defence of the necessity of a secret service, leading to the establishment of the Secret Service Bureau (later MI5 and MI6). 
An avid self-publicist, Le Queux wrote his way from obscurity to wealth and celebrity. The profits from his thrillers bought the image and lifestyle to which he aspired: the cosmopolitan clubman, man of the world, and man of mystery. Boyishly enthusiastic, opportunist, snobbish, name-dropping, sociable yet secretive, delighting in being mysterious, he was apparently a sort of Walter Mitty. He presented himself as a hero involved in dangerous adventures, and listed 'revolver practice' in his 'Who's Who' entry. He claimed an expert knowledge of crime and criminology. He claimed he was an expert on spying and that he was involved in espionage and counter-espionage for Britain, and he gave public lectures warning of foreign spies. His appearance, however, was not that of his fictional heroes. He was portly, genial, and wore pince-nez. The 'Morning Post' obituarist wrote that he was 'an amiable and placid little man, who looked as if he caught the 9.15 from Ealing to the City every morning'. He became for a time the Birmingham consul of the republic of San Marino and wore his gorgeous uniform for publicity photographs; he gained and proudly wore continental orders. 
Le Queux travelled widely. His anonymous Balkan reportage, 'An Observer in the Near East' (1907), was anti-Austrian and pro-Serbian. He repeatedly changed residence, sometimes living in Italy. On 23 November 1887 he married Florence Alice, 25 years old, daughter of Alfred Thomas Dorsett, artist (deceased). In January 1901 she died after fracturing her skull by falling down steps at their Lambeth home: the inquest ruled accidental death. On 22 February 1902 he married at Kensington register office an Italian, Luisa Gemma (declared age 27 years), daughter of Ferdinando Cioni. 'Cassell's Magazine', presumably echoing Le Queux, described her as 'a member of one of the oldest Florentine families' ('Cassell's Magazine', Dec 1904, 693). They had no children, and by 1910 they had separated. 
Le Queux was involved in various business ventures, including allegedly selling army boots to the Bulgarian government and film-making. In 1913 he did not pay his wife money due under the deed of separation and she took bankruptcy proceedings against him. In October he told the assistant official receiver he had lost money on unsuccessful attempts to operate a casino in Corfu and to sell war stores to Serbia, and that until 1910 his annual income had been $5000 and his annual expenditure $3000. He was declared bankrupt and had to resign his consulate. His losses suggest his fantasizing may have spilled over into his business ventures, and he may have been gullible and deceived. 
Like other 'scaremongers' Le Queux flourished during the First World War. He was an amateur spy hunter, lectured extensively on espionage and the German threat, wrote for Horatio Bottomley's 'John Bull', demanded the internment of enemy aliens, and denounced the German 'invisible hand' in Britain. He wrote sensational anti-German fiction presented as fact, including 'German Spies in England' (1915) and 'Love Intrigues of the Kaiser's Sons' (1918), and in a similar mode wrote 'Rasputin the Rascal Monk' (1917) and 'The Minister of Evil' (1917). 
After 1918 Le Queux continued to write thrillers. 'Rasputinism in London' (1919), for example, was about a Clapham curate -- a Keble man and 'satanic scoundrel' -- who established a Rasputinist cult among rich women drug takers based in the Cromwell Road. Le Queux continued his amateur wireless experiments, with more publicity than originality. In 1923 he published his unreliable, largely fictitious memoirs, 'Things I Know about Kings, Celebrities and Crooks'. Apparently resenting lack of official recognition in Britain, from 1923 he spent much time in Switzerland, skiing and writing tourist publicity. After several weeks' illness, he died from heart failure on 13 October 1927 at the Links Hotel, Knocke, Belgium, and was cremated at Golders Green, London, on 19 October. 
Before and during the war, although criticized, Le Queux had been influential, but by 1927, according to the 'Morning Post' obituarist, 'with the cultured reader he passed as a modern variant of Baron Munchausen'. Le Queux's own version of his life was essentially repeated in N. St B. Sladen's 'The Real Le Queux' (1938), in derivative reference works, and belatedly in 'Missing Persons' (1993). However, from the 1970s into the 1990s historians researching Le Queux, 'spy fever', 'scaremongers', and the secret service revealed further information, which formed the basis of a more accurate, if less flattering, portrayal. 


@@@@@


doc= 37667


Leslie, Henry David (1822-1896), composer and conductor, was born in London on 18 June 1822, the fourth of nine children (five sons and four daughters), and the first son to survive infancy, of John Leslie, a fashionable tailor and keen amateur viola player, and his wife, Mary Taylor. He was educated at the Palace School, Enfield, before unenthusiastically joining the family firm. A lugubrious looking, bespectacled, and later whiskery young man, he began musical studies in his mid-teens, studying the cello with Charles Lucas. He later played the cello at the Sacred Harmonic Society concerts. 
In 1840 Leslie published his op. 1, a 'Te Deum' and 'Jubilate' in D. In 1848 his symphony in F was performed by the prestigious Amateur Musical Society under Michael Balfe. His anthem 'Let God arise' was first performed at the Norwich festival of 1849: Charles Lucas called it 'the best antiphonal work since the days of Handel', and 'The Times' found in it 'gifts that are accorded to few'. The next decade saw a dramatic overture, 'The Templar', the oratorios 'Immanuel' (1854) and 'Judith' (1858), and some chamber music. The 'Birmingham Gazette' hailed 'Judith' as a 'great work', but the second part of 'Immanuel' contains probably the finest music Leslie wrote. About the same time came two cantatas, 'Holyrood' (1861) and 'Daughter of the Isles' (1862), and two works given at Covent Garden: the operetta 'Romance, or, Bold Dick Turpin' (1860) and the romantic opera 'Ida, or, The Guardian Storks' (1865). The only major late work was a programmatic second symphony, 'Chivalry', first performed in 1881 at the Crystal Palace. He edited 'Cassell's Choral Music' (1867) and other collections of early partsongs. 
In 1857 Leslie married one of his pupils, Mary Betsy, the daughter of William Henry Perry, a physician, and moved to her family home, Bryn Tanat, Llansanffraid, near Oswestry on the Welsh border. They had four sons and one daughter. The second son, William, became a master of the Musicians' Company, and the third, Charles, played cricket for Middlesex and England. 
In 1847 Leslie became honorary secretary of the newly founded Amateur Musical Society, and from 1855 its conductor. He had also taken charge of a madrigal society which performed in the Hanover Square Rooms and which from May 1856 was known as Henry Leslie's Choir. A basic group of about thirty singers swelled on some orchestral occasions to 240, and over three decades gave several London concerts each year, prepared with a care for detail unique in Britain at the time, though its effects were later attacked as too calculated, even 'effeminate', and many regretted the drift from a pure partsong repertory to grandiose 'mixed concerts' with popular soloists. Leslie wrote a hundred or so partsongs for the choir, including 'O memory', 'The pilgrims', and 'Annabelle Lee', which became best-sellers. 
By the late 1870s Leslie (and many critics) felt that some of his singers were 'becoming a little ropy' and that he himself was tired and stale. A final triumph came at the Paris Exhibition of 1878, where he and Arthur Sullivan organized the British musical element, and Leslie's choir won first prize in the international choral competition. Two years later, after a command performance at Windsor Castle, he disbanded it, and although it was revived at public request under Albert Randegger, with Leslie as president and later conductor (1885-7), and attracted such stars as Charles Santley, it was finally disbanded in 1887. 
In 1864 Leslie realized a long-held ambition in setting up a National College of Music, in Piccadilly, to rival the continental conservatories. Although Sullivan, Julius Benedict, and other prominent musicians were among the professors, it collapsed after only two years. A second attempt (in 1878) led to the foundation of the Royal College of Music in 1883. Leslie was always interested in the training of village choirs, and in retirement he launched the Oswestry Festival of Village Choirs, which absorbed him for some years until underfunding brought it to an end. He died on 5 February 1896 at Boreatton Park, Baschurch, Shropshire, after several years of ill health, and was buried in Llanyblodwel churchyard. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 37668


Le Squyer, Scipio (1579-1659), record keeper and antiquary, was the eldest son of Edmund Le Squyer (died 1620) (third son of George Squyer), later rector of King's Nympton, Devon, and his wife, Martha, second daughter of Mark Slader of Bath. He left home for London in 1597, and was a student at an inn of chancery, New Inn, for four years from 1599. In 1603 he became marshal of his fellow Devonian John Doddridge (later Sir John and justice of king's bench). Before 1620 Le Squyer married Frances, third daughter of Sir Hugh Brawne; they had at least two sons and two daughters. 
While retaining his marshal's position until Doddridge's death in 1628, in 1620 Le Squyer entered crown service as one of the two deputy chamberlains in the receipt of the exchequer. He apparently continued as a deputy chamberlain until 1655, when, with essentially unchanged duties, he was appointed one of the two chamberlains of the exchequer and keeper of its records. The officers gained some of their fees from those wishing to consult 'Domesday Book' and other records in their custody; it was a matter at their discretion whether to index or calendar the records. Le Squyer was as active in this side of his work as had been his predecessor and friend, Arthur Agarde, and about twenty volumes of his abstracts and calendars survive (JRL). In 1627 he was granted an extra $10 p.a. for his 'extraordinary service and charges in sorting, ordering and digesting' the contents of the Westminster treasuries. In April 1643 he was acting escheator of Devon and Cornwall. 
Le Squyer also had a disinterested fascination with the records of the middle ages, especially those of the west country. He was a friend of such antiquaries as Sir Robert Cotton (with whom he swapped medieval manuscripts and from whose collection he copied extracts), Sir Simonds D'Ewes, and Sir William Dugdale, who thanked him as 'a gentleman of great knowledge in Antiquities and a special furtherer of this worke' ('The Antiquities of Warwickshire', 1730, 913). 
A more general indication of Le Squyer's interests is given by the catalogue of his library, which he drew up in 1632 when he had just moved house to Long Acre, Covent Garden. Quite apart from over 200 manuscripts, many heraldic or about Devon and some medieval, he owned nearly 500 printed books, including about 130 each of 'theological' and 'historical' works, over seventy works of 'Poesy' and over forty of 'Morality'. He had made his own translations of one of the 'Psalms and Prayers' of Cardinal John Fisher (although his theological books show a puritan tendency) and of 'The life and death of Edward II', and he had part of the original manuscript of the 'Advancement of Learning' by Francis Bacon. 
By 1656, Le Squyer had married his second wife, Elizabeth. He died in September 1659 and was buried in Westminster Abbey; in his will he had requested that he should be buried near to Agarde's monument there. Elizabeth Le Squyer survived her husband. 
Nigel Ramsay', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37669


Leverson, Ada Esther (1862-1933), novelist, was born in London on 10 October 1862, the eldest child in the family of four daughters and four sons of Samuel Henry Moses, later Beddington, a wool merchant resident in Hyde Park Square, London, and his wife, Zillah, daughter of Sir John Simon, Liberal MP. Her mother was an outstanding amateur pianist. Educated at home, Ada became well read in English, French, and German literature and the classics. On 6 December 1881 she married Ernest David Leverson, formerly Montague David Leverson (1852-1921), son of George Bazett Colvin Leverson, a diamond merchant. Her parents had opposed the match; Leverson was ten years her senior and it later transpired that his young 'ward', being educated in France, was in fact his illegitimate daughter. The Leversons had a son, who survived only twenty-one weeks, and a daughter, Violet, later Violet Wyndham. 
From 1892 Ada Leverson published numerous stories and sketches in 'Punch' and other magazines. Her Kensington home became a meeting-place for writers and artists, particularly those associated with the 'Yellow Book'. Her friends included Aubrey Beardsley, H. Max Beerbohm, George Moore, and, most notably, Oscar Wilde. It was Wilde who christened her the Sphinx, the name by which she was thereafter known to her friends. When the Wilde scandal broke in 1895, Ada Leverson stood out against public opinion and took him into her home when he was released on bail, an act of courage and loyalty for which she has become justly renowned. She was one of the few people who rose early in the morning to greet him on his release from prison in 1897. 
About 1902 the Leversons lost money through an unsound investment. Never happy together, they now agreed to separate, Ernest emigrating to Canada and Ada remaining in London. The publisher Grant Richards encouraged her to turn to novel writing, and between 1907 and 1916 she produced six books: 'The Twelfth Hour' (1907), 'Love's Shadow' (1908), 'The Limit' (1911), 'Tenterhooks' (1912), 'Bird of Paradise' (1914), and 'Love at Second Sight' (1916). These lightly plotted love stories represent the perfect expression of her personality: frivolous and witty, but with an underlying sense of melancholy. They are also important for their closely detailed depictions of the fashions and tastes of the Edwardian age -- a picture made all the more vivid by Leverson's tendency towards playful exaggeration and the novels' inclusions of vignettes of eccentric personalities. 
Ill health and the onset of deafness did little to diminish Ada Leverson's enjoyment of life. Shortly after the First World War she met F. Osbert Sitwell, Sacheverell Sitwell, and Edith Sitwell, who became close friends. During the 1920s she frequently stayed in Florence, where she befriended Harold Acton and Ronald Firbank. Though viewed by many as a relic of the 1890s, she never lost her enthusiasm for new artistic trends. 
Ada Leverson was small but of striking appearance, with bright golden hair and a profile said to resemble that of Sarah Bernhardt. She was famous for her witty, outrageous remarks, which she delivered in a low, purring voice. When she heard, for instance, that Alfred Douglas's elder brother had produced a male heir, she is said to have remarked: 'For once I think Bosie would have preferred a girl' ('TLS', 8 Oct 1993, 31). Her outwardly cynical manner concealed a warm heart, and she was devoted to those she loved. That her novels are not better known is due largely to her extreme modesty about her literary abilities; but there is no doubt that her concise, deceptively light prose style, reliance on dialogue to carry the plot, and delight in satirical exaggeration influenced both Firbank and Evelyn Waugh, and that she has thus left her mark on the development of the twentieth-century novel. 
Ada Leverson died at her home, 8 Clarges Street, Mayfair, London, on 30 August 1933, having published her last book, 'Letters to the Sphinx from Oscar Wilde, with Reminiscences of the Author', in 1930. 
J. W. Speedie', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37670


Lewis, Alun (1915-1944), poet and short-story writer, was born on 1 July 1915 in Cwmaman, Glamorgan, the eldest in the family of three sons and one daughter of Thomas John Lewis (1885-1964), a schoolmaster, and his wife, Gwladys Elizabeth (1884-1979), teacher, daughter of Melchizedec Evans, a Unitarian minister. He grew up in a depressed community and would never forget what he saw there: 'I used to watch the wheel of the pit spin round year after year, after school and Saturdays and Sundays; and then from 1926 on I watched it not turning at all, and I can't ever get that wheel out of my mind. ('Selected Poetry', 9)' From Glynhafod elementary school, Aberdar, he won a scholarship to Cowbridge grammar school, Glamorgan, a tough boarding establishment. He was unhappy there but, determined not to slip back into the pits where his grandfather had wielded a pick, worked hard and won scholarships both to Jesus College, Oxford, and the University College of Aberystwyth. Having to choose between being 'poor in Oxford or comfortable in Aber.', he chose Aberystwyth, where he worked on the university magazine, published his first poems and stories, and dabbled in left-wing politics. He left Aberystwyth in 1935 with a first-class degree in history, for Manchester, from which he returned a year later, with an MA, to take a teacher-training course at Aberystwyth. 
In 1938 Lewis took a job in a Welsh secondary school, but could see the shadow of war approaching and worried over the problem of pacifism. In a letter to Richard Mills dated 30 May 1939 he wrote: 'I have a deep sort of fatalist feeling that I'll go. Partly because I want to experience life in as many phases as I'm capable of -- i.e. I'm more a writer than a moralist, I suppose. But... I'm not going to kill. Be killed perhaps, instead. ('Selected Poetry', 18)' He joined up in the spring of 1940 and spent the next two years moving from camp to camp around England with the Royal Engineers. During this period and against this background he wrote the poems of 'Raiders Dawn' and the short stories of 'The Last Inspection', both published in 1942. Poems and stories alike reveal a compassionate concern for the victims of oppression and tyranny: Welsh miners, private soldiers, women, and children. Lewis never forgot that the military chain of command replicates the social scale, and the issues of the class war meant more to him than those of the fighting war. 
On 5 July 1941 Lewis married Gweno Mererid Ellis, a 28-year-old schoolteacher and daughter of William Ellis, furniture dealer. That October he was commissioned as a reluctant second lieutenant in the South Wales Borderers. A year later, taking leave of his wife with some piercing poems of separation, he set sail for India. There, troubled by the poverty of the peasants and his own involuntary role as a supporter of the imperial system, he became, as he wrote to Richard Mills on 3 March 1943, 'more and more engrossed with the single poetic theme of Life and Death' ('Selected Poetry', 53). 
On leave in the Nilgiri hills in July 1943, Lewis met -- and fell instantly in love with -- Freda Aykroyd, wife of a scientist eleven years her senior. Two months later, she and Lewis met in Bombay and became lovers. Their happiness was clouded, however, by the prospect of distress to their respective spouses. In November Lewis fell ill with malaria, which left him exhausted and increasingly prone to depression. His Indian writings reflect the turmoil of his emotional life in their recurrent images of sunlight and darkness. As in the work of his favourite poet, P. Edward Thomas, the darkness is often that of the forest. One of Lewis's more ambitious poems, 'The Jungle', ends with a question -- '
does the will's long struggle end 

With the last kindness of a foe or friend? 

' -- a question answered on 5 March 1944 when, hours before the start of his first patrol against the Japanese at Bawli Bazar on the north Burma coast, he did himself that kindness with a shot from his own revolver; his body was buried the same day in Bawli north military cemetery. He had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 37671


Lewis, (Dominic) Bevan Wyndham (1891-1969), writer, was born Llewelyn Bevan Wyndham Lewis, on 9 March 1891 at 63 Seaforth Road, Seaforth, Litherland, Lancashire, the eldest son of David John Lewis, pharmaceutical chemist of Seaforth, and his wife, Cecelia Agnes, 'nee' Mayer. He was educated at Cardiff intermediate school, where he showed academic promise, winning four distinctions in the senior honours certificate of the Central Welsh Board at seventeen. His ambition to read law at Oxford, however, was never fulfilled. He enlisted as a private in the Welsh regiment on 1 September 1914, and served with the 11th battalion (the 'Cardiff pals') in France, where he was shell-shocked twice, and in Macedonia, where he caught malaria. He was invalided home in 1918, and demobilized, still a private, at the time of the armistice. On 29 October 1918 he married Winifred Mary (Jane) Holland ('b'. 1893/4), daughter of David Holland, marine surveyor, of Cardiff. They had one daughter, the actress Angela Wyndham Lewis. 
In 1919 Lewis was offered a job by R. D. Blumenfeld, editor of the 'Daily Express'. For six months he was a sub-editor, but then began to write a column for the paper called 'By the way'. He signed it Beachcomber. He thus pioneered in Britain the discursive, witty, exuberant, and surreal style of humour he bequeathed to his close friend J. B. Morton, who took the column over in 1924 and developed it through half a century into an art form. Lewis's marriage ended in 1926, and in the same year Jane married the writer J. B. Priestley. Lewis meanwhile moved on to the 'Daily Mail', where until 1930 he wrote a column called 'At the Sign of the Blue Moon'. His prolific imagination was never more happily displayed. 
Lewis lived much in France, and immersed himself in its history and literature. After his first book, 'A London Farrago', appeared in 1921, he published almost annually a volume of satire or humour, but he had a parallel career as a biographer, writing vigorous and scholarly lives of writers like Francois Villon (1928), Pierre de Ronsard (1944), Francois Rabelais (1957), Moliere (1959), and Cervantes (1962); studies of Louis XI ('King Spider', 1930), and Charles V ('Emperor of the West', 1932). His life of Boswell ('The Hooded Hawk', 1946) vividly displayed his power of conjuring up the past. He had been received into the Roman Catholic church in 1921 (dropping his first name, Llewelyn, in favour of Dominic), and for all their drive and gusto, his books show a strong Catholic bias. 
Lewis also wrote skits, burlesques, and film scenarios, and he was an inspired anthologist. Particularly amusing was 'The Stuffed Owl' (1930), an anthology of bad verse he compiled with Charles Lee. On 22 July 1933 he married Dorothy Anne ('b'. 1900/01), daughter of Bertie Henry Robertson, in a civil ceremony. They had two sons. He returned to the 'Daily Mail' from 1933 to 1936, when he joined the 'News Chronicle' as the columnist Timothy Shy. He also wrote the 'Mustard and the Cress' column in the 'Sunday Referee' from 1930 and was a regular contributor to 'The Tatler' from 1933. He was made a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 1947. He collaborated with the artist Ronald Searle by writing the text for 'The Terror of St Trinian's' (1952). He published his last book, on Goya, in 1968. 
Lewis was a leading member of an influential group of Catholic writers who flourished between the wars, including Hilaire Belloc, G. K. Chesterton, J. B. Morton, Compton Mackenzie, and Evelyn Waugh. Many of them used to meet regularly at Shirreff's wine bar under Ludgate Circus where, despite a lifelong stammer, Lewis more than held his own; he was indeed described by Belloc as the wittiest man he had ever known. He described himself as 'impulsive, lazy, easily imposed upon, distinctly Celt, full of strong loves and hates'. Among the former were wine, France, Spain, the Pyrenees, Elgar, and tradition; among the latter, financiers, socialists, bluestockings, officials, and novelty. He suffered with good humour the misfortune of sharing his name with Percy Wyndham Lewis, the Canadian artist. He was a gentle, courteous, convivial, slightly bemused romantic, born out of his time. He died in Altea, Spain, on 21 November 1969. 
Godfrey Smith', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37672


Lewis, James (1750/51-1820), architect, was probably born in Brecon in south Wales. In 1770, at the age of nineteen, he went to Italy, and a volume of drawings of friezes, urns, and classical ornaments which he made in Rome is preserved in the Paul Mellon collection. He later told the diarist Joseph Farington that he had become well acquainted with Piranesi, and that while abroad he had kept a journal written in Italian but had subsequently destroyed it because he was embarrassed by its poor linguistic quality. After returning to Britain in December 1772, he exhibited at the Society of Artists from 1774 to 1778 and his first recorded employment -- minor work in London -- belongs to this period; then in 1779-80 he published a volume of 'Original Designs in Architecture, Consisting of Plans... for Villas, Mansions, Town Houses', which was evidently intended as an advertisement for his talents, and thereafter he developed a modestly successful practice mainly as a country house architect in the south-east of England. In 1797 he published a second volume of designs which, in contrast to the first, included a significant proportion of executed projects, the product of this practice. 
In 1792, however, Lewis was elected surveyor to Christ's Hospital and in the following year he was appointed to the corresponding post at the Bridewell and Bethlem hospitals: from then on these institutional responsibilities appear to have formed the principal element in his career. For Christ's Hospital he designed the new grammar school (1793; dem.) -- receiving a gratuity of 100 guineas 'for his great attention during the building' because he had charged at a rate of only two and a half per cent instead of the usual five per cent -- and additions to the school in Hertford (1800), and also made designs for various ambitious unexecuted schemes for redeveloping the main buildings. 
Regarding the Bethlem Hospital, in 1810 a competition was held for designs for a new hospital in St George's Fields, Southwark; in the event none of the entries which gained the premiums was actually adopted, and instead Lewis was instructed to incorporate their best features in a new design of his own. The result, erected in 1812-15, was Lewis's largest undertaking. His best work, however, lies in the products of his private practice, in the series of houses such as Bletchingdon Park, Oxfordshire (1782), Eydon Hall, Northamptonshire (1788-9), Lavington Park, Sussex (1790-94), and Hackthorn Hall, Lincolnshire (1793-5), which are elegant neo-classical versions of the Palladian villa form, with interior decoration in the manner of Robert Adam. 
Lewis was one of the fifteen original members of the Architects' Club, founded in 1791. Persistent ill health induced him to give up the surveyorship at Christ's Hospital in January 1816 and that of the Bethlem Hospital the following year. To his two sons and two daughters he left a 'good fortune', and he died in Powis Place, London, on 16 July 1820. 


@@@@@


doc= 37673


Lewis, Ted (1894-1970), boxer, was born Gershon Mendaloff at 56 Umberston Street, St George-in-the-East, Aldgate, London, on 28 October 1894, the third of eight children and eldest son of Harris Mendaloff (died 1939), cabinet-maker, and his wife, Leah (died 1938). He was educated at the Jewish Free School in Bell Lane, Spitalfields, and followed his father's trade. Shortly before his fifteenth birthday he began boxing professionally as Kid Lewis at the Judaean social and athletic club, Whitechapel, where he had nearly fifty contests, and when Premierland opened he boxed there thirty-five times in 1912. The largest boxing saloon in the East End, this was a Jewish institution for twenty years. In October 1913 he won the British featherweight championship at the national sporting club, and the European title four months later. 
In 1914 an offer from Australia took Lewis and his trainer, Alec 'Zalig' Goodman, to Sydney and five matches in three months, from where they sailed to the USA on business which lasted five years. It was here that 'Ted' was added to his name. Boxing mostly on the east coast, Lewis had half his fights restricted by law to no-decision contests. He won the world welterweight championship in Boston in August 1915 from Jack Britton and lost the title to the same man eight months later. Lewis regained the title from the Irish-American in June 1917, and lost it back to him in March 1919. They had met nineteen times. 
Lewis returned to Britain for a contest on Boxing day 1919 at the Royal Albert Hall. He won the British and European welterweight titles in March and June respectively of 1920, and the British middleweight championship a year later. In May 1922 he lost by a knockout in the first round to Georges Carpentier in his challenge for the world's light-heavyweight crown. Lewis lost all his boxing titles during 1923-4, and had his last contest in 1929. In over 270 boxing matches he lost only thirty times. He never refused to fight and earned money voraciously, spent it excessively, and gave hand-outs endlessly. He was sentimental and politically naive, and the outstanding British boxer at the heavier weights in the first half of the twentieth century. 
In January 1917 Lewis married Elsie Schneider (died 1962) in New York; she was from a Jewish family. They had one child, a son. Lewis died on 20 October 1970 at 105 Nightingale Lane, Balham, London, and was buried five days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 37674


Lewis, Timothy Richards (1841-1886), pathologist and parasitologist, was born on 31 October 1841 in Llanboidy, Carmarthenshire, the eldest of eight children of William Lewis and his wife, Britannia Richards. Both parents came from established farming families, and Lewis's early years were spent at Crinow Farm, Narberth. Lewis left the grammar school in Narberth at fifteen to become apprenticed to a Narberth druggist. Four years later he was in London, first with a Mr Porter, an 'operative chemist' of Streatham, and next at the German Hospital in Dalston as an apothecary. As well as acquiring skills in chemistry and the German language, Lewis attended lectures at University College, London, and was awarded the Fellowes medal in 1866. His formal medical qualification (MB, 1867) was, however, gained from the University of Aberdeen. In February 1868 Lewis came first in the London examination for entry to the Army Medical School in Netley, and did equally well in the course. He was commissioned assistant surgeon on 31 March 1868, surgeon on 1 March 1873, and surgeon-major on 31 March 1880. 
Lewis's career was decisively influenced by his being chosen in 1868 to study the current theories of cholera causation, first in Germany and then in India. His colleague on this officially sponsored mission was Douglas Cunningham of the Indian Medical Service, with whom Lewis was to collaborate for most of his career. While in Munich, Lewis made the acquaintance of another lifelong colleague, the epidemiologist Max von Pettenkofer. Lewis and Cunningham reached Calcutta in January 1869, and Lewis worked in India, with one interval, until 1883. In 1879 Lewis spent several months visiting European laboratories. His pathological researches and field studies appeared regularly in the form of official reports presented by Dr J. M. Cuningham, then sanitary commissioner with the government of India, and were concerned with such subjects as cholera, leprosy, 'oriental sore', enteric fever, relapsing fever, and prison dietaries. 
Lewis's pre-eminence as a microscopist led in 1869 to his discovery in human urine of one stage of the filaria parasite, later known as 'Wuchereria bancrofti'. Pursuing this finding, Lewis published in 1872 the first observation of nematode haematozoa in human blood, and coined the term 'Filaria sanguinis hominis'. In 1877 he observed the adult male and female forms. In 1870 he gave the first authentic account of amoebae in the human intestine. 
Lewis returned to England in March 1883 as assistant professor of pathology at the Army Medical School in Netley, where he introduced practical instruction in modern methods of bacteriological enquiry. From 1884 to his death Lewis was involved in critically evaluating Robert Koch's bacteriological explanation of cholera. 
On 8 October 1879 Lewis married Emily Brown, daughter of James Brown of Lewisham. Lewis died childless on 7 May 1886 at his home, Bywood, in Woolston, near Southampton, from pneumonia, possibly aggravated by septicaemia. He gained only minimal official recognition for his work; his early death at forty-four prevented his election to the Royal Society. His name is associated with the first description (published 1878) of a mammalian trypanosome ('T. lewisi'). 
Margaret Pelling', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37675


Lewyn, John (fl. 1364-1398), master mason, is first recorded in 1364 working at Coldingham Priory, a Scottish dependency of Durham Cathedral priory. At Durham itself he had charge of building the kitchen serving the monks' refectory in 1367-74, during which period he was paid $13 6's'. 8died a year and a robe worth 13's'. 4died The kitchen is unique among Gothic structures of centralized plan in being covered by a masonry vault incorporating four pairs of intersecting parallel ribs. The small central octagon generated by these ribs carries the walls of the lantern and smoke louver. The inspiration behind this design is not obvious, although it is probably significant that a much less impressive square version of the same scheme was built over the kitchen of Raby Castle, co. Durham, also begun in 1367. An awareness of the timber vault over the octagonal crossing of Ely Cathedral (1334-41) is very likely, although the latter's solid geometry differs importantly from that at Durham. Whether Lewyn was acquainted with the much earlier Spanish Islamic and Romanesque vaults which provide the closest analogies for his vault cannot be known. 
By 1368 Lewyn was described as 'the bishop's mason' and was granted lands by Bishop Thomas Hatfield (died 1381); other grants by Hatfield were to follow in the 1370s. Also in 1368 Lewyn was appointed to repair the king's castle at Bamburgh. Some work had been done there by 1372, but in 1375 inquiry was made into allegations that Lewyn had received money for the work but had failed to carry out the repairs. In 1378, the same year as saw the reorganization of the king's works in southern England, Lewyn was appointed to carry out works at the royal castle of Carlisle and at Roxburgh Castle, the latter taken from the Scots in 1346. Lewyn's work at Carlisle, the still-extant main gatehouse, does not conform to the terms of the indenture for its building drawn up on 4 April 1378, perhaps because of the need to keep in continuous use the pre-existing and adjacent sheriff's office and prison. 
By 1378 Lewyn may well have been regarded as the leading military architect in the north, for in that year he also contracted with Richard, Lord Scrope (died 1403), for the first phase of Bolton Castle, Yorkshire. Work was completed 'c'.1397, probably largely in accordance with the original scheme. Although unique in the intricacy of its internal planning, Bolton's quadrangular layout with bulky rectangular corner towers inspired imitations at Sheriff Hutton in the North Riding of Yorkshire (1382), Lumley in co. Durham, and Wressle in the East Riding of Yorkshire. The first two castles have several times been attributed to Lewyn. In their overall form, and in various points of detail, all the northern quadrangular castles are indebted to the greatest English castle-building project of the fourteenth century, Edward III's reconstruction of the upper ward at Windsor (1357-69). 
In 1380 Lewyn contracted with John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster (died 1399), to build a new 'mantelet' against the inner face of the fourteenth-century gatehouse at Dunstanburgh Castle. Bishop John Fordham (died 1425) in 1384 appointed Lewyn a commissioner of array for the city of Durham, and with several partners he was granted the borough of Durham to farm; he was also engaged in the export of wool overseas. In 1385-6 he was superintending building works for the crown at Berwick upon Tweed. For Ralph, sixth Lord Neville of Raby (died 1425), Lewyn and his son Walter undertook in 1392 to renew all defective roads at Brancepeth, possibly the result of heavy wear during building operations at the castle there. Between 1390 and 1398 Lewyn was carrying out work at Finchale Priory, a dependency of Durham Priory. It has been plausibly suggested that around this time he was designing the unique cruciform donjon at Warkworth Castle for the earl of Northumberland. Even discounting this and the other major castles which have been attributed to him, Lewyn is clearly recognizable as the leading late fourteenth-century architect in the northernmost counties of England. 


@@@@@


doc= 37676


Liddell, Eric Henry (1902-1945), missionary and athlete, was born in Tientsin (Tianjin), China, on 16 January 1902, the second son in the family of two sons and a younger daughter of the Revd James Dunlop Liddell, a Congregational missionary from Drymen, Stirlingshire, and his wife, Mary Reddin, a trained nurse from Paxton in Berwickshire. His early childhood was spent at the mission station in the village of Siaokuan (Xiaoguan), southern Hebei. In 1907, at the age of five, he was brought back to Scotland, where he attended, first, the village school in Drymen, and, from 1908 to 1920, the School for the Sons of Missionaries in London (later Eltham College). At school both he and his elder brother (Robert Victor) excelled at sports; in 1919 Eric set a new (and still unbroken) school record of 10.2 seconds for the 100 yards. In 1920 he matriculated at Edinburgh University for a BSc degree in pure science. As a student he broke the Scottish records for the 100 and 200 yards, and set a new record for the inter-universities 440 yards (50.2 seconds). His electrifying speed earned him seven international rugby caps for Scotland as a wing three-quarter. He was selected to run in the 100 and 200 metres in the 1924 Olympics in Paris, but declined to run in the 100 metres on religious grounds, because the heats were to be run on a Sunday. He won the bronze medal in the 200 metres, and then had a spectacular and unexpected victory in the 400 metres to take the gold medal in a world record time of 47.6 seconds (10 July 1924). 
Liddell graduated from Edinburgh University a few days later (17 July) and enrolled at the Scottish Congregational college in Edinburgh to read divinity for a year, for he had long since decided to devote his life to missionary work, like his parents. He spent the year immersed in student evangelical activities, speaking all over Scotland at weekends. In the summer of 1925 he took part in his last athletics meeting in Scotland, where he won the Scottish Amateur Athletic Association titles in the 100, 200, and 440 yards, before leaving to take up an appointment as a missionary teacher at the Anglo-Chinese College in Tientsin. He developed athletics at the college, and continued to run at meetings in China. 
In 1931-2 Liddell returned to Scotland on furlough in order to be ordained as a Congregational minister. In 1934 he married Florence, who had trained in Canada as a nurse, the twenty-one-year-old daughter of Hugh McKenzie, a Canadian missionary at Tientsin. They had three daughters, but he never saw his third daughter; she was born in Canada after the upheavals of the civil war and the Japanese invasion of China had persuaded Liddell to send his pregnant wife and young children to safety in 1941. 
Meanwhile, Liddell had been working as a field missionary in war-torn Siaokuan. He wrote 'The Sermon on the Mount: for Sunday School Teachers' (1937), and back in Tientsin he worked on 'A Manual of Christian Discipline', to be translated into Chinese for the guidance of Chinese pastors, and published 'Prayers for Daily Use' (1942). In 1943 he and his missionary colleagues were interned by the Japanese in a camp in Weihsien, Shantung. They were officially internees, rather than prisoners, and life, although monotonous and full of deprivation, was not brutal. Liddell was remembered by survivors for his modesty, his unfailing good humour, and his exemplary Christian conduct throughout their time there -- and despite his strict sabbatarian principles he even refereed hockey matches on Sundays, for the sake of the youngsters with little else to do. He died in Weihsien on 21 February 1945 of a brain tumour. The story of his athletic triumphs was retold in the film 'Chariots of Fire' (1981). 
Magnus Magnusson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37677


Light, Francis (bap. 1740, d. 1794), colonist in Penang, Malaya, was baptized on 15 December 1740 in the parish church of Dallinghoo, near Woodbridge, in Suffolk, the natural younger son of William Negus, a prominent landowner of Melton, near Woodbridge, and Mary Light. He was educated at Seckford's Grammar School at Woodbridge and entered the Royal Navy in 1759 as a midshipman aboard the 'Captain'. He transferred shortly afterwards to the 'Dragon' as an able seaman, but in 1761 he joined the 'Arrogant' as a midshipman. In 1763 he was paid off and two years later he embarked for India. 
At Madras he obtained command of a country ship belonging to a syndicate of European merchants with interests in Sumatra and the northern regions of the Malay peninsula. He established trading connections with the sultan of Kedah, by whom he was offered in 1771 the port and the coast as far as the island of Penang in return for protection against the bugis of Selangor. He urged on his superiors in Madras the advantages of accepting this offer and on the East India Company the desirability of acquiring Penang as a commercial centre. Missions led by Edward Monckton and Charles Des Voeux were dispatched by the company in 1772 to north Sumatra and Kedah, but without results, because the East India Company refused to promise aid against Selangor. 
Light continued to engage in private trade during the 1770s and early 1780s, notably in Salang, off the north-west coast of Siam. Growing Dutch power in the region led to new interest in establishing a British base in the Strait of Malacca, and in 1786 he obtained a renewal of the offer of Penang from the sultan of Kedah, on condition of a defensive alliance with the East India Company. This offer was accepted and Light was appointed superintendent of the island, which was formally acquired as a British possession on 11 August 1786 and called Prince of Wales Island. 
From then on Light administered Penang with great skill and energy, and this led to a considerable growth in population and trade. He also successfully defended the island against an attempt by the sultan of Kedah in 1791 to reclaim it because of the East India Company's failure to observe the defensive clause in the treaty of cession. 
Light lived with a Portuguese Eurasian woman, Martinha Rozells, and they had at least three children, including William Light (1786-1839), the founder of Adelaide. Light died on 21 October 1794 in Penang. 
John Bastin', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37678


Lister, Anne (1791-1840), diarist and traveller, was born on 3 April 1791, probably in Halifax, Yorkshire, although some accounts suggest Welton, South Cave, Yorkshire. She was the daughter of Captain Jeremy Lister (died 1836) and his wife, Rebecca Battle (died 1817), of North Cave, Yorkshire. Her father, youngest son of the Lister family of Shibden Hall, Halifax, one of the chief landowning families of the area, was of a restless disposition and spent his youth in the army. Anne was never very attached to him and wished him more gentlemanly. Two of her brothers died very young; John, the younger of the two surviving boys, died in 1810, and Samuel, the elder (whom Anne loved), died in 1813, leaving Anne one sister, Marian, of whom she was not fond. She was educated at private schools in Ripon and York where, at the age of fifteen, she began her diaries which were partly encoded in a cipher which became more complex with time and which she used to record all private matters, particularly financial and sexual. At school she had her first lesbian experiences with a schoolfriend Eliza Raine who calls Anne her 'husband' in writings which use Anne's code. 
In 1815, to escape her parental home where she was unhappy, Lister moved to Shibden Hall to live with her uncle James and aunt Anne, unmarried siblings. She was fiercely independent in running the estate and conducting her own affairs. She dressed in a masculine style: being much concerned with her appearance, she decided early that she would wear only black. She was intelligent and, helped by the scholarly Reverend Samuel Knight, later vicar of Halifax, taught herself Latin, Greek, algebra, geometry, and other subjects in which she read widely. She also enjoyed music and played the flute. She took an active interest in local schools and was the first woman to be elected to the Halifax Literary and Philosophical Society. She was keenly interested in all details of estate business which she directed personally even when abroad, not least because lack of money was a constant embarrassment to her. She developed a hotel and sold and leased land for building, coal mines, and stone quarries, using and indeed exceeding her income on ambitious alterations to the hall (carried out with the help of the architect John Harper), on landscaping the park, and on travelling. She was an old-fashioned tory and Anglican, disdaining tradesmen, set against dissent, and using her power over tenants and her limited means unsuccessfully to fight the radicalism sweeping the area. Her lesbianism caused her no mental anguish since she explicitly stated it to be a pure form of love, and she was very largely protected from gossip by her discretion and dominant social position. Mary (Marianna) Belcombe was her lover from 1814, and the affair continued after Mary's marriage in 1816 to Charles Lawton. After some other relationships, Lister took as a lover Ann Walker (1803-1854) of Lightcliffe, near Halifax -- a shy malleable girl whom Lister pursued, at least partly, for her wealth, and who lived at Shibden Hall with Lister from 1834. 
In 1826, on the death of her uncle, Lister became sole executor of his will and owner of the Shibden estate. When in 1836 her aunt and father -- who had drawn some of the income of the estate -- died, Lister became completely financially independent. Her increasing wealth gave her scope for travel. Her first journeys, in the 1820s and 1830s, took her to Europe. She spent three years in Paris, where she lived with her aunt and studied anatomy under Baron Georges Cuvier. Medical matters had always interested her and are an important part of her diaries; she now combined interest with practical experiment. She went on to Switzerland, the Netherlands, Denmark, Germany, Italy, and Spain. There she visited not only sights of historical and cultural interest, but also factories, prisons, orphanages, farms, and mines and climbed high mountains, making the first recorded ascent of Vignemarle (10,821 feet) in the Pyrenees. 
In 1839, with her partner Miss Walker, Lister travelled through Belgium, Germany, Sweden, Finland, Russia, the Caucasus, and Persia. Her adventures ranged from galloping across the frozen Volga to visiting a Tartar harem. She reached the Black Sea but became ill with what is variously described as a fever, the plague, and poisoning from an insect bite. She was carried back to Kutaisi, the capital of West Georgia, where she died on 22 September 1840. Her remains and her diaries were brought back to England by Miss Walker and her remains interred in Halifax parish church. Lister bequeathed Miss Walker a lifetime interest in Shibden Hall, from which she was forcibly removed after becoming insane. After Miss Walker's death the house and estate passed to Anne Lister's Welsh male cousins, notably John Lister (1845-1933), an important local benefactor and the first national treasurer of the Independent Labour Party. 
Anne Lister was remembered in her locality long after her death and was the model for Maud in Rosa Kettle's 'The Mistress of Langdale Hall' (1872). She later became known through her diaries which, in twenty-seven volumes and 4 million words (about one sixth in cipher), chronicle in minute detail her daily life at Shibden, her travels, and her personal life. Her cousin John was the first to bring them to public view, choosing extracts of local social and economic interest for the 'Halifax Guardian' (1887-92). He did not publish any of the secret parts, although he had deciphered them. Later authors were also reluctant to publish the coded sections, explained away by one as 'sentimental exchanges with her friends, excruciatingly tedious to the modern mind' (Ramsden, 4). Since the 1980s, however, the diaries have been fully accessible to scholars, and they and about 900 surviving letters have attracted very considerable interest, not least from women's historians because of the commanding position which Lister occupied in her locality and because of her lesbianism. While her diaries and letters are a testimony to her private life, Lister's alterations to Shibden Hall (now a folk museum) and park remain a lasting memorial to her public figure. 


@@@@@


doc= 37679


Lister, Sir (Robert) Ashton (1845-1929), industrialist, was born on 4 February 1845 in Dursley, Gloucestershire, the third of four sons and the sixth of eight children of George Lister, tanner and wire card maker of Dursley, and his second wife, Louisa Richards, who came from a Dursley family of maltsters. He was educated at Dursley Agricultural and Commercial Grammar School and then at schools in Banbury, Dusseldorf, and Versailles, before joining his father's business. 
Lister became estranged from his father and in 1867 set up on his own as a repairer of farm machinery, thus beginning the firm of R. A. Lister & Co. Soon he began manufacturing a range of agricultural and dairy equipment, much of which was exported. Lister travelled widely, promoting trade vigorously, and by 1911 had visited North America fifteen times. His company was not afraid to diversify, and from 1905 to 1914 it produced Dursley-Pedersen bicycles. In 1901 production of woodware began, which by 1909 included teak garden seats, and in 1908 came petrol engines, developed in 1929 into the famous range of diesels. Also in 1908 production began of the equally renowned sheep-shears. 
As an employer, Lister was paternalistic and somewhat autocratic, but benevolent. He drove himself hard, expecting his workforce to do the same, but he was quick to provide them with social benefits -- housing in 1901 and 1908, a hospital and benefit scheme in 1917, holidays with pay, and a consultative board of directors and workers' representatives in 1927. The greatest benefit was to the local community as a whole: as Listers grew so the area climbed to prosperity from the depression that followed the collapse of the woollen trade. 
Lister's activities extended into the community. In 1883 he was elected bailiff of Dursley and in 1893 was appointed a JP. In 1889 he was elected as first county councillor for Dursley, a position he held for thirty years and which was followed by nine years as county alderman. He supported a great variety of movements both by his presence and financially, including temperance, welfare, council housing, and education. The mainsprings of his activity were his religious and political convictions. Brought up by an agnostic father, he was introduced to church life by his wife and by 1899 he was a trustee of Dursley Congregational Church and a keen supporter of nonconformity in general. In recognition of his public work he was knighted in the 1911 new year's honours and in 1919 appointed CBE. 
Apart from his council work, Lister found time to address with technical skill and lucidity trade problems such as marketing and exporting agricultural produce, the new techniques of refrigeration and of drying milk, food adulteration, and the wartime rationalization of flour and bread movements to prevent price rises. Politically he was a Liberal and a strong supporter of free trade and of the social reforms of David Lloyd George. He made three attempts to enter parliament (for Tewkesbury) before succeeding in 1918, when he stood for Stroud as a coalition candidate. He held the seat until 1922. 
Lister was a man of large, spare frame, standing 6 feet tall, with a keen eye and forceful presence. He had a highly retentive memory and was an accomplished and lively speaker. He was a good judge of character, hated hypocrisy, and had no time for conceit. Discussing a sermon with a workman was as pleasurable to him as dining with his friend the prime minister H. H. Asquith. 
In 1866 Lister married Frances Ann (died 1911), daughter of John Box of Dursley, a watchmaker. They had four sons, the eldest of whom died in 1895; from the family of the second, Charles, came the five grandsons who as a team continued the family firm until it was sold in 1965 to the Hawker Siddeley Group. Lister died at his home, The Towers, Dursley, on 6 December 1929, and was buried in the cemetery of the Dursley Tabernacle United Reformed Church. 
David E. Evans', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37680


Little, William John (1810-1894), orthopaedic surgeon, was born on 7 August 1810 at the Red Lion inn, Red Lion Street, Whitechapel, London, the only son and eldest of three children of John Little, proprietor of the Red Lion inn, and his wife, Hannah. The family were related to the Littles who for many generations lived in Carbrooke, Norfolk. At the age of two Little developed a club foot, presumed to be due to poliomyelitis. After schooling at Goodman's Fields, London, and St Margaret's, Dover, he was, from the age of thirteen, educated at the Jesuit college of St Omer, France, winning the laurel wreath for French studies. After being apprenticed to Mr James Sequeira in 1826, his indenture was cancelled in 1828 and he began five years as an apprentice apothecary with the Apothecaries' Company of London. He studied at the London Hospital and the Aldersgate school of medicine. He became MRCS (1832) and MRCP (1837). 
In 1834 Little went to study with Johannes Muller at the University of Berlin in order to discover what could be done to correct his club-foot, which English surgeons refused to treat, leaving it to the bone-setters. During the course of dissections of cadaver club-feet, Little recognized the role of muscles and tendons rather than bones in this deformity. In 1836 Dr Louis Stromeyer of Hanover successfully undertook Achilles tendon division for Little's club-foot. Little received a doctorate from the University of Berlin in 1837 for his work on the nature of club-foot. During the same year he married Elizabeth ('Isa'), daughter of Thomas Roff Tamplin, brewer, of Horsted Keynes, Sussex, and brother of R. W. Tamplin, surgeon to the Royal Orthopaedic Hospital. They had four sons and seven daughters, only seven of whom reached maturity. His fourth son, Edward Muirhead Little, became a well-known orthopaedic surgeon on the staff of the Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital. His grandson was Admiral Sir Charles Little. 
From 1837 Little began to introduce the Stromeyer technique of tenotomy into England. The operation involved anterior division of the Achilles tendon just above the ankle, without anaesthetic, followed by splintage and manipulation. Little's 'Treatise on the Nature of Club-Foot and Analogous Distortions' (1839) recognized the association between fever and club-foot, and came close to describing foot deformity secondary to poliomyelitis. In 1839 Little was elected assistant physician at the London Hospital. 
In 1840 Little founded the Orthopaedic Institution in Bloomsbury, an infirmary for the cure of club-foot and other distortions, and for the study of orthopaedics. In so doing he played an important part in the development of modern British orthopaedics. The Orthopaedic Institution became the Royal Orthopaedic Hospital in 1845, but Little had resigned in 1844. In the following year he was appointed physician to the London Hospital, and he held this position until he resigned in 1863. In 1854 the Revd Andrew Reed, a friend of Little's, established the Royal Hospital for Incurables, and Little became medical examiner and a member of the governing board. 
Little continued his pioneering work throughout his career. In 1843, in a series of lectures at the Orthopaedic Institution (published in 1855 as 'Lectures on the Deformities of the Human Frame'), he described what became known as 'Little's disease', a spastic paralysis of both lower limbs secondary to infantile cerebral palsy. Little recognized that the cause was an abnormal birth which produced brain damage and secondary spasticity of the limbs. In 1843 he published 'On ankylosis or stiff joint: a practical treatise on the contractions and deformities resulting from diseases of joints'. In 1847 he described two boys with what was obviously pseudo-hypertrophic muscular dystrophy, itself described twenty-one years later by Guillaume Duchenne. 'On the Nature and Treatment of the Deformities of the Human Frame' appeared in 1853, and 'Spinal Weakness and Spinal Curvature' was published in 1868. 
In 1877 Little was elected FRCP, a rare honour for a surgeon. He visited North America in 1878, and was elected honorary member of the American Orthopaedic Association in 1890. Little died at home in Ryarsh, West Malling, near Maidstone, Kent, on 7 July 1894, and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 37825


Orme, Eliza (1848-1937), social activist and lawyer, was born on 25 December 1848 at 16 Regent Villas, Avenue Road, London, the seventh of eight children of Charles Orme ('c'.1807-1893), distiller, of Southwark, and his wife, Eliza (1816-1892), eldest daughter of the Revd Edward Andrews of Walworth and eldest sister of Emily Patmore. She attended Bedford College for Women and entered University College, London, in 1871, where she studied law and political economy, winning in 1876 first prize in Roman law and the Hume scholarship in jurisprudence. Among her mentors were John Elliot Cairnes (1823-1875), W. Leonard Courtney (1850-1928), and W. A. Hunter (1844-1898), from whom she learned an attachment to 'laissez-faire' economics and Liberal political principles. She went to Lincoln's Inn in 1873, to read in the chambers of Savill Vaizey, but as a woman was refused admittance to the ranks of conveyancers under the bar. 
In 1888, when Orme earned the degree of LLB from the University of London, she was already established in the Chancery Lane office out of which, from 1875 until about 1904, she conducted a prosperous business, 'devilling' for lawyers as a conveyancer and patent agent. She became a public figure, writing and lecturing about feminist and other contemporary issues. She was a member of the London National Society for Women's Suffrage and of the Society for Promoting the Employment of Women, and was a founding member of the Women's Liberal Federation (WLF) in 1887, editing their 'Women's Gazette and Weekly News' from 1889 to 1891. When the WLF split in 1892 she joined the Women's National Liberal Federation (WNLF), and later wrote the life of the founder ('Lady Fry of Darlington', 1898). The WNLF disagreed with the WLF policy of giving priority to women's suffrage in the face of opposition from the Liberal Party. In Orme's words, 'the great Liberal organization... was not available for the promotion of reforms about which Liberals are in disagreement, and which are in fact not part of an accepted party programme' (E. Orme, 'Lady Fry of Darlington', 1898). In 1892 she was chosen over Beatrice Potter to be senior lady assistant commissioner to the royal commission on labour, supervising the work of three junior investigators and herself examining women's work in Ireland, in the Black Country iron industry, and in London public houses. She opposed protective labour legislation for women workers and her reports demonstrate a conviction that women should not be excluded from any workplace, even the blacksmith's shop. In 1894 she was a member of the departmental committee on prison conditions, examining the situations of female prison staff and inmates. She stated her views in the 'Fortnightly Review': 'The real fact is that women, instead of being reformed by prison treatment, are dragged down by it, and that our system, planned carefully, with the best intentions, is really calculated to manufacture habitual criminals and drunkards' ('Fortnightly Review', 69, 1898, 790-96). 
Orme remained unmarried, living with her parents until their deaths and then with her sister Beatrice at Tulse Hill from the early 1890s. No portrait or personal papers have survived, and little is known about her private life, but she was regarded as a formidable person by Beatrice and Sidney Webb, George Gissing, and George Bernard Shaw. In an article in 'The Examiner' (1 August 1874) she was critical of what she called 'strong-minded women', who went in for stridency and useless eccentricity, preferring the 'sound-minded women... who can take a journey by railway without an escort, who can stand by a friend through a surgical operation, and who yet wear ordinary bonnets and carry medium-sized umbrellas'. A distinctly pragmatic attitude coloured her approach to women's issues: writing in 1897 about the need for higher education and independent careers, rather than charity, for unmarried women she debunked 'the fallacy of supposing a woman keeps other women in employment by living economically on a small income instead of earning and spending a larger one' (E. Orme, 'How poor ladies live: a reply', 'Nineteenth Century', 41, 1897, 613-19). Eliza Orme died of old age and heart failure on 22 June 1937 at Fenstanton, Christchurch Road, Streatham, in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 37826


Ormiston, Thomas (1826-1882), civil engineer, was born in Edinburgh on 28 July 1826, one of at least two sons of John Ormiston and his wife, Margaret Lindsay. The family subsequently moved to Glasgow, where Thomas received a rudimentary education before leaving school early to enter the business of his father and uncle, who were builders in Glasgow. With them he acquired a knowledge of carpentry, masonry, and surveying. In 1846 he entered the engineers' department of the River Clyde Improvement Trust; shortly afterwards he became chief assistant and from 1852 he was acting engineer to the trust for a short period on the death of David Bremner. Three years later James Walker, a past president of the Institution of Civil Engineers, appointed him principal assistant in his London office, where he remained until the beginning of 1862. 
From early in his career Ormiston was interested in the practical side of engineering. While working for the Clyde trustees he designed works himself at Ormidale pier, Port Glasgow, and Ayr harbour, where he developed his own design for a dredger. Further south he worked on the design of docks and harbours in the Isle of Man, the River Mersey, and Cardiff. He also worked on many of the Trinity House lighthouses and in 1856-7 was entrusted with the entire charge of the erection of the lighthouse on The Needles in the Isle of Wight. In addition he was involved in the preparation of designs for the Plymouth breakwater fort, and from 1862 he served as engineer in charge of the fort works. In 1857 Ormiston married Charlotte, daughter of William Lane of Freshwater, Isle of Wight; they had three sons and four daughters. 
At the end of 1864 Ormiston went to Bombay to superintend a large land reclamation scheme adjacent to the harbour for the Elphinstone Land and Press Company of Bombay. This he did so successfully that in 1870 the government of India took the company over, retaining Ormiston's services. In 1873 this led to the establishment of the Bombay Port Trust with Ormiston as chief engineer. Ormiston foresaw the large expansion in Bombay's trade that took place in the 1870s and 1880s, to which the facilities of the Prince's Dock, constructed to his design from 1875 to 1880, made a great contribution. On the occasion of its opening in January 1880 he was appointed CIE. He had previously relinquished his post to his brother George E. Ormiston in 1874 and became consulting engineer to the Bombay Port Trust in London. 
Ormiston was for many years a JP for Bombay, and he took a keen interest in municipal affairs. He gave much time and energy to advising the government on engineering projects throughout India, and in 1879 he visited Cyprus to report on the harbour at Famagusta. He was a fellow of the University of Bombay, and was elected dean of the faculty of engineering in 1879. 
In 1880 Ormiston's health began to fail and early in 1882 he retired to the Isle of Wight, where he died at Neston Farm, Freshwater, on 9 July 1882. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 37827


Grandson, Sir Otto de (c.1238-1328), soldier and diplomat, was the eldest son of Pierre de Grandson, lord of Grandson, on the shore of Lake Neuchatel (now in Switzerland), and his wife, Agnes, daughter of Ulric, count of Neuchatel. His move away from the family home and into English affairs resulted from his father's position as the household knight and dependent of Peter of Savoy, earl of Richmond (died 1268), uncle of Henry III's queen, Eleanor, and a powerful influence at Henry's court. Occasionally in England between 'c'.1245 and his death in 1258, Pierre de Grandson was receiving an annual fee of $20 from Henry by 1249/50, and his son Otto was possibly introduced into the household of Edward, Henry's eldest son and heir, about this time. He first appears, in company with several of Edward's retainers, in October 1265, when he received a grant of confiscated property in London, and by 1268 he was certainly one of Edward's knights. He rapidly became one of the prince's closest friends, accompanying him on his crusade of 1270-72 and appearing as one of his executors in the will that Edward made at Acre in June 1272 ['see also 'Lord Edward's crusade]. When he returned to England as king in 1274 Grandson emerged as 'one of Edward's most trusted henchmen' (Prestwich, 54). 
Henceforth Grandson's considerable services to the crown were partly military but mainly diplomatic. He fought as a banneret in the first Welsh war of 1277-8, visited Gascony and Paris on Edward's business in 1278-9, and fought again in the second Welsh war of 1282-3. In March 1284, after its conclusion, he was made justiciar of north Wales. Grandson was essentially viceroy of the newly conquered lands, a position suggestive of the confidence placed in him by Edward; and he may have had some influence, as his Savoyard friends and kinsmen certainly did, on the design of the castles by which Wales was to be held down. In 1286 he joined Edward in Gascony, after an embassy to the papal curia, and in 1289-90 he journeyed once again to the curia to discuss, 'inter alia', the granting of a papal dispensation for the marriage of Edward of Caernarfon, Edward's son, to Margaret of Scotland (the Maid of Norway), and Edward's projected crusade. 
Although Edward never again went on crusade, Grandson himself led a small expedition to the east in 1290 and was present at the fall of Acre in May 1291. He may have been the author of a memorandum written between 1289 and 1307 concerning plans for a new crusade. After the debacle at Acre he retired to Cyprus, whence he visited Armenia and Jerusalem before returning to Grandson and finally to England in 1296. His involvement in the Anglo-Scottish war, then just beginning, followed the pattern of his earlier work for Edward. He was present at the surrender of Dunbar on 28 April 1296, which marked the victorious conclusion of Edward's first campaign, but his main work continued to be high-level diplomacy. He was active in building up Edward's anti-French coalition in the Low Countries in 1296-7, negotiated for a truce with France in 1298, attended the papal curia in 1300-01, helped to settle the terms for a final French peace in 1303, and was among those sent again to the curia by Edward in 1305 to seek the suspension of Robert Winchelsey (died 1313), archbishop of Canterbury. 
Grandson was rewarded by Edward with extensive land grants in England, especially in Kent, and also in Ireland, and in 1275 with the wardenship of the Channel Islands, later transformed into a life grant. This last proved a source of constant conflict and friction with the islanders. After Edward I's death in 1307 he left England for ever, returning to his ancestral home at Grandson. Although he was occasionally called out of retirement to represent English interests at the curia and at the French court, his main interests were now religious. He took the cross again in 1307, and was a notable benefactor to the Franciscans and Carthusians of his homeland. He died in April 1328 and was buried in Lausanne Cathedral. John Grandison, bishop of Exeter (1328-69), was his nephew. It is hard to think of any comparable figure in medieval English history who lived so long, travelled so widely, or had a career so diverse and adventurous. 
J. R. Maddicott', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37828


Owen, Wilfred Edward Salter (1893-1918), poet, was born at Plas Wilmot, near Oswestry, Shropshire, on 18 March 1893, the eldest of the three sons and one daughter of Thomas (Tom) Owen (1862-1931), railway clerk, of Plas Wilmot, and his wife, (Harriett) Susan (1867-1942), daughter of Edward Shaw JP, ironmonger and former mayor of Oswestry. His father was transferred to Birkenhead in 1898, and between 1899 and 1907 Owen was educated at the Birkenhead Institute. In 1907 the family moved to Shrewsbury, where Tom Owen had been appointed assistant superintendent of the Joint Railways and Wilfred attended Shrewsbury Technical School. His enthusiasm for poetry -- seemingly kindled in 1903 or 1904 -- was growing, but was for some time exceeded by a preoccupation with religion. Under the strong influence of his devout mother he read a passage from the 'Bible' every day and, on Sundays, would rearrange her sitting-room to represent a church. Then, wearing a linen surplice and cardboard mitre she had made, he would summon the family and conduct a complete evening service with a carefully prepared sermon. 
With his cousins Vera and Leslie Gunston, Owen formed an Astronomical, Geological and Botanical Society (of three members). As an early enthusiasm for botany had led him to the study of geology, this in turn led him to archaeology and, in 1909, he made the first of many expeditions to the site of the Roman city of Uriconium at Wroxeter, east of Shrewsbury. He left school in 1911, eager to go to university, and passed the University of London matriculation exam, though not with the first-class honours necessary to win him the scholarship he needed. Disappointed, he accepted the offer of an unpaid position as lay assistant to the Revd Herbert Wigan, vicar of Dunsden, a village outside Reading. In return for help with his parish duties, Wigan gave Owen free board and lodging and some tuition to prepare him for the university entrance exam. The arrangement was not a success. Wigan had no interest in literature, and Owen soon lost interest in theology, the only topic offered for tuition. Over the coming months, however, he attended botany classes at University College, Reading, and was encouraged both in his writing and in his literary studies by the head of the English department. Meanwhile, he gave practical help to the poor of the parish, his early reading of the gospels having been supplemented by his reading of Shelley, atheist and revolutionary (whom he was happy to learn had lived near by). 
Owen's poems of this period show him moving beyond imitations of his admired Keats, and in 1912 the compassion that would characterize his writings from the western front makes itself heard in his response to a village tragedy, the lines beginning: '
Deep under turfy grass and heavy clay 

They laid her bruised body and the child. 

' He gazes into the open grave of mother and daughter with something of the same awed fascination which prompted a more ambitious poem some months later. 'Uriconium/An Ode' is, in an important sense, his first 'war poem'. Contemplating the excavated ruins of the Roman city which, with its inhabitants (his guidebook told him) 'perished by fire and sword', his awareness of the victims' bodies -- so prominent a feature of his later and greater poems -- enables him to feel '
Plasters with Roman finger-marks impressed; 

Bracelets, that from the warm Italian arm 

Might seem to be scarce cold; 

' and it sharpens his perceptions of the weapons that killed them -- 'spears... unblunted yet'. 
Early in 1913 a religious revival swept the parish like a springtide, carrying converts into church, but leaving Owen stranded on the recognition that literature meant more to him than evangelical religion, and that he could no longer reconcile the conservative cant of the vicarage with the godless poverty of the parish. He left Dunsden on the verge of a nervous breakdown and with congestion of the lungs which kept him in bed for more than a month. In July he sat a scholarship exam for University College, Reading, but failed, and in mid-September crossed the channel to take up a part-time post teaching English at the Berlitz School in Bordeaux. Over the next two years he grew to love France and had reached perhaps the highest point of happiness that life would offer him, tutoring an eleven-year-old French girl in her parents' villa, in the Pyrenees, when, on 4 August 1914, war was declared. 
The Owen who left for France in 1913 was a late-Romantic descendant of Keats and Shelley, but the Owen who left France to enlist in 1915 was equipped to become a modern poet. The metamorphosis was largely the result of his friendship with Laurent Tailhade, a poet of the so-called 'decadent' school, who introduced him to the work of Verlaine, Flaubert, and many other nineteenth-century writers who challenged the beliefs and sensibilities of bourgeois society. Tailhade had written two pacifist pamphlets, but was also a duellist and by the end of 1914 had joined the French army. Over the next year Owen's thinking showed similar conflicts and confusion. He too considered joining the French army. His delayed decision indicates an understandable reluctance to go to war, but at no point do his letters speak of any principled aversion to fighting. 'Do you know what would hold me together on a battlefield?' he asked his mother. 'The sense that I was perpetuating the language in which Keats and the rest of them wrote!' ('Wilfred Owen: Collected Letters', 300). Finally, he returned to England, said goodbye to his family, and, on 21 October 1915, enlisted in the Artists' Rifles. 
For the next seven and a half months Owen was in training, mainly at Hare Hall camp in Essex. There were two brief but important interludes in London, spent largely at the Poetry Bookshop in Devonshire Street. Its proprietor, Harold Monro, himself a poet and the editor of the 'Poetry Review', read his poems and gave him encouraging advice. On 4 June Owen was commissioned into the Manchester regiment and underwent further training with its 5th (reserve) battalion in various parts of England, before crossing to France on 29 December. He joined the 2nd Manchesters on the Somme and, in the second week of January 1917 (one of the coldest on record), led his platoon into the trenches. 
In mid-March 1917 Owen fell through a shell-hole into a cellar and was trapped there for three days with only a candle for company. He emerged with concussion and was involved in fierce fighting -- at one point being blown out of the trench in which he was taking cover from an artillery bombardment -- but on 1 May was diagnosed as suffering from neurasthenia (shell-shock) and sent to Craiglockhart War Hospital, near Edinburgh, to recuperate. He was put under the care of a perceptive doctor, Captain Arthur Brock RAMC, who believed shell-shock to result from broken contact with real life, and sought to re-establish that vital connection by means of 'work-cure' (or, as he termed it, 'ergotherapy'). Owen joined the field club Brock had started and became editor of the hospital magazine, 'The Hydra', which would shortly print two of his poems and four by another inmate, Siegfried Sassoon. 
Sassoon's book, 'The Old Huntsman and Other Poems', had just been published. Its 'trench life sketches' ('Wilfred Owen: Collected Letters', 484), with their dynamic use of direct speech (learned from Thomas Hardy), had an overwhelming effect on Owen. He introduced himself, and so began one of the most productive of literary friendships. The older poet's advice and encouragement, showing the younger how to channel memories of battle -- recurring in obsessive nightmares which were a symptom of shell-shock -- into a poem such as 'Dulce et decorum est', complemented Dr Brock's 'work-cure'. The final manuscript of 'Anthem for Doomed Youth' carries suggestions (including that of the title) in Sassoon's handwriting. Owen's confidence grew, his health returned, and in October a medical board decided that he was fit for light duties. On leave in London, he met Robert Ross who in turn introduced him to some of his literary friends: Arnold Bennett, H. G. Wells, and a number of less well known figures, several of whom were homosexual, as were Ross and Sassoon themselves. It is clear from Owen's writings that he shared their sexual orientation; but it is debatable whether he ever entered into a physical relationship that, if detected, could have resulted in a prison sentence like that imposed on Oscar Wilde, a relationship that would have horrified his mother, whose good opinion he valued above all others. There is no evidence that he did. What is certain, however, is that Owen and Sassoon wrote more eloquently than other poets of the tragedy of boys killed in battle because they felt that tragedy more acutely, more personally. 
In November 1917 Owen rejoined the 5th Manchesters in Scarborough. There he read 'Under Fire' (the English translation of Henri Barbusse's book 'Le feu'), the last significant text to filter into his poems: one sentence, for example, being transformed into the lines beginning 'Cramped in that funnelled hole'. This vision of 'one of the many mouths of Hell' would be more fully elaborated in 'Miners' and 'Strange Meeting' and can be traced back, by way of 'Uriconium', to the hell of which he heard at his mother's knee. 
The following March Owen was transferred to Ripon where, over the next three months, he either wrote or revised and completed many of his most celebrated poems, including 'Insensibility', 'Strange Meeting', 'Exposure', and 'Futility'. Part of the power of these derives from his pioneering use of 'pararhymes': escaped/scooped, groined/groaned. In 'Strange Meeting', from which these examples are taken, the second rhyme is usually lower in pitch than the first, giving the couplet a dying fall which musically reinforces the poem's tragic theme. 
Owen was graded GS (fit for general service) in June and rejoined the 5th Manchesters at Scarborough. He was recommended for a home posting but the recommendation was rejected, and when in July he heard that Sassoon was back in England with a head wound, he seems to have accepted that it was his duty as a poet to take his place. He had come to share his friend's sense of mission, a word with appropriately religious overtones. Although both poets were, by this time, fiercely critical of the role of the church that had forgotten the biblical commandment 'Thou shalt not kill', both had a fundamentally religious outlook. Owen never lost his belief in the person and teachings of Christ, and his mother's evangelical influence no doubt contributed to his conviction that he must go out again, as he told her, 'to help these boys -- directly by leading them as well as an officer can; indirectly, by watching their sufferings that I may speak of them as well as a pleader can' ('Wilfred Owen: Collected Letters', 580). He returned to the front in September 1918 during the final advance on the German lines. His courage in the ensuing conflict won him the MC, but he was killed while crossing the Sambre and Oise Canal near Ors in the early morning of 4 November -- one week before the armistice, and two years before the first collection of his poems was published. He was buried in the Ors village cemetery. 
In Owen's famous draft preface for that book, he wrote: 'All a poet can do today is warn. That is why the true Poets must be truthful' (autograph poems, BL, Add. MS 43720-43721). This document came to have the force of a manifesto for the socially concerned poets of the 1930s, who accorded him the status of saint and martyr. Dying at twenty-five, he came to represent a generation of innocent young men sacrificed -- as it seemed to a generation in unprecedented rebellion against its fathers -- by guilty old men: generals, politicians, war profiteers. Owen has now taken his place in literary history as perhaps the first, certainly the quintessential, war poet. He would have preferred another title. On new year's eve 1917 he had told his mother: 'I am a poet's poet.' This proved to be true. The four successive editions of his work have all been edited by poets, and it was only with Benjamin Britten's sensitive setting of Owen's poems in his 'War Requiem' (1961) that he became known to a national and an international audience as the Orpheus of the trenches. 


@@@@@


doc= 37829


Page, Sir Gregory, second baronet (1689-1775), art collector, was born in Greenwich, the elder son of Sir Gregory Page, first baronet (1668-1720), and his wife, Mary, daughter of Thomas Trotman, citizen of London. Both his father and his grandfather had been directors of the East India Company. The first baronet was MP for New Shoreham in 1708-13 and 1715-20: on his death in 1720 his executors sold his large shareholding in the South Sea Company, and his son was left about $600,000. Page himself was also a director of the East India Company (1719-20), and a large stockholder. In 1717 he began buying land in Kent and the City of London, which eventually placed the family among the largest landowners in the county; it was said to be possible to walk for a day in north-west Kent without leaving Page property. 
In 1721 Page married Martha, third daughter of Robert Kenward of Yalding, Kent; they had no children. In 1723 he bought the freehold of Wricklemarsh on Blackheath from the executors of the widow of Sir John Morden, the founder of Morden College, Blackheath. Almost at once the construction of a new house was begun, Page's ample fortune ensuring an astonishing rate of progress. He chose as his architect John James of Greenwich, who had succeeded Nicholas Hawksmoor as clerk of the works at Greenwich, and who designed a restrained Palladian house: a ground plan and cross-section through the rooms were included in the fourth volume of 'Vitruvius Britannicus', (1739). According to a contemporary description, Wricklemarsh was one of the finest mansions in England, resembling 'a royal palace rather than a residence of a gentleman' (Sutton, 364). The viewer goes on to describe elegantly laid out gardens, rooms hung with green or crimson silk damask, cornices, doorcases and chair frames carved in gilt, and chimney-pieces of polished marble. 
A complete list of Page's collection of pictures was printed in the first volume of 'London and its Environs Described', published in 1761 by R. and J. D. Dodsley. It comprised 118 pictures, with paintings by Claude, Poussin, Veronese, Van Dyck, Rubens, Salvator Rosa, Nicolaes Berchem, and a group of ten pictures by Adriaen van der Werff, a contemporary Dutch classicist painter much admired in the eighteenth century. Page presumably had links with the Dutch East India Company: six Dutch East India wood chairs inlaid with the Page/Kenward arms in mother-of-pearl are now in Sir John Soane's Museum. Page was the founder and patron of the dining club the Free and Easy Society, for which a number of Qianlong Chinese armorial punchbowls were made about 1755. 
Page died at Wricklemarsh on 4 August 1775 and was buried alongside his wife in the family vault at St Alfege, Greenwich. He left Wricklemarsh and its collections to his great-nephew Sir Gregory Turner, baronet, of Ambrosden in Oxfordshire, who took the name and arms of Page in compliance with his great-uncle's request. Turner did not live at Wricklemarsh, but let it to a succession of tenants. Horace Walpole (later fourth earl of Orford), wrote in 1779 that 'half the van der Werffs, which cost an immense sum... are spoiled since Sir Gregory Page's death by servants neglecting to shut out the sun' ('Horace Walpole's Correspondence', ed. W. S. Lewis, 33, 1965, p. 137). The picture collection was sold in parts in 1775, 1783, and 1787. Wricklemarsh was sold in 1784 to John Cator, who instructed Christies to auction the materials of the house in 1787; its shell was finally demolished in 1800. 
Charles Sebag-Montefiore', rev. ' 


