@@@@@


doc= 37830


Palmer, George (1745/6-1826), chemist and colour scientist, was, according to his obituary ('Dagen', March 1826), of English birth and the child of Roman Catholic parents. He may have been related to Thomas Palmer, whose prosperous family firm, established at 118 St Martin's Lane, Westminster, was prominent in the supply and fitting of window glass. Its speciality was coloured glass, and Thomas Palmer supplied stained glass to Horace Walpole, fourth earl of Orford, for Strawberry Hill. 
In an autobiographical, published in Leipzig in 1803, George Palmer claimed that, aged twenty-six, he witnessed the fire at the Hotel-Dieu, Paris, in 1772. Soon after this Palmer appears to have taken on, and retained, the alternative name George Giros de Gentilly. In December 1776 a Mr Gentilly is recorded as presenting samples of cloth 'in shades from Flesh colour to Maroon' to the chemistry committee of the Royal Society of Arts (RSA, PR.GE/112/12/18). In the following year he published in London, as George Palmer, his 'Theory of Colours and Vision', which appeared in a French edition (translated by the textile manufacturer Denis-Bernard Quatremere d'Isjonval) later that year. In this study -- the first to put forward the modern theory of colour vision and colour blindness. In his 'Theory of Light and Colour' (1777) he suggested that the retina of the eye contains three different kinds of particle (elsewhere he speaks of 'molecules' or 'fibres'), each of which is excited by a different kind of light. 'The complete and uniform motion of these particles produces the sensation of white.' Colour blindness, he correctly supposed, arose when either one or two of the three types of molecules were non-functional. He also introduced the idea that different sensory fibres within the normal retina could be selectively fatigued, so as to yield coloured after-images. He suggested that a residual motion of the fibres was present in the dark, so that true blacks could be seen only in daylight, by comparison with surrounding objects. Although Palmer's theory of the physics of colour was mistaken (he held there were three discrete forms of light), it is remarkable that this tradesman, or 'chemist' as he identified himself in his 'Theory', came so close to a modern account of the physiology of colour vision. It remained for an establishment scientist, Thomas Young, to suggest in 1802 that the physical variable underlying colour is a continuous one, whereas Palmer's idea of three discrete receptors is correct at the retinal level. 
Although largely unrecognized by the scientific establishment in England, Palmer enjoyed some contemporary recognition on the continent: his explanation of colour blindness first appeared in a secondary account by J. H. Voigt in 'Magazin fur das Neuste aus der Physik' (1781) in which Voigt named him as Giros de Gentilly and identified him as 'Georg Palmer'. Palmer's work was also cited in such texts as J. S. T. Gehler's 'Physikalisches Worterbuch', while the 'Theory' was extravagantly reviewed in the 'Journal Encyclopedique'. About this time Gentilly worked for a textile manufacturer in Louviers, where he invented a mordant for dyeing fabrics with wood extract dyes (Berthollet and Berthollet, 2.327-8). Between 1785 and 1787 he lived at 18 rue Meslee, Paris; Watin's 'Directory' gives his business there as the supply of 'verres colores adaptes aux verres ordinaires'. In Paris he arranged for the publication of his monograph on artificial daylight, 'Lettre sur les moyens de produire, la nuit, une lumiere pareille a celle du jour' (1785), and a second essay on light and vision, 'Theorie de la lumiere, applicable aux arts, et principalement a la peinture' (1786). Palmer's texts on artificial daylight coincided with his involvement with Antoine-Arnoult Quinquet and Ambroise Bonaventure Lange, who were responsible for illegally manufacturing a double air-current oil lamp, from an original design by the Swiss inventor Francois-Pierre-Ami Argand. Palmer's precise role remains unclear and may have been limited to designing the blue-tinted glass shade that enabled lamp light to resemble natural light. 
In the 1790s Palmer returned to the development of dyes. Two letters to the Royal Society of Arts (June 1793, RSA, PR.MC/105/10/452) describe his recent invention of a yellow dye as well as confirming his English origin and his authorship of the 'Theory of Colours and Vision'. Palmer's letters were sent to the society from Florence and he may later have resided in Goslar, Germany, according to four pamphlets published in 1803; later reviews of these works suggest he also lived in Braunschweig and Wolfenbuttel in Lower Saxony. About 1811 Palmer moved to Copenhagen, where he died in poverty on 3 March 1826. 
John Mollon', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37831


Palmer, George Josiah (1828-1892), newspaper founder and editor, was born in Clapham, Surrey, on 30 June 1828, the eldest son and second child in the family of four sons and a daughter of George Josiah Palmer, printer, of Savoy Street, Strand, and his wife, Charlotte, daughter of John Hatchard, the evangelical publisher and bookseller, founder of Hatchards in Piccadilly. He was educated at Clapham grammar school and King's College School, London, and entered his father's printing firm as a compositor, later becoming manager. He married Marianne, daughter of James Beall, upholsterer, of Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, on 15 May 1851. They had six sons and a daughter. 
In 1852 Palmer purchased a small bookselling and printing business in Bloomsbury, London. Trade did not prosper, however, and in 1860 he was forced to sell out and take humbler premises at 32 Little Queen Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields, later to be the home of the 'Church Times'. The turning point in his fortunes came in October 1861, when he was asked to take on the printing and publishing of 'The Union' newspaper, which was trying to bring Tractarian Anglicans into touch with Roman Catholics. The connection soon snapped, however, as by mid-1862 internal squabbles among the paper's managers led to its demise. But Palmer's connection with 'The Union' enabled him to build up a link with leaders of the advanced wing of the high-church party. 
Palmer then decided to enter journalism on his own account and launch a popular church paper. On 7 February 1863 the first number of the 'Church Times' appeared. Like 'The Union' it was founded to forward the work and views of the Tractarians, who were then fighting an uphill battle against fierce opposition in the church. (Such practices as having candles on the altar were then considered popish.) The paper soon attracted readers, outshining all its Anglican rivals, and its sales rose steadily throughout Palmer's lifetime. 
Palmer himself edited the 'Church Times' from its foundation until his retirement in 1887, besides being responsible for its general direction and management. He was a realist, having little faith in committees. His experience of the committee-managed 'Union' convinced him that personal guidance was the safest way to run any enterprise. Three of his sons also spent all or most of their working lives in the service of the 'Church Times'. (The paper remained in the ownership and under the control of the Palmer family until its sale to Hymns Ancient and Modern Ltd in 1989.) Palmer's paper was certainly outspoken: and, as his 'Church Times' obituary remarked, 'our friend was no respecter of persons, however high in official standing, if he deemed it necessary, in support of God's truth or the Church's laws, to condemn their conduct'. Like so many Victorians, he looked the part, his face possessing an authority worthy of a minor prophet. Palmer was also closely concerned with the work of the Church of England Working Men's Society and was for many years its honorary treasurer. He died at 3 Victoria Crescent, Ramsgate, on 27 January 1892. 
Bernard Palmer', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37832


Palmer, Henry Robinson (1795-1844), civil engineer, was born in Hackney in 1795, one of the many children of the Revd Samuel Palmer, nonconformist minister, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Walker. He was educated at the academy run by his father. From 1811 to 1816 he was apprenticed to Bryan Donkin and he early displayed the keen interest in education and the formation of scientific societies that he pursued throughout his life. About 1813-14 he organized in Bermondsey a society of workmen which virtually constituted a mechanics' institute, almost ten years before those established by Leonard Horner in Edinburgh and George Birkbeck in Glasgow and London. 
On completing his apprenticeship Palmer was engaged by Thomas Telford and worked for him for ten years on a large number of road and canal surveys and associated designs. About 1817 he suggested to Joshua Field the idea of founding a society of engineers which would be more accessible to the younger members of the profession than the rather elitist Society of Civil Engineers founded by John Smeaton in 1771. The first meeting of the Institution of Civil Engineers was held on 2 January 1818 with eight founder members present and Palmer gave the opening address, outlining the objectives of the institution. The institution, however, made slow progress until in 1820 Telford, who never joined the Smeatonians, agreed to become the first president and the rules restricting membership to younger engineers were relaxed. Palmer subsequently became a member of the council of the institution and in 1835 was elected one of the vice-presidents; he was always very attached to the body, contributing several interesting papers and seldom failing to take part in the discussions, which he considered to be the most valuable part of its meetings. 
On 30 March 1827 Palmer married Mary Ann Emma Osmond at St Margaret's, Westminster. The previous year he had been appointed resident engineer to the London docks where, over the next nine years, he designed and executed the Eastern Dock, with the associated warehousing, entrance locks, bridges, and other works. He then moved to Westminster as a consulting engineer and was involved in numerous surveys for projected railways, and the design and construction of several docks and harbours, including those at Port Talbot, Ipswich, Penzance, and Neath. He carried out the original surveys for the South Eastern Railway, assisted by P. W. Barlow, and would have executed the scheme but ill health intervened. His original surveys for a Kentish railway dated from the time he was associated with Telford, and he gave parliamentary evidence in favour of navigation interests and against the Liverpool and Manchester Railway in 1825. Between 1821 and 1842 he took out five patents, one of them for a 'suspension railway' which was tried out unsuccessfully in Cheshunt and Deptford Dockyard. Of more importance were those relating to a system of constructing roofs and bridge decks in corrugated wrought or cast iron. The roofs were used extensively in London docks and the patent rights sold to Richard Walker of Rotherhithe, who marketed the system widely. Palmer was elected FRS in 1831; he published two papers on tides and the movement of shingle, in the 'Philosophical Transactions' of 1831 and 1834. 
Palmer died of dropsy on 12 September 1844 at 2 Great George Street, Westminster. A memorial window to him was installed in the main hall of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1954. 


@@@@@


doc= 37833


Pankhurst, (Estelle) Sylvia (1882-1960), political activist, writer, and artist, was born at 1 Drayton Gardens, Old Trafford, Manchester, on 5 May 1882, the second of five children of Dr Richard Marsden Pankhurst (1835/6-1898), a barrister, and his wife, Emmeline Pankhurst (1858-1928), the daughter of Robert Goulden, a prosperous Manchester cotton manufacturer. Sylvia spent her childhood in a household immersed in radical politics and women's rights campaigns. When the family moved to London in 1885 Emmeline and Richard, who had joined the Fabian Society, became involved in a circle of radical and socialist friends and in 1889 helped to form the Women's Franchise League which emphasized the rights of married women. After their return to Manchester in 1893 they joined the recently formed Independent Labour Party (ILP) in 1894. Richard Pankhurst stood unsuccessfully as an ILP parliamentary candidate, but Emmeline had greater success in being elected to the Chorlton board of guardians. 
Sylvia's own interest in socialist and feminist politics was influenced by her parents' activities and also by the many well-known speakers and writers who visited the family. In her early years in London she was mainly educated at home, although there was often no governess, and both she and her elder sister Christabel Pankhurst were frequently left to their own devices to develop their literary and artistic talents. Sylvia was later sent to a school in Southport and also attended the Manchester high school. In 1898, at the age of sixteen, she suffered a devastating emotional blow when her father died suddenly from a perforated ulcer. Of all the children she was closest to him and it is likely that his death had a long-lasting effect, in particular in encouraging her steadfast commitment to socialist politics. A more immediate consequence of his death was her mother's need to clear the debts that he had left and to support her family; Emmeline secured a position as registrar for births and deaths and also kept a small shop. 
Financial problems did not prevent Sylvia, however, from pursuing her aspirations to become an artist. She won a scholarship to the Manchester Art School, where she studied from 1898 to 1903, and then gained a travel award to the Accademia in Venice. After this she was awarded a scholarship to study for two years at the Royal College of Art in Kensington, where she lived in lodgings in Chelsea. She was frequently lonely but managed to spend alternate Sundays with her brother Harry who was at school in Hampstead. It was also at this point that she became a frequent visitor to the home of Keir Hardie MP, one of the leaders of the ILP whom she had first met as a schoolgirl when he stayed with her parents. They developed a close and intimate relationship which was to last until his death in 1915. During this period Hardie was the most important person in Sylvia's life and he helped her to deal with the emotional turmoil that she felt when she became increasingly estranged from her mother and sister just before the First World War. 
Sylvia shared Hardie's socialist beliefs. At the turn of the century she had been involved, along with her mother and Christabel, in the Manchester branch of the ILP. In this same period there was a renewed interest in women's suffrage, in particular among Lancashire textile workers, and the failure of the newly formed Labour Representation Committee (later the Labour Party) to give a commitment to votes for women on the same terms as men led Emmeline and Christabel Pankhurst to establish the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU) in 1903 to campaign for women's suffrage. At first members of the WSPU were drawn largely from the ILP and carried out propaganda for both socialism and women's suffrage in the north of England. Sylvia became increasingly involved in the affairs of the WSPU from her base in London where she attempted to combine training as an artist with paid work and political agitation. In 1906, however, she gave up her studies so that she could devote most of her time to the suffrage campaign. In that year she suffered her first imprisonment after protesting in court at a trial in which women had not been allowed to speak in their own defence. 
From then onwards Sylvia was always in the thick of the fight. She was arrested and imprisoned on numerous occasions and also suffered hunger and thirst strikes as well as forcible feeding. She gained notoriety at the time for her suffrage militancy and it is for this that she tends to be best remembered in subsequent histories. However, she never saw women's emancipation in isolation from her broader socialist politics and this was to cause tension between herself and Emmeline and Christabel Pankhurst who became increasingly hostile to the labour movement. Sylvia's relationship with her mother was made even more strained when Emmeline embarked on an American speaking tour in 1909, leaving her daughters to care for their brother Harry (Henry Francis), born 7 July 1889, who had contracted polio and subsequently died on 5 January 1910. 
Sylvia remained loyal to the WSPU and its militant methods, but was determined to emphasize the needs of working women and to develop links with broader labour struggles. She was supported in this by her younger sister Adela ['see 'Walsh, Adela Pankhurst], who was also active in the affairs of the WSPU but never felt comfortable in the organization which she left in 1911. In the following year Sylvia tried to involve more working women in the suffrage movement by campaigning in the East End of London. She supported George Lansbury, the Labour MP for Bow and Bromley, who resigned his seat in 1912 so that he could run again on the single issue of women's suffrage. Although he lost, the excitement generated by the campaign encouraged Sylvia to establish a new organization in 1913, the East London Federation of Suffragettes (ELF), which was successful in gaining support from working women and also from dock workers. The ELF organized suffrage demonstrations and its members carried out acts of militancy. Between February 1913 and August 1914 Sylvia was arrested eight times. After the passing of the 'Prisoners (Temporary Discharge for Ill-Health) Act' of 1913 (known as the 'Cat and Mouse Act') she was frequently released for short periods to recuperate from hunger striking and was carried on a stretcher by supporters in the East End so that she could attend meetings and processions. When the police came to re-arrest her this usually led to fights with members of the community which encouraged Sylvia to organize a people's army to defend suffragettes and dock workers. She also drew on East End traditions by calling for rent strikes to support the demand for the vote. 
The ELF took an interest in trade union struggles and in 1913 supported the men and women involved in the Dublin lock-out. Sylvia Pankhurst was one of the main speakers alongside George Lansbury and the Irish socialist James Connolly at a rally organized to demand the release of Jim Larkin, a leader of the Dublin strikers. This was the immediate cause of a split between Sylvia and her mother and sister, although Sylvia was already disillusioned with the way in which militancy had come to focus on individual attacks on property rather than on building a mass struggle. By 1914 the ELF was no longer part of the WSPU; Sylvia established and edited her own newspaper, the 'Woman's Dreadnought', and also led a deputation of working women from the East End which was received by the prime minister, Asquith. She remained close, however, to Emmeline and Frederick Pethick-Lawrence, who also left the WSPU at this time. They provided Sylvia with financial support for her personal and political endeavours throughout the inter-war years. 
The outbreak of war in August of 1914 made Sylvia's break with her mother and Christabel, who were fervent supporters of the war effort, even more complete. Sylvia had strong pacifist convictions and through the ELF initiated anti-war activities in London. She worked with other socialist men and women in opposing conscription and, despite being critical of its timidity and political moderation, she also joined in peace work with the Women's International League. The 'Dreadnought' became one of the best sources for information on peace campaigning at home and abroad and helped to establish Sylvia's reputation as a leading anti-war activist. Sylvia was pulled simultaneously in many different directions as she became involved in social welfare questions as well as peace agitation. She worked closely with Norah Smythe, the daughter of a wealthy Liverpool merchant, who had joined her in the East End before the war, to build up social welfare agencies in the area, including nurseries, baby clinics, and communal restaurants, and tried to draw government attention to the sweated conditions of women workers. The broader aims of the ELF were reflected in its change of name to the Workers' Suffrage Federation in March 1916 as a reaction to the narrow provisions of the 'Franchise Bill'. 
As the war went on, however, Sylvia's political outlook became more revolutionary and she began to put less emphasis on the importance of the vote. The Easter rising in Ireland, the Russian Revolution, and the industrial unrest of 1917-19 all helped to develop her revolutionary ideas. In July 1917 she renamed her newspaper the 'Workers' Dreadnought' and in 1918 the Workers' Suffrage Federation became the Workers' Socialist Federation. Sylvia worked on behalf of the Hands Off Russia campaign and visited Russia at the end of the war where she met Lenin. In 1920 she published an article in the 'Dreadnought', based on information from an English sailor, which discussed growing unrest on an unnamed battleship and which urged sailors to support the red navy. This led to her arrest and imprisonment for refusing to name her sources or to reveal who wrote the article. She spent all but one week of her five-month sentence in the infirmary cell of Holloway prison. She was centrally involved with other revolutionary socialists in the activities which led to the formation of the British Communist Party, but her determination to express her own views as freely as possible led to her expulsion in 1921. 
During all of these years of campaigning for socialist and women's causes, Sylvia Pankhurst continued to express her ideas in her art and in her writings. One of her first commissions was to decorate the Pankhurst Hall in Manchester, built in memory of her father by the Hightown ILP. She designed the membership card of the WSPU which depicted working-class women, and her 'trumpeting angel' was used as a design on banners and letter heads. Her paintings were based on socialist realism or on Pre-Raphaelite allegory derived from Walter Crane and as far as possible she used working women as her subjects. It was difficult for her to combine art and political agitation, however, and she soon gave up her painting, but she remained prolific as a writer. Her journalism and a lecture tour to the United States before the First World War helped to finance her political work. She wrote a series of articles on women's work, including potato-picking and pit-brow employment, for the WSPU newspaper 'Votes for Women' which were based on a year-long journey, starting in the summer of 1907, to the north of England and Scotland. She also contributed numerous articles to the suffrage and the socialist press about the importance of the vote for working women and during the First World War used her journalism to develop ideas about revolutionary communism. 
Sylvia Pankhurst wrote books about the movements in which she had been active which were partly historical and partly autobiographical. As one of the earliest chroniclers of the suffrage movement she published 'The Suffragette' (1911) which depicted Christabel as an inspiring leader and legitimated the militant suffrage woman. Her best-known histories were written several years later. 'The Suffragette Movement' (1931) is a lively and vivid account of the militant movement which has been used extensively by historians. Sylvia's judgements on people and events, however, were influenced by her growing commitment to revolutionary politics and by her split with her mother and sister. Christabel was now demonized as an autocratic leader and Sylvia emphasized that the suffrage campaign grew from, and was closely allied to, socialist politics. The same argument is used in the biography of her mother, 'The Life of Emmeline Pankhurst', written in 1935. 
At the end of the First World War Sylvia met Silvio Erasmus Corio (1875-1954), an exile from Italy whose libertarian socialist views and concern with the rise of fascism in his country accorded with her own. They worked together on journalistic projects and in 1924, when Sylvia gave up the 'Dreadnought', they opened a cafe. They then moved to Woodford Green in Essex where Sylvia concentrated on her writing and where, in 1927 at the age of forty-five, she gave birth to her only child, Richard Keir Pethick, named after Keir Hardie and the Pethick-Lawrences, who were among the most important people in her life. She had long believed in sexual freedom and, despite pressure from Christabel, lived out her ideas in practice by refusing to marry. During this period she also wrote extensively, commenting on events in India in 'India and the Earthly Paradise' (1926) and arguing for better maternity care in 'Save the Mothers' (1930). Alongside her suffrage histories she also published an account of her wartime experiences in the East End, 'The Home Front' (1932). 
During the 1920s Sylvia had helped to assist Italian refugees, but it was in the 1930s that she became more politically active in fighting for peace and against fascism. She joined several women's peace groups and was treasurer of the Women's World Committee against War and Fascism. She also helped Jewish refugees and supported the republican cause in Spain. The issue which was to become central to her political work for the rest of her life, however, was the cause of Ethiopian independence. When Italian fascists invaded Ethiopia in 1935-6 she began a weekly journal, 'New Times and Ethiopian News', which she edited for twenty years. This publicized the efforts made by Emperor Haile Selassie to persuade the League of Nations to prevent colonization and led to her being dubbed in Ethiopia the Sword of the Press. After the liberation of Addis Ababa by General Orde Wingate she sent the BBC a record of the Ethiopian national anthem. She helped to raise funds to build and equip a hospital, opposed plans to turn Ethiopia into a British protectorate, and supported proposals for unity between Eritrea and Ethiopia. In the early summer of 1936 she was responsible for the creation of an 'anti-air war memorial' on land next to her Essex home. This stone edifice (designed and carved by Eric Benfield) was unveiled on 21 June by a group including the secretary of the imperial Ethiopian legation. It was accompanied by a plaque condemning 'those who in 1932 upheld the right to use bombing planes' (P. W., 'London Review of Books', 23 Aug 2001). This 'stone bomb' still stands at Woodford Green, and in the 1980s it became a grade II listed edifice. After Corio died in 1954 Sylvia accepted an earlier invitation from the emperor and moved with her son to live permanently in Ethiopia in 1956. There she helped to found the Social Service Society and edited a monthly periodical, the 'Ethiopia Observer'. She was honoured with the decoration of the queen of Sheba, first class. 
Towards the end of her life Sylvia Pankhurst re-established contact with friends from the early suffrage days, including Teresa Billington-Greig, a founder member of the WSPU, who sent a copy of her autobiography to Sylvia for her comments. She had maintained a relationship with her sister Adela, who shared her socialist views, and in the 1950s Sylvia even corresponded once more with Christabel. In 1959 an exhibition of her art was held at the French Institute in London and she willingly contributed material to the organizers. Sylvia died the following year in Addis Ababa, on 27 September 1960. She was regarded so highly in Ethiopia that the emperor ordered that she should receive a state funeral, which was attended by himself and other members of the royal family. She was buried outside Trinity Cathedral in a special plot reserved for the country's heroes. A memorial service was held in London in the Caxton Hall on 19 January 1961. 
Although the focus of her activities changed over time, Sylvia Pankhurst supported socialist and revolutionary politics and campaigns for women's political and sexual freedom throughout her life. She was a serious and dedicated campaigner who lacked the glamour of her sister and mother, insisting on wearing unstylish clothes and no cosmetics since she thought that lipstick 'reveals the slave mentality' (Romero, 266). None the less, with her thick sandy hair, heavy lidded eyes, and slender build she was an attractive figure. She could be warm and compassionate, but Jessie Stephen, one of her co-workers in the East End, claimed that she could 'charm when she liked, but at the core was inclined to be as autocratic as her mother and elder sister Christabel' (Winslow, 82). 
Sylvia is usually best remembered for her activities as a militant suffragette and for her history of the movement. Her contribution to socialist and revolutionary politics has been taken less seriously, perhaps because she never settled in one particular organization and always expressed independent views. Her arrogance, impatience, and reluctance to compromise also limited her political influence at a personal level. In many biographies emphasis has been placed on the difficulties she faced because her mother always favoured Christabel and because of her father's early death, leading one biographer to claim that her life was driven by 'a succession of dependencies on men' (Romero, 287). Yet recent studies of her politics and re-evaluation of her writings have shown that as an anti-fascist, a socialist, a communist, a peace campaigner, an internationalist, and a feminist Sylvia Pankhurst made an important contribution in her own right to radical politics during the twentieth century. The way in which she put together the different strands of her interests meant that at various times she could be politically isolated, but her lengthy involvement in political life deserves serious consideration. 


@@@@@


doc= 37834


Pares, Richard (1902-1958), historian, was born on 25 August 1902 in Colchester, Essex, the eldest in the family of three sons and two daughters of Sir Bernard Pares (1867-1949), historian, and his wife, Margaret Ellis, daughter of Edward Austin Dixon, dental surgeon, of Colchester. After winning scholarships at Winchester College and at Balliol College, Oxford, he took a first class in 'literae humaniores' in 1924 and was elected to a fellowship of All Souls which he held until 1945. A one-year stint as assistant lecturer at University College, London, was followed in 1928 by a year of research in the United States and the West Indies, financed by a Laura Spelman Rockefeller memorial studentship. 
In 1929 Pares was appointed lecturer at New College, Oxford. In 1937 he married Janet Lindsay, daughter of F. Maurice Powicke (1879-1963), historian. They had four daughters. War interrupted the early stages of a brilliant academic career: from 1940 to 1945 Pares served with distinction as an administrative-class civil servant in the Board of Trade, being appointed CBE in 1945. He was joint editor of the 'English Historical Review' from 1939 to 1958; professor of history in the University of Edinburgh from 1945 until his resignation on health grounds in 1954; and in 1951-2 Ford's lecturer in Oxford, delivering the lectures which became probably the most widely known of his books, 'King George III and the Politicians' (1953). He was elected FBA in 1948. 
Pares published extensively in a series of monographs illuminating various aspects of his chosen field, the role of the West Indies in the development of the British empire, and the determination of British international policy during the eighteenth century: his pioneering investigations ranged widely over questions of war and trade and international law. From the start his scholarship, like his wartime work in the civil service, was characterized by indefatigable industry, commanding intellectual powers, personal detachment, and complete integrity. His first book, 'War and Trade in the West Indies, 1739-1763' (1936), a 'tour de force' based on immense research, was infused throughout by his pursuit of what he once declared to be his prime interest in history -- 'to find out how things worked'. In these earlier years he eschewed biography as a path to understanding. But he had revised his view by the time he wrote 'A West-India Fortune' (1950): there, and in 'King George III and the Politicians', the two approaches were fruitfully combined. In the last-named work he opened up lines of interpretation which, even if somewhat modified since, set firm foundations on which other scholars might build: the exuberant vigour and almost Niagara-like outpouring of scholarship gave it a memorable quality. Much of his later work, achieved under the shadow of inexorably crippling and ultimately fatal illness, which he faced with the utmost fortitude, was latterly facilitated by the research fellowship conferred on him by All Souls in 1954. Pares died in the Churchill Hospital, Oxford, on 3 May 1958; his wife survived him. He was considered to be among the outstanding British historians of his time. 
Ian Christie', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37835


Williams, Sir Thomas Herbert Parry- (1887-1975), Welsh scholar and writer, was born at Ty'r Ysgol, Rhyd-ddu, Caernarvonshire on 21 September 1887, the second child and eldest son in the family of four sons and two daughters of Henry Parry-Williams (1858-1925), schoolmaster at Rhyd-ddu, and his wife, Ann Morris ('b'. 1859). He was educated at Porthmadog intermediate school, the University College of Wales at Aberystwyth (1905-9), Jesus College in Oxford (1909-11), Freiburg University (1911-13), and the Ecole des Hautes Etudes at the Sorbonne in Paris (1913-14). He graduated with the degrees of MA (Wales), BLitt (Oxon.), and PhD (Freiburg). During his period of study at Freiburg and Paris he held a fellowship of the University of Wales. His teachers included Edward Anwyl, John Rhys, Rudolf Thurneysen, and Joseph Vendryes, four of the most renowned scholars in Celtic studies in Parry-Williams's generation. 
While still a student in 1912 Parry-Williams won both the chair (for his 'awdl' 'Y mynach') and the crown (for his 'pryddest' 'Gerallt Gymro') at the national eisteddfod of Wales in Wrexham, a feat repeated by him in 1915 at the national eisteddfod held in Bangor (for his 'awdl' 'Eryri' and the 'pryddest' 'Y ddinas'). From 1914 to 1919 he was lecturer in the department of Welsh at the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth. Following dissension over the appointment to a professorship at Aberystwyth in 1919 (connected, in part, with his having been a conscientious objector during the First World War) he withdrew from his academic post in order to study in the faculty of science at the University College. For a year he studied botany, chemistry, physics, and zoology with the intention of undertaking further training to qualify as a medical doctor. The painful turmoil and oppression of that period influenced him greatly, instilling in him a markedly dark cynicism, deep indecision, and humanistic uncertainty, characteristics that pervade much of his writing. In 1920, however, he was elected to the chair of Welsh at Aberystwyth, a post he held until his retirement in 1952. 
Parry-Williams was a distinguished philologist, editor, and critic. His Freiburg PhD dissertation, 'Some points of similarity in the phonology of Welsh and Breton', was published in 1913, and his pioneering 'The English Element in Welsh' in 1923. He took a special interest in early free-metre poetry in Welsh, editing 'Carolau Richard White' (1931), 'Canu rhydd cynnar' (1932), and 'Hen benillion' (1940). He was joint editor of 'Llawysgrif Hendregadredd' (1933), an especially important source for the study of Middle Welsh court poetry, and wrote a treatise on the nature of poetry, 'Elfennau barddoniaeth' (1935). He also published a translation of German short stories, 'Ystoriau Bohemia' (1921), and a modern Welsh version of the Middle Welsh mythological prose narrative tales 'Pedair cainc y Mabinogi' (1937). He edited a collection of Welsh short stories, 'Ystoriau heddiw' in 1938. On 26 August 1942 he married Emiah Jane 
(Amy; 1910-1988)
, the daughter of Lewis Thomas of Pontyberem, Carmarthenshire, a civil servant with the Inland Revenue. She was a lecturer in a training college, and they had no children. 
Parry-Williams continued with his work, editing a series of discussions with Welsh poets analysing poetic creative processes, 'Y bardd yn ei weithdy' (1948); a selection of the poetry of the influential and complex nineteenth-century Welsh poet William Thomas, 'Islwyn: detholion o'i farddoniaeth' (1948); a selection of the works of Richard Davies, 'Caniadau Isgarn' (1949); and a valuable selection of early modern Welsh prose preserved in manuscripts, 'Rhyddiaith Gymraeg', 1, 'Detholion o lawysgrifau, 1488-1609' (1954). He published a lively bilingual appraisal of his Oxford teacher, 'John Rhys (1840-1915)' (1954), and delivered the British Academy Sir John Rhys memorial lecture for 1946, 'Welsh poetic diction', and the annual BBC Wales lecture for 1958, 'Ymhel a phrydyddu' ('On the creative pursuit of poetry'). His Oxford O'Donnell lecture, 'English-Welsh loan-words', was published in 'Angles and Britons: O'Donnell Lectures' (1963). He edited a selection of national eisteddfod-winning chair poems from the period 1926-50 and the 1954 Ystradgynlais national eisteddfod's volume of compositions and adjudications. He also edited a selection of Welsh literature, 'Newydd a hen: detholion o lenyddiaeth Gymraeg' (1954). 
Only rarely did Parry-Williams write in English, other than on linguistic topics. A notable exception is his volume 'Sonnets (1919-20)', published in 1932. These compositions tend to be stilted and uneasy, lacking the immediacy and fluency found regularly in his powerful use of the sonnet form in Welsh. He very frequently translated into Welsh words set to music by composers such as Wagner, Brahms, Handel, Beethoven, Schubert, and Dvorak, as well as contemporary composers, nearly all for performances in national eisteddfod concerts or competitions. 
Parry-Williams reacted to the excesses of traditionalist neo-grammarian linguistics and derived greater satisfaction from creative writing in Welsh, both prose and verse. He was one of the most sensitive and influential writers of the twentieth-century renaissance in Welsh literature and came to be regarded as a remarkable innovator in both style and theme. His essays and poems are a stimulating contribution to meditative writing in Welsh, marked by a searching and courageous intelligence and by a truly superb mastery of his native language. His creative works include 'Ysgrifau' (1928), 'Cerddi: rhigymau a sonedau' (1931), 'Olion: ysgrifau a rhigymau' (1935), 'Synfyfyrion: ysgrifau, rhigymau, sonedau' (1937), 'Lloffion' (1942), 'Ugain o gerddi' (1949), 'Myfyrdodau' (1957), and 'Pensynnu' (1966). An extensive selection of his poetry was published in 'Detholiad o gerddi' (1972). A modest and very inspiring person, he came to be regarded as the most existentialist Welsh writer of his generation, time and time again concerned with abstract concepts, on the face of it anti-religious but in reality deeply involved in spiritual matters. He has been described as an old-fashioned critical modernist, with clear indications of positivism in his work and displaying an irrational reaction to, and a great concern for, what he regarded as transcendental values. His creative work commonly presents striking images of despair and surfeit, of the exterminating worry and triviality of life. His frequent flashes of light-hearted humour were commonly tinged with an awesome irony. His essays in particular display his fine mastery of a mature and confident style, exploiting a great wealth and variety of patterns, sounds, rhythms, senses, vocabulary (often reflecting colloquialisms and dialectal usage), and tropes in abundance. A gifted public speaker, he was at his best reading aloud his own work and delivering stylish, penetrating eisteddfodic adjudications in his memorably sonorous voice. 
Parry-Williams was admitted to the degree of DLitt on two occasions (Wales 1934, Oxford 1937) and to the honorary degree of LLD, by the University of Wales in 1960. He was warden of the guild of graduates of the University of Wales, chairman of the BBC's Welsh consultative council, president of the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion (the society honoured him with its medal), president of the court and a fellow of the national eisteddfod of Wales, president of the National Library of Wales, and an honorary fellow of Jesus College, Oxford. He was knighted in 1958. Parry-Williams died of a heart attack on 3 March 1975 at his home at Wern North Road, Aberystwyth, and was buried in the Beddgelert cemetery, Caernarvonshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 37836


Pavlova, Anna Pavlovna (1881-1931), ballet dancer, was born in St Petersburg on 31 January/12 February 1881 according to an entry in the register of the St Petersburg military hospital; she later changed her second name to Pavlovna. Her mother, Lyubov Fyodorovna Pavlova, a laundry maid, was married to a reserve soldier, Matvey Pavlov; but Anna was most probably the illegitimate daughter from an earlier relationship with a reserve soldier or minor official. There is also the suggestion that she was partly Jewish, which would have reinforced the social stigma of her birth in imperial Russia. Pavlova spent her childhood with her grandmother at Ligovo, outside St Petersburg, but in 1890 she was taken to see 'The Sleeping Beauty', the newly created ballet by Marius Petipa and Pyotr Tchaikovsky, at the Maryinsky Theatre. The production, music, and dancing captured Pavlova's imagination, and from then on she was determined to become a ballerina, although she had to wait two years to qualify for Imperial Ballet School. Ironically, having wanted to be Princess Aurora (a role she first danced in 1908), she never found this a character to which she was totally suited. 
At the age of eleven Pavlova made her first recorded appearance at the Maryinsky in 'The Magic Fairy Tale', choreographed by Marius Petipa for pupils of the school. In 1898 she made her official debut in the 'pas de trois' from 'Pharaoh's Daughter', some six months before graduating in April 1899, when she danced in Aleksandr Gorsky's 'Clorinda' and Pavel Gerdt's 'Imaginary Dryads'. Her rise through the company was swift and measured. She began as a 'coryphee' and was promoted annually so that in 1906 she had reached the rank of ballerina. 
Apparently frail in physique, Pavlova looked different from other dancers of the day (who tended to be stockier and more muscular than later dancers). Almost immediately she was singled out from her contemporaries for being graceful, soft, and feminine. It was these qualities rather than an outstanding technique that attracted attention. She was not a virtuoso dancer in the popular Italian style of the day, but she could be dramatic, poetic, flirtatious, or comic as roles required. She also performed lively character dances. On stage she hid her technique, but her line was impeccable and her arabesque and 'pas de bourree' unsurpassed. Dance was her religion: she was totally dedicated to the art. Like most dancers she worked on her technique throughout her career. In 1903 she and the ballerina Vera Trefilova travelled to Milan to study with Caterina Beretta, and in 1906 she engaged Enrico Cecchetti as her private teacher knowing that he had helped other dancers, most notably Olga Preobrazhenska, overcome their weaknesses. 
Among Pavlova's first successes were her Zulme in 'Giselle' in September 1899 and her first created role, Hoarfrost in 'The Seasons' in February 1900. In 1902 she consolidated her success by dancing Nikiya, the temple dancer heroine of 'La bayadere', and in 1903 the title role in 'Giselle'. These ballets suited her, and used both her dramatic ability and outstanding ethereal lightness. 'Giselle' was a ballet she continued to dance throughout her career. Although she would have liked to dance Nikiya in the West, 'La bayadere' seemed too quaintly old-fashioned for audiences in the 1920s. As Nikiya and Giselle, Pavlova caught the attention of the ageing Marius Petipa, whom she asked to coach her in his ballets. Although at the end of his career, Petipa was still willing to adapt roles to show off the talent of dancers he wanted to encourage, and for her debut in the title role of 'Paquita', he created a new variation to music for the harp by Riccardo Drigo. 
Pavlova also worked with the next generation of choreographers, particularly the reformers Aleksandr Gorsky and Michel Fokine, both of whom welcomed her ability to act through dance. Both introduced a new plasticity to their dances, and Pavlova was a noted exponent of this new free-flowing style. In Gorsky's revised versions of established ballets, which replaced balletic cliches with an attempt at dramatic logic, Pavlova was called on to perform at the imperial theatres in both St Petersburg and Moscow. For Gorsky, Pavlova danced Kitri in 'Don Quixote' and Bint-Ana in 'Pharaoh's Daughter'. For Michel Fokine (also one of her regular partners at the Maryinsky) Pavlova created Armida in 'Le pavillon d'Armide', the Sylph of the Waltz in his first 'Chopiniana' (which inspired his subsequent 'Les sylphides'), and several other roles. Fokine's solo 'The Swan', danced to an extract from Camille Saint-Saens's 'Carnival of the Animals', became Pavlova's signature work from the time she first danced it at a gala in December 1907. This minute dance encapsulates a whole history. Although it is based on classical steps, a series of 'pas de bourree' broken by an occasional attitude, the dancer's arms are expressive rather than formally academic, and thus it has been seen as a synthesis of traditional and modern. This was a synthesis that was symbolic of Pavlova's approach to her career. 
In St Petersburg, Pavlova surrounded herself with influential supporters, as was necessary for the advancement of a ballerina. Most significant among these men was the aristocratic balletomane Victor Dandre, who set her up in an apartment with a ballet studio on the Angliisky Prospekt. Dandre was a member of the St Petersburg city council, but in 1911 he was arrested on a charge of appropriating vast sums of government money. He forfeited bail when Pavlova returned from America, and went with her to London. Pavlova remained loyal to Dandre, who became her manager (there is no evidence that they were ever married -- indeed, her private life remains something of an enigma), setting up her tours and encouraging her to dance popular, easily accessible ballets for new audiences rather than to create more avant-garde works. 
Pavlova had embarked on her international career in 1908. After performing at Riga in Latvia in February, she undertook a tour of Scandinavia in May. It was in Stockholm, where she gave six performances, that she realized the value of her art. As she noted in her brief memoir, 'Pages of my Life', she was overwhelmed by crowds at her hotel after her performances and at the railway station to see her depart. She asked her maid, 'But what have I done to move them to so great an enthusiasm?' Her maid replied, 'Madam, you have made them happy by enabling them to forget for an hour the sadness of life.' 
In 1909 Serge Diaghilev invited Pavlova to be ballerina of the group he was taking to Paris. She agreed, but having previously committed herself to a spring tour of central Europe -- Berlin, Leipzig, Prague, and Vienna -- arrived in Paris only in June, when the season was already under way. She nevertheless scored a great success with Vaslav Nijinsky in 'Les sylphides' and with Michel Fokine in 'Cleopatre'. Although Diaghilev had plans to work with her the following year, it is said that her conservative outlook clashed with the impresario's thirst for modernity. She refused the title role in 'The Firebird' because she found Igor Stravinsky's score ugly. She had anyway become too involved in her own tours, and returned to the Ballets Russes only for its second London season at the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, in 1911. Here she had the chance to be seen with Nijinsky in 'Giselle', 'Cleopatre', 'Le pavillon d'Armide', 'Les sylphides', and the 'pas de deux' 'L'oiseau d'or'. This was the season in which audiences had the opportunity to compare two great ballerinas, Pavlova and Tamara Karsavina. Perhaps it was their fellow dancer Lubov Chernyshyova who explained most clearly the contrast between the two artists. Karsavina 'was the most beautiful woman, all warm, wonderful woman. But Pavlova, when she danced -- not woman at all -- spirit!' 
By this time Pavlova was a star in London in her own right. In 1909 she had travelled from Paris to London, where, partnered by Michel Mordkin, she danced for the king and queen. On 18 April 1910 Pavlova opened at the Palace Theatre, London, in a programme of divertissements as part of a variety bill. The dancers' repertory included 'pas de deux' and duets for Pavlova and Mordkin: the exuberant and frenzied 'Bacchanale' to music from Glazounov's 'The Seasons', the flowing 'Valse caprice' to music by Anton Rubinstein; and solos for Pavlova: 'Le papillon', 'La rose mourante', and of course 'The Swan', all of which were acclaimed by the public. Pavlova's season in London was sandwiched between trips to the United States of America. During the first of these she made her debut there in 'Coppelia' at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York, and made brief visits to Boston and Baltimore. In the autumn Pavlova and Mordkin embarked on a nationwide tour with a full 'corps de ballet' for which Mordkin staged 'Giselle' and an exotic new work, 'The Legend of Aziade'. 
For her initial overseas tours Pavlova received leave of absence from the imperial theatres, between which she would return to the Maryinsky stage. At the start of her second American tour she requested leave for two years, and when it was refused she paid a large forfeit to break her contract. Nevertheless she returned to St Petersburg to dance in 1911 and 1913 and became cut off from Russia only by the First World War and the revolution. From 1912 she made London her base, living at Ivy House, Golders Green (on the edge of Hampstead Heath), which she purchased in 1914. Having already used English children for her production of 'Snowflakes' (a version of 'Land of snow' from 'The Nutcracker') at the Palace Theatre in 1911, she began to train English recruits. After teaching her pupils at Ivy House she started employing English dancers for her company, including Muriel Stuart and Hilda Butsova (Boot), both of whom took over some of her own roles. 
Anna Pavlova played a major role in popularizing fine classical ballet, introducing much of the work of Petipa (sometimes in the form of later revisions) to audiences outside Russia. These, rather than the innovations of other contemporary companies, are the ballets that have stood the test of time and are now danced by classical companies throughout the world. Much has been made of Pavlova's alleged artistic conservatism. It is true that she was not at home with music by Stravinsky, and the designs for many of her productions were merely routine, but she had helped Michel Fokine establish his programme of reforms, employed Leon Bakst as designer when she could, and at the end of her career invited Georges Balanchine to choreograph for her company. She recognized the taste of her audiences and tailored her programmes accordingly, demonstrating to them Russia's rich choreographic heritage. Many of her productions were staged by her ballet masters or her partners, who had to adapt large, spectacular works to the resources of a relatively small touring company. Even when the resources of Charles Dillingham's New York Hippodrome were available to Pavlova in 1916, so that she could mount a production of 'The Sleeping Beauty', it was only as one turn in 'The Big Show', and this ballet seems to have been too sophisticated for American taste at that time. 
For twenty-two years Pavlova toured unceasingly, dancing in major cities and smaller towns, sometimes in venues at which ballet was unknown. She danced in opera houses, on open-air stages, and in public spaces such as bullrings in Mexico. Conditions were often difficult, and although her partners and company sometimes complained, Pavlova's missionary zeal carried her on. Having sailed to the United States in 1914 at the outbreak of war, she performed in North America and Cuba until 1917, when she embarked on a two-year tour of South America and did not return to Europe until 1919. Pavlova's punishing itinerary for 1914-16 is reproduced in Keith Money's 'Anna Pavlova: her Life and Art' (1982). In 1922-3 Pavlova took her company to east Asia; in 1926-7 to South Africa, Australia, and New Zealand (where the meringue-based dessert crammed with fruit and cream was created and named for her); in 1928-9 she went on what proved to be her last world tour. Over a period of eight months Pavlova travelled extensively, dancing in South America, Egypt, India, Burma, Malaya, Australia, and elsewhere. 
Much of Pavlova's work had instant appeal, and she was ideal as a representative of ballet for inclusion at London's first 'Royal variety show' on 1 July 1912; but she also presented some considerably more sophisticated programmes for opera house stages. In the 1920s these included dances learned on the company's world tours, and introduced a serious multiculturalism not found in other companies. Although most of her ballets were arranged for her company by others, Pavlova created a number of her own solos to considerable effect. She also choreographed a one-act ballet, 'Autumn Leaves', to music by Chopin in 1920, in which she played a chrysanthemum buffeted by the north wind; it is eventually picked, but then tossed aside by a poet. The ballet reflected her use of images drawn from nature, which also featured in the solos she made for herself. 
Pavlova was one of the first great theatre artists who appreciated the value of film. Although dissatisfied with most of the results, she persevered with the new medium, recording some of her divertissements as well as providing glimpses of some of the larger works she presented. These were made by professional cameramen in Hollywood or for newsreels, or as home movies, and a compilation (assembled by Dandre) was released as 'The Immortal Swan' in 1935. Pavlova also appeared in the feature film 'The Dumb Girl of Portici' (1916), which she made to fund her company's tours in the United States of America. This is, in some senses, the best record of her artistry. Her joyous tarantella on the seashore and her helplessness and horror when trapped in a rat-infested prison indicate her range as an artist. 
Off-stage Pavlova accepted her role as a public figure and was always immaculately turned out. Her image was frequently used for advertising purposes by companies wanting to sell, for example, shoes, pianos, or face creams. Pavlova expected members of her company to create a good impression. She demanded much of her dancers, but she was also concerned for their development and welfare, and the parties she gave her whole company each Christmas became legendary. Although in most photographs she is fashionably attired, when relaxing away from the public gaze she frequently wore trousers. Pavlova's life centred upon the stage, but she had outside interests. She was actively involved in charity work, establishing and funding an orphanage at St Cloud outside Paris for destitute Russian children, and she was passionately fond of animals and birds; her menagerie at Ivy House included dogs and swans. She was also a talented sculptor. 
It seems that Pavlova could never have been happy without performing, and as a result of her constant work burnt herself out. Her autumn tour of Britain in 1930 ended with a final performance at Golders Green Hippodrome, in which she danced in 'Amarilla', 'Gavotte', and 'The Swan' and performed the 'grand pas' from 'Paquita'. After a short break in the south of France she travelled to the Netherlands for the start of her next tour. On the journey she caught a chill; she contracted pneumonia, which turned to pleurisy, and died at the Hotel des Indes in The Hague on 23 January 1931. She was cremated at Golders Green, London. Her partner, Victor Dandre, outlived her. 
During her lifetime Anna Pavlova was the best-known ballerina in the world. She toured worldwide, and, internationally, her name and the key roles that she danced became synonymous with ballet. As an indefatigable ambassador for her art, she made it her greatest legacy to inspire a whole generation to study ballet, to dance, and to choreograph. Frederick Ashton, for example, repeatedly described how she 'injected him with the poison' that made him want to be a 'ballerina' and then to dance and choreograph. He drew inspiration from his recollections of her performances for many of his creations. Pavlova was slim and ideally proportioned, which gave the illusion that she was taller than her height of 5 feet 3 inches. With her small head on its slender neck and her dark hair drawn back, her physical appearance came to typify what the public expected of a ballerina. Her dancing had a stellar quality that convinced an uninitiated audience that they were in the presence of theatrical greatness. 


@@@@@


doc= 37837


Payne, Robert (1596-1651), Church of England clergyman and natural philosopher, was born in Abingdon, Berkshire, the son of Robert Payne (died 1628), a wealthy woollen draper and four times mayor of the town, and his wife, Martha, daughter of William Branch, also of Abingdon. After attending the local Roysse Grammar School, Robert matriculated a gentleman-commoner at Christ Church, Oxford, on 5 July 1611, graduating BA on 4 July 1614 and proceeding MA exactly three years later. In 1612 he contributed a poem to 'Iusta Oxoniensium', a university volume grieving the death of Henry, prince of Wales, and another poem in 1619 to 'Funebria sacra', lamenting the death of Queen Anne. His surviving notebooks from this period attest to his developing interest in natural philosophy, in particular the philosophy of Roger Bacon, as well as to his embarking on the study of Hebrew. 
Like many other scientifically minded scholars of the time Payne was reluctant to take holy orders and proceed with a clerical career, and he thus migrated in 1624 to the newly created Pembroke College where he became second foundation fellow. Two years later he stood candidate for the Gresham professorship of astronomy, vacant following the death of Edmund Gunter, but lost to another Oxford hopeful, Henry Gellibrand. An unpublished facetious poem also suggests his being, in 1626, an unsuccessful candidate for a Christ Church proctorship. However, he achieved some financial security when, after the death of his father in February 1628, he inherited a sizeable property. By 1630 Payne's scientific accomplishments had recommended him to the mathematician Sir Charles Cavendish and his brother William, successively earl, marquess, and duke of Newcastle, and the latter conferred on him the rectorship of Tormarton, Gloucestershire, that was in his gift. The living was certainly intended to serve as a sinecure for Payne, who was employed as the earl's chaplain and secretary. Consequently, his absence from Tormarton nearly resulted in his suspension in 1632. One of the delicate tasks with which Payne was charged was negotiating Ben Jonson's gratuity for the two masques he wrote on the occasion of the visits of Charles I in 1633 and 1634 to Welbeck Abbey and Bolsover Castle respectively. Jonson was effusive in praising Payne, his 'beloved friend' further intimating to Newcastle his joy in 'the good friendship and fellowship of my right learned friend Mr Payne' ('Ben Jonson', 1.212-13). 
For almost a decade Payne served as a key figure in the intellectual and scientific circle around the Cavendish brothers that extended to include other practitioners, such as William Oughtred, Walter Warner, John Pell, and Thomas Hobbes. Indeed, Payne was an intimate friend of the philosopher of Malmesbury and appears to have played a significant role in the development of the latter's optical theories, as well as his mechanistic philosophy more generally. It is quite likely that 'Short tract on first principles', usually attributed to Hobbes, was actually written by Payne -- certainly the manuscript is in his handwriting. On similar grounds, another short treatise traditionally attributed to Hobbes, 'Considerations touching the facility or difficulty of the motions of a horse', should likewise be credited to Payne. During the mid-1630s Payne translated, for the benefit of Sir Charles Cavendish, Galileo's 'Della scienza mecanica' and Benedetto Castelli's 'Della misura dell'acque correnti', both from manuscripts communicated to Sir Charles by Mersenne. He was also engaged in a variety of chemical experiments with the earl of Newcastle. 
In 1638 Newcastle was entrusted with the education of Charles, prince of Wales, and with his move to London the Welbeck group dispersed. Payne returned to Oxford as canon of Christ Church, retaining contacts with Sir Charles and Hobbes through correspondence. Thus, for example, Payne was among those who circulated copies of Hobbes's 'Elements of Law'. With the outbreak of the civil war and the removal of the court to Oxford, Payne was appointed royal chaplain, and on 1 November 1642 the degree of DD was conferred on him. In 1646 Payne was deprived of his Tormarton living and two years later he was not only expelled by the parliamentary visitors from Christ Church (whose treasurer he then was) but briefly imprisoned in London while a search was made of his property. Following his release Payne retired to his sister's house in Abingdon, occasionally visiting Sir William Backhouse at Swallowfield, Sir George Stonehouse at Radley, Berkshire, and the third earl of Devonshire at Latimers, Buckinghamshire. Payne's surviving correspondence with Gilbert Sheldon attests not only to the modest role he played in keeping the royalist cause alive following the execution of Charles I, but also to his continued intellectual activity. He was instrumental in the diffusion of the ideas of Hobbes, Descartes, and Gassendi in Oxford and elsewhere in England, but his efforts to defend Hobbes in the face of the growing hostility towards him from the Anglican establishment -- some members of whom Payne actually accused of provoking Hobbes to embrace a hostile attitude towards the church -- ended in failure. 
Payne drew up his will on 16 May 1649, apparently during a serious bout of sickness, making his sister Martha executor and chief beneficiary of his estate. Though Payne recovered his health remained frail. By summer 1651 he had moved to Swallowfield where he died, unmarried, in early November. George Morley's eulogy of his friend is indicative of the high esteem in which Payne was regarded by contemporaries. No one, Morley wrote to Sheldon, was 'better made for a friend at all parts and to all purposes than he was. His Moralls were as good as his Intellectualls, and his Intellectualls such as I knew noe man had better: and both accompanied with a modesty allmost to an excesse. ('Walker rev.', 176)' 



@@@@@


doc= 37838


Peace, Charles Frederick (1832-1879), burglar and murderer, was born in Nursery Road, Sheffield, on 14 May 1832, the youngest of the four sons of John Peace, shoemaker, and his wife, the daughter of a naval surgeon. Semi-literate after a cursory schooling, he had a talent for music, being proficient enough with a violin to be billed in his teens at local places of entertainment as the 'modern Paganini'. Despite his artistic pretensions, he was apprenticed to a local steel mill, where two accidents left him with a permanent limp and the loss of three fingers of one hand. 
Although he was to become Britain's most successful cat burglar, Peace showed no early aptitude, and was frequently arrested. By 1854 he had graduated to longer spells in prison -- three sentences totalling twenty years, substantially reduced through remission. Meanwhile, at the age of twenty-seven he met, and is believed to have married, Hannah Ward, a widow with a small child. They had a daughter and a son who died in infancy. But he was learning from experience and moved from town to town to polish his burglary skills. 
By 1872 accrued capital enabled Peace to return to Sheffield with his wife and stepson, setting up as a picture framer. His income was supplemented from the sale of musical instruments and small antiques. Success as a burglar was achieved through skill, daring, and an ability to change his appearance -- a considerable feat considering his distinctive appearance. The limp accentuated a natural bandiness, and being very short he was compared to a monkey, an impression heightened by thick features and a heavy lower jaw. 
Peace's unfortunate appearance and lack of education was offset by a compelling personality, and in 1876 he embarked on an affair with a neighbour, the much younger Katherine Dyson. However, when he attacked her husband, Arthur, she protested and, in front of witnesses, Peace threatened her with a gun. A warrant for his arrest forced him to flee, committing a trail of burglaries in northern cities. In Manchester he was intercepted by PC Nicholas Cock, who was shot and killed. The police arrested John and William Habron, and managed to produce 'eye-witnesses' at the trial, which Peace attended in disguise. William was sentenced to death -- commuted to life imprisonment because he was only eighteen. 
Meanwhile, having returned to Sheffield, Peace shot and killed Arthur Dyson after an argument. Accompanied by his wife and stepson, he headed south, leaving his mark as a burglar. In Nottingham he acquired a mistress, Susan Grey, an attractive and educated widow who accompanied the Wards (he was now using Hannah's name) to London, where they eventually settled in Peckham. Susan was used to complete the air of respectability -- the couple called themselves Mr and Mrs Thompson, and Hannah lived in the basement, posing as their housekeeper. Quite affluent, the newcomers entertained, although Mr Thompson managed to get away at nights, robbing houses across London. However, after considerable success he was eventually caught in October 1878, breaking into a house in Blackheath. Ambushed by two policemen, Peace was overpowered by PC Edward Robinson despite a bullet through the arm. The following month 'John Ward' was given a life sentence for shooting with intent to murder. At that stage Susan Grey revealed his true identity for the $100 reward. 
On the train to face trial in the north, Peace jumped through an open carriage window, and although a guard clung to his shoe he wriggled free, only to be found unconscious in the snow. At Leeds assizes, the evidence of Katherine Dyson was conclusive. Awaiting execution, Peace finally confessed to the murder of PC Cock, providing the detailed evidence to persuade the authorities of Habron's innocence. Peace was hanged by William Marwood at Armley Prison, Leeds, on 25 February 1879, having composed his own memorial card, ending with the words: 'For that I don ['sic'] but never intended.' 
R. H. Lewis', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37839


Peach, Benjamin Neeve (1842-1926), geologist, was born on 6 September 1842 at Gorran Haven, Cornwall, the youngest child of Charles Peach (1800-1886), coastguard, and his wife, Jemima ('nee' Mabson). Following his father's posting to Scotland, Peach attended schools at Peterhead and Wick. His father's important discovery of fossils at Durness was noticed by metropolitan geologists, and Sir Roderick Murchison, when visiting northern Scotland, also remarked on the son's abilities. Accordingly, in 1859 he arranged for Peach to attend the Royal School of Mines, where in the years 1860-61 he studied under A. W. Hofmann, T. H. Huxley, and A. C. Ramsay. 
In 1862 Peach joined the staff of the Geological Survey. After work among the fossils at the London headquarters, he was soon transferred to the Scottish field service. Five years later, he met, and to some extent trained in the field, John Horne, and thus began their lifelong friendship and scientific co-operation. Their best-known work was concerned with the southern uplands and the north-west highlands. In both cases, the views of the structures held by the senior men of the survey, especially Archibald Geikie, were questioned by Charles Lapworth. As a result of this, the southern uplands work had to be revised, and a major effort was required to sort out the geology of the north-west highlands. This involved the recognition of overfolding and thrusting, and the complex imbricate structures produced by repeated faulting. In such investigations Peach proved himself a master at interpreting the internal structure of an area from examination of its external appearances. It was, however, Horne who, in 1883, first realized that the 'official' view of a regular ascending stratigraphic sequence at Durness was mistaken; the following year, after mapping the imbricate structures at Eriboll, Peach reached the same conclusion. After years of detailed fieldwork the results were published in two notable memoirs: 'The Silurian Rocks of Britain, 1, Scotland' (1899) and 'The Geological Structure of the North-West Highlands' (1907). 
In addition to his work in tectonics, Peach was an accomplished palaeontologist, with a special interest in fossil crustaceans and arachnids. His investigations in this area culminated with the publication of 'The Higher Crustacea of the Carboniferous Rocks of Scotland' (1908). For the southern uplands, he had to do much work in the identification of graptolites. In his later survey work, Peach was involved in the revisions to the maps of the Scottish coalfields. He also worked on glacial geology and on the Old Red Sandstone. 
In 1871, Peach married Jeannie Bannantyne, a farmer's daughter; they had a son and two daughters. After her death, he married Margaret Ann McEwan, daughter of the schoolmaster at Assynt, where much of Peach's most important surveying was done. They had two sons. 
Peach was elected FRS in 1892. He was awarded the Murchison and Wollaston medals of the Geological Society (1899 and 1921 respectively), both in conjunction with Horne, and received the Neill medal from the Royal Society of Edinburgh and an honorary LLD from Edinburgh University. He was admired by all who knew him for his physical strength, kindness, and youthful enthusiasms. He was a gifted artist, and explained his ideas by means of diagrams better than in words. He is said to have been a reluctant reader and writer, but there is ample evidence of his epistolary activity in various archives. On several occasions Peach was called on by his chief, Geikie, to accompany him into the field; and Geikie evidently relied on the counsel of his subordinate about controversial issues to a considerable degree. Peach retired from the survey in 1905 and lived in Edinburgh until his death, after an illness of several weeks, on 29 January 1926. 


@@@@@


doc= 37840


Pearse, Patrick Henry (1879-1916), writer and Irish revolutionary, was born on 10 November 1879 at 27 Great Brunswick Street, Dublin, the elder son and second of the four children of James Pearse (1839-1900), stone carver, of London, Birmingham, and Dublin, and his second wife, Margaret (1857-1932), a shop assistant, one of two surviving daughters of Patrick Brady, coal factor, of Dublin. 
Always exceptionally imaginative, young Pearse was greatly influenced by his maternal aunt Margaret, who stirred his romantic soul with patriotic ballads of death and exile, tales of mythological Irish heroes, and hagiographical accounts of such doomed revolutionary leaders as Wolfe Tone and Robert Emmet. Like many children of his time he fantasized about becoming a hero, but his was a morbid preoccupation with suffering and dying for his country or his religion: his heroes had died painful deaths and his main religious devotion was to the crucified Christ. 
Two Christian Brothers at his secondary school in Westland Row, Dublin, helped to spark in Pearse an uncritical passion for the Irish language and its literature: his view of Ireland past, present, and future was always to have mystical overtones. To him, the reputed feats of mythological heroes were real, and the dead whom he admired had mythological status. 
At sixteen Pearse joined the Gaelic League, and henceforward took every opportunity to improve both his public speaking and his writing, in both English and Irish; before he was twenty he had published 'Three Lectures on Gaelic Topics'. Able and industrious rather than brilliant, in 1901 he took a good second-class BA from University College, Dublin, in English, French, and Irish, won an exhibition, and was called to the bar, having studied for a BL at Trinity College, Dublin, and the King's Inns. 
After his father's death in 1900 Pearse became head of his family, and with his brother, Willie -- an artist and sculptor of slight talent -- he tried and failed to keep the family firm prosperous until its final dissolution in 1910. None of the siblings married; Pearse himself seems to have been unconsciously homosexual. His mother, Willie, and his two sisters were all emotionally dependent on him, for though he was reserved and socially uneasy -- especially with women -- he had a strong personality and his passion for his causes was inspiring. Slightly above average height, of sturdy build, he was always self-conscious about an eye disfigurement; in maturity his was a solemn and imposing presence. 
As a lecturer, committee man, writer, and teacher of Irish, Pearse was respected within the Gaelic League for his dedication, prodigious appetite for work, and high-mindedness, though his reserve precluded popularity. From 1903 to 1909 he was paid editor of the league organ, 'An Claidheamh Soluis'. Although the league had to control his over-ambition and financial recklessness he was a success because of his enthusiasm and industry, and because of his innumerable thoughtful, passionate, and often provocative and courageous articles on such topics as education, history, literature, politics, religion, and theatre. Unlike many elements in Irish-Ireland, he was a modernizer who, for instance, put aside his youthful prejudices against Irish literature in the English language to welcome the contribution to literature of controversial figures like J. M. Synge and W. B. Yeats, and who embraced the Belgian model of bilingualism with enthusiasm. In his twenties the Irish language was his paramount concern: in its interests, although himself a nationalist, he praised certain measures of the British government, and, although a devout Catholic, on occasion fiercely criticized the Irish clergy. 
During this period Pearse taught Irish extensively, and in 1908 founded St Enda's, a boys' bilingual secondary school (in 1910 he founded a girls' school, St Ita's, which collapsed two years later). He was a gifted, humane, and exciting -- even mesmerizing -- headmaster with a talented staff, and his selflessness and nobility were inspiring: the school was initially a triumph. In 1910, irresponsibly, he moved St Enda's to grand premises outside Dublin, where perforce it became a boarding-school. Henceforward he fought a constant battle to avoid bankruptcy. James Stephens wrote that 'when something had to be done he did it, and entirely disregarded logic or economics or force' (Dudley Edwards, 1990, edn, 343). As with teaching and journalism, so with literature: he developed what talent he had to the full, writing short stories, poems, and plays in Irish and English, which ranged from the mawkish to the genuinely moving. 
Until 1910 Pearse's nationalist preoccupation was cultural: the school, like his other activities, was geared to spread the gospel of Gaelic-Ireland. But as he became disillusioned with the language movement and worn down by financial worries he increasingly developed his romantic and morbid fascination with people who had died in hopeless revolt; martyrdom became an important theme. In 1912 he called publicly for support for the 'Home Rule Bill', while threatening revolution if it were not passed. Yeats thought him 'a dangerous man; he has the vertigo of self-sacrifice' (Dudley Edwards, 1990, edn, 335). 
The foundation in November 1912 of the anti-home rule Ulster Volunteers led a year later to the counter-balancing Irish Volunteers, of which Pearse was a co-founder and in which he was a highly enthusiastic participant at a senior level. Shortly afterwards he joined the Irish Republican Brotherhood (IRB) and went to America to raise funds for St Enda's. Mixing with hardline Irish-Americans who wanted only to hear that insurrection was nigh set him single-mindedly on a revolutionary course. Back home, valued by the IRB strategists as a fine and passionate orator and a highly persuasive political propagandist, in 1915 he was brought into their inner circle. In 1916 he published several political pamphlets justifying a military uprising, and on Easter Monday he and six IRB colleagues issued a proclamation declaring an Irish republic; Pearse was designated commandant-general and president of the provisional republic. A thousand Irish Volunteers and 120 members of the Irish Citizen Army formed by James Connolly took over major Dublin buildings. Pearse and Connolly were based in the General Post Office, with Connolly directing operations and Pearse producing morale-boosting propaganda. As a consequence of the fighting between the rebels and the British army about 250 uninvolved civilians were killed; on Saturday 29 April, Pearse surrendered to avoid further deaths. He was court-martialled and on 3 May 1916 executed by a firing squad in Kilmainham gaol, Dublin, as, on 4 May, was his brother, Willie, who had acted as his aide-de-camp. He was buried in the gaol. After her brothers' deaths, Margaret Mary Pearse did much to preserve their memory, and later held the co. Dublin seat in the Dail. As the figurehead of the rising, and the author of memorable verse and prose in which militarism was equated with heroic self-sacrifice, Pearse became the most famous of the fifteen executed rebels and the centre of a powerful mythology: each generation of irredentist republicans has cited his uncompromising words in justification of their terror campaigns. 


@@@@@


doc= 37841


Pearson, (Edward) Hesketh Gibbons (1887-1964), actor and biographer, was born on 20 February 1887 in Hawford, Worcestershire, the second of the two sons and four children of Thomas Henry Gibbons Pearson (1853-1942), gentleman farmer, churchwarden, and amateur sportsman, and his second wife, Amy Mary Constance (1855-1934), eldest daughter of George Hesketh Biggs, vicar of Ettington. He attended Bedford grammar school. 
As a man without qualifications Pearson drifted towards a commercial career but, after two and a half years in a City shipping office, he was rescued by a legacy of $1000 from an aunt. Having spent almost all this money on adventurous travelling in South America, the United States, and Canada, he returned in 1908 and was rescued this time by his brother, who employed him as manager of his motor-car showroom in Brighton. Pearson used these years to provide himself with an artistic education, listening to music, reading widely, and growing increasingly responsive to the beauties of the English countryside. He was particularly influenced by the works of Oscar Wilde and of Bernard Shaw, and by the Shakespearian productions of Herbert Beerbohm Tree: Wilde, Shaw, Shakespeare, and Tree, the four authors of what he called his 'revelations', were all to be subjects of his biographies. In 1911, despite his lack of training and regardless of parental disapproval, Pearson joined Tree's company and he subsequently acted also in the productions of Harley Granville-Barker and Sir George Alexander, whom he often understudied. 
Though invalided out of the infantry in 1915 with tuberculosis, Pearson volunteered the following year for the Army Service Corps, and served for three years in Mesopotamia and Persia. He rose to the rank of captain and was awarded the MC. He almost died from a combination of dysentery, malaria, septic sores, and a head wound, and he attributed his unexpected recovery to reciting Shakespeare's plays, several of which he knew by heart. 
In the 1920s Pearson resumed his acting career but he also began to publish short stories, essays, and journalism. His anonymous volume of pen portraits, 'The Whispering Gallery being Leaves from the Diary of an ex-Diplomat' (1926), led to his arrest on a charge of 'obtaining or attempting to obtain money under false pretences', but under cross-examination his engaging candour appealed to the jury, which found him not guilty. In 1931 he left the stage to write biographies, beginning with a life of his maternal ancestor Erasmus Darwin, and he followed this with 'The Smith of Smiths' (1934), a still popular biography of the Revd Sydney Smith, which carried an inviting introduction by G. K. Chesterton. Pearson's technique as a biographer derived from his career on the stage. To some extent he acted his subjects on the page. He did not take his readers back into history so much as bring Thomas Paine, William Hazlitt, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, Sir Walter Scott, and others forward, as if they had suddenly walked in from the street. His treatment was informal and impressionistic, depending on entertaining anecdotes, skilful use of quotation, and the dextrous building up of incidents for its effect. Over the 1930s and 1940s he became the most popular biographer in Britain. Assessing his impact on the reading public, Graham Greene wrote that he had 'some of the qualities of Dr Johnson -- a plainness, an honesty, a sense of ordinary life going on all the time'. 
Pearson's work owed something to the influence of his Johnsonian friend Hugh Kingsmill. He was to pay tribute to Kingsmill after his death in an exchange of letters with Malcolm Muggeridge, published as 'About Kingsmill' (1951), and he recalled what had been the deepest friendship of his life between the lines of 'Johnson and Boswell' (1958), the last book written at the height of his powers. 
Impetuous, opinionated, athletic, good-looking, and full of fun, Pearson was an attractive figure to many women. He felt no competitiveness with other writers and was encouraging to people younger than himself. His genial temperament was, however, punctuated by uncontrollable flashes of temper. These sudden rages, which he attributed to his head wound but which may have been connected with the suppression of inherited melancholy, always passed quickly and disappeared in late life. On 6 June 1912 Pearson married the actress Gladys Rosalind Bardili (1882/3-1951), daughter of Julius Carl Bardili, a German brewer, and his English wife, Emma Gardner, whose surname Gladys used on stage. They had one son who died in 1939. Shortly after his wife's death in 1951 he married on 14 June 1951 Dorothy Joyce Ryder (1912-1976), bank cashier, daughter of Frank Bonham Ryder, an electrical engineer. Pearson died on 9 April 1964 at his home, 14 Priory Road, Hampstead, London. 
Pearson wrote two autobiographical books, 'Thinking it Over' (1938) and 'Hesketh Pearson by Himself' (published posthumously in 1965). After his death, from the 1970s into the new century, several of his biographies were reissued, including his lives of Shakespeare, Tree, Shaw, Wilde, and Whistler, with new prefaces by Anthony Burgess, Sir John Gielgud, Richard Ingrams, Peter Quennell, and Benny Green. These biographies and others have now been overtaken by recent scholarship, but they remain excellent introductions to their subjects' lives, and have begun to appear as audiobooks. 


@@@@@


doc= 37842


Pelham, Peregrine (bap. 1602, d. 1650), politician and regicide, was baptized on 27 September 1602 at Bosham, Sussex, the eldest son of Peregrine Pelham of Wickham, Lincolnshire, and later of Hull, and his wife, Anne. His grandfather was the lord chief justice of Ireland, Sir William Pelham (d. 1587), a descendant of the Pelhams of Laughton, Sussex. Pelham was apprenticed to the Hull merchant Thomas Aslaby and later admitted as a burgess of the town on 3 August 1626. He married his first wife, a sister of John Bowes, in or before 1628 when their son, John, was baptized in Hull. Presumably this wife died, as some time in or after 1630 Pelham married Jacoba Vanlore, the widow of Sir Peter Vanlore (c.1547-1627), a wealthy merchant from Tilehurst, Berkshire. Pelham became prosperous in continental trade, importing French wines and exporting lead. He was elected chamberlain of Hull on 30 September 1630 and served as town sheriff in 1636. On Sir John Lister's death Pelham was elected MP for Hull on 18 January 1641, joining his first cousin Henry Pelham in the Commons. His commercial expertise was soon recognized and on 7 June 1641 he was named to the committee to regulate trade with Scotland. 
Pelham was in Hull in April 1642 when the king appeared before the Beverley gate demanding entry. Pelham conferred with Hull's parliamentarian governor, Sir John Hotham, reputedly in the building now known as the White Hart inn, and refused the king admission, thereby preserving Hull's crucial arms magazine for parliament. On 18 May 1642 Pelham was appointed to a Commons committee sent north to assist Hotham on 24 May. Present in Hull during the siege of July 1642, he reported the town's successful defence in a letter to Speaker Lenthall on 13 July. However, Pelham soon clashed with Hotham over the town's government; by October Hotham was asking parliament to remove Pelham, whom he accused of spreading 'mutinous words' that 'disturbed the peace of the town' ('Portland MSS', 1.66). Claiming that Pelham's anger was rooted in Hotham's refusal to admit into Hull Pelham's brother-in-law, Hotham added that Pelham had accused him of planning to plunder the town. Eventually, Hotham sequestered Pelham's property and sent him on a ship to answer charges in parliament. 
Pelham cleared himself of Hotham's charges promptly; on 27 March 1643 he was named a sequestrator for Hull, and on 3 August as a commissioner for levying money. He became more prominent in parliament because of Hull's massive strategic importance and on 24 December 1644 commented on parliament's trial of Sir John Hotham and his son for treachery: 'They both deserve death' (Wildridge, 48). In 1884 a large cache of Pelham's letters was discovered; now held by Hull Record Office, forty-three of them appear in 'The Hull Letters' edited by T. T. Wildridge. Pelham's correspondence with Hull's corporation reveals him to have been a conscientious and industrious MP. In June 1645 he defended the corporation in parliament; fearing the town's self-government would be threatened, he unsuccessfully opposed its inclusion in the northern association. In August 1647 the Commons accepted his petition for payment of money due to him, and ordered the Sussex sequestration committee to pay him out of the earl of Arundel's estate. In September he was appointed a commissioner for compounding with delinquents. On 30 May 1648 parliament instructed Pelham to travel to Hull to protect the port from the navy's revolted ships, and to confer with General Fairfax over the town's safety. 
On 6 January 1649 Pelham was named to the high court of justice that was to try Charles I. Attending twenty-one sessions during the king's trial, he was among the most committed Regicides. He finally became mayor of Hull in September 1649 with the special consent of parliament. He sat in the Rump and was alive in November 1650, but was dead by 27 December 1650. With more than $17,000 owed to him and ruined by the civil war he died, intestate, unable to pay his doctor's bill. Administration of his estate was granted to his son, John. Parliament granted $500 to pay for his funeral and his widow received the bounty of the Hull corporation. 


@@@@@


doc= 37843


Pemell, Robert (d. 1653), physician, seems to have spent most of his working life in the cloth town of Cranbrook in Kent. He may have been connected with the Pemyll family of Egerton. Nothing is known of his education except that he did not lay claim to any degree. He was probably the Robert Pemel who obtained an archiepiscopal licence to practise medicine about 1632. He may have shared in the puritan tendency of Cranbrook: his published works were all printed for the London theological bookseller Philemon Stephens, and produced in the early 1650s, at a time when publication in both the learned languages and the vernacular greatly increased. 
Pemell's last work, on the diseases of children, was only the second monograph on the subject in English, the first being that of Thomas Phaer a hundred years earlier. General advice books directed at women, parents, or householders were, however, already a well-established genre. At various points Pemell's book on children directs the reader to fuller discussions contained in his earlier publications. 
Pemell's publications were all in the vernacular, but showed some knowledge of Latin, and were derived from classical and contemporary learned authors, with a few references to his own experience. As R. P. he first published 'De morbis capitis, or, Of the Chief Internall Diseases of the Head' (1650). A dedicatory Latin poem was contributed by John Elmeston, schoolmaster of Cranbrook. In the same year appeared ''Ptochoupharmakon', seu, Medicamen miseris, or, Pauperum pyxidicula salutifera. Help for the poor' (1650). This was aimed less at the poor themselves than at those able to help them and 'not able to make use of Physitians and Chirurgians'. A later edition (1653) included an appendix on whether to let blood in smallpox. Pemell's productivity continued with 'Tractatus de simplicium medicamentorum facultatibus. A treatise of the nature... of such simples as are most frequently used' (1652). This was helpfully structured for 'the vulgar capacity' and young practitioners. A second part, 'Tractatus de facultatibus simplicium', followed in 1653. His final work, on children, he advertised as fulfilling his promise to follow up the 'Tractatus', but in 'more hast', because 'I see my glasse runs apace': 'De morbis puerorum, or, A treatise of the diseases of children... very useful for all such as are housekeepers' (1653). 
Pemell's will was dated 7 April 1652, he being then in 'good health'; he was buried in Cranbrook on 3 June 1653. He left a widow, Elizabeth, and three children, all under age. The eldest, Thomas, was to have 'all my books in case he betake himself to the study and practice of physic'. 


@@@@@


doc= 37844


Cornwall, Peter of (1139/40-1221), scholar and prior of Holy Trinity, Aldgate, was born on his father's estates in or near Launceston, Cornwall, the son of Jordan of Trecarrel (died 'c'.1180), sometime 'praepositus' (or provost) of Launceston. In his 'Liber revelationum', book 1, chapter 6, he gives some account of his father's character, and he relates stories concerning his grandfather Ailsi and his uncles, Jordan's brothers, of whom the two eldest, Bernard and Nicholas, were 'scriptores' in the royal chapel in the time of Henry I. Peter also mentions his kinship by marriage to Reginald de Dunstanville, earl of Cornwall; whence it has been conjectured that Peter's mother was a sister of the earl's wife, Beatrice, daughter of William fitz Richard of Cardinan, the most important of the local nobility. 
Little is known of Peter's early career. He studied in London where his teacher was Master Henry of Northampton, a canon of St Paul's, who was often in residence during the 1170s and 1180s. Godfrey de Lucy, later bishop of Winchester, is once referred to as his fellow student. After 1170 he was received as an Augustinian canon by Prior Stephen at Holy Trinity, Aldgate -- the mother house from which the priory in his home town of Launceston had been founded. In Stephen's company he attended a synod in London, where a sermon preached by Gilbert Foliot, bishop of London, provided the inspiration for Peter's first work of scholarship, the massive 'Pantheologus', completed in 1189. In this book he presented a great quantity of biblical material organized by subject as an aid for preachers, using the method of treating a scriptural theme 'per distinctiones' -- that is, presenting interpretations of words schematically, according to the various senses in which they could be interpreted. Of the extant copies, there is one complete set in a contemporary hand, BL, Royal MSS 7 E.viii, 7 C.xiii, 7 C.xiv; this belonged to the library of Rochester Cathedral priory and may have been a presentation copy from Peter to his friend Gilbert de Glanville, bishop of Rochester. 
In 1197 Peter succeeded Stephen as prior of Holy Trinity, Aldgate, one of the three major religious houses in London. He continued in office until his death on 7 July 1221, and was buried at the priory. He was a conscientious administrator and was remembered as a great teacher. In 1210 Peter and his friend Benedict, abbot of Stratford Langthorn, acted as intermediaries between King John and Stephen Langton, archbishop of Canterbury, unsuccessfully seeking a reconciliation and an end to the interdict. 
Peter of Cornwall is now remembered principally for his scholarship, which was of a compilatory rather than an original nature. His 'De reparatione lapsus generis humani' (Som. ARS, MS DD/AH 66/17) is dedicated to Gilbert de Glanville. This work is referred to in the 'Liber disputationum contra Symonem Iudeum' (Eton College, MS 130, fols. 92-226'v'), which Peter dedicated to Stephen Langton in exile during the interdict (1208-11). The biblical compilation intended to introduce the latter work does not survive. Peter's personal manuscript of his 'Liber revelationum' (LPL, MS 51) is an immense collection of visions relating to the next life, compiled between 1200 (in which year he was aged sixty) and 1206. It is largely derivative, but it contains some stories written from his own experience and that of his personal acquaintances, including an account of his family and its devotion to St Stephen's Church, Launceston. These personal stories, together with the prefaces to his theological compilations, provide the principal evidence for his career. 
Richard Sharpe', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37845


Montfort, Peter de (c.1205-1265), magnate, was the son of Thurstin de Montfort (died 1216) and his wife, a daughter of William (I) de Cantilupe, a steward of King John. A leading supporter of Simon de Montfort, earl of Leicester (but no relation), Montfort was technically not a baron, for he held little directly from the king. He was, however, a substantial magnate. His chief seat was at Beaudesert, a low hill above Henley in Arden in Warwickshire, where extensive earthworks of the family castle still remain. Another important base was at Preston in Rutland. 
In 1166 Montfort's great-grandfather, another Thurstin de Montfort, had held ten fees from the earl of Warwick, which made him the second greatest of his tenants. The connection with the earls of Warwick, however, played no discernible part in Peter's career, partly because the earldom was held from 1242 until 1263, in right of his wife, by a Poitevin favourite of the king, John de Plessis, who established few local roots. Much more important for Montfort was the family of his grandfather William (I) de Cantilupe (died 1239), whose principal residence was at Aston Cantlow, only 4 miles from Beaudesert. His father died in 1216 and Montfort spent many years as Cantilupe's ward, developing what was to be a lifelong friendship with his son Walter de Cantilupe, bishop of Worcester from 1238 to 1266. The fleurs-de-lis of the Cantilupe coat of arms were incorporated into Montfort's seal. 
It was probably ties of neighbourhood that drew both Montfort and Walter de Cantilupe into the circle of Simon de Montfort, for Beaudesert and Aston Cantlow are respectively 9 and 12 miles distant from Kenilworth, after 1244 Earl Simon's great base in England. In 1248 Montfort was in Earl Simon's retinue when the latter went out to Gascony as seneschal and thereafter there are numerous instances of the close connection between the two men. Peter de Montfort attested many of the earl's charters and was probably often in his company; in 1259 he was named as an executor of Simon de Montfort's will. His faithful service was rewarded with a grant of the manor of Ilmington in Warwickshire. Part of that service was doubtless to help Earl Simon build up his following of midlands knights, for Montfort was well connected locally -- in 1260-62 six knights of Warwickshire and Leicestershire acted as his pledges (TNA: PRO, JUST 1/953, mm. 1d, 7; 954, m. 23d). 
From 1254 onwards, while Montfort remained close to Earl Simon, his career developed independently. He was employed by Henry III on diplomatic missions, was given an important command in the Welsh marches, and by 1257 was on the royal council. He was also closely connected with Edward, the king's son, whom he had accompanied to Spain for his marriage to Eleanor of Castile in 1254. Fear of being ousted from Edward's entourage by the king's Poitevin half-brothers perhaps gave him a personal interest in the political upheaval of 1258, which began with the half-brothers' expulsion from England. In that upheaval Peter de Montfort played a leading part. He was one of the seven magnates whose confederation in April 1258 began the revolution; he was one of the baronial twelve who were to draw up the plans of reform; and he was one of the council of fifteen set up by the provisions of Oxford to govern England in the king's name. In all these capacities Earl Simon was a colleague. However, unlike the earl (who withdrew to France), Peter de Montfort accepted the king's recovery of power in 1261, and in the following year served the king and Edward as custodian of Abergavenny, which he tried in vain to protect from the attacks of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd. None the less, when Earl Simon returned to England in April 1263 and raised once more the standard of the provisions of Oxford, Peter de Montfort joined him. This time he was to remain with him to the end. When the civil war commenced in March 1264, he was in command of the Montfortians in Northampton and was captured when the town fell to the king on 5 April. Released after Earl Simon's great victory at Lewes (14 May), Peter de Montfort was one of the council of nine imposed on the king (June 1264) and thenceforth played a major part in the direction of central government. In September he was one of those appointed to negotiate with the king of France and the papal legate in the abortive hope of finding some political settlement. His rewards during this period of power included a grant from the king of the manor of Garthorpe in Leicestershire. Montfort accompanied Earl Simon throughout his final campaign and died with him at the battle of Evesham on 4 August 1265. His eldest son, from his marriage with Alice, daughter of Henry Audley, was wounded in the battle but survived to recover eventually the bulk of his father's properties. The direct male line of the family died out in 1367. 
The support Peter de Montfort gave Earl Simon was of the first importance. While a close personal friend and follower, he also enjoyed his own power base in the midlands and an independent career in the service of the king and his son Edward. He possessed considerable abilities as a soldier, diplomat, and councillor. It is highly significant that Earl Simon retained the loyalty of such a man to the last. 
D. A. Carpenter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37846


Lawrence, Emmeline Pethick-, Lady Pethick-Lawrence (1867-1954), suffragette, was born on 21 October 1867 in Clifton, Bristol, the second and eldest surviving child in the family of thirteen children (five of whom died in infancy) of Henry Pethick, a nonconformist businessman of Cornish farming stock, and his wife, whose maiden name was Collen, and to whom he was happily married. Emmeline Pethick's early years in Clifton and at the boarding-school in Devizes which she briefly attended from the age of eight were not happy -- beset as she was by fear of the unknown, ignorance about sexuality, remorse at committing unintended solecisms, and resentment at perceived injustice. In later life she had no children of her own, yet her lifelong instinctive sympathy with children was striking, and a misunderstood childhood was one experience she shared with her future husband. She portrayed herself later as a truthful and rational child, but to adults she must have seemed wilful and stubborn. Things improved with the family's move to Weston-super-Mare, where she attended a day school and at fifteen a nearby finishing school, and her relationship with her father burgeoned, the first of her three close father-daughter relationships with men. He was courageous but also good fun, and his staunch defence of liberty and justice was a lifelong influence. Many years later she recalled her pride when he defended the Salvation Army against local hooligans: 'in my dumb, childish fashion I simply worshipped him for it, and it forged our relationship for ever' ('Votes for Women', 2 May 1913, 439). Her Pethick relations remained central to Emmeline Pethick's social life, but her mother, more conventional in her views, was also affectionately recalled. 
Shy, immature, and not pretty, Emmeline Pethick now experienced the twin pressures of socialism and a yearning for independence, and diverged from what was then the young woman's conventional course of marriage and motherhood. Her father eventually shed his Methodism and drifted through other Christian allegiances into unbelief, but it was through going to the Methodist West London Mission in 1890 that Emmeline Pethick realized her potential. Walter Besant's 'The Children of Gibeon' (1886) had inspired her to mix with other social classes in the big city, and here was her opportunity. While philanthropy for women was then often a substitute for a career, it could also sometimes offer an escape from convention -- in her case from 'the petty life of a second-rate seaside resort' (Pethick-Lawrence, 95). She delivered her first public speech in a large hall at the mission's anniversary meeting on 21 October 1891. At the mission she met Mary Neal, and in jointly running its working girls' club they discovered their complementary qualities, from which stemmed a lifelong friendship. In 1895 she and Mary Neal planned to leave the mission to found the Esperance Working Girls' Club. Influenced by William Morris, Edward Carpenter, and Walt Whitman, Emmeline Pethick's evangelical background was waning concurrently with the advance of her social concern. But her loss of faith, unlike her father's, was masked through the transfer of her religious emotions to other causes, and during the transition she needed help from her second father-daughter relationship, for 'the strongest influence upon the first half of my life' (ibid., 97) was the evangelical Christian socialist Mark Guy Pearse. Reluctant at first, he eventually gave full backing to her breakaway movement. The club was reinforced in 1897 by the Maison Esperance, a co-operative dressmaking business set up in Wigmore Street, and in 1900 by a hostel at Littlehampton for working girls' holidays. 
Emmeline Pethick was active in the late 1890s at Percy Alden's Mansfield House settlement in Canning Town, and there she met Frederick Lawrence ['see 'Lawrence, Frederick William Pethick- (1871-1961)]. The son of Alfred Lawrence, carpenter and later owner of a building firm, he was living at the settlement as a prospective Liberal Unionist MP. In a highly emotional courtship, replete with exchanges of flowery and high-toned letters, Emmeline Pethick edged him away from Unionism towards the more internationalist, ethical, and egalitarian outlook to be found among Liberals, and thereby built up the third among her father-daughter relationships. They married at the Town Hall, Canning Town, on 2 October 1901. It was the start of an unusual lifelong partnership in which each annexed the surname of the other, while each retained separate bank accounts and considerable autonomy within a marriage whose harmony was much advertised and celebrated. Commemorative social functions and exchanges of curiously mannered and formal correspondence henceforth annually recalled the key moments of their courtship. 
At first their life was taken up with several causes, including Chinese labour and working-class representation in parliament, but in 1906 James Keir Hardie introduced Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence to the Pankhursts. There followed what she recalled as 'a very extraordinary sequence of incidents' whereby a person 'not of a revolutionary temperament, was drawn into a revolutionary movement' (Pethick-Lawrence, 148). Annie Kenney's artless entreaties drew her into becoming treasurer to the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU), and with her husband's support she became central to the women's suffrage movement's militant wing. She brought three major skills to it. Her vague but elevated and enthusiastic eloquence, enhanced in timing and attire by a sense of drama -- even of melodrama -- inspired many. Her shrewd eye for dramatic propaganda, allied with uncritical acceptance of Christabel Pankhurst's ruthlessly sectarian strategic sense, greatly boosted the union's funds, to which she and her husband alone contributed more than $6000. And, as she later recalled, 'it became my business to give their genius a solid foundation' (ibid., 152); the Pethick-Lawrences' organizational skills provided offices and staff, as well as the mass-circulation periodical 'Votes for Women', which they co-edited. They worked informally but closely with Christabel Pankhurst until 1912, the contrasting temperaments of the trio providing firm, imaginative, and efficient leadership. Nor did Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence shrink from personal sacrifice at more than one level. In 1906 when she was first imprisoned for militancy her claustrophobia produced breakdown and she capitulated. But by braving five further imprisonments she thereafter led by example, also enduring force-feeding at Holloway gaol on one occasion in June 1912. When suffragette violence escalated in 1912, the Pethick-Lawrences and Mrs Pankhurst were tried for conspiracy, and after their conviction the courts sequestered the contents of the Pethick-Lawrences' country home. 
There had always been a latent divergence between the charismatic loner Emmeline Pankhurst and the Pethick-Lawrences as brilliant organizers. When Christabel Pankhurst changed horses and backed her mother, the divergence opened out. In a ruthless break with the past, the two Pankhursts in 1912 launched a more extreme form of militancy, and ousted the Pethick-Lawrences from the WSPU. Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence later realized that her husband's wealth, hitherto an asset to the union, might at that point have become a liability, but she rightly questioned Pankhurstian tactics. Privately bitter and shocked at how they had been treated, the Pethick-Lawrences behaved during this crisis with some dignity, and were keen to avoid dividing the movement, but in later life they were more sympathetic to Sylvia Pankhurst than to her mother and elder sister. In 1913-14 they continued to edit 'Votes for Women', and gradually formed a group of moderate militants round it: the Votes for Women Fellowship. Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence's moralistic and libertarian mentors, from Mazzini to her father, were at one with Olive Schreiner (another major influence upon her at this time) in envisaging freedom as a cause which could unite both sexes. The fellowship in 1914 evolved into a new structure, the United Suffragists, which she saw as a vehicle of 'militancy without violence' ('Votes for Women', 7 Feb 1913, 273), a bridge between militants and non-militants, and between men and women. 
The First World War introduced violence of quite another order, and for Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence, as for many pre-war feminists, the promotion of international peace and of rights for women abroad seemed linked causes that flowed naturally out of British suffragism. Given her worldwide travels, her opposition to the South African War, and her Liberal nonconformist background, she naturally sought to bring about the worldwide family of men and women that had long been present within her mind, and from 1915 until 1922 was treasurer of the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom. For her the war was 'the final demonstration of the unfitness of men to have the whole control of the human family in their hands' ('Votes for Women', 16 Oct 1914, 21). She participated in 1915 in the international women's peace conference at The Hague, and deplored the terms of the Versailles peace settlement. Here, in her view, lay the roots of the Second World War: on 14 October 1939 she told Sylvia Pankhurst that Britain's earlier injustice towards Germany made it impossible for her to support another war (Sylvia Pankhurst collection, Institute of Social History, Amsterdam). 
Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence never retreated from her feminist ideals, but her public career suffered almost immediately from the way political party cut across inter-war feminist loyalties. In 1918 she stood as Labour candidate for Rusholme, championing nationalization, a capital levy, equal pay, and an equal moral standard, but she came bottom of the poll with only a sixth of the votes cast. She publicly campaigned against black-and-tan British policy in Ireland, and from 1926 to 1935 was president of the Women's Freedom League. She backed the Open Door Council and the Six Point Group, fiercely feminist bodies, but within the National Union of Societies for Equal Citizenship she tried in the mid-1920s to straddle the divide between 'old' (libertarian) and 'new' (interventionist) feminists, and more than once publicly asserted the need for economic equality between the sexes. 
As her husband's inter-war political career advanced, however, Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence's public career went into decline. She accompanied him on overseas tours, backed him in his election campaigns, and ran the Surrey homes and gardens that they both loved so much. Nobody reading the letters they exchanged when parted during his cabinet mission to India in 1946 will doubt the intensity of their affection. But this was no Webb or even Cole partnership: politics were not central to Emmeline's life, she had her own circle of friends, and she put more effort into gardening than into public commitments, paradoxically displaying many of the traits associated with the unemancipated woman. Though four years older than her husband, she elicited from him the same paternal and chivalrous response that she had evoked in her father and Pearse. Moody, impulsive, self-indulgent, and frequently taking to her bed, she was in later life careless with money, untidy, and absent-minded. Yet she could deploy her charm, in alliance with her wealth and classless outlook, to win devotion from a semi-commune of servants and secretaries: substitute children who benefited socially and educationally thereby. Her public life contracted further after the 1930s because of growing deafness, her unconcealed deaf-aid constituting more of a distraction for her audiences than a help. Prolonged disability and ultimately demoralizing illness preceded her death at home at Fourways, Gomshall, Surrey, on 11 March 1954. 
It is for her central role in the militant suffrage movement that Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence is remembered. Her autobiographical 'My Part in a Changing World' (1938), which she enjoyed writing, is dedicated to her husband, 'my unchanging comrade and my best friend'. It is reticent about her married life, but valuably documents in its first eight chapters the influences moulding her life as child and young woman. Appropriately it devotes its largest section, eleven chapters, to the WSPU -- and only two jejune chapters to the years after 1914. Though impressively fair-minded and at times perceptive, her account of the suffragettes is essentially an uncritical and largely impersonal chronology. Nowhere did she convincingly justify the contradiction between her humanitarian and democratic instincts on the one hand, and her promotion of violent tactics and authoritarian suffrage structures on the other. Her prose and oratory could be embarrassingly sentimental and stagey; as she once told a young admirer, 'my dear, it doesn't matter a bit as long as you 'feel' what you're saying' (Lutyens). Virginia Woolf cast a cold eye over the performance at a suffrage rally in 1918: 'I watched Mrs Pethick Lawrence ['sic'] rising & falling on her toes, as if half her legs were made of rubber, throwing out her arms, opening her hands, & thought very badly of this form of art' ('Diary', 125). 
Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence's personal contribution to winning the vote for women, if she had focused on describing it, would have been difficult to disentangle from that of her husband. The Pethick-Lawrences' wealth, their courage, their vague and highly emotional idealism, and the example they set as a married couple who combined liberty with harmony -- all helped to ward off any British feminist tendency towards sex war, and made a national movement out of what might otherwise have remained a Labour Party sect. In later life her career was eclipsed and in some ways cramped by that of her husband, as well as by disability, and the 'Dictionary of National Biography' felt no need to commemorate her in its volume for the 1950s. The joint Pethick-Lawrence archive was once very large, but wartime salvage and deliberate destruction after her death impoverished it. None the less, ample materials exist for the full-blown biography that would be fully justified, but remains as yet unwritten. 


@@@@@


doc= 37847


Petre, Robert Edward, ninth Baron Petre (1742-1801), Roman Catholic leader, was born about February 1742 in London, the only son (he had three older sisters) of Robert James Petre, eighth Baron Petre (1713-1742), of Ingatestone, Essex, a botanist and garden designer, and his wife, Anna Maria Barbara Petre (1716-1760) ['see under 'Petre family], daughter of James Radcliffe, third earl of Derwentwater. He succeeded to his barony as a minor in July 1742 and may have been educated at the English Jesuit college at St Omer in France. 
Petre was the principal representative of an enlightened, tolerant, rather tepid English Catholicism shared by the small but powerful grouping of 'old' Catholic families. His wealth made him one of the principal paymasters of the English Catholic community, and in political circles he was generally seen as the leader of Catholic opinion. He was one of the central figures in the Catholic Committee, a self-appointed body formed in 1778, predominately lay in character and noble in membership, which saw itself as speaking for 'informed' Catholic opinion (Petre always protected radicals among the clergy, such as Alexander Geddes), and which agitated for the freeing of the English Catholics from civil disabilities. It had considerable influence in negotiating the 'Catholic Relief Acts' of 1778 and 1791 and in preparing a new oath of allegiance. 
The visit of George III to Thorndon in October 1778 gave a royal seal of approval to Petre's efforts. Not all his co-religionists were so enthusiastic. Petre paid little attention either to the Irish dimension of Catholic relief or to the changing constituency of English Catholicism. The Cisalpine Club, formed in 1792 from the leading members of the Catholic Committee, looked very out of date by 1830 when its meetings finished. Ultramontanism was becoming more vigorous, and initiative among the English Catholics was moving away from the old Catholic families to the increasing Catholic population of towns. It was priests, not peers, who were now providing leadership in the church. Many of the disputes in which the English Catholics were involved during Petre's lifetime were about the place of lay power in an increasingly clericalized church or, as John Milner, bishop of Castabala, one of Petre's most bitter critics, put it, 'whether the nomination of our Pastors shall be with 'Lord Petre' or 'the successors of' 'St Peter'' (Duffy, 'Doctor Douglass', 249). 
Petre married twice. In 1762 he married Anne (died 1787), younger daughter and coheir of Philip Howard of Buckenham, Norfolk. They had four sons, two of whom died in infancy, and one daughter. In 1788 he married Juliana Barbara (died 1833), sister of Bernard Edward Howard, later twelfth duke of Norfolk, and daughter of Henry Howard of Glossop, Derbyshire. They had one son and two daughters. 
Elected FSA and FRS in 1780, Petre was also a leading freemason and grand master of the English freemasons in 1772-6 (the last Catholic to hold that office). James Paine designed his new residence at Thorndon Hall, Essex, and Lancelot (Capability) Brown laid out the grounds. Lord Petre died at his home in Park Lane, London, on 2 July 1801. He was succeeded in the barony by his eldest son, Robert Edward ('b'. 1763). 
Dominic Aidan Bellenger', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37848


Petty, Maximilian (bap. 1617, d. in or after 1661?), Leveller, was probably the child of an Oxfordshire gentry family who was baptized on 3 June 1617 at Tetsworth. If so he was the second surviving son of John Petty (died 1619x22) of Stoke Talmage, near Tetsworth, and his second wife, Anne (died 1622), widow of Thomas Webley, clothier, of Witney in Oxfordshire, and daughter of one Johnson of Witney. He was apprenticed to London Grocers' Company in 1634 and gained his freedom in 1642. At an unknown date he married Mary, daughter of his uncle Leonard Petty; the couple had a single child, Mary, who married one Blackwell. The Pettys were connected by marriage to the Hampdens and the Ingoldsbys; one of Maximilian's uncles, another Maximilian, was MP for Westbury, Wiltshire, in 1628-9. The MP Maximilian was probably acquainted with the puritan martyr Alexander Leighton, and his son, Edmund, sat for parliament in 1660. 
Petty is renowned for his contribution to the Putney debates, the discussions of the New Model Army and civilians in autumn 1647 concerning the settlement of the nation. That summer he attended talks over the army's terms for settlement, 'The Heads of the Proposals'. Soon afterwards, as he described at Putney, it 'pleased God to raise a company of men that do stand up for the power of the House of Commons' (Woodhouse, 89). Petty became acquainted with these men and a cipher key suggests his involvement over the summer in their attempts to forge links with and influence the New Model's agitator organization. By autumn this civilian effort to secure a platform within the army reached its zenith when Petty and John Wildman brought a counter-proposal for settlement, the 'Agreement of the People', to the army general council on 28 October. Possibly the work of Wildman on behalf of his and Petty's associates in London the 'Agreement' was a written constitution calling for a new social compact between the people and their rulers, far more radical terms for settlement than those of the army. None the less the paper split the general council and became the focus of fierce debate, during which Petty (or Pettus as the clerks recorded his name) expressed hostility to the negative voice of king and lords. However, his comments on the franchise, which dominated debate on 29 October, have attracted most attention. The 'Agreement', with its demand for a more equal redistribution of the electorate 'according to the number of the inhabitants' and Petty's remark that 'We judge that all inhabitants that have not lost their birthright should have an equal voice in elections' were interpreted (perhaps correctly) by the generals and their supporters as a call for manhood suffrage (ibid., 444, 53). Yet towards the end of the debate and in an attempt to reach a compromise position on the franchise Petty referred to his willingness to 'exclude apprentices, or servants, or those that take alms' (ibid., 83). The 'Agreement' would never be realized without the support of the New Model, and compromise on the franchise, probably not the most important proposal, was an attempt to secure it. The tactic failed when in committee the army addressed the majority of concerns voiced by soldiers who supported the 'Agreement'. The outcome in November was an army 'Remonstrance', based on the New Model's terms for settlement, which excluded the civilian proposals. The generals subsequently turned on Petty and his disruptive associates, identifying as Levellers those who sought to 'take away all kind of distinction of [king or lords] from other men' (ibid., 123). 
By contriving a second civil war in 1648 Charles I turned the New Model's generals against him. Although parliament resumed negotiations with the defeated king the army vehemently opposed the discussions and courted support from well-affected Londoners. In November, meetings between Levellers and City Independents saw their proposals for settlement sent to army headquarters. Later that month Petty, Wildman, John Lilburne, and William Wetton journeyed to Windsor to express the Levellers' remaining concerns to the commissary-general, Henry Ireton. As a result it was agreed that a committee of sixteen, consisting of four MPs, army officers, City Independents, and Levellers, would draw up a second 'Agreement of the People' as the basis for a settlement. Petty was chosen as a Leveller representative and attended the committee's meetings at Windsor and at Whitehall, which produced a draft document. When in December the draft was submitted for debate by the council of officers it is unclear whether he sided with those Levellers who protested at the conduct of the talks. He is not listed among the large Leveller delegation that presented Sir Thomas Fairfax with a petition critical of proceedings, yet neither was he among the Levellers who attended the council's debates after the precipitate withdrawal of the Leveller leader Lilburne. When in March 1649 Leveller criticism of the new military regime prompted the arrest of their leading figures Petty was not among them. Nevertheless Thomas Scott, the Commonwealth's intelligencer, considered him one of the principal Levellers who remained at liberty and questioned him regarding their activities. 
The Levellers' demise during 1649 brought a temporary halt to Petty's political pursuits. By April 1650 he, Wildman, and Wetton were employed in administering the estates of the republican MP Henry Marten. Marten was a member of the 1648 committee of sixteen and his close ties with the Levellers during the late 1640s suggest that he may have known all three men earlier. Alongside Wetton, Petty was a co-administrator of Marten's Derbyshire estates and also assisted in administering the MP's Berkshire lands. By autumn 1659 his political activities resumed in London where both he and Wildman attended James Harrington's republican club, the Rota. This select debating society of metropolitan intellectuals discussed and voted on issues of popular government. John Aubrey described Petty as 'a very able man in these matters, and who had more then once turn'd the councill-board of Oliver Cromwell' ('Brief Lives', 1.290). Although the Rota was short-lived Petty's republican ties may have been of longer duration. In 1661 a Mr Pretty reportedly met in London with a small group of republicans, including Wildman. Under questioning that November Wildman denied knowing a Mr Pretty but offered that he knew a Mr Petty, an associate of the duke of Buckingham. Buckingham was involved in intrigue with Wildman and Lilburne in the 1650s and could conceivably have known Petty through them. If Wildman was referring to Maximilian Petty it is the last surviving record of him, his place and date of death being unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 37849


Peyton, Sir Robert (c.1633-1689), politician and conspirator, was the fourth son of Henry Peyton (died 1656), examiner in chancery (1632-54), of Chancery Lane, London, where his son was born. Peyton was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1655, having also succeeded his father as an examiner in chancery in 1654. He married Jane Robinson (died 1684), daughter of Lionel Robinson of Cowton Grange, Yorkshire. They had at least one son and one daughter. He was knighted in 1670, served as deputy lieutenant for Middlesex from 1670 to 1676 and again in 1689, as JP from 1672 to 1676, and as MP for Middlesex in the parliaments of spring 1679 and autumn 1680. 
Despite holding these positions of responsibility in the 1670s, Peyton was a leading member of the opposition to Charles II. He was a political associate of both the main opposition leaders, George Villiers, second duke of Buckingham, and Anthony Ashley Cooper, first earl of Shaftesbury. By the mid-1670s Peyton had become the leader of a republican group, 'Peyton's gang', and it has been argued that this group had a hand in the murder of the JP Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey in 1678, which provoked widespread belief in the bogus Popish Plot. Godfrey was a member of Peyton's gang, but after receiving, in his capacity as a JP, the Popish Plot depositions of the false informer Titus Oates, Godfrey promptly warned one of the accused Catholics and the court itself. Peyton may have decided to have Godfrey killed both because of his 'betrayal' and to stir up hatred against the Catholics, on whom suspicion would inevitably fall. 
Peyton's heavy involvement in opposition plotting had already been noted by the government. In 1676 Peyton and a number of his fellow JPs for Middlesex were removed abruptly from the bench. This was an unusual step, because Charles II -- at least prior to 1681 -- was notoriously tolerant towards his political opponents (much to the chagrin of his supporters). Although most of those removed were members of Peyton's gang, there is also some evidence to suggest that Peyton and his friends were removed for being involved in the distribution of seditious literature. 
Peyton was one of the most active members in the turbulent parliament of spring 1679. In the same year he became the chairman of the radical Green Ribbon Club, having been a founder member of the club some six years earlier. However, by the end of 1679 Peyton had briefly and secretly come over to the court interest. This remains rather a shadowy affair. Peyton appears to have been won over by the renowned Catholic midwife Elizabeth Cellier. Peyton later claimed that his motives were sexual, and certainly both of them, Peyton in particular, had a reputation for sexual licentiousness. There is also, however, some evidence to suggest that Peyton was partly motivated by fear. When Charles II had fallen seriously ill at the end of summer 1679, Peyton and some of his opposition colleagues, including fellow London radicals such as Sir Thomas Player and Francis Jenks, had apparently discussed rising in revolt against James, duke of York, should he become king. However, Charles had recovered, James was experiencing a temporary resurgence of his fortunes, and Peyton appears to have been afraid of the repercussions. Whatever Peyton's reasons for his temporary defection, he was discovered and bitterly attacked by his former friends in the next parliamentary session. 
Peyton did move back into some degree of opposition (now called whig) contact, and he was involved on the peripheries of the 1682-3 Rye House plot. In 1685 he planned to raise London for James Scott, duke of Monmouth, during the Monmouth rebellion. Peyton, however, vacillated, being unsure of support, and Monmouth was defeated in the west while Peyton was still holding meetings. Peyton's plotting was discovered, and, charged with high treason, he fled abroad to the Netherlands. 
In 1686 the English envoy to the states general, Bevil Skelton, and some of James II's army officers attempted to kidnap Peyton and bring him back to England, but failed, and the affair caused a diplomatic incident. Two years later, Peyton commanded a regiment in William of Orange's invasion force against James II. However, Peyton died in London less than a year later, on 3 May 1689, reportedly of a fever two days after drinking bad claret. He was buried in London on 8 May. 
Peyton had a violent character, behaving viciously in the frequent private quarrels in which he became embroiled. He may well, though, have had a magnetic side to his personality, to be able to rise to such a high position in opposition circles. 


@@@@@


doc= 37850


Philipps, Sir John, fourth baronet (c.1666-1737), politician and evangelical patron, was born about 1666 (the evidence of his funerary monument as to his date of birth being demonstrably unreliable). He was the second but first surviving son of Sir Erasmus Philipps, third baronet (died 1697), of Picton Castle, Pembrokeshire, a Commonwealth commissioner for the propagation of the gospel, and his second wife, Catherine ('b'. 1640/41), the daughter of Edward Darcy of Newhall, Derbyshire. He entered Westminster School as a king's scholar in 1679 and attended Trinity College, Cambridge (where he matriculated in 1682), and Lincoln's Inn (from January 1684). 
Of puritan stock, and imbued with his family's sober piety, Philipps grew up a wholly devout Anglican, anxious above all for the survival and renewal of a church beset, as he saw it, by spreading laxity and licentiousness. In January 1697 he became fourth baronet on the death of his father, and on 12 December of the same year he married Mary (died 1722), the daughter and heir of an East India merchant, Anthony Smith. They had three sons and three daughters. While MP for Pembroke boroughs from 1695 to 1702 (he was to sit again, for Haverfordwest, 1718-22), Philipps was responsible for the introduction of several legislative measures to suppress 'vice and profaneness', notably the 'Blasphemy Act' of 1698, aimed principally at anti-trinitarian heretics, and the ill-fated 'immorality' bill the following year, originally designed to tighten the laws against prostitution, but injudiciously extended to make adultery itself a misdemeanour, and for this reason rejected by parliament as impracticable. To his critics it seemed as if Philipps, 'the Welsh Owl', had 'run mad with reformation'. 
Outside parliament Philipps was involved in the local societies for the reformation of manners, and was one of the first to join the similarly orientated Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK), taking an active role in its agitations against playhouses and against duelling. On one occasion he ostentatiously refused a challenge from an infuriated opponent in a lawsuit, preferring to endure public humiliation rather than call out his tormentor (though he did complain to the Commons of the breach of privilege), and earned the public thanks of the society for setting such a 'noble and Christian' example. When the SPCK switched its primary focus towards educational and evangelizing enterprises, Philipps was a generous and constant benefactor, 'the ornament, and in a great manner the support' of the society for many years. At his own expense he established no fewer than twenty-two charity schools in Pembrokeshire alone. He was a member of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts and the East India mission, and a commissioner for the building of fifty new churches, and he also took a close interest in the relief and resettlement of continental protestant refugees. 
There was always a subsidiary social and political objective behind Philipps's reforming zeal, to combat crime and disorder through a reimposition or at least an encouragement of religious discipline. He viewed himself as a 'patriot' (of an old-fashioned whiggish stamp), and his philanthropic efforts as an extension of his 'patriotism'. 'The endeavours of a man truly good', he once wrote, 'are not confined to this or that particular design, but lay hold on all opportunities of doing the best service he can to the souls and bodies of mankind.' But the real impetus derived from an overpowering experience of Christian faith. A correspondent of the Halle pietists, and heavily influenced by them, he was an enthusiastic patron of many evangelical preachers, notably George Whitefield and the Welsh revivalist Griffith Jones, who became his brother-in-law and intimate friend. In his latter years, though plagued by failing eyesight, he gave considerable practical encouragement to the Oxford 'methodists', whose predilection for preaching and catechizing accorded fully with his own. 
Philipps died on 5 January 1737, 'suddenly, of a fit of apoplexy, as he was sitting in his chair at his house in Bartlett's Buildings, Holborn', and was buried in St Mary's Church, Haverfordwest. He was succeeded first by his son Erasmus Philipps, and then by a younger son, John Philipps, 'a notorious Jacobite'. 
D. W. Hayton', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37851


Phillips, George (1806-1877), analytical chemist, was born in 1806, probably in February. He was probably illegitimate. Nothing definite is known of his education and early life except that he was 'bred a grocer'. On 17 February 1826 he received his first certificate of suitability for a post in the excise service. He was appointed 'expectant of excise' on 17 April 1827, and to his first post as an assistant on 2 September 1827. Phillips's career was orthodox for the next sixteen years. He served in various parts of the country, reaching the grade of principal officer by 1833. 
During this period he became interested in the adulteration of tobacco, an issue of considerable importance in the 1830s and 1840s. Many non-tobacco substances were being mixed with the leaf, causing loss to the revenue, and an act forbidding this was passed in 1842. In order to detect adulterants, a laboratory (the ancestor of the later laboratory of the government chemist) was set up at the excise department headquarters in Broad Street, London, in October 1842, staffed solely by George Phillips. Phillips had, he said, taught himself the principles of chemistry to enable him to detect adulteration. His confidence in his ability was borne out in practice, and by 1857 the amount of adulteration had been considerably reduced. 
Phillips married twice, firstly Sophia, with whom he had two children, George (who became a tobacconist and wine merchant) and Elizabeth. Sophia died in August 1856, aged fifty. He married, secondly, a widow with at least two children, Hannah Gocher White ('nee' Wills), on 30 October 1869. There were no children from the second marriage, and Hannah died in December 1876. 
In 1844 Phillips gave evidence before the select committee on the tobacco trade. Despite his obvious scientific expertise, the board of excise seems to have had some doubts about his qualifications, and in 1845 instructed him and nine other officers to matriculate at University College, London, and to attend classes in general and analytical chemistry. This early example of government help for education continued until 1858, after which excise officers were trained by Phillips within the laboratory, and examined by outside assessors. 
With Thomas Dobson, later secretary to the Board of Inland Revenue, Phillips also carried out a number of experiments of importance to the brewing industry (and to the revenue). The two men were presented by the Treasury with $1000 between them for their services. Other important investigations were carried out by Phillips alone, into the determination of alcoholic strength and the use of methyl alcohol to denature ethanol. 
Phillips continued to progress in the service, rising to the grade of surveying general examiner of the first class in 1853. In 1858 the laboratory was reorganized as a separate establishment by the Board of Inland Revenue, with which the excise had been merged; Phillips was appointed principal of this larger laboratory, testing many different substances including food, beer, and spirits, as well as tobacco. He published no major works, but wrote eighteen informative and valuable annual reports, put his name to several government papers, and took out two patents on analytical subjects. 
On his retirement on 8 April 1874, Phillips was granted a pension at the rate of his full salary of $750 p.a., for his 'peculiar and exceptional services'. This was fully justified in view of his immense work in founding and raising his laboratory to the first rank of importance in the fight against adulteration of food and other substances. He died on 16 January 1877 at his home, 71 Tufnell Park Road, Islington, London; and was buried at Highgate cemetery on 22 January 1877, the burial place of his two wives, and other members of his family. 


@@@@@


doc= 37852


Phillips, Marion (1881-1932), first Labour Party woman organizer, was born on 29 October 1881 at St Kilda, Melbourne, Australia, youngest in the family of three sons and four daughters of Phillip David Phillips (1836-1909), a well-to-do Australian-born Jewish lawyer, and his wife, Rose Asher, from New Zealand. She was educated at home, at the Presbyterian Ladies' College, Melbourne (1897-8), and then at Ormond College and Melbourne University, where she studied philosophy and history (BA, 1904). She went to England in 1904 to study at the London School of Economics (1904-7), and graduated DSc (Econ) with a doctoral thesis on the development of New South Wales; she published it in 1909 as 'A Colonial Autocracy'. She was a lecturer at the London School of Economics in 1911 and from 1918 to 1920, but was gradually drawn into politics. 
From 1905 to 1909 Phillips was employed first by Sidney and Beatrice Webb and then by the royal commission on the poor laws as a research assistant for inquiries into public health, poor-law medical relief, and the treatment of destitute children. In 1907 she joined the Fabian Society and the Independent Labour Party and in 1908 the Women's Labour League, whose executive committee she joined in the following year. Also in 1909 she set up house with two women friends, Mary Longman and Ethel Bentham. She joined the non-militant National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies, and acted for a time as its secretary during 1910. While admiring the bravery of the militant suffragettes, Phillips was politically astute in forcibly pointing out the damage done by their non-party alignment and by the distractions from democratic discussion that militancy entailed. She was for a time an organizing secretary to the Women's Trade Union League, and in 1911 became temporary secretary of the Women's Labour League; she rose to full-time secretary in 1912 and edited its 'League' leaflet (from 1913 entitled 'Labour Woman') from 1912 until her death. Katharine Bruce Glasier, gossiping to Ramsay MacDonald on 21 April 1913, said that Phillips reminded her of Eleanor Marx in 'her love of power and intrigue'; deploring Phillips's egotism, Glasier exclaimed, 'O if only she could fall in love and mate and marry. But just now she is as hard and cold as glass' (TNA: PRO, Ramsay MacDonald MSS, 1157/18). In 1912 Phillips was active in the Fabian reform committee, which annoyed the older generation of Fabians by trying to forge closer and more exclusive links between the Fabians and the Labour Party. In the same year she was elected a Labour councillor in the London borough of Kensington, where she pressed for public provision of baby clinics, school meals, improved council housing, employment schemes, and prohibition of sweated labour. 
Phillips strongly defended the need for separate women's political organizations, at least until women matched men in political experience and maturity. During the war she was a member of the War Emergency Workers' National Committee, the consumers' council of the Ministry of Food, and the Central Committee on Women's Training and Employment. In 1917-18 she served on the committee on post-war reconstruction, where she often clashed with Beatrice Webb. She became a member of the advisory committee of London magistrates, and edited a volume of essays -- 'Women and the Labour Party' (1918) -- which aimed to show 'the contribution which the Labour Party has to make upon questions that are peculiarly the concern of women' (introduction, 9). Its ten distinguished contributors surveyed the various needs of women in differing circumstances -- as mothers, brain-workers, and domestic workers -- and their circumstances in relation to such problems as housekeeping, trade unionism, internationalism, and the poor law. 
In 1917 Phillips became secretary of the Standing Joint Committee of Industrial Women's Organizations, which drew together women in trade unions, the co-operative movement, and the Women's Labour League, whose branches became the core of the Labour Party's branch women's sections. The league's conference became the annual Conference of Labour Women, and its secretary in 1918 became Labour's chief woman officer. This ensured that Phillips was well placed for prominence in the distinct structure for women that the Labour Party now established, and she pushed her advantage home. Throughout her career Phillips was known for her powerful and abrasive manner: in June 1917 Beatrice Webb described her as 'shrewd and capable but contentious', and in March 1918 as 'hardly an element of solidarity in an office' ('Beatrice Webb's Diaries, 1912-1924', 85, 116). In May 1918 Webb referred to Phillips's 'insolently critical attitude towards all persons and institutions' and her 'sharp satirical tongue' -- so much so that she was 'much disliked by the other leading women of the labour movement' ('Diary of Beatrice Webb', 3.302). 
None the less, personal and party ambitions were now fused for Phillips, and her redoubtable energies help to explain how 2000 women's sections of the party came into existence within fourteen years. She would arrive at area conferences 'carrying a secretary's kit and demonstrating how best to use a card index, how to draft minutes or to keep section accounts' (Middleton, 35), and with two other activists she collated her experience into a practical manual, 'Women's Work in the Labour Party', complete with diagrams and reading guidance. 'Labour Woman' -- an earnest, close-printed, double-column monthly -- was Phillips's organ for repudiating any compromise with frivolous views of women: she aimed only at 'the sane working woman who feels her responsibilities as a citizen and desires to carry them out' ('Labour Woman', Jan 1920, 8). Phillips, and many women like her, worked hard at the undramatic but necessary organizational tasks involved in creating a new political constituency, settling where necessary for the practical, but never losing sight of the ideal. She was particularly active in advancing women's interests on international bodies, and in pressing for improved working-class housing estates to include community centres with nurseries, communal kitchens, libraries, concert halls, and home-help services; all these she saw as not merely desirable in themselves but as essential to emancipate working-class housewives. 
In introducing 'Women and the Labour Party' Phillips had emphasized that 'essentially the interests of men and women are one and indivisible' (p. 10) but that the party recognized the need fully to draw upon women's special expertise in some aspects of life, and that major reforms could be secured only if men and women banded together politically. Hence the party's special structure, designed to encourage women into the political sphere. Phillips's career in the party should be seen against Labour's overall situation at this time: it was transcending its pressure-group origins to break into new areas of support and become a full-blown national party. If Liberal and Labour territory was to be extended and the new women voters mobilized, the more equalitarian forms of feminism could not be pursued to the end; besides, their individualism was difficult to reconcile with socialist and trade-union objectives. A broader variant of feminism, not necessarily so labelled, was required to gear the party into the daily lives of the women who were in the overwhelming majority: wives and mothers who did not necessarily seek paid work. Phillips resolved the tension between class and gender as priorities for those who were concerned about deprivation in Britain by attempting when possible to ride both horses; when forced to choose, however, she followed her party's class priorities and repudiated feminist sectarianism. For her it was more important to defend the working-class housewife and mother through practical schemes for public welfare than it was to carry forward the more moralistic and individualist dimensions of feminism. So ultimately Phillips's career had the effect of collaborating in the two-party system's inter-war fracturing of feminism. 
Phillips strongly opposed committing the Labour Party to promoting birth control in the 1920s, if only because the party depended so heavily on a traditionalist and Roman Catholic working-class following. 'Sex should not be dragged into politics', she told Dora Russell; 'you will split the party from top to bottom' (Russell, 172). When feminists divided in 1929 on whether women should receive special protection on hours and conditions within the labour force, Phillips aligned herself against the Open Door Council and with feminists such as Margaret Bondfield or Clara Rackham who contested any analogy with the professional woman's capacity to bargain freely with the employer ('The Times', 1 Feb 1929, 13), and she was particularly concerned to defend the expectant and nursing working mother ('The Times', 4 March 1929). She clashed more than once with Lady Astor, arguing in Astor's constituency at the general election of 1924 that the House of Commons needed not women, but Labour women. She repudiated any notion of a 'women's party', together with Astor's notion of putting feminist commitment above party loyalty. In parliament on 28 November 1930 she accused Astor of criticizing Labour MPs, including herself, when absent, and of absenting herself when they spoke ('Hansard 5C', 28 Nov 1930, col. 1723). 
Phillips was small, dark, and serious-looking, with rimless spectacles, and became matronly in middle age -- 'handsome in a coarse and sumptuous way', as Beatrice Webb somewhat earlier put it ('Diary of Beatrice Webb', 3.302, May 1918). With W. S. Tomkinson she co-edited 'English Women in Life and Letters' (1926), a lavishly illustrated collection of documents illuminating the lives of British women in the past: servants, housewives, fashionable women, criminals, and paid workers. With a Unionist colleague she was elected Labour MP in 1929 for the double-member constituency of Sunderland. In her maiden speech on 9 July 1929 she spoke up for free trade, arguing that Sunderland shipbuilders had gained nothing from so-called 'safeguarding'. Defending annual paid holidays on 15 November 1929, she wryly pointed out that 'the sort of holiday that my constituents in Sunderland get is an involuntary holiday, with either Poor Law relief, unemployment benefit, or nothing at all' ('Hansard 5C', 15 Nov 1929, col. 2478). Her fellow Labour candidate in 1931, D. N. Pritt, described her as 'idolised in Sunderland', and praised her 'great capacity for organisation' (Pritt, 29). None the less the Unionists, profiting from Liberal withdrawal, won both seats at the general election of 1931. 
Although Phillips was the first Australian woman to win a seat in a national parliament, she distanced herself in later life from her Australian background. She died an atheist, from stomach cancer, on 23 January 1932 at the Empire Nursing Home, Vincent Square, London; she was cremated at Golders Green on 27 January. Unmarried, she left her estate ($267) to her friend and political companion Charles Wye Kendall. 


@@@@@


doc= 37853


Phillips, Peregrine (1800-1888), chemical manufacturer and inventor, was born in Philadelphia Street, Bristol, on 30 January 1800, the fourth of six children of Peregrine Phillips senior (1764-1833), a tailor at 24 Philadelphia Street and then at 34 Milk Street, Bristol, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Cox. Phillips senior, the son of a butcher of the same name and Martha Owen of Haverfordwest, was descended from the puritan preacher Peregrine Phillips (1623-1691), and was a deacon at the Broadmead Baptist Church in Bristol. In 1824 Phillips senior started a vinegar-making business with a John Thorne at 48 Thomas Street, Bristol. 
Phillips married Susannah Chapman (1806-1850), daughter of Richard and Elizabeth Chapman, on 18 November 1826 at St Mary's Church in Islington. He probably joined his father's vinegar-making partnership around the same time, as his first child, Elizabeth, was born at Thomas Street, Bristol, in 1827. 
In 1831 Phillips junior took out a patent (no. 6096) for the manufacture of sulphuric acid by the contact process. The manufacture of sulphuric acid had become an increasingly industrialized process over the previous century due to improvements made by Joshua Ward from 1736, and the lead chamber process developed by John Roebuck from 1749. However, their processes relied on the combustion of saltpetre and sulphur, while Phillips's method saved on saltpetre by directly passing sulphur dioxide and oxygen through a platinum catalyst. By then passing the resultant sulphur trioxide through towers of moistened pebbles, the process produced a more concentrated sulphuric acid. 
Phillips did not remain in Bristol to exploit his invention. In the months between starting the patent application process in March and receiving the patent in September, he left his father's vinegar-making partnership in June 1831. The reasons for his departure are unclear, but in the same year he and his family crossed the Atlantic from Bristol on the 'Cosmo', under Captain John Gillespie. They landed at New York, before eventually settling across the Ohio River from Cincinnati, in Campbell county, Kentucky. Phillips senior's business at Thomas Street lasted only another year before the plant and stock were sold by auction in October 1832. 
In 1837 Phillips took out another patent (US no. 160), for the manufacture of white lead, and by 1839 had set up a white lead manufactory on Plum Street, between 2nd and 3rd streets, in Cincinnati, Ohio. His involvement in this venture was apparently short-lived, as the factory was in the hands of Townsend, Hills & Co. by at least as early as 1842. Little is known about Phillips's activities in the 1840s, but a P. Phillips was appointed a judge of lamps, candles, and soaps at the 1842 fair of the Ohio Mechanics' Institute, alongside the pharmaceutical manufacturer William S. Merrell. 
By 1850 Phillips had returned to Campbell county, where he was a farmer. Either he or his son of the same name was a justice of the peace in northern Kentucky in 1869. By 1870 he had retired, living with his son Alfred and some of his grandchildren in the tiny village of Buena Vista in Harrison county, Kentucky. Peregrine and Susannah Phillips had nine children: Elizabeth, Peregrine, and Susannah were born in Bristol; Alfred Chapman and Mary Bullmer were born in Kentucky; and Robert Allen, Richard Sidney, Emaline, and George Cox were born in Ohio. Phillips died in Cynthiana, Harrison county, Kentucky, on 6 March 1888, and was buried at Evergreen cemetery, in Campbell county, Kentucky. 
It was not until the 1870s that the contact process for manufacturing sulphuric acid began to be exploited on an industrial scale, by Rudolf Messel in London and Clemens Alexander Winkler in Freiburg. It eventually proved to be of major significance for a variety of industries, with concentrated sulphuric acid being used in particular to produce artificial fertilizers. 


@@@@@


doc= 37854


Pilcher, Percy Sinclair (1867-1899), aeronautical engineer, was born in Bath on 16 January 1867, the youngest in the family of three sons and two daughters of Thomas Webb Pilcher (1799-1874), formerly curator of the British Museum picture gallery in Rome, and his second wife, Sophia Robinson, a very young and energetic Scottish lady. In 1874 Pilcher's father died, leaving less than $600. Sophia took her four surviving children (one son had died in childhood) to Celle, near Hanover in Germany, where she died in 1877. Thomas David Pilcher, the head of the family at nineteen, brought his sisters and brother back to England and sent them to school. In 1880 Percy entered the Royal Navy as a cadet. In 1887 he resigned at his own request to go to Glasgow to begin an apprenticeship in the engineering department of Randolph, Elder, shipbuilders, of Govan. For a short time in 1890 he attended classes at University College, London, as an unmatriculated student. In the same year he published 'Gliding', which was reprinted as number 5 of the 'Aeronautical Classics' in 1910. He then worked for eighteen months in the Southampton naval works before returning to Glasgow late in 1891 as an assistant lecturer in naval architecture and marine engineering at the university, and it was soon after this that his intensive study of the design of birdlike gliders began. 
In 1895 Pilcher began to build his first full size glider, the 'Bat'; the wings were at a pronounced angle to the horizontal and it was fitted with a rudder but no tailplane. In April 1895 he discussed the construction of the 'Bat' with Otto Lilienthal, the German hang-gliding pioneer, and learned a great deal about the practical problems of controlling hang-gliders in the air. Pilcher's first trials with the 'Bat' in the summer of 1895 showed that Lilienthal had been right to insist that a horizontal tail surface was essential, and after modifications Pilcher succeeded in making a number of short downhill glides, but the angle of the wings was still too great for lateral stability. The goal for which he was striving was clearly shown in his remarkable patent of 1896, which described the world's first practical design for a powered aeroplane developed from gliders which had actually flown. 
In the winter of 1895-6 Pilcher built the 'Hawk', equipped with the world's first sprung-wheeled undercarriage, in which, often with the assistance of a towed take-off, he made many flights including his record glide of some 750 feet on 20 June 1897. By 1899 he had completed and tested a 4 hp engine weighing only 40 lb and had built a triplane in which to mount it. At a demonstration on 30 September 1899, at Stanford Hall, near Market Harborough, he flew 'Hawk', but crashed to the ground. Pilcher was severely injured and never regained consciousness; he died two days later, on 2 October 1899, at Stanford Hall. He was buried at Brompton cemetery in London. He was unmarried. Some historians have speculated whether, had Pilcher lived, he might have achieved proper powered, sustained, and controlled flight before the Wright brothers did so in December 1903. 
Ronald M. Birse', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37855


Plath, Sylvia (1932-1963), poet and writer, was born in the Massachusetts Memorial Hospital on 27 October 1932, the daughter of Otto Emil Plath (died 1940) and Aurelia Frances Schober. Otto had emigrated from Prussia at sixteen and Aurelia was a second-generation Austrian-American. Their second child, Warren, was born in 1935. Sylvia spent her early childhood at 24 Prince Street, Jamaica Plain, Boston, until 1936 when the family moved to 92 Johnson Avenue, Winthrop, where Aurelia's parents lived. Otto Plath was an entomologist, specializing in the study of bees, and a teacher of German at Boston University. He died suddenly when Sylvia was eight, of undiagnosed diabetes, following an emergency leg amputation. After his death she declared, 'I'll never speak to God again'; it haunted her for the rest of her life. In one of her last prose writings, 'Ocean 1212-W', she wrote that her first nine years 'sealed themselves off like a ship in a bottle -- beautiful inaccessible, obsolete, a fine, white flying myth' (Plath, 'Johnny Panic', 124). The family moved inland to 26 Elmwood Road in Wellesley, Massachusetts, and Aurelia's parents helped to look after the children, while Aurelia worked for Boston University College of Practical Arts and Letters. 
Sylvia was an ambitious child, and 'dangerously brainy', as she writes in 'America! America!' (Plath, 'Johnny Panic', 36). She was determined to succeed in everything she attempted, always striving for perfection and hugely dependent on her mother's praise. Her first published poem appeared in the 'Boston Traveller' when she was eight. As a young poet she experimented with various forms, including the villanelle, and was influenced by such diverse writers as D. H. Lawrence, Virginia Woolf, Henry James, Wallace Stevens, and Dylan Thomas. At eighteen she wrote in her journal: 'I can never read all the books I want; I can never be all the people I want and live all the lives I want.' By the time she graduated from Bradford Senior High School in Wellesley, in 1950, she had sent dozens of stories to 'Seventeen' magazine, finally succeeding in getting one published ('And Summer Will Not Come Again') in August that year, just before she entered Smith College with a prize scholarship. She called herself at this time 'The girl who wanted to be God' (Plath, 'Letters Home', 40). 
During Plath's first two years at Smith she led a frenetic life, writing poems and journalistic pieces, editing the 'Smith Review', and excelling academically. In 1952 she wrote ecstatically to her mother, 'The world is splitting open at my feet like a ripe, juicy watermelon'. In the last three years she had earned $1000 through her writing, with her stories published in 'Seventeen' and 'Mademoiselle'. At the same time her journal describes her growing sensation of existing in a stifling 'bell jar' and charts her anxious thoughts: 'What to do? Where to turn? What ties, what roots?' In her third year she was awarded a guest editorship at 'Mademoiselle' and spent what she was later to describe as the 'deadly summer of 1953' in New York ('Journals', 269). It was a confused and troubled period, culminating in her being refused admission to the Harvard writing seminar. She returned home and suffered a serious mental breakdown (for which she was treated with electro-convulsive therapy, ECT), and attempted to commit suicide by taking an overdose of her mother's sleeping pills on 24 August. Later she wrote of this act: 'I... blissfully succumbed to the whirling blackness that I honestly believed was eternal oblivion.' It was a near-miracle that she survived, after lying hidden for three days in a 'crawl space' under the family house. 
Following further ECT, psychotherapy, and insulin-shock treatment at McLean Hospital in Belmont, Massachusetts, with Dr Ruth Beuscher, Plath returned to Smith in February 1954. With her glittering, newly dyed, blonde hair, and bright smile, she was popular on the social circuit. She wrote an honours dissertation on the image of the double in Dostoyevsky, and graduated 'summa cum laude' in June 1955. In her senior year she met Richard Sassoon, nephew of Siegfried Sassoon, a sophisticated Yale student with a European background, who had a great influence upon her. From October 1955 until June 1957 she attended Newnham College, Cambridge, as a Fulbright scholar in English, spending her first winter and spring breaks travelling on the continent. Her short stories from this time, such as 'The Wishing Box', show an early awareness of the constraints of gender roles. She published poems in Cambridge student magazines, and it was at a party to launch one of them, 'St Botolph's Review', that she met Edward James (Ted) Hughes (1930-1998), a recent Cambridge graduate and -- in her own words -- 'a singer, story-teller, lion and world-wanderer' with 'a voice like the thunder of God'. This 'cataclysmic' encounter, during which Plath bit Hughes on the cheek and he seized her scarf and earring as souvenirs, has become part of their legend, as has 'Pursuit', the poem Plath wrote at this time beginning, 'There is a panther stalks me down'. She described it as being about the 'dark forces of lust' ('Journals', 214). She visited him in London in March, on her way to a holiday in Europe. On her return she wrote: 'I took a plane from Rome through the mist-shrouded sky... renounced... my old life and took up Ted.' In her journal she hailed him as her 'savior', the lover and companion she needed 'as I need bread and wine'; years later Hughes described his own response: 'I made my world perform its utmost for you.' His world was the natural world, the world of animals, weather, and landscape reflected in his poetry. Plath's writing, in contrast, came later from her deepest inner self and the mythology, both ecstatic and chilling, that she wove around it. Hughes described her writing her earlier poems 'very slowly, Thesaurus open on her knee, in her large, strange handwriting'. 
They married in London at St George's Church, Bloomsbury, on 16 June 1956, Joyce's Bloomsday, with Aurelia Plath as the sole witness. Plath's journal exultantly records: 'We came together in that church of chimney sweeps with nothing but love and hope and our own selves.' Several of the entries written on their honeymoon, spent in Paris (with Aurelia) and Benidorm, are drafts for articles and short stories, including the enchanting 'Sketchbook of a Spanish Summer'. She wrote in her journal that Spain was 'the source... of creative living and writing'; her poems written about Spain are full of colour, energy, and light ('Journals', 249). In October, after a visit to Hughes's parents in Yorkshire, they returned to Cambridge, Plath to begin her second year at Newnham and Hughes to teach at a boys' school, renting a flat near Grantchester Meadows for $4 a week. Plath wrote to her mother of their 'lovely hours together': 'We read, discuss poems we discover, talk, analyze'. A friend recalled them as 'almost incandescent with happiness'. Nevertheless, some of Plath's poems hint at darker forces in the marriage; her Newnham tutor later commented on 'the passionate 'rage' which has since come to be recognised as the dominating emotion of her poetry' (Wagner, 84). It was at this time, both strongly drawn to the study of astrology and the supernatural, that they began to consult a Ouija board together, an experience described in 'Ouija': '
It is a chilly god, a god of shades 

Rises from the glass to his black fathoms. 

' Her 'Dialogue Over a Ouija Board' was purportedly a transcription of a spirit text from an imp called Pan. Pan successfully predicted the draws on a football coupon, although he also pronounced on more serious issues and passed on communications from a Prince Otto who was beholden to the Colossus, a figure who reappeared in her later poems. They continued to work hard, Plath diligently typing out her own and her husband's work and sending it off in batches to magazines and publishers. In February 1957 Hughes won the New York Poetry Center competition with his collection 'The Hawk in the Rain'. 
In March 1957 Plath was appointed to a teaching post at Smith. Late in May she heard that her selection of poems entitled 'Two Lovers and a Beachcomber' had been shortlisted for a prize awarded by the 'Yale Series of Younger Poets', to be judged by W. H. Auden. Plath's poetic aims had changed and developed over the first year of marriage. She wanted to temper the more formal, abstract elements of her work and aim for a 'more conversational quality' in her poetry. She considered one of her best poems of this period to be 'All the Dead Dears'. 
Plath completed her BA degree in June, and she and Ted crossed the Atlantic later that month, spending the summer 'writing and fishing' on Cape Cod. In the autumn they moved to Northampton, Massachusetts; Plath began lecturing at Smith, on texts ranging from 'Oedipus Rex' to 'The Waste Land', an experience that depressed and exhausted her. 'All fake, all false', she wrote in her journal. 'Why so weary, so slack all winter?... No explanations, only obfuscations'. That summer, however, two of her poems, 'Mussel Hunter at Rock Harbor' and 'Nocturne', were to her great delight at last accepted by the 'New Yorker', the magazine she admired above all others. 
But in January 1958 Plath was struggling to write. The events on which she reflects form the basis of her novel 'The Bell Jar': 'I wonder if, shut in a room, I could write for a year. I panic: no experience! Yet what couldn't I dredge up from my mind? Hospitals & mad women. Shock treatment & insulin trances. Tonsils & teeth out. Petting, parking, a mismanaged loss of virginity and the accident ward, various abortive loves in New York, Paris, Nice. I make up forgotten details. Faces and violence, Bites and wry words. ('Journals', 316)' But Ted's appointment that month as instructor of English and creative writing at the University of Massachusetts meant that they could save money, and by June they were resolved to devote themselves to their writing. Encouraged by new friends, the poet W. S. Merwin and his wife, Dido, they moved to an apartment in Beacon Hill, Boston, in September, and formulated a programme of study and writing. Plath, however, suffered again from writer's block (a subject addressed fluently in her 'Poems, Potatoes'), and took a job as a part-time secretary at the adult psychiatric clinic of Massachusetts General Hospital, an experience which helped to shape her posthumously published story, 'Johnny Panic and the Bible of Dreams'. In this sinister tale a secretary in a psychiatric hospital keeps her own private record of patients' dreams which she also invents. She is caught by the hospital authorities and given shock treatment to wipe her memory. Her memory is saved, however, by the imaginary Johnny Panic, her 'god of fear'. 
Severely depressed, and without telling her husband or her mother, Plath herself resumed psychoanalytic treatment with Ruth Beuscher in December. Her journal for this period contains some darkly bitter reflections on her father's death and the mixture of guilt, resentment, and hostility she feels towards her mother and all the other 'mother figures' who disapprove of the path she has taken with the husband who helps her to fight her 'soul-battles' and 'grow up with courage'. The 'Sylvia' of the journals is in marked contrast to the 'Sivvy' of the 'Letters Home' to her mother whom, encouraged by her therapist, she now regarded as a 'walking vampire': 'Whatever elements there were in [my writing] of getting her approval I must no longer use it for that. I must not expect her love for it' ('Journals', 449). Some of her poems echo her distress: in 'Full Fathom Five' she weaves her dead father into Ariel's song: '
Your shelled bed I remember. 

Father, this thick air is murderous. 

I would breathe water. 

' At this time the image of her father became interwoven with that of her husband, the fear of his abandonment of her inextricably linked to her father: she dreamed that she was running after Ted in a hospital, 'knowing he was with another woman, going into mad wards and looking for him everywhere' ('Journals', 447). 
Plath's therapy continued into the following year, when she took another part-time job, working for the chairman of the department of Sanskrit and Indian studies at Harvard. In February 1959 Plath attended Robert Lowell's writing seminar at Boston University. (Lowell later described her as a 'distinguished, delicate, complicated person'.) Crucially, both Lowell and Anne Sexton, whom she met through the seminar, encouraged her to use autobiographical elements in her writing, and she began to write poems inspired by her past at Cambridge ('Watercolour of Grantchester Meadows'), Winthrop (the philosophical 'Suicide off Egg Rock'), and Benidorm ('The Net Menders'). Sexton's poem 'My Friend, My Friend' almost certainly influenced Plath's 'Daddy', and after class, over martinis at the Ritz, she and Plath discussed their attempts at suicide. 
Plath later told a British Council interviewer that she was excited by the 'breakthrough' that came with Lowell's 'Life Studies' 'into very serious, very personal emotional experience, which I feel has been partly taboo' (Alvarez, 22). Sexton's influence enabled her to bring to the fore a specifically female perspective. 'Point Shirley' showed the immediate effect that Lowell had upon her writing: using the locale of her grandmother's home town, it set the hostility of nature and the isolation of the individual into a personal frame. In 'Electra on Azalea Path', which recalled Plath's visit to her father's grave in Winthrop, a daughter speaks to her dead father: '
I am the ghost of an infamous suicide 

My own blue razor rusting in my throat. 

O pardon the one who knocks for pardon at 

Your gate, father -- your hound-bitch, daughter, friend. 

It was my love that did us both to death. 

' Lowell, who had also spent time at McLean Hospital, helped Plath to understand what depression had taught her. 
Despite the inspiration she drew from this, Plath actually wrote little poetry for five months and concentrated on short stories such as 'The Fifteen Dollar Eagle', 'The Daughters of Blossom Street', 'The Fifty-Ninth Bear', and 'Sweetie Pie and the Gutter Men', which were all later published in 'Johnny Panic and the Bible of Dreams' (1977). Plath took her short-story writing very seriously, but viewed it more in terms of financial reward, taking care to tailor her stories to particular magazines. For her a poem was 'concentrated, a closed fist', while fiction was 'relaxed and expansive, an open hand'. She said she would never dream of putting a toothbrush in a poem, and yet the short stories contain elements of later poems (Plath, 'Johnny Panic', 57). 
Notwithstanding fears of an 'imaginative paralysis', she had managed to produce a substantial amount of writing during her time in Boston, including 'The Bed Book', a charming story for children about a jet-propelled bed, and 'The It-Doesn't-Matter Suit', also for children (both were published posthumously). By the end of May she was able to write: 'I have conquered my Panic Bird. I am a calm, happy and serene writer'. 
In summer 1959 Plath -- in the early stages of pregnancy -- and Hughes drove across Canada and the United States to visit Plath's aunt Frieda and her husband in California; some of her short stories of this year were inspired by this trip. From September to November they were guests at Yaddo, an artists' colony in Saratoga Springs, New York. Here Plath completed the poems that made up her first published book, 'The Colossus'. This was a time of creative rebirth for her. Consolidating what she had learned from Lowell and Sexton, she produced the extraordinary 'Poem for a Birthday', a present to herself in October 1959. For Hughes 'The Stones', which formed part of this sequence, and which described the reconstruction of a shattered self, spoke 'with a new voice'. Plath herself felt that Yaddo had released in her a need 'to be true to my own weirdnesses' ('Journals', 520-21), and 'Poem for a Birthday' is the first extended attempt to incorporate highly personal material into her work. From this time on she wrote with a renewed intensity and with a new realism, although she worried about writing from her own psyche ('confessional' writing was not at this time a respected poetic mode). If 'Poem for a Birthday' is to some degree a response to her pregnancy, 'The Manor Garden' further explores the idea of autumnal decay and sterility bringing forth new life. Written in mid-October, 'The Colossus' itself contains a more scathing attack on the father, while 'Mushrooms' sees Plath looking outwards to contemplate malevolent nature. This period was, as her mother commented, 'an oasis in a year of change' (Plath, 'Letters Home', 353). 
In December Plath and Hughes moved back to England, spending Christmas in Yorkshire before settling in London, in a rented flat at 3 Chalcot Square, Primrose Hill. Frieda Rebecca Hughes was born there on 1 April 1960. While still in Boston Plath had written: 'I want a house of our children, little animals, flowers, vegetables, fruits'. This flat was small and cramped, but they made it as comfortable and cheerful as they could, and settled down to London life, work, and parenthood. They took turns to write and mind Frieda, and later borrowed a room from W. S. Merwin where Sylvia worked in the mornings, Ted in the afternoon. 
Plath wrote comparatively few poems in 1960, and the reason for that lies in 'Stillborn', a 'sad diagnosis' of a recurrence of writer's block. The abiding theme in her work of this year is pregnancy, sterility, and creativity. Some of Hughes's stories, and a verse play, however, were recorded for radio (as was a contribution by Plath to 'The Poet's Voice' series), and his second volume of poems, 'Lupercal', was published in March that year. Plath signed a contract for the publication of 'The Colossus', to appear in the autumn. In February 1961 she suffered a miscarriage (the subject of 'Parliament Hill Fields'), and in the following month had an appendectomy; her stay in hospital produced the acclaimed poems 'Tulips' and 'In Plaster'. That summer her poem 'Insomniac', completed in May, was awarded first prize at the annual Cheltenham festival and she started writing what became 'The Bell Jar', which she dismissed in October 1962 as a 'potboiler and just practice'. By June she was once again pregnant, and in August the family moved out of London, to Court Green, a former manor house and rectory in North Tawton, Devon, with 2 acres of land. During their first months there Hughes reviewed books, continued to write for the BBC, and had stories and poems published in British and American magazines; Plath sold poems to the 'New Yorker' and the 'New Statesman'. On 17 January 1962 their second child, Nicholas Farrar Hughes (died 2009), was born at Court Green after a Christmas described by Plath to her mother as 'the happiest and fullest I had ever known'. 
In March 1962 Plath wrote a verse play for radio, 'Three Women', on the subject of childbirth. It was at this time, as Hughes later wrote, that 'the ghost of her father' returned to haunt her and the chilling, deeply disturbing voice of her 'Ariel' poems began to assert itself. She realized her desire as recorded in her Boston journal to write poetry of 'real situations behind which the great gods, play the drama of blood, lust and death'. Aurelia Plath visited Devon in summer 1962, just as Plath and Hughes had begun to keep bees -- an activity which drew Plath still closer to the memory of her father. Other poems written during this period, including 'Crossing the Water' and 'Berck-Plage', are full of images of the sea and drowning. About this time Plath had a car accident, caused by her blacking out. She had run off the road onto a disused airfield but was not seriously hurt. The marriage was by now under great strain; Hughes had begun an affair with Assia Wevill (who with her husband David had taken over their London flat) and he and Plath agreed to separate, finally parting during a holiday in Ireland in September. In 'Event', written in May 1962, lovers 'touch like cripples'. The violence and masochism in 'The Rabbit Catcher' is also a testimony to this difficult time. Hughes found it so close to the bone that he eliminated it (and 'The Jailer') from the published 'Ariel'. 'Words Heard, By Accident, Over the Phone' transcribes the searing pain of betrayal, while 'Burning the Letters' re-enacts one of the remedies for that pain. 'The Colossus' was published in New York in July 1962, but made very little impact. Plath herself told an interviewer that she was herself bored by the poems in it, although it contains some of the best of her writing, including 'The Disquieting Muses', 'Lorelei', and 'Full Fathom Five'. 
Throughout the autumn Plath stayed with her children in Devon, working in 'the blue, almost eternal hour before the baby's cry' in a fever of creativity to write the poems she felt to be the best she had ever produced, announcing to her mother that 'they will make my name'. She no longer wrote with Roget's 'Thesaurus' on her lap, but fluently produced a remarkable series of bee poems. Almost everything in her life -- from the trivial to the life-changing -- was transmuted into art. On 12 October came the cold, sinister 'Daddy', which she herself described as 'an awful little allegory', which the speaker of the poem felt compelled to act out. The allegory was of a daughter who renounces her Nazi father with his 'love of the rack and the screw'. This was swiftly followed by 'Lesbos', 'Lady Lazarus', and 'Getting There'. She was also finishing 'The Bell Jar', about which she continued to speak to friends with some embarrassment, feeling that it was something she needed to write to break free from the past. She took up horse-riding, and wrote to her mother that living apart from Hughes was 'wonderful -- I am no longer in his shadow' (Plath, 'Letters Home', 479). 
In December Plath moved back to London, taking a five-year lease on another flat in Primrose Hill in a house that had once been inhabited by Yeats. Although often tired, anxious, and depressed, she continued to write at great speed, sometimes producing three poems a day. Her friend and fellow poet Al Alvarez, who likened this 'amazingly creative period' to Keats's 'marvellous year' of 1818, commented of these last, almost hallucinatory outpourings, that they made 'poetry and death inseparable'. Alvarez, who saw her in the months before her death, thought that she had physically altered by this time; her hair, which had reverted to its natural warm brown many years ago, was let loose from its bun and hung down; her face was pale. 
The 'Atlantic Monthly' accepted 'The Arrival of the Bee Box' and 'Wintering' for publication, and she also wrote a memoir of her childhood, 'Ocean 1212-W' for the BBC 'Writers on Themselves' series. This is an unusual philosophical account of the birth of the self and the artist, and a final confrontation with the father and mother of her childhood. 'The Bell Jar', the 'queer and slangy' (as she described it) autobiographical novel looking back to her mental breakdown ten years earlier, was finally published in England -- having failed to find an American publisher -- under the pseudonym Victoria Lucas, on 23 January 1963. Its critical reception was distinctly indifferent. The new year had brought extremely bitter weather and both Plath and her children fell ill with flu; Plath was also taking antidepressants prescribed by her London doctor, and was apparently responding well to treatment. The flat she lived in was barely furnished, and her poems of January 1963 are also spare, and in many cases stripped down to couplets, as in the bleak 'Sheep in Fog' into which the harsh winter of 1962-3 seems to have seeped, in the mute horror of 'Contusion', and the ominously resigned 'Edge', written on 5 February. But there are many bright spots in the poems of this month which counter accounts of Plath's final work as 'death-driven' -- the 'clear eye' of the eponymous 'Child' which the speaker wants to fill with colour; and the blooming sun, like a geranium ('Mystic'). In 'Balloons', written the same day as 'Edge', 'oval soul-animals' left over from Christmas delight '
the heart like wishes or free 

Peacock blessing 

Old ground with a feather beaten in starry metals. 

' The speaker of 'Mystic' triumphantly announces that 'The heart has not stopped'. In 'Kindness', written on 1 February, '
the blood jet is poetry, 

There is no stopping it. 

You hand me two children, two roses. 

' If her own prepared collection for 'Ariel', which began with 'Morning Song' and ended with 'Wintering', had been published in the way she had intended, the first word of the collection would have been 'love' and the last, 'spring' (Perloff). But despite poetic intimations of another rebirth, on the morning of Monday 11 February, following an anguished weekend spent with friends, Sylvia Plath committed suicide by gassing herself in the kitchen of the flat, having protected her sleeping children by sealing up their bedroom door, and leaving biscuits and milk by their beds. She was buried near Hughes's family home at Heptonstall in Yorkshire. 
Plath's 'afterlife' has in some ways been as tempestuous as her actual life. Hughes edited her last poems into the 'Ariel' volume, published in 1965, which precipitated her rise to fame. It omitted some of the poems Plath had earmarked for inclusion, and rearranged the order of those remaining. It was preceded by significant discussion in the press about her suicide, and by serial publication of many poems. Ted Hughes wrote notes on the content and background of 'Ariel', printed in the 'Poetry Society Bulletin' in February that year. Hughes's editing of Plath's poetry and short stories has had an undoubted impact on how her work has been received. In 1971 Hughes published two further collections of poetry -- 'Crossing the Water' and 'Winter Trees' -- which included poems written in between the 'Colossus' and 'Ariel' poems, as well as those which had been removed from his collections of 'Ariel'. In the same year 'The Bell Jar' appeared under her own name with a preface by Lois Ames which revealed for the first time details about her personal life -- it sold in huge numbers and is now regarded as a classic of modern fiction. In 1976 Aurelia Plath published her daughter's heavily edited, dutiful, and determinedly cheerful 'Letters Home' (partly to counteract the impression of their relationship given in 'The Bell Jar'). The Pulitzer prize-winning 'Collected Poems', edited by Hughes, appeared in 1981, firmly establishing Plath as one of the greatest and most original poets of the twentieth century. The Plath myth-making machine swung into action almost as soon as 'Ariel' was published. 'Time' and 'Life' magazines reviewed the volume as 'strange and terrible' in a style as 'brutal as a truncheon', written during her 'last sick slide towards suicide'. Such criticism helped to perpetuate the idea that her death was the most famous thing about her, and encouraged further critics to read the poems as solely charting her increasing mental agitation. But even a cursory reading of the poems reveals the many voices of her work -- the amused, hopeful, triumphant, as well as the enraged and vitriolic -- and Plath herself, when talking about her work, was amusing and charming, her voice controlled, guttural, and powerful. In 1971 in 'The Savage God', his study of suicide, her friend Al Alvarez proposed a counter-myth, that of the 'priestess emptied out by the rites of her cult' -- a gifted poet whose death came by mistake and too soon (Alvarez, 29). Critics interpreted these myths in different ways: on the one hand she is freed from her courtship with death, her early work examined for the moment when the true poet is 'born'; on the other she emerges like 'Lady Lazarus' with a voice full of hot venom, a woman abandoned by her husband who wrote her best work while on the edge of destruction. Both myths have been rigorously deconstructed by Jacqueline Rose in 'The Haunting of Sylvia Plath' (1991). In a further twist, Plath was taken to task for self-aggrandizement in Anne Stevenson's controversial biography 'Bitter Fame' (1989), which was officially sanctioned by the Plath estate (managed by Ted's sister Olwyn Hughes). 
With Anne Sexton and Adrienne Rich, Plath pioneered a movement in women's writing, and a way of finding alternatives for the limitations placed on women by the idealization of the housewife's role in 1950s America. A writer and a mother, Plath provided a model for a new generation of poets of the consciousness-raising movement, and she remains enormously popular especially with young female readers. Her lasting triumph will be the power and precision of her poetic voice, and her vision of new possibilities for women writers. 
By 1982, when Ted Hughes published a curtailed edition of her journals, Plath had become a feminist icon. He was frequently blamed for her death by a small section of the American radical feminist community, and her grave was defaced in the late 1980s -- the name 'Hughes' scratched out. During the years of attack Hughes, who continued to live in their house at Court Green, wrote and spoke little of his life with her -- keeping, as he put it, 'a wall of astral fire' around himself and his children -- until 'Birthday Letters', an extraordinarily moving and intimate volume of poems addressed to Plath and describing their life together during what he once described as 'those headlong years', was published in January 1998. He died of cancer nine months later. A new and complete edition of Plath's surviving 'Journals' appeared in 2000: one journal was missing, and Hughes had destroyed the last one because he did not want their children to read it: 'In those days', he said, 'I regarded forgetfulness as an essential part of survival'. But this publication added a significant amount of material to the edition of 1982, and revealed the extremes of her deeply complex nature if not the 'real' Sylvia Plath. The ever-growing list of biographies and critical works is a testimony to her mythic appeal and her astonishing poetic gifts. 


@@@@@


doc= 37856


John Platt (1817-1872) was born on 15 September 1817, learned the ironmoulder's trade, and was admitted to the partnership in 1837. On 9 March 1842 he married Alice Radcliffe (1823-1902), daughter of Samuel Radcliffe (1780-1838) of Lower House, who had been Oldham's leading cotton manufacturer. John Platt became the senior partner in the firm after the successive deaths of his father in 1842, of his elder brother Joseph (1815-1845), and of Elijah Hibbert in 1846. He became a member of the Manchester Royal Exchange in 1842 and so secured admission to the world's largest assembly of users of cotton machinery. His mechanical ability became apparent in his first patent, taken out in 1846. He proved to be a man of great business faculty, of broad and far-reaching perception, and of astute judgement, especially of character. He became the prime mover in the operations of the firm at the most propitious of times, when statutory restrictions on the export of machinery were abolished in 1843. His achievement was to establish the supremacy of the firm in the newly opened markets of Europe. During the late 1840s Hibbert and Platt surpassed Dobson and Barlow of Bolton in size to become the largest textile machinery firm in Lancashire as well as the largest employer of labour in Oldham. During the 1850s it became the largest machinery maker in the world. The firm supplied the domestic market as well as the export trade, especially the mills of Oldham, whose spindleage expanded sixfold in thirty years (1842-72) to establish its pre-eminence as the largest mill town in the world. Oldham lay on the Pennine frontier of Lancashire and had few intrinsic advantages for the development of manufacturing industry. John Platt supplied ample compensation for its shortcomings and provided its mills with an external economy of unrivalled efficiency. If any one man may be credited with founding the industrial power and commercial prosperity of Oldham then it should be John Platt, under whose dynamic aegis the town established its world primacy in the two staple trades of cotton spinning and engineering. The number of hands employed by the firm increased twelvefold in thirty years, from 500 in 1843 to approximately 7000 in 1872. By 1871 its payroll supported over 40 per cent of the borough's population of 82,619, assuming an average household size of five persons. 
John Platt secured the invaluable support of his younger brother James Platt (1824-1857), who possessed supreme engineering and marketing ability and who in 1857 became the first engineer to be elected to the House of Commons. They expanded capacity at the Greenacres works to meet the growing demand and then in 1845 they opened the Hartford new works at Oldham's new railhead, where they adopted the use of machine tools as well as the railway. John Platt moved his own residence to nearby Werneth Park in 1848. The increased use of machine tools aroused opposition among the operative engineers. John Platt organized the Central Association of Employers of Operative Engineers and defeated the Amalgamated Society of Engineers in a four-month lock-out in 1852. Thereafter he developed the use of self-acting tools to the fullest extent, so economizing on the use of skilled labour. He favoured the restriction of union functions to the payment of benefits and the extension of the franchise, coupled with the secret ballot, in order to free operatives from the influence of 'turbulent and unscrupulous' union leaders ('Hansard 3', 1871, col. 613). 
The brothers bought out the Hibbert interest in the firm in 1854 and renamed it Platt Bros. & Co., the style by which it was henceforth known. They recruited men of outstanding technical and managerial ability, promoted them to the rank of manager and, from 1854, admitted them as partners. Their new policy generated an unrivalled 'esprit de corps' and prevented the firm from becoming a recruiting ground for rivals. The brothers had in effect subordinated the interests of the Platt family to the higher interests of the firm. Together they transformed the firm from an assembler of parts into a fully integrated engineering enterprise. The firm established control over its supply of raw materials by adding a foundry in 1854 and a forge in 1857 and by undertaking the manufacture of rollers, spindles, flyers, and tin-plate as well as, from 1859, brick-making machinery. During the boom of the 1850s in power-loom weaving it added, in 1857, looms to its range of machines. Thereby it became the only firm able to offer clients a full line of machinery, excluding only flax-processing and finishing machinery. In order to maintain its reputation in foreign markets the firm manufactured machinery of the highest quality, undertook the continuous improvement of its staple lines, used iron instead of wood in construction, maintained close ties with the steam engine makers of Bolton, and supplied an after-sales service through the dispatch abroad of skilled machine erectors. Above all, it employed enterprising foreign agents, especially Adolphus Sington (1810-1887) and Ludwig Knoop (1821-1894), known as 'the Arkwright of Russia'. It captured the Russian market after 1843, the Indian market after 1854, and the Japanese market after 1867. After a sensational success at the Great Exhibition in 1851 it used international exhibitions as an important technique of marketing, winning an unparalleled series of thirty-three exhibition honours between 1851 and 1924. 
John Platt responded effectively to the challenge created by the cotton famine, becoming a member of the Central Executive Committee in 1862. He helped to found the Manchester Cotton Company Ltd (1860-64) in order to develop the supply of cotton from India. His works embarked on the manufacture of cotton gins adapted to the short Indian staple and adapted the industry's preparatory machinery to the use of short stapled Surat. He encouraged the mills of Oldham to replace American by Indian cotton and so to steal a march on other mill towns. He endowed the town with the most advanced system of technical education in the region outside of Manchester. He established a works library in 1848, a new science and art school in 1865, and a works school in 1866, making attendance compulsory as a condition of employment. In 1859 he became a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers and in 1866 contributed to its proceedings its first paper on cotton spinning machinery. In 1861 he became a fellow of the Society of Arts and a guarantor of the International Exhibition of 1862, aiming to encourage the use of Indian cotton. He served as president of the Oldham Lyceum from 1865 to 1868 and helped in 1868 to endow a chair of engineering in Owens College. The incorporation of the company in 1868, with a capital of $912,306, enabled him to make his managers into fellow directors and gave the engineering industry its first limited company. Under his management the firm made average annual profits of 13.7 per cent between 1842 and 1872. 
John Platt became as active in the political sphere as in the economic. He became chairman of the Oldham Liberal Party in 1847 and so embarked on twenty-five years of public service. He was the prime mover in securing the incorporation of Oldham as a borough in 1849. He became the first of the Platts to serve on the borough council (1849-62) and the first Liberal mayor, holding that high office for three terms (1854-5, 1855-6, 1861-2) and ushering in forty years of Liberal control of the council. He established municipal control over the supply of gas and water and was mainly responsible for the construction between 1856 and 1863 of rail links to Oldham, serving from 1862 to 1867 as a director of the London and North Western Railway Company. A convinced radical in politics, he served as MP for Oldham from 1865 until his death. In 1871 he was publicly commended for twenty-five years of civic service in an address signed by 8000 working men, assembled in the Co-operative Hall. He had become a member of the Anti-Corn Law League in 1843 and he remained a lifelong advocate of free trade, helping Richard Cobden to negotiate the Anglo-French commercial treaty of 1860. 
In religion John Platt abandoned the Congregational faith of his fathers and became an Anglican, perhaps on the occasion of his marriage in 1842. He remained, however, an Anglican of the radical variety, favouring disestablishment and even disendowment. In 1857 he acquired a country estate at Bryn-y-Neuadd, Llanfairfechan, which he transformed from a hamlet into a summer resort and endowed with a railway station in 1861 as well as a church in 1864, adding the much larger neighbouring estate of Gorddinog in 1869. He became a JP and deputy lieutenant of Caernarvonshire and in 1863 high sheriff as well as JP and deputy lieutenant of Lancashire. On 18 May 1872 he died suddenly from typhoid in Paris at the age of fifty-four. The funeral was attended by 20,000 people and by 21 clergy. In 1878 a bronze memorial was inaugurated outside the town hall, giving Oldham its second public statue. His estate was valued at under $800,000, where his father in 1842 had left under $10,000, Elijah Hibbert under $30,000, and his brother James $137,589. In thirty years of marriage his wife had given birth to six daughters and seven sons. 



@@@@@


doc= 37857


Playfair, James (1755-1794), architect, was born in Benvie, near Dundee, on 5 August 1755, the third son in the family of five sons and three daughters of the Revd James Playfair (1712-1772), minister of Liff and Benvie, and his second wife, Margaret Young (1719/20-1805). His eldest brother was the distinguished mathematician and geologist John Playfair (1748-1819); a younger brother was William Playfair (1759-1823), the pamphleteer, inventor, and mathematician. After their father's death in 1772 John assumed responsibility for the upbringing of the family and, it appears, for launching James on his career. Where or with whom James Playfair received his training is not known, but by 1783 he was established in London; and in that year he announced himself by publishing a pamphlet on 'A Method of Constructing Vapour Baths', and began to exhibit at the Royal Academy. 
Playfair's practice, however, was to be mainly in Scotland, and it developed rapidly from that time. In 1785 he won the competition for a public building in his native county of Forfarshire, the town and county hall in Forfar. At about the same time he secured the patronage of Henry Dundas, first Viscount Melville, the most powerful man in Scotland, for whom he designed Melville Castle, Edinburghshire (1786-91); while his small number of English patrons included the collector Sir George Beaumont. By 1789 he was employing five assistants in London, and his brother Robert, a solicitor in Edinburgh, was attending to his Scottish business; and in spite of his Presbyterian background Playfair was working on Sundays to keep up with the pressure of work. In the course of this success he also travelled abroad on at least two occasions: in 1787 he visited Paris, where William Playfair was then the agent of the Scioto Land Company of Ohio -- and for whom he later made abortive designs for an ideal 'American city' -- and in 1792-3 he was in Italy, where his itinerary included the Greek temples of Paestum. This promising start to a career was, however, to be abruptly terminated, for after eleven years in practice Playfair died at the age of thirty-nine. 
A significant proportion of Playfair's executed work must therefore be regarded as not fully mature, but in spite of this he is a figure of considerable interest as a pioneering exponent of the spare detail and basic geometrical forms of advanced neo-classicism. These qualities were already present to a degree in certain early works, such as the Forfar town hall (1786-8) and Kirriemuir church, Forfarshire (1786-90), while at Melville the somewhat perfunctory detail in the castellated style is accompanied by other features reminiscent of the work of Sir John Soane. But his style developed rapidly after his Parisian visit of 1787, when he doubtless encountered at first hand the revolutionary architecture of E.-L. Boullee and C. N. Ledoux. The results of this experience can be seen, for example, in the Graham mausoleum in Methven, Perthshire (1793), and a number of unexecuted projects of his later years, but most particularly in his finest and best-known work, Cairness House, Aberdeenshire (1791-7). Here the clear-cut geometry of the main block is completed by the extraordinary service range which clearly shows the direct influence of French neo-classicism; it is semicircular in plan with a similarly shaped entrance arch and primitivist Doric details. The whole, with further features such as the 'Egyptian' billiard-room, forms one of the most remarkable neo-classical houses in Britain. 
Playfair married Jessie Graham, and their children included the well-known Scottish architect William Henry Playfair (1790-1857). Playfair died in Edinburgh on 23 February 1794, according to Joseph Farington, of 'a broken heart in consequence of the death of his eldest boy' (Farington, 'Diary', 1.180). His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 37858


Plummer, John (c.1410-1484), composer, was one of the leading musicians of the generation following Lionel Power and John Dunstaple. He was also, from 1444 to 1455, the first holder of the newly created post of master (or warden) of the children of the Chapel Royal, the household chapel of the English kings. Nothing is known of his parentage or birth, though his career suggests that he was probably born about 1410. 
He first appears in the records as a junior clerk or singing man in Henry VI's Chapel Royal, in 1441. The document authorizes an unusually large payment, and it has been plausibly conjectured that it was intended to reimburse him for expenses connected with the 'impressing' of choirboys for the chapel, which had been ordered in 1440. In 1444 he was officially entrusted with the care, maintenance, and teaching of the eight chapel children: the creation of Plummer's post probably reflects the growing use of treble voices in part-music as well as in plainchant. 
On giving up the mastership in 1455 Plummer became verger of the royal free chapel of St George at Windsor Castle, with important administrative as well as processional duties; he retained this post until his presumed death in 1484, when he was paid for the last time, and for only part of the year. Though the surviving attendance registers attest his regular presence in Windsor, he continued as a clerk of the Chapel Royal under Edward IV, no doubt on an occasional basis, becoming senior clerk by 1465 and figuring in the last surviving account for 1467. In Windsor he was active as a man of property and left money, with his wife, Agatha, to endow a chantry. He may have been married before: a Johanna (Joan) Plummer was a member of the Confraternity of St Nicholas or London guild of parish clerks at the same time as himself, and died in 1457. 
Six surviving compositions may be ascribed with certainty to Plummer, namely two movements of a four-voice tenor mass with the antiphon 'Nesciens mater' as its tenor, and three three-voice settings of Marian antiphons which do not use the chant and must have been sung as votive memorial pieces; his masterpiece, 'Anna mater matris Christi', sets a respond, again without the chant, in a remarkable texture of three equal tenors with an optional treble part riding above -- certainly a fitting example of the art of the master of the chapel children. Plummer's music, like that of Dunstaple and Power, was valued abroad and appears in continental manuscripts. He was one of the first composers to experiment with pervasive imitation and invertible counterpoint, a generation before Josquin des Prez. Two further mass cycles and a votive antiphon, anonymously transmitted, are also believed to be his. 
Brian Trowell', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37859


Pollen, Arthur Joseph Hungerford (1866-1937), expert on gunnery and businessman, was born on 13 September 1866 in Southwater, Sussex, the eighth child and sixth son in the family of eight sons and two daughters of John Hungerford Pollen (1820-1902), artist and author, a Tractarian who had followed J. H. Newman into the Roman Catholic church, and his wife, Maria Margaret (1838-1919), daughter of the Revd Charles John LaPrimaudaye. He was educated at the Oratory School, Birmingham (1878-84), and read history at Trinity College, Oxford (1884-8), gaining a second-class degree in modern history in 1888. He entered Lincoln's Inn in 1893. In 1895 Pollen stood unsuccessfully as a Liberal for Walthamstow. On 7 September 1898 he married Maud Beatrice, daughter of Joseph Lawrence, a prominent Conservative MP and chairman of the Linotype Company. They had a daughter, who died at the age of four in 1905, and two sons, including Arthur, father of Francis Pollen, church architect. Pollen became managing director of the Linotype Company in 1898, and proved himself to be both a shrewd businessman and an intelligent technical innovator. 
Pollen became interested in the problem of naval rangefinding after witnessing gunnery practice at sea in 1900. Several years of development work were undertaken at the Linotype works, in conjunction with Linotype's designer Harold Isherwood. Following unsuccessful but nevertheless promising trials in late 1905 and early 1906, he won the support of John Jellicoe, Percy Scott, and Sir John Fisher, which resulted in the establishment of an agreement to perfect his ideas. The purpose was to enable long-range naval guns to score hits when attack ship and target were moving fast and relative to each other. Pollen, accustomed to the business methods of civilian life found his efforts obstructed, however, by an influential faction of naval officers that included Reginald H. S. Bacon, Arthur Knyvet Wilson, and Frederic C. Dreyer. Thus, although Pollen's instruments were capable of greatly improving the gunnery of the Royal Navy, they were for the most part rejected because of political controversy, technical confusion, faulty tactical analysis, and financial considerations, and a much inferior and derivative system that had been put forward by Dreyer was adopted instead. 
Pollen founded the Argo Company in 1909 to hold his patents, and in 1911 he took a holding in T. Cooke & Sons of York, which manufactured his equipment. Pollen's instruments in their final forms were in themselves significant scientific and technical achievements. For example, the incorporation of a differential analyser in his gunnery computer (known as the Argo clock) anticipated by nearly twenty years the work in this important area of both D. R. Hartree and Vannevar Bush. In 1910 he devised a rangefinder which could be used even at dusk. This was sold to the Russians, the Royal Navy having refused even to examine it. Before the First World War his privately circulated papers on technology, tactics, and strategy were read in influential naval and political circles. Battle experience largely validated Pollen's technical and tactical views, and key members of his pre-war design team were thus charged with the development of the Royal Navy's post-war fire-control systems. In 1925, moreover, the Royal Commission on Awards to Inventors ordered that $30,000 be paid to Pollen for his contributions to the Dreyer system, which before the war had incorporated -- albeit imperfectly -- elements of the Argo clock without his knowledge or permission. 
During the war Pollen was Britain's leading naval journalist, writing for 'Land and Water' and lecturing widely. In addition to his many contributions to newspapers and journals, Pollen wrote a popular general account of the war at sea, 'The Navy in Battle' (1918). In 1917 he achieved great success in America as an unofficial representative of British interests. After the war Pollen returned to business, serving on the board of the Birmingham Small Arms Company and again as managing director of the Linotype Company. Pollen was also vice-president of the council of the Federation of British Industries, chairman of the British Commonwealth Union, and in the last years of his life took an active role in the development of English Catholicism as chairman of 'The Tablet'. 
Pollen was a handsome man whose exceptional intellect and engaging manners attracted the friendship of many prominent figures in the navy, business, academia, the arts, and sport. His favourite pastimes were shooting and golf. Pollen died on 28 January 1937 at his home at 238 St James Court, Buckingham Gate, in London. 
J. T. Sumida', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37860


Potter, Vincent (c.1614-1661?), parliamentarian army officer and regicide, was born, apparently in Warwickshire, of unknown parents. Potter was an original member of the Massachusetts Bay Company, and in mid-May 1635 he sailed out of London on the 'Elizabeth and Ann', bound for New England. In midsummer this vessel arrived at Boston, Massachusetts, where Potter settled and was employed as a soldier at the nearby Castle Island Fort for $10 per year. He probably fought in the Pequot War, and though his wife is unknown he had a brother-in-law named Thomas Fowle residing in Boston before the civil war. In June 1639 Potter prepared to return to England, placing his apprentices with other settlers. 
Potter set sail for England from Massachusetts Bay in the 'Fellowship' on 10 October 1639. A fellow passenger later recalled his quibbling over a shipboard sermon (Lindholdt, xix). From a devotional text reportedly carried by him throughout the civil wars, Potter was apparently a strict puritan. The ship landed in Devon on 24 November after a passage marred by cold weather: 'our deck in a morning ore-spread with hoaries frost, and dangling Isickles hung upon the Ropes' (Lindholdt, 25). Potter continued to trade with New England until the outbreak of civil war when he joined the parliamentarian army. Robert Greville, second Baron Brooke, commissioned Potter a captain of horse on 30 January 1643 at Warwick. After Brooke's death at Lichfield, Potter continued to serve under the parliamentarian Warwickshire county committee in Colonel William Purefoy's regiment of horse. The assessments of the villages of Snitterfield and Hatton were among those assigned to maintain his troop, which on one occasion ventured into Oxfordshire to support Sir William Waller's army at Abingdon. On 5 December 1644 Potter was among the 200 horse that burned the house of Lionel Cranfield, earl of Middlesex, at Milcote, Warwickshire, allegedly to prevent the royalists from garrisoning it. 
Potter gave up his troop on 25 July 1645 and succeeded his brother Captain John Potter as parliamentary commissioner to the army on 14 July. These commissioners were accountable to the committee for the army chaired by Robert Scawen MP. They were intermediaries between parliament and the New Model Army and, if required, were empowered to stop soldiers' pay. Potter was extremely diligent in his duties and joined his new colleague, Thomas Herbert, at Basingstoke on 10 October 1645. He purchased horses for Sir Thomas Fairfax and arranged supplies for Oliver Cromwell's leaguer before Basing House. Potter was a strict disciplinarian and repeatedly condemned the practice of free quarter, pointing out that if it continued, the New Model Army would fall 'Parallel to the Enimy, who in nothing more then free Quarter has forfeited the affeccons of the Countrys' (TNA: PRO, SP 28/129/10). On 5 November he wrote to Edward Massey requiring him to discipline his plundering troops who had looted some 'poore men but well affected to our Armies' (TNA: PRO, SP 28/129/10). Potter's efficient administration of supplies and his realization that the people would favour the side that most refrained from plunder and free quarter helped ensure the speedy success of the New Model Army's western campaign. 
Potter subsequently became the foremost administrator in settling army pay arrears, formulating 'Potter's lists' of former soldiers. He continued as army commissioner during the second civil war, and after the battle of St Fagans on 8 May 1648 he was appointed a county commissioner for Pembrokeshire. Potter attended the high court of justice that tried Charles I on seventeen occasions and signed the king's death warrant ['see also 'Regicides]. On 6 March 1649 he also signed the death warrants of the royalist peers Arthur Capel, first Baron Capel of Hadham, James Hamilton, first duke of Hamilton, Henry Rich, first earl of Holland, and George Goring, first earl of Norwich. Having been promoted to a colonelcy by June 1649, he co-ordinated the receipt of provisions for Cromwell's Irish campaign. On 17 August he was appointed with Herbert to state the accounts of officers of the Train during service in Ireland, under the same conditions as they had in England. 
In June 1650, after his return to England, Potter arranged Cromwell's travel northwards to organize the forthcoming campaign against the Scots. He was dispatched on 27 August to join Cromwell in Scotland, empowered to superintend the issuing and receipt of provisions to each of the regimental accounts. On 5 March 1651, on Cromwell's personal recommendation, Colonel Potter was appointed commissioner for improving lands in Scotland brought under the power of the English forces there; and on 29 April 1652 Potter and Herbert were commissioned to Irish affairs once more. 
In 1660 a Robert Howcott claimed his reward for assisting in the arrests of Potter and his fellow regicide John Downes. Potter was tried as a regicide on 16 October 1660. At his trial Potter declared, 'I will deny nothing; I confess the fact, but did not contrive it' ('State trials', 5.1214-15). Owing to intense pain from kidney stones Potter complained he could not speak: 'I am not in a condition to declare what I know, and would speak; I am mighty full of pain... I beseech you let me go to ease myself' ('State trials', 5.1214-15) but the court refused him permission to urinate. Found guilty, he was sentenced to death and imprisoned in the Tower of London. He escaped the horror of being hanged, drawn, and quartered as he died there, probably in 1661, before his sentence could be carried out. 


@@@@@


doc= 37861


Powell, Lawrence Fitzroy (1881-1975), literary scholar and librarian, was born at 235 Cowley Road, Oxford, on 9 August 1881. He was the youngest of the seven children of Harry Powell (1830-1886), a trumpeter, who was wounded in the charge of the light brigade of 1854 and who published his 'Recollections' in 1876, and his wife, Anne Budd, of Oxford. Powell was named after two of Harry Powell's regimental officers. He was educated at a board school in London. 
Powell began work in the library of Brasenose College, Oxford, in 1893, and in 1895 became a boy helper at the Bodleian Library, under E. W. B. Nicholson. In 1901 he joined the team of William Craigie on the 'New English Dictionary'. On 31 July 1909 he married Ethelwyn Rebecca (1873/4-1941), writer, daughter of James Slatter Steane, wine merchant, of Oxford. They had one son. In 1914 Powell was declared unfit for active service, but joined the Admiralty in 1916. After the war he returned to the 'New English Dictionary'. In 1921, supported by Joseph Wright and Charles Firth, he was appointed librarian of the Taylor Institution, Oxford, from which he retired in 1949. Thereafter he supervised many graduate research students, and was recognized by honorary fellowships at St Catherine's and Pembroke colleges in 1966, and an Oxford DLitt in 1969. It was one of his few boasts that he had never taken an academic examination in his life. 
Powell's lexicographical work under Craigie laid the foundations of his scholarship, enforcing an interest in Samuel Johnson. In 1923 R. W. Chapman invited him to revise the edition by G. Birkbeck Hill of James Boswell. The four volumes were published in 1934, and acknowledged with the award of a DLitt by Durham University in 1935. Thereafter, as for Johnson, the title was inseparable from his name. The emergence of more Boswellian material from Malahide Castle and Fettercairn House led to a full edition of Boswell's 'Tour to the Hebrides'. A motoring tour of Scotland with James Marshall Osborn in 1935 was followed by annual excursions with Esmond de Beer to Raasay, where Powell prepared articles and papers in tranquil surroundings and pursued the intricacies of highland genealogy. This edition was published in 1950 as volume 5 of his 'Boswell', together with a separate index volume to the whole. 
Powell's scholarship ranged over work on the sections M-N, Q-R, Si-St, and U-V, for the 'Oxford English Dictionary'; an edition of the translation by Nicholas Love of Bonaventure's 'Meditationes vitae Christi' of 'c'.1410; studies of the 'Adventurer' of John Hawkesworth; the bibliography of Samuel Johnson, Thomas Percy, Thomas Pennant, and Robert Southwell; contributions to the 'Cambridge Bibliography of English Literature', vol. 2 (1940), and the Yale edition of Johnson (1963); and a collaboration with John Munro on the London Shakespeare (1958). His published works are listed in 'Johnson, Boswell and their Circle' (1965), a Festschrift celebrating his eighty-fourth birthday. Equally important contributions are recorded in the acknowledgements of Johnsonian and Boswellian scholars, who benefited from his advice. 
The career of L. F. (as he was generally known) displayed native tenacity. An orphan boy with few material advantages, he was largely self-taught, undeterred by difficulties, ever alert for information, and he kept his memory in full activity. A formidable indexer, he rightly considered his memory superior to card indexes, and drew together disparate source material, references, and recondite information, with effortless skill. For his pupils he resembled Johnson without the danger: cheerfulness was always evident. He was eminently clubbable, loved a 'bon mot' or anecdote, and despised gossip. He defied the doctors of 1914 with energetic pedestrianism, and in his eighties would sometimes trick unwary visitors by suggesting a stroll. He was a shrewd and learned editor, a patient mentor, and a courteous friend; his 'Boswell' is a lasting memorial. 
In 1969 Powell became seriously ill and in February 1970 was moved to the Tracy Nursing Home in Banbury, from where he continued to collect material for a further edition of 'The Life of Johnson'. He died there, aged ninety-three, on 17 July 1975. 
J. D. Fleeman', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37862


Preston, Thomas (1860-1900), physicist, was born on 23 May 1860 in Ballyhagan, Kilmore, co. Armagh, Ireland, the youngest of three sons, the eldest of whom died young, of Abraham Dawson Preston, a gentleman farmer of Mulladry, Kilmore, and his wife, Anne, daughter of John Hall, quartermaster, and widow of John Ritchie, from which marriage she had a daughter. He was educated at the Royal School, Armagh, and graduated from the Royal University of Ireland in 1884 and from Trinity College, Dublin, in 1885. In Dublin he studied under G. F. Fitzgerald, the mathematical natural philosopher. 
In 1886 Preston published 'A Treatise in Spherical Trigonometry' with his cousin W. J. McClelland, which ran to several editions. In 1890 he published the first of his two major textbooks, 'Theory of Light', followed by 'Theory of Heat' in 1894. These, with many subsequent editions, became standard textbooks for undergraduates until the Second World War. In 1891 he became professor of natural philosophy at University College, Dublin, a position he held until his death, and he was later appointed a fellow of the Royal University of Ireland. In addition to this he held a government post as inspector of science and arts for Irish schools from 1894. In 1895 he married Katherine Mary ['see 'Preston, Katherine Mary], daughter of Thomas McEwen, dominie of Baldernock School. They had one daughter and two sons, one of whom died in infancy; the other, George Dawson Preston, became a notable physicist. His widow became a pioneer of education for women in Ireland as principal of Alexandra College, Dublin. 
Preston's fame rests on his discovery of the anomalous Zeeman effect, which he first reported in a paper presented to the Royal Dublin Society in December 1897. His discovery led to contacts with leading physicists who were investigating the recently discovered Zeeman effect (the way in which atomic spectra are influenced by magnetism), including Joseph John Thomson, William Thomson, Heinrich Hertz, and Albert Michelson. Michelson, using expensive apparatus in Chicago, attempted to disprove the empirical rule discovered by Preston, but Preston publicly disproved him. The Zeeman effect was anomalous whenever it departed from the form predicted by classical theory. Preston's rule helped the Zeeman effect become an important tool in spectrum analysis, and opened up the possibility of quantum physics. 
Preston also engaged George Johnstone Stoney, vice-president of the Royal Society and the man responsible for coining the term 'electron', in a public dispute in the 'Philosophical Magazine' over a mathematical conclusion, in which the president, J. W. Strutt, intervened on Preston's behalf. Elected FRS in 1898 Preston was also made an honorary DSc by the Royal University of Ireland and awarded the Boyle medal of the Royal Dublin Society. He died at his home, Bardowie, Orwell Park, Rathgar, Dublin, on 7 March 1900. 
Anne Pimlott Baker', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37863


Price, Dennis (1915-1973), actor, was born on 23 June 1915 in Ruscombe, Berkshire, the younger son and second of the three children of Brigadier-General Thomas Rose Caradoc Price (1875-1949), an army officer descended from a Cornish baronet's family, the Prices of Trengwainton, and his wife, Dorothy Patience, daughter of Sir Henry Verey, official referee of the Supreme Court of Judicature. He was educated at Radley College, Oxfordshire, and read theology at Worcester College, Oxford, where he joined the Oxford University Dramatic Society. On leaving Oxford without a degree he studied for the stage at the Embassy Theatre School, and made his London debut at the Queen's Theatre on 6 September 1937 with John Gielgud in Shakespeare's 'Richard II'. 
In 1939 Price married the actress Joan Schofield, daughter of Major-General Arthur Cecil Temperley of Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire. They had two daughters. The marriage was soon undermined by Price's homosexuality and alcoholism. 
After being invalided out of the Royal Artillery in 1942, Price joined the company of Noel Coward, who was so impressed by his charm that in 1943 he gave him the leading role of Charles Condamine in his play 'Blithe Spirit', at the Duchess Theatre in London. In 1944 he won his first starring role on screen in 'A Canterbury Tale', directed by Michael Powell. Tall, handsome, and urbane, he swiftly became one of Britain's leading international film stars. He played the title role in 'The Bad Lord Byron' (1948), was chosen by Ivor Novello for the lead in the Technicolor film of Novello's musical 'The Dancing Years' (1949), and reached the peak of his career with 'Kind Hearts and Coronets' (1949), in which he was supremely sardonic as the heartless murderer of eight ducal cousins, all played by Alec Guinness. 
Joan Schofield divorced Price in 1950, and the British film recession brought a sharp decline in his popularity. On 19 April 1954 he was found unconscious in his gas-filled flat in Egerton Gardens, Kensington, but the dramatic publicity generated by his attempted suicide led to a revival in his fortunes. He starred on the South African stage in 'Separate Tables' (1957), made an acclaimed Broadway debut as Hector Hushabye in 'Heartbreak House' (1959), and had further notable film roles in 'Private's Progress' (1955), 'The Naked Truth' (1957), 'I'm All Right, Jack' (1959), 'Tunes of Glory' (1960), and 'Tamahine' (1963). 
In 1965 Price's nonchalant interpretation of the butler Jeeves in the BBC television series 'The World of Wooster' delighted its creator, P. G. Wodehouse, who felt that Price had 'that essential touch of Jeeves mystery'. 
Troubles with the Inland Revenue caused Price's strategic withdrawal in 1966 from his London home in Curzon Street, Mayfair, to settle on the channel island of Sark. He was declared bankrupt in 1967. He died from cirrhosis of the liver at the Princess Elizabeth Hospital, St Martin's, Guernsey, on 6 October 1973. 
Michael Thornton', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37864


Prince, Henry James (1811-1899), founder of the Agapemonites, was the youngest son of Thomas Prince (1745-1816), a West Indian plantation owner, formerly of Liverpool, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Stevens (1775-1847). Henry was born on 13 January 1811 at 5 Widcombe Crescent, Bath, Somerset, and was brought up by his widowed mother and her elderly Roman Catholic lodger, Martha Freeman, the daughter of a business associate of Henry's father. He was educated at a school in Corsham. In September 1827 he was articled to John Nicholls, an apothecary in Wells, moving to London in 1831 to study at Guy's Hospital and the Webb Street medical school. Having qualified on 16 February 1832, he was appointed in May as medical officer to the General Hospital in Bath, but after an abdominal operation in London in April 1835 he resigned. A year earlier he had experienced an evangelical conversion, and he was now encouraged to consider ordination when, as a convalescent, he visited his half-brother John Prince of Shincliffe Hall, co. Durham. With this object he entered St David's College, Lampeter, in March 1836. Further ill health caused him to miss a term in September 1837. Devout and earnest by temperament, he gathered about him a small group of Welsh students, known as the Lampeter Brethren, who fasted, prayed, and studied with him. On 10 July 1838 he married his mother's lodger, Martha Freeman (died 1842), who was considerably older than him. In 1839 he completed the course at Lampeter and was ordained. 
In June 1840 Prince became curate of Charlinch, near Bridgwater, Somerset, where his initially absent rector, Samuel Starky, soon joined in the popular enthusiasm for his ministry, which Prince later described in 'The Charlinch Revival' (1842). Shocked by his unconventional methods, the bishop of Bath and Wells revoked Prince's licence to preach on 4 May 1842. There was further adverse comment when, only months after his wife's death in April 1842, Prince married Starky's sister Julia on 16 September. Meanwhile he engaged in open-air preaching near Charlinch before taking up a temporary curacy at Stoke by Clare, Suffolk, but in November the parochial discord sown by Prince led the bishop of Ely also to prohibit him from preaching. 
Adopting typically messianic language Prince proclaimed the imminent 'Day of the Lord'. He referred to himself as Elijah, and to Starky and himself as the 'two witnesses' of 'Revelation' 11, also privately claiming that he was the incarnation of the Holy Ghost. In 1843 he preached in Adullam Chapel in Brighton, but when in 1844 some former colleagues denounced him as heterodox, Prince joined Starky in Weymouth, gathering there an entourage of devoted followers. Meanwhile, near Bridgwater, some of his admirers, known as Princites, were engaged in energetic revivalism, but in early 1846 their leader decided that the days of evangelism were over and the elect should wait in isolation for the imminent return of Christ. In December 1846 the community moved to more spacious accommodation in a purpose-built settlement in Spaxton, barely a mile from Charlinch. The purchase of this Agapemone, or 'abode of love', was made possible when his followers sold their lands, allowing Prince (known in the community as Beloved) to dispose of the proceeds. Particularly controversial was the way in which he had persuaded three wealthy sisters to marry three of his clerical followers. 
In 1856 Prince announced that he was the chosen means of reconciling God's spirit with the sinful flesh of humanity. In a ceremony called the Great Manifestation, Prince was 'spiritually married' to a young member of the community, Anne Willet (or Zoe) Paterson. He sought to justify his action in one of his characteristically tortuous books, 'The Little Book Open' (1856), but several of his scandalized followers abandoned him when Paterson gave birth to a daughter, Eve, whose father was almost certainly Prince. 
The wealthier members of the community lived in some comfort, but rumours of general profligacy, as opposed to Prince's special privileges, were unfounded. In 1860 Prince was publicly discredited in the case of 'Nottidge v. Prince', heard in chancery, when the relatives of a deceased member of the community successfully contested her will, revealing how Prince had secured control of his followers' assets. The movement survived quietly in Prince's later years, gaining more publicity when its members held a campaign at Clapton, London, in the 1890s. The preacher, approved by Prince, was a lapsed Anglican curate, John Hugh Smyth-Pigott. When Prince died at the Agapemone in Spaxton on 8 January 1899 and was buried in its grounds, Smyth-Pigott was soon recognized as his successor. 


@@@@@


doc= 37865


Prior, Arthur Norman (1914-1969), philosopher, was born on 4 December 1914 in Masterton, New Zealand, the only child of Norman Henry Prior, physician, and his wife, Elizabeth Munton Rothesay Teague, who died two weeks after giving birth. He grew up with two brothers and a sister from his father's second marriage. Educated at Wairarapa high school in Masterton, he took a BA in philosophy and psychology (1935) and an MA in philosophy (1936) at Otago University, Dunedin. The grandson of two Methodist missionaries in Australia, he became a Presbyterian at university and was active in the Student Christian Movement (SCM) as a Christian socialist. In 1937 he married an SCM colleague, Claire Hunter, and sailed to Europe. For three years the couple lived a bohemian existence, supported principally by religious journalism. In 1940 Prior returned to New Zealand and worked as a railwayman, dock labourer, and hotel bellman before joining the Royal New Zealand Air Force in 1942. In 1943 his first marriage was dissolved and he married Mary Laura Wilkinson, daughter of Frank Howitt Wilkinson (died 2012), a Presbyterian minister of Timaru, New Zealand. She was then a zoology undergraduate at Otago and was later to become a historian and author of an acclaimed study of 'Women in English Society, 1500-1800' (1986). One son and one daughter were born to this happy marriage. 
On demobilization Prior resumed the academic career he had begun at Otago as assistant lecturer under John Findlay in 1937. From 1946 to 1958 he taught philosophy at the University of Canterbury at Christchurch, as lecturer, senior lecturer, and (from 1952) professor. Initially isolated as a philosopher, he frequented the literary group around Charles Brasch which ran the journal 'Landfall'. His earliest philosophical publications concerned religion and ethics; his first book, 'Logic and the Basis of Ethics' (1949), combined historical erudition with contemporary relevance in a manner typical of him throughout his life. 
The logic of that title was very informal, but soon Prior began to take an interest in logic which, if at first traditional, was much more formal. In 1951 he completed a 220,000 word textbook entitled 'The craft of formal logic'; it was never published in his lifetime, but a shorter and almost totally rewritten version was published in 1955 as 'Formal Logic'. By now Prior had shifted his attention from traditional logic to the mathematical logic in which henceforth he worked; this change was largely due to the Polish logician Jan Lukasiewicz, in homage to whom he used, throughout his life, the unfashionable Polish logical notation. 
In 1954, taking cues from the modal logic of the Stoics and from some remarks on time by Findlay, Prior conceived the idea that the logical relationships between sentences in past, present, and future tenses could be set out as a self-standing branch of logic. In the same year he hosted a visit to New Zealand by Gilbert Ryle, and impressed him with the clarity and independence of his thought. He received, and accepted, an invitation to visit Oxford to give the John Locke lectures. 
In these lectures, delivered in the first six months of 1956, Prior presented his new ideas on the relationship between modal logic and the grammar of tense. Their publication in 1957 as 'Time and Modality' launched the tense-logic that he was to pursue until 1968 and that was to be developed by many other logicians before and after his death. Tense-logic is significant for metaphysics as showing the coherence of the thesis that tense belongs to the real and not just to the mental world; but it also has importance for linguistics and computer science. 
In Oxford in 1956 Prior met many British logicians, helped to organize logic colloquia, and lectured in many universities. He quickly made his name in the British philosophical community, and he accepted an invitation to hold a newly created chair of philosophy in Manchester. At the end of 1958 he and his family left New Zealand for good. While at Christchurch he had been ordained as a church elder. On arrival in England in 1959 he severed his links with Presbyterianism, though he retained an expert knowledge of Scottish Calvinism until his death. 
Prior held the Manchester chair for six years. During this time he published many insightful, and often provocative, papers on metaphysics. His researches into tense-logic led him to reflect on the nature of time and on traditional problems about foreknowledge and determinism, the persistence of substances through time, and the criteria for identity and the reidentification of individuals. The papers he published on these topics were original contributions to ongoing philosophical debates; but in all of them he was able to draw on an extraordinary reservoir of knowledge of medieval logic as well as post-Reformation theology. Most of his papers on these topics were collected in the volume 'Papers on Time and Tense', published in 1968 just before his death. 
In 1962 Prior spent a quarter at Chicago as a visiting professor. In 1963 he was elected as a fellow of the British Academy, and in 1965-6 he held the Flint professorship of philosophy at the University of California at Los Angeles. There he was surrounded, for the first time, by enthusiasts for tense-logic. With the aid of colleagues and pupils he worked out a new and mathematically much more sophisticated presentation of his system, published in 1967 as 'Past, Present and Future', a book which surveyed the whole field which had developed from the initial enrichment of classical logical calculi with symbols for forming past and future tenses. It presented different formal systems corresponding to different traditional positions about time, fate, and chance. 
On his return to Manchester in January 1966 Prior received an invitation from Balliol College, Oxford, to take up a tutorial fellowship recently vacated by R. M. Hare. Though the transition involved an increased teaching load and a loss of salary and status, Prior accepted the invitation and quickly became one of the most valued members of Balliol's governing body. His college fellowship went with a university lecturership, which was upgraded to a readership in 1969. 
Throughout his life, whether at Christchurch, Manchester, or Oxford, Prior was an inspiring and selfless teacher. He and his wife kept open house for his pupils at all hours. They never set up defences to keep private life separate from academic. They were generous hosts, happy to allow friends to use their Shropshire cottage or to join them in cruises on the canals which they loved. Prior had a special gift for making friends with children, entering into their games and sharing their fantasies. Throughout life he himself preserved the virtues of childhood in the open frankness of his friendship and the wide-eyed enthusiasm of his curiosity. He was quite free of pretence or pomp, and could never be persuaded to take trouble over the appearance of his clothes or his hair. 
When following a new line in research, Prior could write at enormous speed and in the most adverse circumstances; 'Formal Logic' was largely completed in nine weeks, and the first version of tense-logic was worked out during horrible months while he was nursing his two children through tuberculosis and his wife was hospitalized with the same disease. 
In 1969 Prior's first Balliol sabbatical fell due: he arranged to spend it at the University of Oslo. But during the previous year he had suffered from both rheumatism and angina pectoris, and though he obtained initial relief from cortisone in Norway he suffered a lethal heart attack on 7 October 1969. He was cremated in Trondheim, where he had died, and a memorial ceremony was held in Balliol. Between 1971 and 1976 three volumes of his writings were published posthumously ('Objects of Thought', 'The Doctrine of Propositions and Terms', and 'Papers in Logic and Ethics', all edited by Peter Geach and Anthony Kenny). An unfinished work was completed by K. Fine and published as 'Worlds, Times and Selves' in 1979. Prior's papers were deposited in the Bodleian Library in Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 37866


Pritchard, Thomas Farnolls (bap. 1723, d. 1777), architect, was baptized on 11 May 1723 at St Julian's Church, Shrewsbury, the eldest in the family of four sons and one daughter of John Pritchard (1696/7-1747), a joiner of Shrewsbury, and his wife, Hannah Farnolls. His own background was also as a joiner, but from the late 1740s onwards he developed a quite extensive professional practice in both Shropshire and the neighbouring counties. A speciality of his was the supply of chimney-pieces and other elements of interior decoration, and of funerary monuments. A drawing book of his designs of this type, later acquired by the library of the American Institute of Architects in Washington, indicates that he employed a number of carvers on a regular basis -- the two principal names are Alexander van der Hagen and John Nelson of Shrewsbury -- to execute them. Overall, his churches and houses are no more than pleasant provincial work -- examples are the rebuilding of St Julian's Church in Shrewsbury (1749-50) and Hatton Grange, Shropshire (1764-8) -- but his decorative and funerary designs reveal him as a highly competent exponent of both the rococo style and the Gothic manner of Batty Langley. Examples of his interior decoration are at Croft Castle, Herefordshire (1765), Gaines in Whitbourne, Herefordshire ('c'.1765), and Shipton Hall, Shropshire. Among his monuments, in the Gothic and rococo modes respectively, are those to Sir Whitmore Acton in Acton Round church, Shropshire (1763), and to Mary Morhall (died 1765) in St Mary's, Shrewsbury. 
Pritchard's chief claim to fame, however, lies in his role in connection with a structure of a quite different type which he did not live to see executed -- the famous iron bridge across the River Severn in Coalbrookdale, Shropshire. His involvement with bridge building started in 1767, when he was appointed surveyor to direct the widening of the English bridge in Shrewsbury to a design by Robert Mylne; when that project was abandoned, he submitted a design for the new bridge which was rejected in favour of that by John Gwynn. Then in 1773-4 he made two designs for a bridge to cross the Severn in Stourport, Worcestershire, the first to be of timber with stone abutments and the second a single arch of brick but resting on a cast-iron centre. Neither of these was adopted -- the executed bridge was a conventional masonry structure of three arches -- but in his design for the Coalbrookdale Bridge, made in 1775, he adapted some of the principles of the timber proposal to a structure wholly of cast iron. It was a modified version of this design which was executed by the Coalbrookdale ironworks in 1777-9, the first iron bridge in the world. 
On 1 January 1751 Pritchard married Eleanor Russell (died 1768) at St Julian's Church; three of their children died young. Their surviving daughter, Anne (died 1813), married the surveyor John White, whose son John White junior published an illustrated account of Pritchard's bridge designs in a pamphlet entitled 'On Cementitious Architecture as Applicable to the Construction of Bridges' (1832). In his later years Pritchard lived in a house called Eyton Turret in Eyton-on-Severn, Shropshire, which he had formed from one of a pair of Jacobean garden buildings in the former grounds of a demolished mansion. He died on 23 December 1777 and was buried at St Julian's, Shrewsbury. The full extent of Pritchard's work only became apparent with the discovery of his drawing book, reproduced in Julia Ionides' study of Pritchard's life and work (1999). 


@@@@@


doc= 37867


Proast, Jonas (c.1642-1710), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, was the son of Jonas Proost (1572-1668), pastor successively of the Dutch Calvinist congregations in Colchester and London. Oxford weaned Proast from puritanism: he matriculated at Queen's College in 1659, graduated BA in 1663, and MA, from Gloucester Hall, in 1666. He incorporated MA of Cambridge in 1670. Thereafter he remained in Oxford as chaplain of Queen's and, from 1677, of All Souls. 
In 1688 occurred the signal event of his career, his expulsion from All Souls. The warden, Leopold Finch, was one of James II's tory collaborators. In April 1688 he stood for election to the Camden chair of history, but was beaten by his high-church rival Henry Dodwell, for whom Proast was a canvasser. Enraged at his chaplain's disloyalty, Finch peremptorily sacked him. Proast turned to Archbishop William Sancroft, the college's visitor. Sancroft would willingly have challenged the crown on Proast's behalf, but the revolution of 1688 intervened. Proast meanwhile stoutly defended the church against popery in two unpublished tracts, 'A brief defence of the society of St Mary Magdalen College' and 'The case of reading the declaration for liberty of conscience'. Proast dithered over accepting the oaths of allegiance to William and Mary. More importantly, he hated the 'Toleration Act' and he attacked John Locke's 'Letter Concerning Toleration'. It became imperative for the new latitudinarian archbishops to avoid countenancing the view that the revolution was a victory for the type of intolerant Anglicanism of Sancroft and Proast. Archbishop John Tillotson was, complained the Jacobite antiquary Thomas Hearne, 'very dilatory in doing [Proast] justice' ('Remarks', 1.97). Proast was restored in 1692, but he did not secure arrears of stipend, and the case dragged on until 1698, in the reign of Archbishop Thomas Tenison. Proast's friends found preferment for him: in 1692 as ecclesiastical law officer for Berkshire, and in 1698 as archdeacon of Berkshire, which he remained until his death. 
Proast's only published works were three tracts against Locke: 'The Argument of the 'Letter Concerning Toleration' Briefly Considered' (1690), 'A Third Letter Concerning Toleration' (1691), and (confusingly) 'A Second Letter to the Author of the Three Letters Concerning Toleration' (1704). Locke's second (1690), enormous third (1692), and unfinished fourth (1704) letters are replies. In them Locke buttressed Tillotson's position and assaulted the Oxonian high-church citadel. The debate concerned the efficacy of coercion on behalf of 'true religion'. Proast argued astutely, drawing upon St Augustine's arguments against the Donatists. He conceded that the mind cannot directly be forced to assent to a proposition, but held that penal laws can break the weight of intellectual prepossession. Thus coercion is indirectly efficacious in altering people's disposition to search for truth, and consequently the godly magistrate should use force. Locke's friends commended him for demolishing Proast's ecclesiastical regime as effectively as he had the absolutist civil polity of Sir Robert Filmer. 
Proast died in St Mary Magdalen parish, Oxford, unmarried, on 18 April 1710, and he was buried in St Mary Magdalen Church the next day. Hearne thought him 'a truly honest, wise man, and a good scholar, but reserved in his conversation' ('Remarks', 2.374). Tenison judged him 'full of an evil spirit' -- understandably, since Proast had told him that 'justice forsook Lambeth when Archbishop Sancroft removed from thence' (Goldie, 153). 
Mark Goldie', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37868


Prophete, John (c.1350-1416), dean of York and administrator, was Welsh by birth, from the diocese of St David's, and probably from Carmarthenshire, but he had family ties across the border, especially with the Prophetes, Plowfields, and Hores around Hereford and the Felds of Ombersley, Worcestershire, all in the lower strata of county society. His nephew, Thomas Feld DCL, lived and worked with his uncle and aspired shamelessly to his cast-off offices and preferments. Their wills catalogue the family. 
Prophete was a chief trustee to the heretic and rebel Sir John Oldcastle (died 1417) and also his kinsman, probably through Katherine ferch Richard ab Ieuan, Oldcastle's first wife. He also did business with another heretic, Sir John Cheyne of Beckford (died 1414), but no suspicion ever fell upon himself. Probably educated at Oxford, he had become a notary public by July 1376, and in that capacity he followed William Courtenay, bishop of Hereford (1369-75), to London (1375-81), where he recorded the controversial 'confession' of the rebel John Ball in 1381, and to Canterbury, where he served as registrar of the provincial court from 19 February 1382 to 18 November 1384, and thereafter as secretary, trusted adjutant, and friend until Courtenay died in 1396. When the archbishop, by rank rather than enthusiasm, headed the reform commission imposed on Richard II in 1386, Prophete was seconded to the king's household as a watchdog. After Richard's critics moved against the king and his friends in 1387-8, Prophete was assigned to service the proceedings of the council through which Richard II was now obliged to work. Although formally designated as a clerk of the privy seal (1389) and the holder of the office of secondary there (1394), his status and duties had only nominal connections with that place of drudgery. By 1392 he was formally 'clerk of the council' and had, by shrewd organization of its records, contributed greatly to its claims to political authority. Richard II recognized this by his brusque dismissal of Prophete in 1395. 
Prophete spent his exile in and around his deanery of Hereford until, after the revolution of 1399, he was recalled at once to become one of the most active attenders on the royal council, doubtless to contribute bureaucratic flair to a government badly needing to prove its administrative competence. In 1402 he even acted briefly as secretary to Henry IV. On 4 October 1406, when Henry's government was at its nadir, he finally became keeper of the privy seal. There he remained through nearly nine years of sharp ministerial changes, an unprecedented term, perhaps indicative of a unique standing in the civil service, but also of lack of personal political influence. 
To his nephew's bitterness and despair, Prophete never gained the bishopric that customarily ended the keeper's term. By Prophete's own analysis this was because he would not stoop to intriguing for one on his own account. Possibly his several masters thought him indispensable or, less graciously, simply a workhorse. But he held such a plurality of rich benefices already (reckoned at $750-$900 p.a.) that, with his $100 salary on top, only certain bishoprics were worth considering: by chance, next to none of these fell vacant in his time, and those that did were too politically important to fall to him. 
Between 1378 and 1407 Prophete enjoyed thirty-five benefices (although never more than twelve at once). In his heartlands of Hereford (where he was dean) and Wales, he was Trollopian in touch, and a generous kinsman. A letter-book (BL, MS Harley 431) may not be his compilation, but is the memorial to his intrigues. Yet, after becoming dean of York in 1406 he did one more reshuffle of his holdings, then never changed them again. Did such brokerage seem ill-becoming to one in great office? On 3 June 1415 (as Henry V was leaving for France) he resigned, just when his licence for absenteeism from his deanship of York ran out. None the less, it was in London that he made his will on 8 April 1416, characteristically dedicated to his kin, staff, and domestic servants. To them he gave detailed care, now as always: most had been with him for many years. At some point affection had crept in on both sides. Similarly, Prophete still had a shrewd and not unaffectionate eye on his several scattered preferments. He had always been willing to spend on them. With Archbishop Courtenay long dead there was no one from a greater world to consider. He died before the end of April 1416 and was buried in Ringwood, Hampshire, in accordance with his directions to be buried there should he die within the province of Canterbury. 
R. G. Davies', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37869


Punnett, Reginald Crundall (1875-1967), geneticist, was born in Tonbridge on 20 June 1875, the son of George Punnett, builder and architect, and his wife, Emily Crundall. (A strawberry growing ancestor devised the wooden basket known as a 'punnet'.) He went to Clifton College, where he was taught by W. A. Shenstone, the first schoolteacher to be elected FRS. He won a scholarship to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where, after years of athletic inactivity on medical advice, he became an accomplished cricketer. He obtained a second class in part one (1896) and a first in part two (1898) of the natural sciences tripos. 
In 1898 Punnett worked for some months in Naples on the evolution of small sharks before becoming a demonstrator in the natural history department of St Andrews University. In 1901 he was elected to a fellowship at Caius. Among his colleagues there was Ronald Fisher, who was to succeed him in the chair of genetics. A common interest in cricket brought Punnett in touch with William Bateson, with whom he began to collaborate on inheritance in 1903, first in mice and later in peas, fowls, and rabbits. Bateson had already published a defence of Gregor Mendel's principles of heredity; in 1905 Punnett published his influential 'Mendelism', in both small and large versions. The book was a popular success; its sales at one time were said to compete with those of Marie Corelli. It contained 'Punnett's diagram', a geometric representation of the consequences of fertilization. In 1908, following discussions at the cricket nets after a lecture on Mendelism to the Royal Society of Medicine, Punnett consulted with G. H. Hardy, his fellow cricketer and co-secretary of the committee for the retention of Greek in the previous examination. The result was Hardy's law, a cornerstone of mathematical genetics. 
Bateson and Punnett worked together for nearly seven years; they were the founders of experimental genetics in Britain, and the main exponents of Mendel's models of inheritance. Both started as marine biologists, and in Cambridge both worked on animals and plants. Each had a robust approach to mathematical exuberance, a deep respect for farmers and seedsmen, and an interest in the broader implications of Mendelism. Their joint experimental work ended when Bateson was appointed director of the newly founded John Innes Horticultural Institute in south London in 1910. In 1911 Bateson and Punnett founded the 'Journal of Genetics', which they edited jointly until Bateson's death in 1926. In 1912 Punnett was appointed to the Balfour professorship of biology at Cambridge -- effectively the first chair of genetics to be established anywhere -- after Bateson had declined it. In the same year Punnett was elected FRS. 
During the First World War, Punnett served in the food production department of the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries, where he developed sex-linked plumage variants as a means of sexing chicks; this led to many of the commercial self-sexing breeds. In 1923 he published 'Heredity in Poultry', and produced a map of the X chromosome of the chicken. 
In 1913 Punnett married a widow, Eveline Maude Froude Nutcombe-Quicke (died 1965), daughter of John Froude Bellew of Stockleigh English, Devon; they had no children. After his marriage Punnett diverted his formidable athletic activities from cricket to tennis. In 1943 he retired to Somerset, where he maintained his wide interests, which included Japanese prints, Chinese porcelain, biologists of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, and wine: he retained a personal cellar at Caius, which he visited annually. At seventy-four he published humorous verse in Latin. He died on 3 January 1967 while playing bridge at his home, Bilbrook Lodge, Bilbrook, Washford, near Minehead in Somerset. 
J. H. Edwards', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37870


Purney, Thomas (1695-1730?), poet and prison chaplain, was born on 1 August 1695. His parents have not been identified. Perhaps he was related to a family of Purneys in Buckinghamshire, but his poems hint that he spent his childhood in Kent. After two years at Merchant Taylors' School, London, he was admitted as a pensioner to Clare College, Cambridge, on 2 July 1711. He graduated BA in 1715-16. 
Purney's two volumes of 'Pastorals' (November 1716 and February 1717) purport to be written 'after the simple manner of Theocritus', but their closer model is the anti-classical, faintly Spenserian eclogues of Ambrose Philips, featuring English rural scenery, folklore, and dialect. Purney's critical theory is developed in his prose 'Full Enquiry into the True Nature of Pastoral' (1717), greatly indebted to the 'Guardian' papers on pastoral by Thomas Tickell. A long anti-Jacobite mock-heroic poem, 'The Chevalier de St. George' (published in October 1718), is attributed to Purney by Giles Jacob, who notes justly that it is written in an extraordinary style ('Poetical Register', 1723, 2.304). Outlandish diction is a feature of 'The Last Day', a long poem by a deceased college friend, John Bulkeley, which Purney prepared for the press in 1719. Purney advertised in 1717 a poem in fifteen books on Edward, the Black Prince, but it never appeared. 
Purney was ordained priest (London diocese) on 24 May 1719 and in November of that year, as 'a young suckling divine of twenty-four years of age' ('Orphan Reviv'd'), was appointed ordinary (full-time chaplain) of Newgate prison on the recommendation of the bishop of Peterborough. Purney's salary was $35 p.a. but the great profit of his much sought-after post was in writing accounts of the behaviour, confessions, and dying words of hanged malefactors: his predecessor, Paul Lorrain (died 1719), is said to have left $5000 after twenty years as ordinary of Newgate. Purney's accounts were particularly colourful because he harried condemned men to confess to more crimes than they had committed. He also tried unsuccessfully to reduce disorder at religious services in prison. 
Purney's health declined from 1724, perhaps owing to typhus, endemic in Newgate. He withdrew from most duties two years before he resigned as ordinary in November 1727. His last 'Ordinary's Account' appeared in May 1725, when one of the malefactors hanged was Jonathan Wild. However, Fielding's satire of the Newgate ordinary in his 'History' of Wild ('Miscellanies', vol. 3, 1743) is probably directed against Purney's successor James Guthrie (cf. 'Craftsman', 460, 26 April 1735). Purney is portrayed sympathetically in Harrison Ainsworth's 'Jack Sheppard' (1839). It is thought he died in Kent in 1730. 


@@@@@


doc= 37871


Pye, Edith Mary (1876-1965), midwife and international relief organizer, was born on 20 October 1876 in London, the eldest daughter in the family of three daughters and four sons of William Arthur Pye JP, wine merchant, and his wife, Margaret Thompson Kidston, daughter of James Burns Kidston, writer to the signet, of Glasgow. The sister of Sir David Randall Pye (1886-1960), and niece of an eminent surgeon, Edith Pye trained as a nurse (SRN) and midwife (SCM) and by 1907 was superintendent of district nurses in London. In 1908 she joined the Society of Friends. 
In December 1914 Edith Pye went to Chalons-sur-Marne to set up a maternity hospital for women refugees from Rheims in what had been an insane asylum, without hot water or electricity, 15 miles from the fighting line. One thousand babies later, in April 1919, Edith Pye departed, one of very few women to have been made a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur. 
From March 1921 until October 1922 Edith Pye joined her lifelong friend Dr Hilda Clark (1881-1955), granddaughter of John Bright, to try to feed all the severely undernourished children under the age of four in Vienna. Together they successfully masterminded the acquisition and distribution of British and American hard currency, with which they bought Croatian fodder to feed the Swiss cows donated to Austria, which in turn provided free milk. Edith Pye privately published Hilda Clark's letters from France, Austria, and the Near East, 1914-24, in a book called 'War and its Aftermath' (n.d., 'c'.1956), which documents their joint relief operations at that time. 
In May 1923 the Quakers sent Edith Pye to report on conditions in the French-occupied Ruhr. She found 'a complete absence of civil justice' and the seeds of implacable future enmity. Throughout the 1920s and 1930s her moderate and conciliatory personality worked to mediate between the revolutionary and the gradualist wings of the Women's International League as she served on its international executive. 'She was not the sort who enjoyed a scrap' (private information). In May 1928 the league sent Edith Pye on a three-month goodwill mission to India, Indo-China, and China to study the status of women. 
In 1929 Edith Pye became president of the British Midwives' Institute, later called the Royal College of Midwives, a post she occupied for twenty years. It was during her period of office and with her strong encouragement that the chloroform capsule was developed that first enabled midwives to administer pain relief to women in childbirth in their own homes. In July 1932 Edith Pye published an article on this subject entitled 'Anaesthetics in labour from the midwife's point of view' in the 'Newsletter of the Medical Women's Federation'. Between 1934 and 1936 Edith Pye was accorded the honour of being made president of the International Confederation of Midwives. 
In addition to this high-profile commitment to midwifery, Edith Pye never ceased her efforts at international rescue work. In 1934 she became vice-chairman of the Friends' Germany emergency committee that she had helped found to succour German and German Jewish refugees from Hitler. During the Spanish Civil War Edith Pye instigated the formation in Geneva of the international commission for the assistance of child refugees in Spain. Between January 1939 and June 1940 she worked on the French-Spanish border to alleviate the wretchedness of the defeated Spanish republicans, only leaving on the last boat to sail for Britain from Bordeaux. Between 1940 and 1945 she worked as honorary secretary to the famine relief committee (chaired by G. K. A. Bell, bishop of Chichester) which tried, via the Red Cross, to send food, vitamins, and medical aid to children in German-occupied Europe, against the wishes of the British Ministry of Economic Warfare. Immediately after the Normandy landings in 1944 Edith Pye toured liberated France with the Friends' relief service to arrange bulk food supplies for the children she found suffering from malnutrition. It was said of her in the 'Manchester Guardian' -- on the occasion of her seventieth birthday -- that her 'activities for refugees and humanitarian causes have in their own way been as assiduous as those of the late Eleanor Rathbone' ('Manchester Guardian', 10 Oct 1946). 
In 1952 Edith Pye and Hilda Clark retired to Street, Somerset. Edith Pye complemented her friend's daring breadth of vision with her own genius for detailed organization. Both women were exceptionally free from egotism, always drawing out the talents of their co-workers and being very willing to delegate authority. Both believed that 'there is something that is contagious other than hate', as Edith Pye said in her Lister lecture to the Quaker Medical Society in 1934. Both women were a credit to what Edith Pye called 'the secular arm' of the Society of Friends. Edith Pye died at her home, 4 Overleigh, Street, Somerset, on 16 December 1965 and was buried in the Quaker burial-ground under the same headstone as Hilda Clark. 


@@@@@


doc= 37872


Pye, Sir Robert (bap. 1585, d. 1662), exchequer official and politician, was baptized on 24 March 1585 at Much Dewchurch, Herefordshire, the fourth and youngest son of Roger Pye (died 1591) of the Mynde (which lay in the parish) and his wife, Bridget (died 1624), daughter of Thomas Kyrle of Walford, Herefordshire. Pye did not attend university but was admitted to the Middle Temple in June 1607. 
At some date between 1615 and 1618, together with his eldest brother Walter Pye, Robert joined the service of George Villiers (later first duke of Buckingham). In March 1617 he was granted the profit on the extra import duty levied on the goods of foreign merchants entering the country (a kind of revenue farm), in place of Sir Lionel Cranfield, who was moving on to higher things. Their paths were to cross and recross in the years ahead. In April 1618 Pye became co-grantee of a minor but potentially profitable office in chancery -- presumably granted by the lord chancellor, Sir Francis Bacon (later Viscount St Albans) to gratify Buckingham. But the decisive advance in Pye's prospects came with the disgrace and dismissal in 1619 of the lord treasurer, Thomas Howard, first earl of Suffolk, and his henchman Sir John Bingley. He succeeded the latter as auditor of the exchequer of receipt and writer of tallies. Successive holders of this post and of the clerkship of the pells, which had overlapping duties, had been at odds during the previous reign. Their relative importance was partly a matter of administrative procedures, but perhaps even more of the personality and political connections of their respective holders. In any case the auditorship was a lucrative office. 
Pye was knighted in 1621. In the early 1620s he was able to acquire an estate at Faringdon in Berkshire, the manor house then comprising the castle. By then he had married Mary Croker, daughter of John Croker of Battisford, Gloucestershire; by 1623 they had a one-year-old son, Robert Pye, and three daughters, and at least one more son and a daughter followed. Pye proved able to arrange advantageous matches for the three daughters who survived to adulthood: in 1632 Anne married Edward, son and heir of Sir Robert Phelips of Montacute, Somerset, carrying with her a portion of $3000; Dorothy married Edward Poole of Kemble, Wiltshire, in 1638; and Mary married in 1641 George Speke of White Lackington, Somerset, whose wardship Pye had earlier bought for $1800 ['see 'Speke, Mary]. His youngest son, who died in 1660, Pye set up in business as a Levant merchant. 
Pye sat in the parliaments of 1621 and 1624 as MP for Bath. The potential conflict between his financial responsibilities as a royal office-holder and his obligations as servant or client of the Villiers interest emerged openly in the parliaments of 1624-6. In the last parliament of King James's reign, that of 1624, he turned against his old colleague and now chief, the lord treasurer, the earl of Middlesex (as Cranfield had become), who was the victim of the new alliance between Buckingham and the Commons' majority in favour of war against Spain. The auditor appeared as one of the witnesses in the lord treasurer's impeachment. In 1625 Pye was elected MP for Ludgershall and in 1626 for Westminster (where Buckingham was steward). In these first two parliaments of Charles I he defended his master, as in turn relations deteriorated between the Commons and Buckingham, although in 1627 Sir James Whitelocke privately praised Pye's conduct in connection with his disapproval of the then lord treasurer. In September of that year Pye, appalled by the disastrous financial and political consequences of the forced loan, advised his patron that the regime should make 'some speedy accommodation of this loan, for nothing pleaseth so long as this is on foot' (Cust, 71). In the election of 1628 Buckingham was unable to place Pye as MP for Westminster for a second time. In a tumultuous election, one newsletter reported, 'when Sir Robert Pye's party cried, 'A Pye, a Pye! a Pye!' the adverse party would cry 'A pudding! a pudding! a pudding!' and others 'A lie! a lie! a lie!'', and he was beaten by over 1000 votes by his 'patriot' opponents and forced to find a seat in the small Cornish borough of Grampound (T. Birch, ed., 'The Court and Times of Charles the First', 2 vols., 1848, 1.327). In the parliament of 1628 -- when his colleague, the senior revenue auditor of the upper exchequer, was savagely attacked, expelled from the house and committed to the Tower of London -- Pye's defence of Buckingham was limited to assuring the Commons that it was the favourite's mother and not his wife who was a recusant Catholic. Otherwise he tended to speak on financial technicalities. He was, however, extremely active in his capacity as an executor after Buckingham's assassination. Indeed, as late as 1638, the lord deputy of Ireland, Sir Thomas Wentworth (later first earl of Strafford) was strongly critical of him for putting the interests of the Villiers family before those of the crown, in connection with the Irish customs revenues. 
As against this, Pye seems to have worked hard -- or got others to do so -- in preparing the revenue and expenditure balances and averages of 1635 (covering the years from 1631) and of 1636-9; and he appears to have set about the same process for the reconstructed administration of 1641. Pye's very lukewarm support for the parliamentarian side may have owed more to his determination to retain his office than to any principled convictions. More than once he was saved from serious trouble only by his connections by marriage with John Hampden, whose daughter Anne had married his son Robert. None the less the king did summon the officers of the exchequer to join him in Oxford; Pye's colleague, who was also his 'comptroller' and administrative rival, the clerk of the pells, obeyed this call. So there were two lower exchequers of receipt, in Westminster and in Oxford, during 1643-6, although a large proportion of parliament's revenues came in through various 'ad hoc' treasuries in the City of London, bypassing the exchequer altogether. 
Pye's own estate lay in disputed territory which changed hands at least twice. Having been captured by the cavaliers, Faringdon Castle was virtually destroyed in a siege by Pye's own party. More positive evidence for his religious commitment is found in his membership (with his boyhood friend Sir Robert Harley) of a small committee to oversee the destruction of crucifixes and images in the captured royal regalia. 
Pye was elected to the Long Parliament in December 1640 in a by-election at Woodstock. Not surprisingly he was among those members secluded at Pride's Purge in December 1648. His record as an MP, especially in the Long Parliament, suggests someone extremely active, and useful to the house, but not of major political importance. He seems to have taken no part in public life under the Commonwealth, but when the exchequer was re-established under the protectorate he failed to regain his old post as auditor, having to wait for this until the Restoration, when he protested, perhaps predictably, that he had never really been a parliamentarian at all. Pye's career epitomizes the interactions between the obligations of patron and client and the public service under the old administrative system. He died at Westminster on 20 May 1662. His will suggests considerable wealth but not vast affluence. The Berkshire estate went to the elder surviving son, Robert. The younger, John, inherited properties that Pye had bought in Staffordshire and Derbyshire which formed an estate substantial enough to support the baronetcy that he acquired in 1665. 


@@@@@


doc= 37873


Pyne, John (bap. 1600, d. 1678), politician, was baptized on 21 February 1600 at East Down near Barnstaple, Devon, the eldest son of Thomas Pyne (died in or before 1609), gentleman, of Merriott in Somerset, and his wife, Amy, daughter of Thomas Hanham of Wimborne Minster, Dorset. He was heir to his grandfather, John Pyne of Curry Mallet, Somerset, who died in 1609. He matriculated from Hart Hall, Oxford, in February 1610, graduated BA in 1612, and proceeded MA in 1615. He entered the Middle Temple in 1619 and was called to the bar in 1629; he kept chambers until 1637. The influence of his mother's family secured Pyne's election for Poole in Dorset to the parliaments of 1625, 1626, and 1628, but he did little in Westminster. Most of the speeches by 'Mr Pyne' in 1628 were almost certainly made by his uncle, Hugh Pyne, who was briefly MP for Weymouth and Melcombe Regis. John may have spoken on the 'Marriage Bill' on 22 April, however; he would have been especially interested, because of difficulties over his intended marriage to his cousin, Eleanor Hanham, with whom he eloped in 1629 and married on 23 April. 
In the 1630s Pyne held minor offices in Somerset, but he was not a JP until 1646. He obstructed collection of ship money in 1638 and Poole returned him to both 1640 parliaments. He was regarded as one of the 'rigid party' against the king. Named one of parliament's deputy lieutenants in March 1642, he subsequently had an undistinguished military record. Moderately wealthy, he claimed wartime losses of $1000. By 1645 he headed an extreme parliamentarian faction in Somerset, which in the recruiter elections assisted radical candidates. Under his leadership the Somerset county committee became notorious for its vindictiveness. Pyne used it ruthlessly to pursue royalists, harass political opponents, and bully witnesses and minor officials. He promoted county petitions supporting the vote of no addresses, Pride's Purge, and the trial of Charles I. But although named to the high court of justice in January 1649, he stayed away and returned to parliament only after the king's execution. He occasionally attended the Rump Parliament, but his main achievement during the Commonwealth was to govern Somerset successfully. He survived the abolition of the county committee in 1650, and sat in the nominated assembly of 1653, though he was largely inactive as a member. Presbyterian in religion, he was tolerant of other sects, and supported proposals to abolish tithes and remodel the universities. As he was an outspoken critic of the 'Instrument of government' the protectorate brought an end to his parliamentary career. He appeared against John Penruddock and his rebels in 1655, but refused any office under Oliver Cromwell, and was badly beaten in the 1656 elections. Nevertheless, he sat in the restored Rump in 1659, and retained his position as a JP throughout the 1650s. 
At the Restoration, Pyne took the oath of allegiance but was debarred from holding public office. He was several times imprisoned on suspicion of plotting, but otherwise lived quietly in Curry Mallet. His first wife died some time in or after 1654, and he later married Amy White. He died in 1678, having asked to be buried silently at night. Two sons survived him (Pyne disinherited John, the elder, making the younger, Charles, his heir); a daughter Susannah (Pitts) died in 1676. 
David Underdown', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37874


Quelch, Henry (1858-1913), socialist and journalist, was born at Park Street, Hungerford, Berkshire, on 30 January 1858, son of James Quelch, a village blacksmith, who was an invalid for the last twenty years of his life, and his wife, Mary Ann Wooldridge, the daughter of an agricultural labourer. He had at least one brother, Lorenzo. The family was poor and the young Quelch began full-time work at the age of ten, migrating to London when he was fourteen. On 19 May 1878 he married Sarah ('b'. 1856/7), daughter of Thomas Fisher, a labourer. In 1881 they were living in Bermondsey with their two daughters. He had a variety of unskilled jobs, and at the beginning of the 1880s, when he first became involved in radical politics, he was working in a wallpaper warehouse. 
Always known as Harry, Quelch first joined the Bermondsey Radical Club and soon became known in London left-wing politics. He became a member of the Democratic Federation, later the Social Democratic Federation (SDF), and was one of its few proletarian activists in the early days of the newly emerging socialist movement. Quelch was entirely self-educated: one of the great autodidacts of the modern labour period. He taught himself French in order to read Karl Marx's 'Capital', and later learned German. He began writing for 'Justice', the weekly paper of the SDF which first appeared in January 1884, and two years later he took over the editor's position from H. M. Hyndman. Quelch resigned from the editorship in 1889 in order to work full-time for the new unionism, but he returned to the editor's chair in 1891 and remained editor until his death. In 1891 he also became manager of the newly established Twentieth Century Press. He was a competent and careful administrator, and retired in 1909, with unfortunate results for the publishing company for the next few years. 
Quelch produced in 'Justice' a lively and well-informed paper which remains invaluable for the history, especially the grass roots history, of the modern labour movement. In politics he was usually to the left of H. M. Hyndman, whom he much admired, but he accepted the latter's scepticism towards trade unionism and its place in the socialist movement. Quelch was inevitably involved in most of the many disputes and debates of the decades before 1914, and not only in Britain, for he was a constant attender at international conferences of the European left. He was a vigorous opponent of the 'impossibilities' in Scotland and London, anti-syndicalist in general, hostile to the Pankhursts, and only lukewarm on women's suffrage. He was a wholehearted supporter of Indian independence, and gave unstinted assistance to the Russian revolutionaries. When 'Iskra' had to be printed in London, Quelch put all the resources of the Twentieth Century Press at the disposal of the Russians, who for a time included Lenin. On the issue of Germany in the years before 1914 Quelch was not as xenophobic as Hyndman, but he supported the idea of a 'citizen' army and an 'adequate' navy to counter German expansionist aims. It was an issue that sharply divided the Marxist left. 
Quelch married twice. There was one son, Tom, but it is unknown whether Quelch's first or second wife was his mother. Henry Quelch died on 17 September 1913 at his home, 35 Limesford Road, Peckham, London, having been in increasing ill health for a number of years. He was survived by his second wife, M. C. E. Quelch. 
John Saville', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37875


Rackam, John (d. 1720), pirate, was quartermaster under Charles Vane, one of the leaders of the New Providence 'pirate republic', when, in November 1718, he challenged Vane's decision not to attack a French frigate in the Windward passage, and was elected captain in his place. Essentially a small-time and not particularly bloodthirsty pirate, who preyed mostly on fishing boats and small coastal vessels, his main claim to fame is that his ship was the one in which two female pirates, Anne Bonny and Mary Read, pursued their scandalous careers. Rackam was supposedly a tall, dark-eyed, handsome man whose swashbuckling manner was matched and supported by his theatrical dress: striped calico shirt, jacket, and trousers. 
In May 1719 Rackam, like many of his profession, took advantage of the pardon being offered by the governor of the Bahamas, Captain Woodes Rogers, and while ashore in Nassau he met Anne Bonny (1698-1782), who became his mistress, and joined his crew when he again took up piracy. Mary Read joined them later when Rackam captured the ship on which she was travelling. On 22 August 1720, Rackam and his twelve crew stole the 12 ton sloop 'William' from Nassau harbour, hoisted Rackam's distinctive skull and crossed cutlasses, and attacked several small vessels on a cruise from the Bahamas to Jamaica. On 5 September Woodes Rogers issued a proclamation naming 'Rackum' and his crew, including Bonny and Read, as pirates, and sent out vessels to hunt them down. In early November they were captured by 'a brisk fellow, one Jonathan Barnet' in the well-armed 90 ton 'Tyger', one of ten vessels commissioned in 1715 by the then governor of Jamaica, Lord Hamilton, to hunt pirates. 
On 16 November 1720, Rackam along with his sailing master George Fetherston, his quartermaster Richard Corner, and most of his crew were tried for piracy before a vice-admiralty court at Spanish Town, Jamaica, under the presidency of the governor, Sir Nicholas Lawes. All eleven were condemned and sentenced to hang. In a separate trial, held ten days after Rackam's execution, Mary Read and Anne Bonny were also sentenced to hang, but were reprieved when they informed the court that they were both 'quick with child'. 
Rackam and his ten male accomplices were hanged at Gallows Point, Port Royal, Jamaica on 18 November 1720. His body was afterwards hung in irons from a gibbet on Deadman's Cay at the entrance to the harbour, as a deterrent to others. This sandy islet is today named Rackam's Cay. 


@@@@@


doc= 37876


Radcliffe, Mary Ann (b. c.1746, d. in or after 1810), writer, was the only child and heir of an Anglican retired merchant, already past seventy years old when she was born, and his thirty-year-old Roman Catholic wife. Her father, whose forename was James, died when she was two. Mary was educated at the Bar Convent in York, after which she was courted, aged fourteen, by the 35-year-old Joseph Radcliffe: 'poor, little me!... like a bird in a cage, I fluttered to be at liberty' (Radcliffe, 16). She eloped while visiting London, 'And from these transactions... have I to date the area of my misfortunes' (ibid., 30). She and Radcliffe married in 1761, and she bore the first of her eight children at fifteen; the last two died young. 
After Radcliffe's fortune was withheld by law and her husband's business ventures in London and elsewhere failed, she ran a coffee house, took in lodgers, and chaperoned a pregnant unmarried young lady. Her last spell of living with her husband ended when she sought work as a governess in London. Other jobs included sewing, shopkeeping, and housekeeping from 1781 to 1783 for Mary Stewart, countess of Traquair, an old school friend at whose home Radcliffe met the liberal Catholic theologian and translator of the 'Bible' Alexander Geddes. 
Radcliffe's 'Memoirs' (1810) mentions obliquely the writing of fiction ('was I soaring into the airy regions of fiction, I would quickly change the theme'), but does not mention any of the novels ascribed to her. Although she wanted to remain anonymous, her publisher set her name to her polemic 'The Female Advocate' (1799), out of 'a view to extend the sale, from the same name at that period standing high amongst the novel readers' (ibid., 387). Sales strategy and the fame of Ann Radcliffe probably account for other ascriptions and half-ascriptions to Mary Ann Radcliffe, first made in 1802 though some refer to 1790. 'Radcliffe's New Novelist's Pocket Magazine' published its two numbers as hers in 1802 (giving her current address correctly); the second number credits her with 'The Secret Oath', also 1802, a chapbook. The same year a Minerva Press catalogue listed 'Mrs. Radcliffe' as author of 'The Fate of Velina de Guidova' (1790), an epistolary novel; in 1814 another of its catalogues listed 'Mrs. Ann Radcliffe' as author of 'Radzivil, a Romance', 'translated from the Russian of the celebrated M. Wocklow' (1790), whose text speaks of its author, translator (a 'young gentleman'), and editor-reviser as all male. In 1809 J. F. Hughes published 'Manfrone, or, The One-Handed Monk' as by 'Mary Anne Radcliffe', and switched authorship of 'The Mysterious Baron' (1808) to her from Eliza Ratcliffe. 'Manfrone', reprinted in 1819, 1825, 1839, [1878], and 1971 as either hers or Ann Radcliffe's, was claimed in a letter to the Royal Literary Fund by Louisa Theresa Bellenden Ker. An extremely gory, high-flown Gothic novel, it is nothing like 'Velina' or 'Radzivil', and none of these novels resembles Mary Ann Radcliffe's known work. 
If not a novelist, Radcliffe remains an unusual writer. 'The Female Advocate, or, An Attempt to Recover the Rights of Women from Male Usurpation' (1799) which, despite advice from Arthur Murphy, led to 'an unlucky circumstance... between the bookseller [Vernor and Hood] and myself' (Radcliffe, 387), discusses the shrinking female job market and the snare of prostitution; its feeling but down-to-earth tone reflects harsh experience: 'All women possess not the Amazonian spirit of a Wolstonecraft; but, indeed, unremitted oppression is sometimes a sufficient apology for their throwing off the gentle garb of a female' (ibid., 399). The 'Critical Review' (December 1799) was unwarrantably hostile. Radcliffe's 'Memoirs... in Familiar Letters to her Female Friend' (which reprints her earlier book) was begun at Portobello near Edinburgh in 1807, finished in dire poverty after five years housebound with rheumatism, and published by subscription in 1810. 


@@@@@


doc= 37877


Brown, Alfred Reginald Radcliffe- (1881-1955), social anthropologist, was born Alfred Reginald Brown on 17 January 1881 at 39 Farm Road, Aston, Warwickshire, the second son and last of three children of Alfred Brown (1834-1886), manufacturer's clerk, and his second wife, Hannah ('c'.1845-1925), daughter of Owen Radcliffe, engineer, and his wife, Susan Smith. By 1917 he was adding Radcliffe to his name, following the lead of his brother Herbert whose middle name it was, and began assuming the hyphenated form by 1923. He was educated at the Commercial Travellers' School, Pinner, Middlesex, from 1890 to 1896; at King Edward VI School, Birmingham, from 1896 to 1898, where he was a foundation scholar; and at Trinity College, Cambridge, from 1902 to 1906, to which he won an exhibition in 1901. There he read for the mental and moral science tripos, and obtained a second class (division 1) in part one (1904) and a first in part two (1905); he was trained in anthropology by A. C. Haddon and W. H. R. Rivers. He married Winifred Marie Lyon ('b'. 1880), daughter of Algernon Jasper Lyon, a Cambridge solicitor, and his wife, Mary Elizabeth Mason, on 19 April 1910. They had one child, Mary Cynthia Lyon Radcliffe. Radcliffe-Brown and his wife had become estranged by about 1926, but did not divorce. 
Seemingly possessed by a wanderlust, Radcliffe-Brown spent well over half his adult life outside England. He was a fellow of Trinity College from 1908 to 1914, a master at the Sydney Church of England grammar school from 1915 to 1917, and director of education in the kingdom of Tonga from 1918 to 1919, and was the first professor of anthropology at the universities of Cape Town from 1921 to 1925, Sydney from 1926 to 1931, and Oxford from 1937 to 1946. He held chairs at Chicago from 1931 to 1937, and Alexandria from 1947 to 1949, and was also a visiting professor at Yenching (Yanjing) University in China, from 1935 to 1936, the University of Sao Paulo in Brazil from 1942 to 1944, and Rhodes University in South Africa in 1952. If his career was brilliant, his childhood circumstances had been difficult, and he was fortunate to have been admitted to the Commercial Travellers' School, founded in 1845 to provide for 'the destitute Orphans of deceased and the Children of necessitous Commercial Travellers.' School records show that his family had neither property nor expectations. 
Although he did not achieve the standards later set by Bronislaw Malinowski, in which emphasis is placed on long-term participant observation of a limited area, Radcliffe-Brown was one of the first British anthropologists to undertake fieldwork on his own, principally in the Andaman Islands from 1906 to 1908, and Western Australia from 1910 to 1912, with shorter periods in several states of Australia between 1914 and 1930. Some uncertainty surrounds the circumstances of his main research, especially in the Andamans, about the deficiencies of which he had no illusions, but he did not -- as is sometimes claimed -- depend there or in Australia on the inmates of gaols and hospitals. He travelled extensively in his Australian fieldwork, obtaining information especially on kinship, social organization, and totemism, thus laying a foundation for the comparative and analytical studies for which he had a natural talent and with which his name is especially associated. 
Radcliffe-Brown's role in creating the academic discipline of social anthropology in English-speaking countries was 'immense' (Pocock, 54) and is unmatched even by Malinowski. Effectively it began with his Cape Town appointment, though he had lectured in Cambridge, London, and Birmingham before the First World War. The courses he developed at Cape Town and subsequently at Sydney drew the attention of undergraduates to the nature of African and Australian societies, the comparative method, and the theories of the French sociological school. He conveyed a clear and comprehensive view of the scope and method of anthropology and a sense that new ground was being broken and obsolete theories overthrown. The difficulty in both countries of instituting and maintaining an adequately funded programme of research was all the more disappointing because he was confident that his type of anthropology could solve ethnographic problems, discover laws of society, and provide enlightened guidance to governments and the public. 
In South Africa and Australia anthropology had been developed by amateur scholars, some of whom achieved much in spite of their isolation. In the United States, where the discipline was already well established in universities, Radcliffe-Brown's approach stimulated a number of anthropologists 'to reconsider the whole matter of method, to scrutinize their objectives, and to attend to new problems and new ways of looking at problems' (Redfield, ix). In particular, he staked a claim for anthropology, or comparative sociology as he also called it, to be the basis of a possible unified natural science of society, and sought to undermine counter-claims by economics and psychology to provide models for this science. Once again, however, he remained for only a few years before leaving for another country. Whatever hopes he brought to Oxford came to little owing to the suspension of anthropology during the Second World War and his retirement, which he is said to have resisted, shortly afterwards. Later he regretted having left Chicago (Stocking, 'Yours affectionately, Rex', 4-5, 8). 
Radcliffe-Brown conceived of anthropology as an 'investigation of the nature of human society by the systematic comparison of societies of diverse type' (Radcliffe-Brown, 'Method', 133). He attached great importance to the study of primitive societies (though he also encouraged studies of communities in China, India, and Japan and was appreciative of W. L. Warner's Yankee City series), partly because of their differences from Western civilization and partly because they were changing or being destroyed so rapidly. Investigation involved a series of steps: carrying out intensive field research; demonstrating how institutions such as kinship, religion, politics, and economics are interconnected; and analysis in terms of the concepts of social structure and social function (the concept of social value was important to him in principle, but less salient in practice). Social structure, not culture, was the linchpin in this scheme of inquiry. Thus unlike Malinowski, who understood function as essentially biological, Radcliffe-Brown defined it as the contribution a belief or custom made to the maintenance of the social structure. Although the stress in his work, as in that of the anthropologists most influenced by him, was on synchronic rather than diachronic studies, he held that all societies resulted from a process of evolution which explained the great variety among them. 
Radcliffe-Brown has been taxed with ignoring conflict and assuming that customs and institutions work smoothly together to serve a larger purpose -- hence the comment that 'a dose of Marx or Adam Ferguson would have done Radcliffe-Brown the world of good' (E. E. Evans-Pritchard, 'Fifty years of British anthropology', 'TLS', 6 July 1973, 763). In fact, he never supposed that simple solidarity was the only characteristic of human life. His early opinion that opposition 'is of the utmost importance to inquiry', is expressed in war and between the sexes, and 'is as fundamentally necessary to human society as solidarity', was further developed in lectures to Sydney students on 'social opposition' or 'socially regulated antagonism' (Maddock, 11, 15). It was also conveyed to a wider audience in his Huxley memorial lecture (1951), when he argued that the 'Heraclitean union of opposites' has been often used 'not only in the establishment of systems of cosmology but also in organising social structures' (Radcliffe-Brown, 'Structure', 115). True, his writings do not convey the impression that 'social arrangements are transient creations based on domination, and ever liable to challenge from a new social movement' (N. McInnes, 'The Western Marxists', 1972, 23-4). But societies of the kind in which Radcliffe-Brown was most interested were not characterized by class conflicts or challenged by revolutionary or reform movements developing from within. Their transformation, as he knew from his Andamanese, Australian, and African experience, arose from contact and collision with alien societies. 
Speculation about the sources of Radcliffe-Brown's anthropology has often derived it mainly from one pre-eminent figure, usually Rivers or Emile Durkheim. In fact, he placed himself in 'a cultural tradition of two hundred years' (Radcliffe-Brown, 'Structure', 14) originating with eighteenth-century thinkers, mostly from France or Scotland, who included Montesquieu, Lafiteau, and Adam Ferguson -- and further developed by some of the pioneering sociologists and anthropologists of the nineteenth century. As he did not engage in scholarly exegesis of the work of others it can be difficult to discern their precise significance in his thought. A number of influences can, however, be identified with some confidence. For example, his interest in natural science (and art) began as a schoolboy, his first reported lecture being on zinc mines in Cumberland to the Natural History Society at King Edward VI School on 21 February 1898 (not long after his brother, who became a mine surveyor in South Africa, had graduated in engineering science from King's College, London). His interest in anthropology and in French sociology also predates Cambridge, having been awakened by Peter Kropotkin and Havelock Ellis respectively. To these sources he added Herbert Spencer's hypothesis of social evolution, the methodology of the French sociologists, and the ideas of Heraclitus and Chinese philosophy on social and cosmic dualism. Rivers and Durkheim may have been the most important influences, but he criticized aspects of their thought and it would be wrong to see him as a disciple -- discipleship, as opposed to influence or inspiration, would have conflicted with his scientific outlook. 
Radcliffe-Brown wrote with 'crystalline clarity' (J. G. Peristiany, 'Obituary', 'Nature', 17 Dec 1955, 1149) and had the gift of enthusing students, 'with whom he was always ready to discuss the problems of their science, not only in the lecture room but at any time and in any place. He numbered these students all over the world' (Evans-Pritchard, 200). Yet he published relatively little and wrote slowly, confessing to Winifred Hoernle that he could spend a week over one or two sentences. His difficulty was not shortage of ideas. As Raymond Firth wrote to Camilla Wedgwood on 22 September 1929, 'R. B. has many projects; I should like to see some of them mature' (Wedgwood papers, NL Aus., MS 483, box 1). The only book he completed was 'The Andaman Islanders' (1922), based on his first fieldwork. Other planned works, including a collaborative study of African religion and social structure with Winifred Hoernle, his 1937 Chicago seminar on a natural science of society, his Josiah Mason lectures at the University of Birmingham on primitive cosmology (1951), and an introduction to social anthropology, were never finished, though a stenographic version of the original Chicago seminar circulated during his lifetime and was published after his death. 
Radcliffe-Brown's appearance and manners fascinated contemporaries. The biologist and novelist E. L. Grant Watson, who knew him from Cambridge and accompanied him in Western Australia, described him as a man of dramatic personality and inventive genius, 'beautiful to behold' as he expounded anthropology ('But to what Purpose', 83-4). The educationist Professor D. D. T. Jabavu, who attended his vacation school lectures in Cape Town, reported him to be 'tall of stature, with the typical flowing hair of the carefree genius' and to possess 'a sense of humour and joie de vivre in his subject' ('Cape Times', 24 March 1924). According to a popular Australian magazine, his 'aesthetic appearance has earned for him the sobriquet of 'the Valentino of the 'Varsity'. This versatile professor of anthropology is equally at home in discoursing on the latest movements of modern art as he is in determining the age of paleolithic relics' ('The Home', 1 Oct 1928). Student songs captured his flamboyance. In one he is bad, mad, and faddy, frequents gas-bagging bohemian circles, is the idol of Sydney's younger set, and is pally with Government House ('Sydney University Song Book', 1928). 
Outside anthropology Radcliffe-Brown had an astonishing range of interests on which he addressed university and other audiences. He opened art exhibitions, spoke on music, debated the authorship of Shakespeare's plays and championed both modernism and the League of Nations. He spoke with few or no notes and with a few exceptions (including articles for 'Art in Australia' on the painters Lionel Lindsay and Margaret Preston) did not develop his views in writing. His circle of acquaintances also extended beyond academe to embrace artists, writers, and bohemians. In Sydney, for example, they included Lionel and Norman Lindsay, Aletta Lewis, Ethel Anderson, George Lambert, and Christopher Brennan. Perhaps he would have achieved more in anthropology had he concentrated his energy, but his versatility and personal qualities attracted students of the new discipline and helped recruit some who would take leading positions in it. Moreover, his thoughts out of class were of a piece with his approach to anthropology and help throw light on it. For example, what he admired in modern art was its scientific spirit and love of clarity, its appeal to intellect and hatred of sentimentality -- even the brutality of modern German painters, he told the Society of Artists, could be commended as 'a good antidote to the over-sentimental' ('Sydney Morning Herald', 19 Sept 1929). Addressing a conference on international affairs, he stated that antagonism is 'as necessary to the life of society as solidarity' and cannot be eliminated ('Sydney University Union Recorder', 2 Oct 1930, 250). 
Nicknamed 'Anarchy Brown', he was an anarchist as a student, but 'not of the violent bomb-throwing type, though he had known several of these' (Watson, 'To this end', 90). He came to see the anarchist ideal, unlike socialism, as unrealizable, but saw the latter as having a dangerous tendency to glorify the state. His later views might be described as libertarian in a non-doctrinal sense, characterized by freedom from convention and sympathy for 'unpopular but intellectually defensible causes' (Firth, 296). An atheist from at least his student years, he became an honorary associate of the Rationalist Press Association in 1952. An Oxford student remembered him as 'somewhat assertive in his arguments against religion' (C. Fuller, 'An interview with M. N. Srinivas', 'Anthropology Today', 15/5, 1999, 5), but the nearest he came to showing it in print was the suggestion that religion is a source of 'fears and anxieties from which [men] would otherwise be free -- the fear of black magic or of spirits, fear of God, of the Devil, of Hell' (Radcliffe-Brown, 'Structure', 149). In the Josiah Mason lectures founded by the Rationalist Press Association, he denied that the secret ceremonies of Australia and New Guinea are based on 'sham and fraud', insisting that the old men in charge used secrecy as a method of conveying their sense of the world as a mysterious place. In general he avoided intruding his personal values into anthropology, holding that the anthropologist's job is to investigate beliefs as part of social reality, not to determine whether they are true or ethical or logical. His restraint may have sprung from an austere conception of science or from the functionalist fear that destroying a people's beliefs will undermine their social system. 
Radcliffe-Brown died on 24 October 1955 at University College Hospital, St Pancras, London, and was cremated at Golders Green. 


@@@@@


doc= 37878


Hall, Marguerite Antonia Radclyffe- (1880-1943), novelist, was born on 12 August 1880 at Sunny Lawn, West Cliff, Bournemouth, the second child of Radclyffe (Rat) Radclyffe-Hall (1846-1898) and Mary Jane Sager, 'nee' Diehl (1854-1945), an American widow from Philadelphia. By her own account, Radclyffe Hall's childhood was not a happy one. Her elder sister Florence's death in infancy left her an only child and her parents divorced acrimoniously when she was three. She rarely saw her father thereafter and was unloved by her volatile mother, who remarried in 1890. Her mother's third husband was Alberto Visetti (died 1928), a professor of singing at the Royal College of Music. Despite showing a precocious musical talent, she received scant encouragement from her stepfather (though he did, it seems, make sexual advances towards her). Her education was fitful and she remained a chronic bad speller all her life. Governesses and fashionable day schools were followed by a brief stint at King's College, London (there is no record of any degree), then a year in Dresden. At twenty-one she inherited a considerable legacy left in trust by her grandfather Charles Radclyffe-Hall (died 1879), who had made a fortune treating tuberculosis patients in Torquay, Devon. 
Without the need to earn a living, Radclyffe Hall was well into her forties before she took up writing seriously. She claimed to be a 'congenital invert' and is best known today for her novel 'The Well of Loneliness', a serious if sentimental treatment of lesbianism which was the occasion of great controversy when it was published in 1928. Home Office papers released on 27 November 1997 reveal the furore into which Whitehall was thrown over the possible general release of the novel. The work was described to Jonathan Cape by a government official as 'inherently obscene... it supports a depraved practice [and] is gravely detrimental to the public interest' ('The Guardian', 28 Nov 1997, 8). Cape felt it prudent to withdraw the novel, and it was subsequently banned in England, with proofs intended for a publisher in France seized in October 1928. This led to the order of the chief magistrate, Sir Chartres Biron, that all copies be destroyed, and that literary merit presented no grounds for defence. Despite protests from literary figures such as Virginia Woolf, Leonard Woolf, and John Buchan, Biron's judgement was upheld by a Court of Appeal. 

'The Well of Loneliness' was, in fact, the fifth of seven novels written by Radclyffe Hall, the others being 'The Forge' (1924), 'The Unlit Lamp' (1924), 'A Saturday Life' (1925), 'Adam's Breed' (1926), 'The Master of the House' (1932), and 'The Sixth Beatitude' (1936). A volume of short stories, 'Miss Ogilvie Finds Herself', was published in 1934. All these works, traditionalist in style but exhibiting an impressive psychological grasp, reflect in varying degrees her deep sense of being a social outsider and, increasingly, demonstrate her preoccupation with a search for spiritual self-knowledge through suffering and denial. 'Adam's Breed', a best-seller which also won two prestigious literary prizes, the Femina Vie Heureuse and James Tait Black (only E. M. Forster's 'A Passage to India' had previously achieved this 'double'), marked the peak of her career. Some of her best writing has a descriptive power which owed much to her early experiments with lyric poetry. Between 1906 and 1915 five slim volumes of her poems were published, many being set to music by popular composers of the day. The best-known was 'The Blind Ploughman'. 
Despite a modern resurgence of interest in Radclyffe Hall, she does not fit easily into the stereotype of the gay or feminist pioneer. A staunch Roman Catholic after her conversion in 1912, her instincts, political and temperamental, remained deeply conservative. (By the late 1930s, indeed, she was expressing protofascist and antisemitic views.) Believing herself a man trapped in a woman's body, she liked to be called John, assumed a male pseudonym (her father's name, significantly), and cultivated a strikingly masculine appearance, sporting cropped hair, monocles, bow-ties, smoking jackets, and pipes. A woman's best place, she proclaimed, was in the home. 
And yet Radclyffe Hall's campaigning stand on behalf of homosexuals was undeniably courageous. Moreover, her most important relationships were with notably independent-minded women. Her first partner, Mabel Veronica Batten ('c'.1856-1916), a well-known lieder singer and society beauty, exercised an educating influence, introducing the future novelist to a highly sophisticated coterie of professional women (many of them lesbians), and her first real taste of artistic and intellectual life. After Mabel's death, Hall sought to contact her through a medium and became a lifelong adherent of spiritualism. Una Elena Troubridge (1887-1963), a talented sculptor and translator, and Mabel Batten's cousin, set up house with Hall in 1918, becoming at once 'wife', amanuensis, and soulmate. The couple stayed together for the rest of Hall's life, braving an acrimonious separation from Una's husband (who was an admiral), winning a lawsuit for slander in 1920 (Hall was called 'a grossly immoral woman'), and surviving a tortuous nine-year relationship between Hall and a Russian nurse, Eugenia Souline, in the 1930s. 
In her heyday in the 1920s Hall was a conspicuous figure at writers' gatherings (she was a leading member of PEN and the Writers' Club), at theatrical first nights, and in the society of many well-known authors, actors, and artists. She moved restlessly between a succession of homes in London, Sussex, Paris, and Florence, and mixed with a diverse cosmopolitan circle which included E. F. Benson, Noel Coward, Colette, Gabriele d'Annunzio, Romaine Brooks, and Natalie Barney. The 1930s heralded a progressive decline in both her literary output and her reputation. Plans to live permanently in Italy were forestalled by the onset of another world war. Ill health dogged her last years and she died of cancer of the colon on 7 October 1943 at her London flat, 502 Hood House, Dolphin Square, Pimlico. She was buried in Highgate cemetery, Middlesex. 'The Well of Loneliness' was finally republished without a stir in 1949. In 1974 the BBC broadcast it on the radio on 'Book at Bedtime'. 


@@@@@


doc= 37879


Raisin, Catherine Alice (1855-1945), geologist and educationist, was born at 13 Camden Terrace, Camden New Town, London, on 24 April 1855, the daughter of (Daniel) Francis Raisin, pannierman at the Inner Temple, and his wife, Sarah Catherine, 'nee' Woodgate. She was educated at North London Collegiate School and at University College, London, which she entered in 1873, although she also taught at her old school until 1875. She studied botany, taking the honours examinations as a private student, and also geology and mineralogy. When University of London degrees were opened to women in 1878, she concentrated on botany, geology (studying under T. G. Bonney), and zoology (under T. H. Huxley). After taking her BSc in 1884, with second-class honours in geology and third-class in zoology, she stayed on at University College as voluntary research assistant to Professor Bonney. In 1898 she was awarded a DSc, only the second woman geologist to receive this degree from the University of London. She was elected a fellow of University College in 1902. 
After serving as demonstrator in botany at Bedford College for Women from 1886 to 1890, Raisin succeeded Grenville A. J. Cole as head of the geology department, becoming the first woman head of a geology department in a British university. From 1907 she was also Norton Sumner lecturer in geology; she held both posts until her retirement in 1920. From 1890 to 1907 she also headed the botany department, and, from 1898 to 1901, was vice-principal of the college. 
The Geological Society of London awarded Raisin the Lyell fund in 1893, the first such honour given a woman. It was accepted for her by Professor Bonney, since women were not then allowed to attend meetings of the society. She became one of the first women fellows in 1919, when women were finally admitted. 
Much of Raisin's work was in microscopic petrology and mineralogy, interests she had developed when training under Bonney. She was known as an excellent microscopist. Her first research, an examination of the metamorphic rocks of south Devon, was notable as one of the early attempts to map metamorphic facies. Other work included field and laboratory studies of rocks from the Ardennes and Switzerland, and the petrography of rock collections from the Himalayas and many parts of Africa. She published twenty-four scientific papers between 1887 and 1905. Her best-known work was her detailed investigation of the microscopic structure of minerals forming serpentine, published as a joint paper with Bonney in 1905 ('Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society'). 
Remembered by colleagues as a strong, vigorous, and charming woman, Raisin was also a 'character', who ruled absolutely in her department and dealt summarily with opposition. An outstanding teacher, she paid close attention to the work of her assistants, and was always solicitous about her students; among them she was affectionately known as 'the Raisin', and (secretly) 'the Sultana'. In committee she could be a formidable opponent. One of Britain's first professional women geologists and a noted pioneer among late nineteenth-century women educationists, Raisin took a keen interest in all aspects of women's advancement. In the late 1870s she founded and organized a discussion group for women, the Somerville Club, which, when it opened in 1880, had 1000 members. She served as its honorary secretary and then as chair. After retiring, Raisin gave much time to various women's groups and to societies for the promotion of women's interests. She was a member of the Geologists' Association for sixty-seven years, and latterly its most senior member. She died on 12 July 1945, unmarried, at Ash Priors Nursing Home, Pitville Circus, Cheltenham and was buried on 17 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 37880


Rambush, Niels Edward (1889-1957), chemical engineer, was born on 25 March 1889 in Selde, Denmark, the eldest in the family of four sons and one daughter of Sigurd Harold Alfred Rambusch, medical practitioner and chief medical officer for northern Jutland, and his wife, Johanne Faartoft; both parents were sometime liberal members in the Danish parliament. He was sent away to school in Nykobing Mors, living with grandparents for seven years. On leaving school he decided against entering university, preferring to study the practical side of engineering through an apprenticeship to a master blacksmith in Nykobing Mors. At the age of fifteen he moved to Copenhagen to complete his practical engineering experience, and two years later he graduated as a mechanical engineer at the Copenhagen Technical College. Rambusch married Mavis, daughter of John Henry Blackmore, grocer, in 1911. They had two sons, the elder of whom died at the age of nineteen, and two daughters. 
In 1911, following six months' military service with the Danish infantry, Rambusch was invited to England by Arthur H. Lymn, who had formed a business in London to develop and exploit commercially the existing processes of gas production for industrial purposes. After a short period Lymn took Rambusch into partnership and formed the gas and chemical engineering firm of Lymn and Rambush. During his years in London, Rambusch expanded his knowledge of chemical processing, continuing his studies at Battersea Polytechnic under Professor J. W. Hinchley, who invited him to become a founding member of the Institution of Chemical Engineers in 1922. In 1930 Rambusch acquired British citizenship, having changed his name by deed poll to Rambush. 
In 1918 Lymn and Rambush was taken over by the Power-Gas Corporation of Stockton-on-Tees. Rambush was appointed chief engineer and his boundless energy and leadership earned him rapid promotion with ever greater responsibilities. He was soon appointed chief engineer of the subsidiary company, Ashmore, Benson, Pease & Co., manufacturers of gas holders and iron and steelworks plant. He became general manager of both companies in 1931, managing director in 1938, and in 1951 executive chairman of the Power-Gas Corporation Ltd, which by then had acquired all the assets of the subsidiary company. He continued as chairman until his death. 
Rambush travelled widely in connection with company business and contributed many technical papers, which earned him an international reputation. His 500 page 'Modern Gas Producers' (1923) was for many years the standard work on the gasification of solid fuels in a fixed bed with a mixed blast of air and steam. In 1931 Rambush was awarded the Moulton medal of the Institution of Chemical Engineers and in 1954 he became a vice-president of the institution. In 1948 he received an honorary DSc from the University of Durham. Rambush died on 15 May 1957 at Barton House, Stockton-on-Tees. 
G. B. Taylor', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37881


Ramsbottom, John (1814-1897), railway engineer, was born at Todmorden, Lancashire, on 11 September 1814, the son of a cotton spinner who owned the only steam-driven mill in the area. He was educated by local schoolmasters and Baptist ministers. His practical training started at his father's mill, where he was given a lathe and built small working steam engines. He then rebuilt and re-erected the beam engine at his father's mill and invented the weft fork, later adopted universally, which enabled looms to be worked at high speed. He was an active and enthusiastic member of the Todmorden Mechanics' Institute, showing quick perception and ability in all mechanical matters. 
About 1839 Ramsbottom went to Manchester and joined Sharp, Roberts & Co., who already had a high reputation as builders of locomotives and cotton-spinning machinery. Here he gained experience in locomotive building and his ability sufficiently impressed Charles F. Beyer, who ran the locomotive department, that, in 1842, he recommended Ramsbottom as locomotive superintendent of the Manchester and Birmingham Railway; in 1846 the latter company became part of the London and North Western Railway (LNWR), of which Ramsbottom was then appointed district superintendent of the north-east division. In 1857 he was promoted to locomotive superintendent of the northern division, covering all routes of the LNWR north of Rugby, at Crewe works, where in the following year the first of almost 1000 of his DX 0-6-0 type freight locomotives were built. Some of these were still running over sixty years later. In 1859 he built the first of his 2-2-2 type express locomotives, two of which took part in the railway 'race' between east- and west-coast companies from London to Edinburgh in 1888, and in 1863 he developed the 2-4-0 type for use over more heavily graded routes. 
In 1862 Ramsbottom became all-line chief mechanical engineer of the LNWR, Britain's largest railway, with locomotive construction concentrated at Crewe works. His mechanical and organizing abilities were given full scope during the rapid development of these works, where he introduced Bessemer open-hearth steelmaking. In 1868 he installed Siemens-Martin furnaces. He reduced the number of individual locomotive types and standardized their components to the greatest possible extent; and new machine tools and equipment ensured accuracy in manufacture, and facilitated transfer of components within the works. The result was a more than twofold increase in the rate of locomotive production. He was the inventor of water pick-up troughs laid between the rails, whereby a scoop lowered into the trough from the locomotive or tender allowed additional water to be picked up while the train was running, thus making possible much longer non-stop runs. First applied in 1860, this was rapidly extended to most British and some American and French main-line railways. His other inventions included narrow spring piston rings (1852), tamper-proof safety valves (1856), and locomotive screw reverse (1858). In 1870, locomotive haulage replaced steel-rope haulage of trains up the steep gradient from Liverpool, and Ramsbottom designed ventilating extractor fans to remove foul air and smoke from the tunnel. 
In 1871 Ramsbottom retired from the LNWR. In 1883 he became consulting engineer and in 1885 a director of the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway, where he was responsible for the design and construction of their Horwich locomotive works near Bolton and was chairman of the rolling-stock and locomotive workshop committees. He was also a director of Beyer, Peacock & Co., locomotive builders, a firm in which his two sons held important positions. 
A modest and kindly man, Ramsbottom took a great interest in technical education and was a governor of Owens College, Manchester, where, in 1873, he endowed the Ramsbottom scholarship for young men in the locomotive department of LNWR. He was a founder member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1847 and its president in 1870-71. He was a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers from 1866 and in 1868 received the honorary degree of MEng from the University of Dublin. Ramsbottom died on 20 May 1897 at Fernhill, his home in Alderley Edge, Cheshire, and was buried in Macclesfield cemetery. 
George W. Carpenter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37882


Ramsey, Frank Plumpton (1903-1930), mathematician and philosopher, was born on 22 February 1903 at 71 Chesterton Road, Chesterton, Cambridge, the eldest of the two sons and two daughters of Arthur Stanley Ramsey (1867-1954), fellow and later president of Magdalene College, Cambridge, and his wife, Agnes Mary Wilson (1875-1927). He was baptized at Horbling church, Horbling, at Easter 1903, but rejected religion in his teens. 
As a child Ramsey lived with his parents in Howfield, Buckingham Road, Cambridge. He was educated at Winchester College (1915-20), and at Trinity College, Cambridge (1920-23), where he read mathematics, winning an entrance scholarship, and becoming a senior scholar in 1921 and a wrangler in 1923. In 1924 he became a fellow of King's College, Cambridge (only the second non-Kingsman to do so), and in 1926 a university lecturer in mathematics, a post he held until his death. On 21 August 1925 he married Lettice Cautley Baker (1898-1985), a psychologist and later a photographer, at the St Pancras register office in London. They lived in Cambridge, first in a flat in Hoop Chambers, Bridge Street, and then, from about April 1927, at 4 Mortimer Road. They had two daughters. 
Ramsey was tall (6 feet 3 inches), bulky, and short-sighted. He appeared clumsy but was not -- he was, for example, a good tennis player. He produced his extraordinary output of major contributions to mathematics, logic, philosophy, and economics by working for about four hours a day, mostly in the mornings, since he found it too exacting to work longer. His afternoons and evenings were often spent walking and listening to records. He listened a lot to classical music, both live and recorded, went to the opera in London, and was a keen hill-walker. He was a quiet, modest man, easy-going and uninhibited. His tolerance and good humour enabled him to disagree strongly without giving or taking offence, for example with his brother Michael Ramsey whose ordination (he went on to become archbishop of Canterbury) Ramsey, as a militant atheist, naturally regretted. 
Ramsey's main interest in mathematics was in its foundations. His 'The foundations of mathematics', read to the London Mathematical Society on 12 November 1925, was the culmination of the reduction of mathematics to logic undertaken in Russell's and Whitehead's 'Principia mathematica' (1913). On mathematics itself he published only eight pages, 'On a problem of formal logic' (read to the London Mathematical Society on 13 December 1928), but this has since become the basis of a branch of mathematics known as Ramsey theory. He also worked on economics, encouraged by his friend and contemporary John Maynard Keynes, who edited the 'Economic Journal'. His economics papers 'A contribution to the theory of taxation' (1927) and 'A mathematical theory of saving' (1928), which were published there, founded two branches of the subject -- optimal taxation and optimal accumulation -- which took off in the 1960s and 1970s. 
Keynes also helped to persuade King's College to make Ramsey a fellow, despite his attacks on the concept of probability (as an a priori measure of the extent to which evidence supports a hypothesis) developed in Keynes's 'A Treatise on Probability' (1921). After criticizing this concept so effectively that Keynes himself abandoned it, Ramsey worked out his own ideas on the subject in 'Truth and probability', written at the end of 1926. This classic paper, only published after his death, laid the foundations of modern subjective interpretations of probability, and related theories of games and decision making, foundations which were not rediscovered and built on until the 1940s. 
Ramsey's real vocation, however, was philosophy, influenced especially by Russell and the early Wittgenstein of the 'Tractatus logico-philosophicus' (1922), which he was the first to translate into English from the German. He visited Wittgenstein in Austria in 1923 and in 1924 and established a lasting friendship with him. After Wittgenstein's return to Cambridge in January 1929 the two used to meet several times a week for long philosophical discussions. As Wittgenstein later acknowledged in his preface to 'Philosophical Investigations', Ramsey's criticisms of the 'Tractatus' were a primary influence in bringing him to reject its key doctrines, such as its claim to have shown a relation (of language to the world) which cannot be stated: for, as Ramsey remarked, 'What we can't say we can't say, and we can't whistle it either' (Ramsey, 146) -- Wittgenstein was a famous whistler. 
Ramsey's own work in philosophy, besides the pieces mentioned above, included published papers -- 'Universals' (1925) and 'Facts and propositions' (1927) -- and notes on 'Universals of law and of fact', written in 1928, as well as 'Theories' and 'Knowledge', written in 1929. Like his work on economics and probability, all these notes and papers were way ahead of their time. 'Universals', for example, challenges the a priori status, still unquestioned by most philosophers, of the distinction between universal properties (such as being wise) and the particular entities (such as Socrates) which have them. 
'Universals of law and of fact' has had more, if still belated, success. In it Ramsey advocated a new theory of what distinguishes laws of nature such as 'all men are mortal' from universal statements that are only accidentally true. This theory, which Ramsey himself rejected a year later in 'General propositions and causality', is now widely accepted as the best account of natural laws in the empiricist tradition of David Hume. 'Theories', similarly, has revolutionized our understanding of how scientific theories -- identified with what are now called their 'Ramsey sentences' -- are related to the laws and observations they explain. 
'Facts and propositions' is no less famous for its new and still contested reduction of the analysis of truth to that of belief, via the fact that (in Ramsey's example) 'It is true that Caesar was murdered' means no more than that Caesar was murdered. It also anticipates much later and equally contentious theories of the mind by trying to define our beliefs by how they make us act -- just as his fragmentary note 'Knowledge' does by equating knowledge with true beliefs that have been reliably formed, as opposed to ones their holders could justify. 
Several of Ramsey's papers were prepared for publication only after his death, in 'The Foundations of Mathematics' (1930), edited by his friend R. B. Braithwaite. All the philosophical works mentioned here are contained in his 'Philosophical Papers' (1990), which also includes his work on the foundations of mathematics and a bibliography of his writings. 
The present influence of Ramsey's work in mathematics, logic, economics, and philosophy makes it hard to understand why it took so long to be taken up. There seem to have been several reasons for this. One is that he was no controversialist, and never pressed his own views. Another is the sheer difficulty of the topics he tackled and his original and unorthodox conclusions and arguments. A third is the fact that the very simplicity of his writing tends to conceal its originality and importance. And finally, those in Cambridge who understood his ideas and might have developed them were, for many years after his death, seduced into following the more charismatic character and enigmatic doctrines of Wittgenstein. More recently, however, Ramsey has come into his own, and is recognized as the founder of whole areas of mathematics and economics besides major theories in philosophy. 
After a long attack of jaundice, Ramsey died on 19 January 1930 in Guy's Hospital, London, of a combination of the undiagnosed hepatitis that had caused his symptoms and the effects of an operation designed to deal with their supposed cause. He was buried alongside his mother in the St Giles' and St Peter's burial-ground, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 37883


Ramsey, William (d. 1349), master mason, belonged to a family which included several master masons active in Norwich and London in the first half of the fourteenth century. He is first documented in 1323 and 1325 working as an ordinary cutting mason at St Stephen's Chapel in Westminster Palace. Between 1326 and 1336 he and his brother John visited the works of the cloister at Norwich Cathedral priory as consultant master masons. On 23 November 1331 William and his wife, Christina, along with others including two other men named Ramsey and a priest, were accused of going to the house of John Spray without Aldersgate for the purpose of abducting Spray's ward Robert Huberd and marrying him to William's daughter Agnes. William and the rest were acquitted of the abduction and the fourteen-year-old Huberd, heir to the considerable property of his father, a minter, chose to stay with Ramsey, who became his guardian in succession to Spray. Within a few months Ramsey had been appointed master mason of the new chapter house and cloister of St Paul's Cathedral, and on 13 July 1332 the city exempted him from sitting on assizes and from jury service in order to enable him to concentrate wholly on that work. Along with the remodelling of the south transept of what is now Gloucester Cathedral ('c'.1331-7), these destroyed but fairly well recorded buildings were the earliest example of the Perpendicular style of architecture. The influence of the cloister was to be felt in London and south-east England for at least the next half-century, most obviously in the south cloister walk of Westminster Abbey (begun in 1344), which is merely an enlarged copy of the St Paul's design, and most notably in the nave of Canterbury Cathedral (begun after 1381), whose piers are a most ingenious application of the system embodied in the St Paul's vault responds. 
Ramsey's position, that of master mason of the most prestigious building then in progress in the city of London, probably accounts for his being appointed in 1335 to a commission to inquire into the state of the Tower of London. The impending war with France was the background to this investigation and to Ramsey's appointment for life on 1 June 1336 as both chief mason in the Tower of London and chief surveyor of the king's works of masonry there and at all the other king's castles south of the River Trent. His most architecturally significant contribution to the Tower was the remodelling in 1336-8 of the great hall (destroyed). From February 1344 he had charge of the masonry work at Windsor Castle, where a 'Round Table' 200 feet in diameter was under construction for Edward III's projected order of chivalry. This work ceased in November of the same year and was subsequently destroyed. By 1337, when Ramsey took charge of the works of St Stephen's Chapel, Westminster, his royal responsibilities were evidently regarded as extending beyond castles to encompass all masonry work south of the Trent. The main opportunity for executing a new design at St Stephen's was the upper storey of the west porch (destroyed after 1834). Although in the Perpendicular style, this structure matched in its exceptional richness the fifty-year-old design of the main chapel to which it led. In the field of decorative architecture it was to exert an influence as powerful and enduring as that which the cloister of St Paul's had exercised on the more monumental genres. As late as the 1450s the London mason Richard Beke incorporated numerous quotations from the St Stephen's porch into the choir screen of Canterbury Cathedral. 
Ramsey's royal work coexisted with a private practice which may well have been extensive, like that of other leading royal architects of the late middle ages. Unfortunately, the only documented episode is his appointment on 23 May 1337 to advise on the works of the eastern arm of Lichfield Cathedral. The resulting design of the main vessel of the presbytery took account of the earlier work on the site and did not include the innovatory Perpendicular tracery used at St Paul's. Ramsey may also have been heavily involved in the profitable business of tomb making, but his only documented works of this kind are the marble tomb-chest of Blanche of the Tower (an infant daughter of Edward III) in 1343, and the now-destroyed monumental brass over the grave of Abbot Thomas Henley (died 1344), both in Westminster Abbey. Stylistic evidence indicates that Ramsey was the designer of the outstandingly splendid canopied tombs of Edward III's younger brother John of Eltham (died 1336), at Westminster, and Archbishop John Stratford (died 1348), at Canterbury. 
Ramsey died at the height of the black death, within a few days of 29 May 1349. His daughter Agnes, the child of his marriage to Christina, later submitted accounts to the exchequer which showed that over half the fees and robes due to him as king's chief mason had never been paid. This indication that Ramsey was prosperous enough to be able to live and conduct his business without depending on his official pay, is borne out by the size of his contribution -- $10 -- to the $5000 loan made by the city of London to Edward III in 1340. In 1347 he served as a common councillor for Aldersgate Ward. 


@@@@@


doc= 37884


Rawnsley, Hardwicke Drummond (1851-1920), Church of England clergyman and conservationist, was born on 18 September 1851 at the rectory, Shiplake, Oxfordshire, the fourth of ten children of the Revd Robert Drummond Burrell Rawnsley (1817-1882), rector of Shiplake, and his wife, Catherine Ann (1818-1892), the daughter of Sir Willingham Franklin, chief justice at Madras, and the niece of the Arctic explorer Sir John Franklin. Educated at Uppingham School (1862-70) under the headmastership of Edward Thring, where he gained a scholarship and won prizes for athletics and literature, Rawnsley went up to Balliol College, Oxford, in 1870. Here he distinguished himself in athletics and rowing, and gained a third class in natural science in 1874. Under the tutelage of John Ruskin he joined the 'Hinksey roadmenders', and through Ruskin was introduced to Octavia Hill. 
After taking his MA Rawnsley was ordained deacon in 1875, and became the first chaplain of Clifton College mission. His success in winning the confidence of the people in one of Bristol's poorest areas, through his unconventional approach to the priestly ministry, paradoxically led to his dismissal. In 1877 he was ordained priest and in 1878 took up his ministry in Wray on Windermere. On 29 January 1878 he married Edith Fletcher (1846-1916) of Croft, Ambleside. They had one son, Noel, who, because of his parents' numerous activities and love of travel, suffered a somewhat solitary childhood. 
Having elicited the support of Ruskin, Octavia Hill, and Sir Robert Hunter, solicitor to the Commons Preservation Society, in 1883 Rawnsley successfully spearheaded the campaign to prevent the construction of slate railways from the quarries above Buttermere, which would have ruined the unspoilt valleys of Newlands and Ennerdale. This, the first of his numerous campaigns to protect the region, hastened the foundation of the Lake District Defence Society. In 1883 he was appointed vicar of Crosthwaite and rural dean of Keswick, where, with the help of his artistically gifted wife, Edith, in November 1884 he founded the Keswick School of Industrial Arts to provide employment and craft training for local people. Rawnsley's interest in education for life led him to take a large part in the foundation of Keswick high school, which opened in October 1898, one of the first co-educational secondary schools in the country, of which he was a benefactor. Here he encouraged the introduction of a broad curriculum, including music, dance, drawing, carpentry, gymnastics, and gardening. 
From 1888 Rawnsley served on the new Cumberland county council, opposing the construction of roads over lakeland passes, reducing mining pollution, and organizing the proper signposting of footpaths. His persistence and single-minded determination made him some enemies; his opposition to the granting of new liquor licences offended vested interests and lost him re-election in 1895. Undeterred from his reforming zeal, he went on in later years to inveigh against pornography and against screen violence in the cinema. In 1893 he was appointed canon of Carlisle Cathedral. Five years later he reluctantly declined the bishopric of Madagascar, feeling that he had already committed himself too deeply to the causes of conservation in the Lake District and, more recently, on a national scale. Refining ideas which Ruskin had been the first to promulgate, Sir Robert Hunter, Octavia Hill, and Rawnsley met in the offices of the Commons Preservation Society on 16 November 1893. The result of this meeting was the foundation of the organization which, eight months later, was officially inaugurated under the presidency of Hugh Lupus Grosvenor, first duke of Westminster, as the National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty. Rawnsley, honorary secretary until his death, oversaw the acquisition of large areas of countryside, particularly in the Lake District and the west country. 
An inveterate traveller, in 1896 Rawnsley was sent as a newspaper correspondent to cover the coronation of the tsar in Moscow, and three years later he toured the eastern states of the USA as ambassador for the National Trust. He had previously made visits to the Holy Land and to Egypt to see the excavations of Sir Flinders Petrie and had undertaken several walking and painting tours in the Alps with his wife. 
In 1912 Rawnsley was appointed honorary chaplain to George V, for whose coronation he had organized the national bonfire celebrations -- having previously masterminded the bonfires for Queen Victoria's jubilees. In 1918 he chaired a war memorials committee and organized nationwide pyrotechnic displays in celebration of the armistice. 
Rawnsley's friendship with the Potter family led eventually to the acquisition by the National Trust of Lake District farms and more than 4000 acres of land given during her lifetime and bequeathed at her death by Beatrix Potter (Heelis). Rawnsley had encouraged Beatrix Potter in her literary aspirations and had been instrumental in helping her to achieve publication of her first books, though Warne's did not accept the verse version of 'Peter Rabbit' which he had composed in the belief that in that form it might prove more acceptable to a publisher. In addition to innumerable pamphlets and articles, children's songs and hymns, Rawnsley published more than forty books, many of them about the life, history, and literary associations of the Lake District, and, as a minor lake poet, a vast output of verse, principally in the form of sonnets. 
Rawnsley was impulsive, eloquent, irascible, and of a mercurial temperament, with a stocky figure, piercing blue eyes, and bristling beard. Though described by one parishioner as 'the most active volcano in Europe', he was none the less a charming and entertaining host, and, in spite of his heavy commitments nationwide, still found time for the pastoral care of his flock. An acute and sensitive observer of the natural world, a legacy of his schooldays under Thring, he had a profound reverence for the work and philosophy of Wordsworth, which coloured his view of the preservation of lakeland. A family connection with Alfred, Lord Tennyson led to the production by embroiderers of the Keswick School of Industrial Arts of the pall for the poet's coffin at Westminster Abbey. 
Rawnsley's wife died in December 1916, and on 1 June 1918 he married his secretary, Eleanor Foster (1873-1959), the daughter of William Frederick Simpson of Grasmere. There were no children of this second marriage. Rawnsley retired from the ministry due to ill health in 1917, to live at Allan Bank, Grasmere, the former home of Wordsworth, where he died on 28 May 1920. He was buried on 1 June in Crosthwaite parish churchyard. Friars Crag, Derwentwater, was purchased by public subscription and given to the National Trust in his memory in 1922. 


@@@@@


doc= 37885


Redman, Henry (d. 1528), master mason, was the son of Thomas Redman (died 1516), a mason, and, presumably, of his wife in 1516, Alice. Henry's will of 1 July 1528 reveals him to be of the family of 'Reedmans' living 'besyde our Lady of Reedbone', a chapel in the parish of Bury near Ramsey in Huntingdonshire. Henry's father was a working mason at Westminster Abbey from 1490 until 1505, when he became the abbey's master mason. He held this post until his death in 1516, when he was succeeded by Henry. In 1495-7 Redman was working on the completion of the nave of Westminster Abbey, at the same rate of pay as his father. He is next documented in 1501-4 carrying out a contract for building the Observant Franciscan friary founded by Henry VII beside his newly reconstructed palace of Richmond. Redman's fellow contractors were Henry Binks, master of the London Carpenters' Company, and Robert Nevill, a brickmaker and bricklayer. 
In his capacity as master mason of Westminster Abbey, Henry Redman continued the building of the nave and rebuilt the chancel of St Margaret's Church from 1516 to 1523. It is highly likely that he was also responsible for the sumptuous chantry chapel built by Abbot Islip on the north side of the presbytery during the early 1520s. In 1516, along with the master mason William Vertue and the master carpenter Humphrey Coke, Redman drew up the designs for the west cloister range and gatehouse (Lupton's Tower) at Eton College. In the meantime he had been put in charge of Cardinal Wolsey's two main building projects, York Place (later Whitehall Palace) and Hampton Court, begun in 1514 and 1515 respectively. By 1525 he had become joint master mason with John Lebons for Wolsey's third great project, Cardinal College (now Christ Church), Oxford. The simultaneous employment of two master masons is unusual in the late medieval and early modern periods in England, but it is a feature of many of the largest and most rapidly prosecuted early Tudor royal works. It was probably intended to insure against the disruption which the sudden demise of a master mason would normally cause, and it may well be significant that the plague was especially virulent during these years. Lebons seems to have been the more active of the college's two master masons until the work was halted by Wolsey's fall in 1529. 
For Henry VIII, Redman built in 1516-19 two towers for viewing jousts in the tiltyard of Greenwich Palace. On 12 September 1519 he became king's chief mason, jointly with William Vertue, and on 19 July 1520 he was appointed chief mason at Windsor Castle, evidently a sinecure. The fact that when Redman died on 10 July 1528 Henry VIII said that he was 'sorry' indicates that the king had good cause to regret the loss of his master mason, the implication being that Redman was very competent and had done considerably more royal work than is revealed by the extant documentation. Redman typifies the architects employed by Wolsey and by Henry VIII during the earlier part of his reign in that his work was stylistically heavily dependent on the principal buildings erected for Henry VII. His work at York Place and Hampton Court, in brick with stone dressings, has the same informality of composition and simplicity of detailing as the north range of Greenwich Palace by Robert Vertue (begun 1500), and the only technically and aesthetically complex work attributable to Redman, the Islip chantry chapel, reiterates with minimal variation much of the rich and novel ornamental vocabulary of the nearby lady chapel (Henry VII's Chapel), designed by Robert Janyns and begun in 1503. 
A damaged and incomplete brass showing two unnamed daughters survives (in the Museum of London) from an otherwise lost monument erected to Redman and his wife, Joan, in the chapel of St Lawrence, Brentford, Middlesex. The original site of the monument, on the north side of the sanctuary, was the most prestigious available for any tomb, and was no doubt granted because Henry and Joan had given lands which doubled the income of the chapel's priest. That the trustees of this endowment were Master John Spelman, the future king's bench judge, and his wife and son, is valuable evidence of the connections and social standing of a royal master mason early in Henry VIII's reign. 


@@@@@


doc= 37886


Reed, Sir Andrew (1837-1914), police officer, was born in Galway town, Ireland, on 26 September 1837, the only son and third of the four children (the others of whom died in childhood or adolescence) of John Reed, land agent, and his wife, Mary, daughter of John Adamson of Moate, co. Westmeath. His mother died when he was three and in 1847 his father remarried. He was brought up partly by his father's family, many of whom were Roman Catholics, and for a time was fostered among Irish-speaking peasants. He attended dame-school and Erasmus Smith's school in Galway, and at sixteen he was earning his living as a tutor. In 1856 he won a science scholarship, which enabled him to enter Queen's College, Galway, from which he obtained an LLB. 
In 1859 Reed passed the examination for entry into the Royal Irish Constabulary (RIC) as an officer cadet and went to Dublin to train at the force's depot in Phoenix Park. After four months he was appointed a sub-inspector in north co. Tipperary. But his district was rather too quiet for his taste and in 1862 he obtained a transfer to co. Donegal. The rugged west coast of Donegal was a favourite haunt of illicit distillers and he spent an adventurous four years in pursuit of them. In 1866 he was transferred to co. Kilkenny and then in 1867 to Belfast. In the latter year he married Elizabeth Mary (died 1913), only daughter of Hamilton Lyster of Croghan House, near Birr, King's county. They had one son and three daughters. 
Reed's stay in Belfast was brief, for, late in 1868, he was invited by Colonel John Stewart Wood, the inspector-general of the RIC, to become his private secretary in Dublin. He filled this position for eleven years, first under Wood, and then from 1876 under his successor, Lieutenant-Colonel George Hillier. During these years he found time to study law and, when in 1873 he was called to the Irish bar, he contemplated retiring from the RIC to practise law. But Wood dissuaded him. At Wood's request, Reed also substantially revised the RIC manual, first issued in 1866, and produced his own 'Irish Constable's Guide', which was to become the Irish policeman's bible. In 1874, prompted by his commitment to temperance, he published what became a standard text on 'The Liquor Licensing Laws of Ireland'. 
In 1879 Reed passed the examination for county inspector and was appointed to Donegal, with his headquarters in Letterkenny. This gave him 'the greatest delight', he later wrote, as he was tired of the job of clerk and 'longed... for the pleasant outdoor life, and the variety in work, of an Irish police officer' (Reed, 3). But, with the spread of the land war to Donegal in 1880, he found himself with the far from agreeable duty of providing police protection at numerous evictions. As the land agitation escalated he was recalled to Dublin in June 1881 and put in charge of the RIC's crime division, with the task of combating politically inspired crime. He was thus closely involved in investigating many of the controversial crimes of the period. By his own reckoning, from June 1881 to November 1882, he was only absent from his office for one day. When Hillier's health broke down in 1882 owing to the strain of work, he was appointed assistant inspector-general, and in 1884 he became one of the country's four new divisional magistrates, based in Athlone. 
In August 1885 Reed was offered the inspector-generalship of the RIC. He was initially reluctant to accept, fearing charges of anti-Catholic bias because his appointment would leapfrog the claims of seniority of the Catholic deputy inspector-general. He agreed, however, when told that an outsider would be sought if he refused the appointment. He served in the position until his retirement in August 1900, the year he was appointed CVO. He was knighted in 1889 and appointed KCB in 1897. 
Although these years were not as difficult as those of the land war, the so-called Plan of Campaign, directed against selected landlords between 1886 and 1891, produced a number of serious clashes between the RIC and protesting tenants. Reed also took personal charge of the RIC in Belfast during the riots of August and September 1886, the worst of the century, which he later described as the 'most arduous' duty of his whole police career. 
Reed was the only inspector-general without a military background; the only one to rise through the ranks from a cadetship; and the only one with academic and legal training. He thus placed less emphasis on military drill and the use of firearms and more on the mastering of the legal and technical aspects of police duties. His attempts to turn RIC men from soldiers into policemen may have been appropriate in the largely peaceful Ireland of the mid- and late 1890s, but when the RIC was called upon in 1919 to resume its military character in order to defeat the IRA, it proved unequal to the task. 
Reed died at his home 5 Dartmouth Road, Dublin, on 7 November 1914, having spent much of his retirement travelling in Europe and America. His son Captain Hamilton Lyster Reed, of the Royal Artillery, won the VC at the battle of Colenso in 1899. 


@@@@@


doc= 37887


Smith, Sir George Reeves- (1863-1941), hotelier, was born in Scarborough, Yorkshire, on 17 July 1863, one of at least two sons of George Reeves-Smith, who was for a time manager of the Brighton aquarium. Educated at Brighton College, Reeves-Smith was apprenticed to Bordeaux wine merchants, Jean Calvert & Co., before training in the hotel industry. About 1890 he was appointed manager of the Victoria Hotel, Northumberland Avenue, London. By 1893 he was manager of the Berkeley Hotel, Piccadilly, which he subsequently purchased by forming a small syndicate in 1897, taking for himself the office of managing director. 
Richard D'Oyly Carte, founder of the Savoy Hotel, sought to rebuild his management team after the departure of Cesar Ritz and Auguste Escoffier. To secure the services of Reeves-Smith, he purchased the Berkeley Hotel in 1900 and appointed him managing director of the Savoy Company. Reeves-Smith held this office, together with that of vice-chairman of the Savoy Company, from 1916 until his death. 
Reeves-Smith's style of management was precise, for he was aware of the slightest derogation from high standards of housekeeping or service; yet he was innovative and capable of masterly delegation. Although apparently punctilious and conservative in manner and dress, he had a shrewd business appreciation of practical detail and people's tastes in leisure activities. Some idea of his skill may be gained from 'Imperial Palace' (1930), a novel by Arnold Bennett based on the author's knowledge of the Savoy and its chief executive, and dedicated to Reeves-Smith. 
Reeves-Smith founded the Hotels and Restaurants Association (1910) and was chairman of its executive (1910-41) and of its council (1931-41). He was connected with several industry-wide associations and committees, as well as being chairman of the London coronation accommodation committee (1937). He was involved in the Preston Hall settlement for tuberculous ex-servicemen in Aylesford, Kent (1919-25), and the British Sanatorium in Montana-Vermala, Switzerland. He was knighted in 1938 for service to the hotel industry, and in the same year he was made a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur. In 1939 he became a knight commander of the Order of the Crown of Italy. 
On 16 August 1888 Reeves-Smith married Maud, daughter of Charles Hindle, a Brighton hotelier. They had a son, who was killed in the First World War, and a daughter. They lived in rooms, first in the Berkeley, then at Claridge's (also part of the Savoy group of hotels). Reeves-Smith was an inveterate buyer of books, and it was said that he bought a hotel in Seaford, Sussex, to accommodate his library. He died from pneumonia on 29 May 1941 in his rooms at Claridge's, survived by his wife. 
Tom Jaine', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37888


Reid, Elisabeth Jesser (1789-1866), slavery abolitionist and founder of Bedford College, London, was born on 25 December 1789 in London, the second of two daughters of William Sturch (1753-1838), a wealthy Unitarian ironmonger, and his wife, Elisabeth (1759/60-1841). In 1821 Elisabeth the daughter married John Reid (1776-1822), physician, from a nonconformist family in Leicester; he died thirteen months later, on 2 July 1822. Mrs Reid used her independent income to practise warm-hearted benevolence and was soon well known for her ardent altruism, supporting, for example, a scheme of Harriet Martineau to enable poor people in the Lake District to buy their own houses. She befriended many American abolitionists, including, during the General Anti-Slavery Convention in London in 1840, American women delegates, such as Lucretia Mott, who were denied the floor of the convention. In 1853 Mrs Reid gave hospitality to Harriet Beecher Stowe, who had come to England to speak about slavery at private gatherings of women, and in 1860 she shared her home with Sarah Parker Remond, the first black woman to undertake a public lecture tour in Britain on the slavery question, who later studied at Bedford College. 
Elisabeth Reid, together with her friends Anna Jameson, Julia Smith (aunt of Florence Nightingale and Barbara Leigh Smith Bodichon), and Harriet Martineau, form 'the missing link' in the history of the self-emancipation of Englishwomen between Mary Wollstonecraft and the Langham Place circle of the late 1850s. A college for women had been Mrs Reid's dream from childhood, and in 1849 she put up the money to found Bedford College, London, hoping for hundreds of applications but in fact receiving at first only a few dozen, including those of her own friends. The college was founded as a radical, even visionary institution, being intended to widen women's culture and thus their whole lives, rather than merely provide vocational training for future governesses. Unlike its contemporary, Queen's College, Bedford later became part of the University of London, and among its first outstanding students were Barbara Bodichon and George Eliot. 
One of the college's most innovatory features was the composition of its governing body, which, at Mrs Reid's insistence, included three Lady Visitors -- the first time that any British institution had women sharing officially in its direction. Mrs Reid's religion was the love of humanity and she found it hard that the first women's college should win so very little understanding or support at its outset, especially from men. Even her lifelong friend, Henry Crabb Robinson, thought she carried 'radicalism to a romantic excess' and had 'bigoted opinions about female education', but Julia Smith said of her: 'Her failures are better than other people's successes' (Smith to Robinson, 20 June 1844; Tuke, 17). She played a vital, pioneering role in opening higher education to British women. She died on 30 March 1866 at her home, 21 York Terrace, Regent's Park, London. She had no children. 
Sybil Oldfield', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37889


Rendel, Stuart, Baron Rendel (1834-1913), industrialist, politician, and philanthropist, was born in Plymouth on 2 July 1834, the fourth son in the family of four sons and three daughters of James Meadows Rendel (1799-1856), civil engineer, and his wife, Catherine Jane, daughter of James Harris of Plymouth. Two of his brothers were George W. Rendel and Alexander Rendel. He was educated at Eton College and at Oriel College, Oxford, where he graduated in 1856 with a fourth-class degree in classical studies. 
He married in 1857 Ellen Sophy, daughter of William Egerton Hubbard of Horsham, Sussex, brother of J. G. Hubbard (later first Baron Addington). In 1861 he was called to the bar (Inner Temple), but before long, through his father's association with the inventor and arms manufacturer W. G. Armstrong, became the London manager of Armstrong's engineering firm, a post which involved business relations with foreign governments. At the time of his death he was vice-chairman of the company. 
In 1880 Rendel was elected Liberal MP for Montgomeryshire, and he held the seat for the next fourteen years. His victory there was remarkable, because he had no Welsh connections, and the seat had long been monopolized by the powerful local family of Wynn, a member of which he defeated. He spent $12,000 on the election (to his opponent's $20,000), and thereafter devoted, on his own admission, 20 per cent of his annual expenditure to politics. He soon became known as 'the member for Wales', and was accepted as leader of the Welsh Liberal group in parliament. Under his guidance it began to act coherently, with the result that the Liberal leadership was compelled to pay more attention to Welsh causes. 
This process was assisted by Rendel's close friendship with W. E. Gladstone, which became closer still when one of his four daughters, Maude Ernestine, married one of Gladstone's sons, Henry Neville Gladstone. Sharing Gladstone's Anglican high-churchmanship, he was well qualified for the difficult task of reconciling him to the policy of Welsh disestablishment. A leading opponent of disestablishment, Bishop A. G. Edwards of St Asaph, later wrote of Rendel that he 'read the Welsh character in its strength and weakness', and so achieved unity and discipline within the Welsh party. 
Rendel gave much encouragement to the rising generation of authentically Welsh politicians, among whom T. E. Ellis and, above all, David Lloyd George were outstanding. Lloyd George thought very highly of him and used to quote with approval his dictum that in politics 'there are no friendships at the top' (too often attributed to Lloyd George himself). In addition, Rendel took a special interest in Welsh education and culture. He deserves most of the credit for the 'Welsh Intermediate Education Act' of 1889; and from 1895 to the end of his life he was president of the University College at Aberystwyth, to which he regularly contributed $1000 a year. In 1898 he presented the fine site overlooking Aberystwyth on which the National Library of Wales was built. 
In Gladstone's later years, Rendel frequently, together with George Armitstead, acted as host, confidant, and companion, regularly playing backgammon with Gladstone in the evening. On Gladstone's resignation in 1894 Rendel was created Baron Rendel of Hatchlands in Byfleet, Surrey. Hatchlands was his English estate, but he also had villas in Italy and the south of France, and in London a succession of grand houses, at the last of which, 10 Palace Green, Kensington Palace Gardens, he died on 4 June 1913, his wife having died in 1912. The peerage became extinct. 
Rendel was a shy man, but confident in his views and, to those who knew him well, a shrewd, witty, and charming companion. Had he been more self-assertive he might have risen higher in politics, but in his chosen field he made good use of his wealth and talents. 
John Grigg', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37890


Reuter, (Paul) Julius de, Baron de Reuter in the nobility of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha (1816-1899), news agency founder, was born on 21 July 1816 in Kassel, Germany, the third son in the family of four sons and one daughter of Samuel Levi Josaphat, provisional rabbi of Kassel, and his wife, Bette Sanders of Kassel. Soon after the death of his father in 1829, Israel appears to have become a clerk in an uncle's bank in Gottingen. 
Reuter moved to England on 29 October 1845, under the name Julius Josaphat. Two weeks later, on 16 November 1845, he was baptized as Paul Julius Reuter at St George's German Lutheran Chapel, Whitechapel, London. And one week after that, on 23 November 1845, he married Ida Marie Elisabeth Clementina, the daughter of Sigismund Matthaeus Magnus, a Berlin civil servant. They had three sons and four daughters, of whom two sons and one daughter reached adulthood. In 1847 Reuter became a partner in a Berlin bookshop and publishing business, Reuter and Stargardt, but the firm's radical pamphlets may have incurred official displeasure and Reuter moved to Paris in 1848. There he first worked as a translator in the news agency run by Charles Havas, and this working relationship later developed into a friendship. He soon switched his attention to bridging the 100 mile gap between the Franco-Belgian telegraph wire which ended at Brussels and the German one at Aachen. By renting pigeons at Aachen, he was able to beat the mail train by several hours, but by Christmas 1850 the gap was finally closed and his service became redundant. 
Having now accumulated a small amount of capital and a tiny corps of agents in European cities, Reuter moved to London in June 1851 and set up an office in the Royal Exchange Buildings. He made use of the new Dover-Calais cable to transmit economic information, which he sold to clients, between the London and Paris stock exchanges. Although he sold a news service to some European papers, he found it hard to sell a news service within the United Kingdom, and 'The Times' was particularly recalcitrant. Eventually, in October 1858, he persuaded the 'Morning Advertiser' and other newspapers to take his service on a fortnight's free trial. This was a success, and at last even 'The Times', under pressure from rising costs, succumbed. 
Reuter, who was naturalized in 1857, energetically expanded and developed his agency, showing a keen appreciation of the value of exclusive news 'beats' and following the cable around the world; 10 January 1859 saw his first major beat, the king of Sardinia's speech which prefaced the war of Italian independence. In 1865 he broke the news of President Abraham Lincoln's assassination several hours ahead of any rivals. In 1865 Reuters opened an office in Alexandria, the first outside Europe, and in 1866 the first Asian office was opened in Bombay. So that his firm could lay its own line to Germany, he floated Reuters as a $250,000 public company on 20 February 1865, taking the post of managing director. The company made a large profit when that line was nationalized. In 1870 Reuter formed a worldwide news agency cartel with Havas in Paris and Wolff in Germany, which survived until the 1930s. He secured his most spectacular coup in 1872 when he won a concession from the shah of Persia covering the exploitation of all industrial and mineral rights. Owing to religious pressure and intervention from Russia, however, this was soon rescinded. Reuter retired in 1878, handing over control of the agency to his son, Herbert de Reuter (1852-1915). The success of Reuter's agency lay in its objectivity, speed, and even-handed treatment of clients. The later profits of the news business were never substantial and much was ploughed back into expansion. 
Adorned with lavish side-whiskers, Reuter, succinct of speech but a superb salesman, was short and lively; he gazed sharply at visitors through pince-nez spectacles. A strong supporter of the British empire, he ran his business in patriarchal fashion. In 1871 he was ennobled by Ernst II, duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, as Baron von Reuter, and was from that time known as Baron Julius de Reuter. In 1891 Queen Victoria, to whom Reuter had been careful to send copies of important cables, allowed him to 'enjoy the privileges of the foreign nobility in Britain'. 
Reuter died on 25 February 1899 at 97 promenade des Anglais, Nice, France, his wife surviving him. His life became the subject of a film in 1941, released in the United States as 'A Dispatch from Reuters' and elsewhere as 'This Man Reuter'. It formed a piece of mid-war pro-British propaganda, using Reuter's career as an example of British and American commitment to a free press, showing how, in pursuit of the creation of a news agency that successfully promoted such freedom, Reuter had chosen to leave Germany and set up in London. 'The geographical moral was tacit but obvious' (Read, 276). 
Reuter's ultimate impact and influence has been summed up in the following way: 'Julius Reuter had taken the first step in a progression which was to lead in the late twentieth century to instant news and almost instant public reaction -- telegraphs, telephone, radio, satellite; still pictures as well as text; newsfilm; and, finally, television. Arguably, the first stage -- the making of news quickly available by overland telegraph and undersea cable -- was the most important stage of all, in the sense that whereas the first stage brought about a transformation, everything afterwards, however impressive, has been simply a refinement. (Read, 70-71)' Reuters remained under family control until the suicide of Herbert de Reuter in 1915. It then moved into other hands, but continued to develop and operate successfully into the twenty-first century. 


@@@@@


doc= 37891


Holdingham, Richard of (d. 1278?), cartographic patron and supposed map maker, probably also named as Richard de Bello, is known for certain only as the author or at least the patron of the large and very detailed late thirteenth-century world map which is now preserved at Hereford Cathedral (known as the 'Mappa mundi'). This bears an inscription in its lower left corner requesting prayers for 'Richard de Haldingham o de Lafford' ('Richard of Haldingham or of Lafford') who 'made and drew this history' ('fet e compasse cest estorie'). Holdingham is a hamlet in the parish of Lafford, Lincolnshire, and Richard is described as of either place in order to make his identity clear to people unacquainted with Holdingham. Lafford is a prebend of Lincoln Cathedral, and Richard has been assumed to be also identifiable as Richard de Bello (of Battle, almost certainly Battle in Sussex) who was prebendary of Lafford in 1277 and who was also treasurer of Lincoln Cathedral by October 1270, until at least April 1278. He is first found as a canon of Lincoln in 1265; he died on 4 November 1278. 
The map gives some prominence to Lincoln and also names Lindsey (meaning either the later Lindsey or possibly the county of Lincoln), and the map's patron must have been just such a well-educated man with Lincolnshire connections as Richard de Bello, who was a master of arts. A link with the Augustinian priory of Kirkham, Yorkshire, is also suggested by the presence on the map of this relatively minor religious house. Although the map has very possibly been at Hereford since the later middle ages, and certainly since 1682, Hereford has an inconspicuous place on it, added at an early date in the abbreviated form 'H'ford'. There is no reason to associate Hereford with the prebendary of Lafford, the map's putative patron. One Richard de Bello was canon of Hereford from 1305 until he died in 1326, as well as being canon of Salisbury from 1298, but clearly he cannot be identified with his namesake, the canon of Lincoln. That the Hereford canon gave the map to Hereford remains a mere hypothesis; his ecclesiastical career was linked rather with the diocese of Salisbury, while the city of Salisbury is not included on the map. 
World maps were not uncommon room furnishings in royal palaces and ecclesiastical institutions in the middle ages; one is listed in the mid-twelfth-century catalogue of the library of Lincoln Cathedral. Their ultimate source is maps from Roman imperial times, but in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries they received such modifications as the placing of Jerusalem in the centre, as on the Hereford map. The Hereford map is datable on stylistic and palaeographic grounds to about the very late thirteenth century. It includes Conwy and Caernarfon, whose castles were only begun in 1283 and not finished until about 1292, and it has therefore been suggested that it was made over a period of years. It does not have this appearance, however, and it may simply be a copy that updates but generally reproduces one that was written about the 1270s by, or rather for, Richard of Holdingham; despite the words 'made and drew' ('fet e compasse'), Richard of Holdingham is hardly likely to have actually written and drawn the map himself, since it has mistakes that show a lack of understanding of what was being copied. 
The discrepancies of date between the life of Richard of Holdingham who was prebendary of Lincoln, and the map that is now at Hereford, are best explained by the hypothesis that Richard commissioned a world map in the 1270s, and that this was copied in every detail (down to the inscription that names him) but with some additions (such as Conwy and Caernarfon) in the late 1280s or 1290s, shortly before being brought to Hereford. 
There remains also the faint possibility that Richard of Holdingham was not the same as the prebendary of Lincoln; it is perhaps significant that the inscription does not refer to him as a master (of arts). 


@@@@@


doc= 37892


Richards, Sir George Henry (1820-1896), naval officer and hydrographer, was born in Antony, Cornwall, on 13 January 1820, the eldest of three sons and second of four children of Captain George Spencer Richards RN, and his wife, Emma Jane, daughter of Samuel Harvey. Richards entered the Royal Navy in 1832 and in 1835 was appointed midshipman in the survey ship 'Sulphur', serving in the Pacific under Captain Edward Belcher. Belcher was notoriously difficult to please, and, of the surveyors who piloted the fleet to Canton (Guangzhou) during the First Opium War (1839-42), Richards was one of the few to receive his praise. In 1842, as lieutenant, Richards served in the surveying brig 'Philomel' off the Falkland Islands and the coast of South America. He commanded the 'Philomel''s small-arms men at the storming of the forts in the Parana River, Argentina, in 1845, and was promoted commander. On 24 July 1847, in Hampshire, he married Mary (died 1881), daughter of Captain Richard Spackman Young RE. They had four daughters and four sons, the eldest, George, becoming a rear-admiral. From 1847 to 1851 Richards served under Captain John Lort Stokes surveying the coasts of New Zealand in arduous conditions, sometimes from open boats. In 1852 he served again under Belcher, this time on a voyage to the Arctic in search of the Franklin expedition. No sign of Franklin was found, despite a number of prodigious sledge journeys, including one by Richards which lasted for ninety-three days. Belcher proved more overbearing and unreasonable than ever on this mission and Richards's tact and judgement were critical in holding the operation together. He was promoted captain in 1854. Between 1856 and 1863 he carried out surveys of Vancouver Island and parts of British Columbia. 
In 1863 Richards was appointed hydrographer to the Royal Navy, and began work in January 1864. Among his innovations was to make charts readily available for general use on Royal Navy ships, so that all officers, not only those responsible for navigation, would become familiar with them. He also organized the compilation and publication of charts showing prevailing winds and currents for each quarter of the year and improved the training of pilots. Under Richards hydrographic activity concentrated on areas of strategic importance, such as Canada when the USA was expanding into Alaska, or the newly opened Suez Canal in 1870, and areas of economic expansion such as Japan and Chile in the 1860s. Following the successful laying of an Atlantic submarine cable from the 'Great Eastern' in 1866, British ships began laying cables in other parts of the world. Naval surveying ships undertook preliminary work, taking soundings along the proposed routes and sampling the seabed: these activities coincided with a surge of interest in the scientific exploration of the sea. Richards worked with the Royal Society, of which he was elected a fellow in 1866, to arrange for scientists to accompany hydrographic cruises from the Faro Channel to the Strait of Gibraltar, and for the 'Challenger', with scientists chosen by the Royal Society on board, to set out in 1872 on a scientific voyage of three years. In 1868 Richards privately circulated his 'Memoir' of the hydrographic office, which is an important source for the history of the department. During his period of command the workload of the service increased substantially, in part because of increasing scientific demands and in part because of the transfer to it of Indian hydrographic work. 
Richards was promoted rear-admiral in 1870, and became CB in 1871. He retired as hydrographer in 1874, and became managing director of the Telegraph Construction and Maintenance Company, which laid 76,000 miles of submarine cables during his period there. He was knighted in 1877, and in the same year became a vice-admiral on the retired list. In 1882 he married, as his second wife, Alice Mary, daughter of the Revd Robert Tabor of Cheam School; she survived him, but they had no children. Richards died in Bath on 14 November 1896. 


@@@@@


doc= 37893


Richardson, Charles (1814-1896), civil engineer, was born at Capenhurst Hall near Chester on 14 August 1814, the third son of Richard Richardson JP, a deputy lieutenant for Cheshire, who died when Charles was six years old, and his wife, Dorothea. He was educated privately in England and France, and then at Edinburgh University which he left in 1833. From his earliest years he showed exceptional ability in mechanics and a natural talent for engineering, which his mother in particular did much to foster. 
At the age of nineteen Richardson was apprenticed to Isambard K. Brunel who employed him on the Box and Sapperton tunnels and on other sections of the Great Western Railway. In 1858 he was appointed resident engineer under Brunel of the Bristol and South Wales Union Railway, which was to involve a ferry crossing of the River Severn. After the death of Brunel in 1859 he was promoted engineer-in-chief, and it was while working on the ferry piers in 1862-3 that the idea of the Severn railway tunnel came into his mind. Although the plan was at first rejected on the grounds of cost, eventually in 1872 the 'Severn Tunnel Bill' was passed by parliament and construction began the following year. In October 1879 the headings from the English and Welsh sides were only 138 yards apart when a great inrush of water occurred, and the work was brought to a standstill. At this stage Richardson was replaced as engineer-in-chief by John Hawkshaw, and the former's role was much diminished. It was the end of 1881 before the most strenuous efforts of the engineers, contractors, and divers enabled the tunnel to be pumped dry and work to continue. At the end of 1886 the tunnel was opened to passenger and goods traffic; it was more than 4 miles long and its construction occupied almost fourteen years, at a cost of more than $2 million. Much credit is due to Richardson for the conception of the scheme. He developed a system for successfully aligning the two headings with unparalleled accuracy, and on occasion his advice was ignored when it might better have been followed. 
Richardson was the inventor of the cane-spliced cricket bat and a catapult for bowling which was successfully used for many years. He was elected a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1875. In his later years he wrote three papers on the Severn tunnel, one on arches, and one on the disposal of sewage. He died at his home, 10 Berkeley Square, Bristol, on 10 February 1896, survived by his wife, Mary Frances, and two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 37894


Richardson, Dorothy Miller (1873-1957), novelist and journalist, was born on 17 May 1873 at Albert Park, Abingdon, Berkshire, the third of the four daughters of Charles Richardson (1836-1915), grocer and tradesman, of Abingdon, and his wife, Mary Miller (1843-1895), daughter of Edward Taylor, manufacturer, of East Coker, Somerset. She attended schools in Abingdon and in Worthing, Sussex, where the family settled in 1880. In 1883 the Richardsons moved to Putney, London. There Dorothy was educated first by a governess and then in the intellectually stimulating environment of Southborough House, which provided the only formal education she valued in retrospect. 
Charles Richardson's aspirations to rise socially and live the life of an intellectual gentleman, combined with his unwise investments, led the family into bankruptcy. Dorothy thus had to start earning her own living when she was seventeen. In 1891 she taught at a finishing school in Hanover, Germany, for six months. After her return to England she taught at a school in Finsbury Park, Middlesex. She considered teaching to be an unduly confining experience and resigned her subsequent post as a governess in 1895 in order to look after her mother, who suffered from severe depression. Her parents, who had been forced to sell their house in London, had moved to Chiswick in 1893, and Mary Richardson's ordeal came to a tragic end when she committed suicide during a stay in Hastings with her daughter Dorothy in November 1895. 
In 1896 Richardson moved to Bloomsbury and earned a meagre living as an assistant to a Harley Street dentist. In London she showed an interest in a wide range of political, feminist, philosophical, and religious avant-garde movements of her time. She was a close friend of H. G. Wells (1866-1946), who, among others, encouraged her to write. She had a brief affair with him, became pregnant, miscarried, and subsequently suffered a breakdown in 1907. As a result of these events, she gave up her job, spent the following winter in Switzerland, and then lived on a farm in Sussex for several years. There she felt attracted to Quakerism, which became the topic of her first two books, 'The Quakers Past and Present' (1914) and 'Gleanings from the Works of George Fox' (1914). From 1907 she devoted herself to a journalistic career, publishing periodical articles on topics which ranged from literature and politics to dentistry, as well as reviews, sketches, short stories, and poems. She also engaged in translation work from German and French originals. In 1912 she began to write fiction while staying in Cornwall with friends. Twelve books of her best-known work, 'Pilgrimage', were published between 1915 and 1938; the first collected edition of all thirteen volumes of this novel, comprising 'Pointed Roofs' (1915), 'Backwater' (1916), 'Honeycomb' (1917), 'The Tunnel' (1919), 'Interim' (1919), 'Deadlock' (1921), 'Revolving Lights' (1923), 'The Trap' (1925), 'Oberland' (1927), 'Dawn's Left Hand' (1931), 'Clear Horizon' (1935), 'Dimple Hill' (1938), and 'March Moonlight' (1967), appeared posthumously in 1967. 
In 'Pilgrimage' Richardson provided an impressionistic account of the experiences of the central character, Miriam Henderson, which are modelled on the author's own migratory life between 1891 and 1915. Her writing technique is experimental and has frequently been compared to James Joyce's and Virginia Woolf's style. Richardson believed that reality in the early twentieth century could no longer be captured by imposing a plot through conventional narrative devices. Instead she immersed herself in Miriam's multilayered consciousness and narrated everything through the mind of her heroine. In doing so she frequently sacrificed conventional form and selectivity, which she considered to be characteristics of male writing. She attempted to portray life as continually fluctuating, blurred, and opaque, as well as an open-ended and timeless experience without fixed meanings. What is more, she considered her technique to be a specifically female way of writing. In her foreword to the 1938 edition of 'Pilgrimage' she pointed out that feminine prose should be 'unpunctuated, moving from point to point without formal obstructions', and Virginia Woolf claimed that Richardson had invented 'the psychological sentence of the feminine gender' ('TLS'). In a review of 'Pointed Roofs', which was published in 'The Egoist' in April 1918, May Sinclair first applied the term 'stream of consciousness' to literature in her discussion of Richardson's stylistic innovations. Even though Richardson despised Sinclair's term, it is today closely associated with her writing. 
On 29 August 1917 Richardson married the artist Alan Odle (1888-1948), son of Samuel Odle, a bank clerk. Her husband was fifteen years younger than she and had consumption, and she looked after him until his death in 1948. Between 1917 and 1939, when the Odles had to give up their rooms in Queen's Terrace, St John's Wood, the couple lived alternately in London and Cornwall. After 1939 they settled in Cornwall, and Richardson remained there after her husband's death. There were no children of the marriage. 
In 1954 Dorothy Richardson moved to a nursing home at 131 Albemarle Road, Beckenham, Kent, where she died on 17 June 1957. In accordance with her wishes her body was donated to medicine, and over two years after her death was interred at the Streatham Park cemetery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 37895


Riddell, Maria (1772-1808), poet, was born in England on 4 November 1772, the sixth of seven children and the youngest of the three daughters of William Woodley (1722-1793), a West Indian plantation owner, twice governor and captain-general of the Leeward Islands, and his wife, Frances Payne. She first demonstrated her literary bent at the age of fifteen, jousting in verse with Joseph Jekyll, a noted wit twice her age; her 'Inscription on an hermitage', written during a stay in the Caribbean in 1788, displays real poetical maturity. In the course of a second visit in 1790-91 she composed her 'Voyages to the Madeira and Leeward Caribbean Isles: with sketches of the natural history of these islands' (1792), published with the help of the Edinburgh printer William Smellie, who praised its 'science, minute observation, [and] accurate description'. 
On 16 September 1790, on St Kitts, Maria married a widower, Walter Riddell (1764-1802), lieutenant (on half pay), plantation owner on Antigua and the second son of Walter Riddell of Newhouse, a well-connected Dumfriesshire merchant, whose other son, Robert, of Glenriddell, was a noted antiquary and friend of Burns. They returned to Scotland, where Walter bought an estate near Dumfries. Renamed Woodley Park, it became the scene of many fashionable and literary gatherings. Two daughters, Anna Maria (1791-1859) and Sophia (1792-1797), were born before Walter departed in 1796 for Antigua, where he died. 
Maria's acquaintance with Robert Burns, to whom she owed her introduction to Smellie, began in Dumfries in late 1791. Despite the 'Rape of the Sabines' episode during Christmas 1793, when a drunken Burns may have overstepped the bounds of propriety towards his hostess, and notwithstanding the lampoons with which he requited his subsequent exile from her house, the intimate friendship that Burns formed with this 'really first-rate woman' survived its year-long breach. She wrote a highly perceptive appreciation of Burns's character after his death in the 'Dumfries Journal' (August 1796) and collaborated energetically with his biographer James Currie -- thereby also effectively protecting her own interests and reputation. 
Maria left Scotland in 1797 for London, where she remained until granted, in 1803, apartments in Hampton Court Palace. Intelligent, beautiful, and widely read in four languages, she cultivated men of 'unquestionable genius' such as Sir Thomas Lawrence and Henry Fuseli, whom she compared to Burns: his 'Lament for Maria' (1809?) was probably written in response to her death. Other literati who frequented her soirees included Sir James Mackintosh, Samuel Rogers, and 'Conversation' Richard Sharp. Her only other published work was 'The Metrical Miscellany' (1802; 2nd edn, 1803), an anthology of fugitive verse by contemporary celebrities, in which she also published twenty of her own poems (among them the prefatory verses of 1802 by 'The Editor'). Of her prolific correspondence, little beyond that with William Roscoe and James Currie has survived. In 1808 Maria married Phillips Lloyd Fletcher (1782-1863), an officer of dragoons, of Gwernheylod, Ellesmere, Flintshire. She died on 15 December 1808 in Chester and was buried in the Fletcher family vault at Overton. 


@@@@@


doc= 37896


Rigby, Christopher Palmer (1820-1885), diplomatist and army officer, was born on 18 January 1820 at Yately Lodge, Yately, Hampshire, the youngest son and sixth of the eight children of Tipping Thomas Rigby (1774-1862), barrister and recorder of Wallingford, and his wife, Ann Eliza, 'nee' Cousins. Educated at Abingdon grammar school (1831-3) and at Addiscombe College (1834-5), Rigby began his military career in 1836, as an ensign in the 5th regiment of native infantry stationed in Poona. He remained in India, except for a posting in Aden from 1840 to 1843, until 1850 -- with one leave in England. During these years of service overseas he acquired fluency in eight oriental and African languages, and wrote a number of erudite articles which appeared in the 'Transactions of the Bombay Geographical Society'. 
Rigby returned to India in April 1854 -- to Bombay -- and soon afterwards was appointed president of the examination committee for native languages -- his latest recreation being the study of Turkish. At this period relations between Persia and Britain were worsening on account of Afghanistan. Accordingly, in September 1854 Britain dispatched an expeditionary field force to the Persian port of Bushehr, with Rigby as interpreter and, later, superintendent of police -- with himself the only policeman in the town. 
After returning to Bombay early in 1858 Rigby was appointed the East India Company's agent in Zanzibar and British consul, the previous consul having died at his post thirteen months previously. On 27 July 1858, the day of his arrival in Zanzibar, Rigby called on the sultan, Majid bin Sa'id al-Busa'idi, aboard his flagship and was given a royal salute. The sultanates of Muscat and Zanzibar had recently been separated by the terms of the Canning award, but Majid's position remained insecure; in 1859 his half-brothers Thwain of Muscat and Barghash, who was to succeed Majid as sultan, attempted to capture Zanzibar. However, at Rigby's instance, the Royal Navy gave Majid the necessary support and the insurrection failed, Barghash being sent to Bombay where he was compelled to remain for eighteen months. 
While serving in Zanzibar, Rigby met and assisted several celebrated explorers: Sir Richard Burton (who was to be accused by Rigby of withholding payment from porters and other members of the expedition to Lake Tanganyika -- an accusation which was denied by Burton), J. H. Speke, and David Livingstone. In particular, he befriended James A. Grant. 
Atkins Hamerton, Rigby's predecessor in Zanzibar, had signed a treaty with Majid's father in 1845; this restricted, but did not abolish, the east African slave trade. Rigby worked with ardour to suppress the traffic in slaves and his efforts to enforce the 1845 treaty were unremitting. Furthermore, he ordered the emancipation of all slaves owned by British subjects residing in Zanzibar; it is estimated that he set free 8000 slaves up to the time of his leaving Zanzibar. 
In 1861 the Bombay government published Rigby's 'Report on the Zanzibar Dominions', a comprehensive and informative survey of the sultanate. On 5 September 1861 Rigby left Zanzibar because of ill health and returned to England. In January 1864 he was appointed commissioner for the settlement of boundary disputes between the states of Baroda and Jamnagar. On 27 June 1867, in London, he married Matilda, 'nee' Prater. They had two sons (one of whom was killed in action in the First World War) and two daughters (one of whom died in infancy). 
Rigby resigned from the army in August 1867 with the rank of major-general. Shortly before his death he lost all his savings in the collapse of the Oriental Bank. He died at his home, 14 Portland Place, London, on 14 April 1885; he was survived by his wife. His daughter Lillian (1875-1949) edited, as C. E. B. Russell, 'General Rigby, Zanzibar and the Slave Trade' (1935). She became a follower of Albert Schweitzer, was his first British assistant at Lambarene, and was the English translator of Schweitzer's philosophical lectures. 
P. J. L. Frankl', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37897


Ripley, Dorothy (1767-1831), missionary, was born on 24 April 1767 in Whitby, Yorkshire, the second daughter in the large family of Dorothy and William Ripley (1739-1784), of Whitby. Her father was a master mason and a Methodist minister. Dorothy learned to pray at two or three, and felt chosen to preach the gospel to the heathen from eleven. Her teenage years were turbulent, marked by a suicide attempt in 1783, and in 1784 the death of her beloved father. At about twenty, on her way 'to meeting', she encountered a group of sailors who had just stripped, tarred, and feathered a beautiful girl 'ruined by a snare'. Ripley 'became servant to this miserable female', helped her on with borrowed clothes, 'lifted up my eyes to Heaven, and asked, Why is this not me Lord?' Later, in her prison visiting, she always sought out prostitutes for kindness. 
In 1802, already a minister for ten years, Dorothy Ripley set out to preach to 'Ethiopia's children' living under 'base tyranny' in 'the large cities of America'. Several times she returned home because of illness, but never for long. She maintained links with the Quakers but made a point of religious independence: 'As I am not a member of any community, no society can answer for my irregular conduct.' She valued herself on being self-supporting, 'enabled to pay my own expenses many times, at Inns, by printing'. At Chester in England in October 1807 she spent two days editing a slim volume of letters addressed to her by several 'Africans and Indians', including a black bishop, proto-feminist Indian women, and a convicted felon. 
In New York in 1810 Ripley issued her 'Extraordinary conversion, and religious experience... with her first voyage and travels in America'. She stated that this was the first volume and reprinted it in London in 1817, but never produced a second volume. A similar work prepared for the press soon after this one appeared only in 1819, in Philadelphia, as 'The Bank of Faith and Works United'. That year she also published an account of a nineteen-year-old woman executed for arson. Her memoirs in jaunty verse (including 'A Hymn from my Nativity', written in 1819) and prose (written in late 1821, in Mythe near Tewkesbury) appeared together at Bristol as 'An Address to All in Difficulties'. A second, revised and expanded edition of 'The Bank' in 1822 earned her a passage to the southern states of America, her ninth Atlantic crossing. On yet another voyage, from New York to France in 1826, she found time to write a preface to her father's recently discovered memoirs, published in Philadelphia in 1827. 
Ripley's texts reflect the contradictions of her career. The language of her faith and preaching was other-worldly, yet she was deeply concerned with social issues and the roots of crime and poverty. She was selfless in religious commitment, yet delighted in displaying herself in print as a spiritual heroine. Dorothy Ripley died on 23 December 1831 in Mecklenburgh, Virginia. She was unmarried. 
Isobel Grundy', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37898


Rivers, William Halse Rivers (1864-1922), psychologist and anthropologist, was born on 12 March 1864 at Constitution Hill, Chatham, Kent, the eldest in the family of two sons and two daughters of Henry Frederick Rivers (1830-1911), curate, and his wife, Elizabeth Hunt. Family tradition claims that he was a descendant of William Rivers, the midshipman who shot the sniper who fatally wounded Lord Nelson. Rivers was educated at Tonbridge School, the University of London, where he matriculated in 1882, and at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London. When he received the MB and MRCS in 1886 he was the youngest medical graduate in the history of the hospital. Rivers travelled to Japan and North America in 1887 as a ship's surgeon, and thereafter he regularly undertook sea voyages as a means of overcoming poor health. He became MD in 1888 and FRCP in 1899. 
Rivers was house surgeon at Chichester Infirmary (1887-9) and house physician at St Bartholomew's (1889-90). In 1891 he joined the Neurological Society and became house physician at the National Hospital for the Paralysed and Epileptic. Here he met John Hughlings Jackson, Michael Foster, Henry Head, and Charles S. Sherrington. He also worked with Victor Horsley on investigations into the existence and nature of electrical currents in the mammalian brain, conducted at University College, London (UCL). Rivers resigned from the National Hospital in 1892 and travelled to Jena where he worked with Ewald Hering. During his visit he wrote in his diary that 'I have during the last three weeks come to the conclusion that I should go in for insanity when I return to England and work as much as possible at psychology' (Slobodin, 13). On his return he was appointed clinical assistant at Bethlem Royal Hospital, and the next year assisted G. H. Savage on his lectures on mental diseases at Guy's Hospital. About this time he also began to lecture on experimental psychology at UCL. By 1893 Rivers was teaching physiology at Cambridge and spent that summer working in Heidelberg with Emil Krapelin on measuring the effects of fatigue. Rivers became university lecturer in psychology at Cambridge in 1897, and in 1902 he was elected a fellow of St John's College. In 1907 he was appointed to the newly established lectureship of physiology and experimental psychology and made director of the university's new psychology laboratory, the first of its kind in Great Britain. 
Rivers was interested in the relation between mind and body. His most famous experiment was conducted between 1903 and 1907 in collaboration with Henry Head. Head severed two of the cutaneous nerves in his left forearm and sutured the ends together. He and Rivers then spent four years mapping the recovery of sensory perception in Head's arm. The experiment reinforced beliefs that 'civilized' man retains underneath an evolutionary primitive nervous system. His slightly later work on the influence of alcohol and caffeine on fatigue was also one of the first experiments to rely on a double-blind procedure. 
In 1898 Rivers had joined the Cambridge anthropological expedition to the Torres Strait. He performed some of the first experiments in cross-cultural psychology and also developed the genealogical method as a key to the study of social organization. He then spent several months during 1901-2 among the Toda people of south-west India. The resulting monograph, 'The Todas' (1906), set new standards of ethnological accuracy. In the following years he began to propound diffusionism, the doctrine that cultural traits were not independently invented but carried from one area to another. During 1907-8 he travelled to the Solomon Islands, and other areas of Melanesia and Polynesia. His two-volume 'History of Melanesian Society' (1914) presented a diffusionist thesis for the development of culture in the south-west Pacific. 
In 1913 Rivers delivered three lectures at the London School of Economics which were later published as 'Kinship and Social Organization' (1915). He visited the New Hebrides during 1914 and early 1915, returning to England during the spring of that year. In July he joined the Maghull Military Hospital, Lancashire, as a physician. Here Rivers, who was already familiar with the work of Freud and Jung, was introduced into a society in which the interpretation of dreams and the discussion of mental conflicts formed the staple subjects of conversation. In 1916 Rivers was commissioned as a captain in the Royal Army Medical Corps and in October he was posted to Craiglockhart Hospital for Officers, near Edinburgh, where he played a key role in the development of techniques to heal shell-shocked soldiers. Because of this experience he came to champion the cause of psychiatry and of a high-minded version of socialism. Rivers became psychologist at the Royal Flying Corps Central Hospital at Hampstead in 1917. All through the war he continued to work on method and theory in psychotherapy and wrote the entry on psycho-therapeutics in volume 10 of the 'Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics' (1918). Between 1918 and 1919 he was also on the staff of the Empire Hospital for Officers, Vincent Square, London. His post-war writings drew his previous interests together, as he developed ideas on the nature of instinct, the interpretation of dreams, and the relationship of myth and dream. In 1922 he became the Labour candidate for the University of London constituency, but he died before the election. 
Rivers played a fundamental role in the establishment of both experimental psychology and social anthropology as academic disciplines in Great Britain. His pre-war writings were crucial for steering anthropology away from interpretations based on evolution to ones based on the functioning structure of the contemporary society. His turn to diffusionism, however, was generally seen as a misguided shift towards a method of interpretation that relied too heavily on conjecture. 
Rivers was a shy, reticent man hampered by a stammer. He led a rather monastic, reclusive life and displayed a complete disregard for personal gain. In the years after the war, however, he became much more outgoing and sociable, and he welcomed opportunities for public speaking. The officers under his care, who included Siegfried Sassoon, remembered him as a patient and deeply sympathetic man. Rivers is portrayed in Sassoon's 'The Complete Memoirs of George Sherston' (1937) and in Pat Barker's trilogy: 'Regeneration' (1992, released as a film in 1997), 'The Eye in the Door' (1994), and 'The Ghost Road' (1996). 
In 1908 Rivers was made a fellow of the Royal Society and was awarded the society's gold medal in 1915. He was president of the anthropological section of the British Association for the Advancement of Science in 1911, of the Folklore Society in 1921, and of the Royal Anthropological Institute in 1921-2. The universities of Manchester, St Andrews, and Cambridge awarded him honorary degrees in 1919. Rivers died on 4 June 1922 in the Evelyn Nursing Home, Cambridge, following an emergency operation on an intestinal obstruction. His ashes were interred in St Giles's cemetery, Cambridge, following a funeral service in St John's College chapel. He was unmarried. Thirty years later Siegfried Sassoon was to write 'I should like to meet Rivers in the 'next world'. It is difficult to believe a man such as he could be extinguished' (Slobodin, 62). 


@@@@@


doc= 37899


Roberton, Sir Hugh Stevenson (1874-1952), composer and conductor, was born in Glasgow on 23 February 1874, the second son and third in the family of four sons and two daughters of James Roberton, founder of the family firm of undertakers, James Roberton & Son, and his wife, Mary Sim. He was educated in Glasgow, trained in the family business, and at twenty-one was appointed general manager of the funeral department of the Glasgow Tramway and Omnibus Company. Inspired by his mother, an untrained singer who knew hundreds of folk-songs, he exhibited instinctive musical gifts from an early age, conducting a group of children when he was ten. As a composer and conductor he was entirely self-taught, gaining experience by singing in and directing church choirs. In 1901 he was appointed conductor of the Toynbee Musical Association, a mixed-voice choir attached to a men's social club, and in 1906 he founded the Glasgow Orpheus Choir, with which his name became indelibly linked for the rest of his life. Within two years the choir was booked to sing at the Queen's Hall in London, and a royal command performance soon followed at Balmoral. 
In addition to the traditional songs of Scotland, the Glasgow Orpheus Choir gave early performances of most of Sir Edward Elgar's partsongs, and included in their programmes music by Bach and Brahms, and Roman Catholic and Greek Orthodox liturgical music. Roberton published some 300 pieces of his own, and his work became an integral part of the choir's programmes. They included 'Songs of the Isles' (1937), based on highland airs, a 'Concert Edition of Scottish Airs', and his best-known partsong anthem, 'All in the April evening'. In 1911 he founded the Glasgow music festival and in 1921 he was a founder of the British Federation of Music Festivals. He became well known as a music festival adjudicator, working in Canada every alternate year between 1924 and 1938, and he took the Glasgow Orpheus Choir on tours to Canada, the USA, and half a dozen European countries. Roberton's interests extended to chamber music, and for some years his concerts featured visits from the London String Quartet and the Lener String Quartet. 
Roberton wrote two plays, published as 'Kirsteen' (1922); a collection of humorous sketches, 'Curdies' (1931); and 'Choir Singing' (1925). He married first, in 1895, Joan, daughter of Donald McGillivray, and second, in 1909, Helen, daughter of John Birkmyre, fisherman. There were two daughters and four sons by the first marriage, and three sons by the second. 
In 1951 Roberton took on the vice-presidency of the newly formed Musicians' Organization for Peace. He had always been a socialist and a pacifist, a brave position for a man in public life to adopt at the time, and he and his colleagues paid a heavy price for his principles when in 1940 the BBC banned broadcasts by the Glasgow Orpheus Choir. This prompted a debate in parliament and elicited one of Winston Churchill's most astute and amusing comments: he did not see, he said, why being a pacifist should make a man play flat. The ban was rescinded. 
In 1951 Roberton decided he could no longer provide the dynamic leadership needed to maintain the choir's international reputation, and stepped down. As a result, the Glasgow Orpheus Choir, so totally identified throughout its life with just one man, ceased to exist. 
Roberton was knighted in 1931. From Aberdeen University he received an honorary LLD in 1951. He died on 7 October 1952 in Glasgow, and was survived by his second wife. 
Michael De-la-Noy', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37900


Roberts, Sir Gilbert (1899-1978), civil engineer, was born in Hampstead on 18 February 1899, the son of Henry William Roberts, pharmaceutical chemist, who died when Gilbert was a child, and his wife, Lily Hodgson, who later remarried. He had an elder sister and a half-brother. He was a bright boy with a gift for mathematics and was sent to Gresham College to study engineering, but soon after the outbreak of war in 1914 joined the Royal Flying Corps and served as a flight lieutenant in 73 squadron in France. In 1918 he was shot in the knee while on a bombing raid and spent some time in hospital before being awarded an army scholarship, which enabled him to complete his studies at the City and Guilds College, London. He graduated BSc with first-class honours in 1922. 
Roberts started work as an assistant to Ralph Freeman of Sir Douglas Fox & Partners on the design of the Sydney harbour bridge for Dorman Long & Co., and when they were awarded the contract in 1924 he was transferred with the rest of the design team to their office in London. He worked with them for ten years, initially on the Sydney harbour and Newcastle upon Tyne bridges, and then from 1931 on the design and construction of welded steel bridges, of which his Billingham Bridge was the first all-welded bridge in Britain. In 1925 he married Elizabeth Nada, daughter of Frederick Rudolph Hora, schoolmaster. They had two daughters. 
From 1936 to 1945 Roberts was in charge of construction and development for Sir William Arrol in Glasgow, where he took the initiative in substituting welding for the traditional riveting of joints in steel structures. He stayed with Arrol for a further four years as director and chief engineer before joining, in 1949, Freeman, Fox & Partners, with whom he remained until his retirement in 1969. He was jointly responsible for the original design work on the great suspension bridges across the estuaries of the Severn, Forth, and Humber, and later developed and patented the revolutionary aerofoil-shaped box-girder deck of the final Severn Bridge design. He was knighted in 1965 for his work on the Forth road bridge, which had been opened the previous year. 
Among Roberts's many other notable designs were the Dome of Discovery at the Festival of Britain (1951); Auckland harbour bridge, the Wye Bridge on the Welsh side of the Severn crossing, the Volta River bridge (later known as Adomi bridge) in Ghana, and the new Maidenhead Bridge; radio telescopes in Australia and Canada; and two Goliath cranes of 400 tons capacity for use in the construction of nuclear power stations. He was also involved in the design of two bridges, at Milford Haven in Wales and the West Gate Bridge in Melbourne, Australia, both of which collapsed during construction in 1970, with the loss of four and thirty-five lives respectively. In the first accident the design was certainly not at fault, but the underlying cause and the ultimate responsibility for the West Gate tragedy were never clearly established, in spite of the most searching questioning of Roberts and other witnesses by the Australian royal commission investigating the accident. A few weeks later he suffered a heart attack, and on recovery was ordered complete rest. 
Roberts's writings included numerous papers and articles on the design and construction of his bridges and other structures. He was a fellow of the Royal Society (1965), the institutions of Civil and Structural Engineers, the Institute of Welding, the American Society of Civil Engineers, Imperial College, London, and the City and Guilds of London Institute. He was awarded the Telford gold medal of the Institution of Civil Engineers (1967), the royal medal of the Royal Society (1968), the James Watt medal of the Institution of Civil Engineers (1969), and the Churchill gold medal of the Society of Engineers (1970). Awards received by Freeman, Fox & Partners, to which his outstanding designs contributed in no small way, included the Queen's award to industry in 1967, and, jointly with Rolls-Royce, the first MacRobert award in 1969. Roberts died of heart failure on 1 January 1978 at St Stephen's Hospital, London. He was survived by his wife. 
Ronald M. Birse', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37901


Robertson, Henry (1816-1888), civil engineer, was born in Banff on 11 January 1816, the youngest of the twelve children of Duncan Robertson, Inland Revenue official, and his wife, Christian Anderson. With the aid of a scholarship he studied at the University of Aberdeen, where he graduated MA before he was twenty. At about that time his father died and the family moved to Glasgow; soon afterwards Robertson decided to become an engineer. 
After some training under Peter McQuistin, a Glasgow civil engineer, and working as a mining engineer in Lanarkshire and on Dundee waterworks, Robertson became increasingly involved in railway engineering. He assisted in Joseph Locke's survey of the west coast main line route between Lancaster and Glasgow on the Shap Fell section, and took a masonry contract on Locke's Glasgow, Paisley, and Greenock line which brought him into contact with William Mackenzie and other engineers. He was approached by capitalists in 1842 to report on the practicality of restoring the derelict Brymbo ironworks in Denbighshire, which formerly belonged to John Wilkinson. The shareholders included Mackenzie, William Betts, and A. M. Ross, all former associates of Hugh MacIntosh. Robertson was so favourably impressed by the industrial potential of the area that when the necessary capital was raised he moved south to Chester. In 1846 he married Elizabeth (died 1892), daughter of William Dean of London. They had one son and three daughters. 
Robertson realized that the improvement of communications throughout the area was a pressing need, and became involved in the construction of many of the railway lines on both sides of the Welsh border, including the North Wales Mineral Railway which served the Brymbo ironworks, the Shrewsbury to Hereford line, the LNWR central Wales line from Craven Arms to Llandovery, the Ruabon to Dolgellau line, and the branch to Bala and Blaenau Ffestiniog. The contractor for many of these lines was Thomas Brassey. As part of these works Robertson designed a number of fine masonry viaducts, such as those at Cefn and Chirk, as well as the Kingsland Bridge over the Severn at Shrewsbury, then one of the largest single-span iron bridges in Britain. 
When steel began to supersede iron in the 1880s Robertson developed the Brymbo ironworks into the largest steelworks in north Wales, and by that time he had also acquired a number of important collieries and other industrial concerns. In 1855 he had been brought in as a partner to Beyer and Peacock's Gorton factory in Manchester, recently built for the manufacture of railway locomotives, and he maintained an active role in the management of Beyer, Peacock & Co. until his death. He was also a partner in the firm of Robertson and Mackintosh, civil engineers, with offices in London. 
Robertson was chairman of three of the railway companies of north Wales as well as the Wirral Railways Company; chairman of the Minera Lime Company, the Broughton and Plas Power Coal Company, the Brymbo Steel Company, and the Brymbo Water Company; and director of the Wrexham, Mold, and Connah's Quay Railway Company. He was also an active politician, elected to represent Shrewsbury as a Liberal in parliament 1862-5 and 1874-85. In 1885 he was elected MP for Merioneth. He was a JP for Merioneth and Denbighshire. 
Robertson was elected a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1848 and of the Institution of Civil Engineers the following year. He died on 22 March 1888 at his mansion, Crogen, near Pale, Llandderfel, Merioneth, and was buried in Llandderfel churchyard. His wife died in 1892. 


@@@@@


doc= 37902


Robertson, (William) Strowan Amherst (1894-1955), Church of England clergyman and Franciscan friar, was born at Redlands, The Common, Ealing, Middlesex, on 16 October 1894, the elder of the two children of William Robertson (1853/4-1925), a jeweller, and his wife, Lucy Ann Amherst (1871-1957). He had one brother, Charles. Although small and delicate from birth, Robertson revealed early in life a strong will, offset by a winning charm and courtesy, which marked him out as a leader and organizer. Educated at Westminster School and at Queens' College, Cambridge, where he took a third-class degree in history in 1916, he was ever at the centre of a circle of friends and activities. He was nicknamed Algy, a name by which he was generally known for the rest of his life. Brought up as a Congregationalist, his attraction to a more catholic expression of Christianity led him to become an Anglican. However, he never forgot his nonconformist roots and he combined throughout his life the best of the catholic and evangelical traditions. 
In 1917, being unfit for military service, Robertson accepted a post lecturing in history and English literature at St Paul's College, Calcutta. Here, he manifested his considerable teaching abilities. He was deeply moved by India, by both its cultural richness and its material poverty, and was determined to return. After three years, he left to train for ordination at Westcott House, Cambridge. Ordained deacon in 1921, priest in 1922, he served a curacy at St George's, Cullercoats, near Newcastle, and then spent three years as a travelling secretary for the Student Christian Movement, promoting ecumenism among ordinands. In 1927 he returned to India to be a novice in the Christa Seva Sangha (CSS), a multiracial Franciscan community, founded at Poona in 1922. Robertson absorbed himself in the life of the CSS 'ashram', founding a hostel for university students, but his health was unable to cope with the climate and he returned home. It was therefore in England in 1931 that he was professed as a friar. 
Accepting the living of St Ives, Huntingdonshire, Robertson made the vicarage into a branch house of CSS. Far away from the decision-making centre of the Sangha, he spent the 1930s forging links with other small Franciscan communities in Britain. It was his vision and drive which was primarily behind these groups coming together to found one united order, the Society of St Francis (SSF). He was consequently life professed in SSF in 1937 rather than the Sangha. 
One of the brotherhoods in the union had a friary at Hilfield in Dorset as the centre for its ministry to the poor, particularly wayfarers. Robertson moved there and reorganized the varied groups of brothers into one community, adding evangelism and retreat-giving to the social work of the friars. While maintaining the discipline of religious life, he intentionally fostered a warm and open atmosphere in the society, stressing in particular his vision of 'sacramental friendship' as being at the heart of community life, without which he believed no collective ministry could prosper. Robertson therefore developed the traditions of Anglican religious life away from the more austere models favoured by other men's communities. 
Robertson's own outwardly disorganized life, characterized by a habitual lateness for appointments, masked a keen judgement of events and people. His skills in listening made him respected as a spiritual director. He was in great demand as a preacher and missioner, and was a member of the Church of England's commission on evangelism. Yet it was his establishment of SSF as a coherent and successful religious order during the years 1937-55 which was his lasting achievement. In the decades after his death, SSF grew to be the largest of all men's communities in the Anglican communion. He also had a significant role in the founding of both a Franciscan third order and a contemplative community for women, the Community of St Clare, at Freeland, Oxfordshire. Soon after a diagnosis of inoperable cancer of the liver, he died of pneumonia in the Gordon Hospital, Westminster, aged sixty-one, on 23 November 1955. His funeral service took place at St Matthew's, Westminster, and his ashes were interred at Hilfield Friary on 29 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 37903


Robins, Elizabeth (1862-1952), actress, writer, and feminist, was born at East Walnut Street, Louisville, Kentucky, on 6 August 1862, the eldest daughter of Charles Ephraim Robins (1832-1893), insurance broker and banker, and his cousin and wife, Hannah Maria Crow (1836-1901). Childhood was punctuated by family deaths and dissension. Her half-brother died in adolescence, and one of four brothers died in infancy, as did a sister (the other died aged twenty). The birth of her youngest brother, Raymond, with whom she had a sustained intense relationship, presaged her mother's mental decline. Her father's restlessness signalled further dislocation. From the age of three until she was ten Robins lived on Staten Island, New York, then on her parents' separation she moved to her paternal grandmother in Zanesville, Ohio. By 1885 her mother was institutionalized, dying in an asylum in 1901. 
Grandmother Jane Hussey Robins did, however, provide vital stability and inspiration. A thinly disguised, loving portrait of her exists in Robins's epic novel, 'The Open Question' (1898). Putnam Seminary for Young Ladies gave Robins a sound education and introduced her to drama. Following a spell with her father, now a financial agent in a mining camp in Colorado's Rocky Mountains, she turned to the New York stage rather than acting 'in loco parentis' for younger siblings. Only nineteen, lacking training, financial support, or connections she nevertheless persevered, taking the stage name of Claire Raymond, and was aided (and hindered) by good looks and the chance discovery of a wealthy relative. She spent several years at the renowned Boston Museum Company, where she met George Richmond Parks ('b'. 1856), an actor, whom she married in 1885. They had no children. Prone to depression and jealous of his wife's minor successes, he drowned himself in 1887. Distraught, Robins immersed herself in Shakespearian roles, undertaking a punishing coast to coast tour with the veteran actors Lawrence Barrett and Edwin Booth. 
Robins accompanied the widow and daughter of the violinist Ole Bull to Norway in 1888. Stopping in London 'en route' for home, she was captivated by the stage. Oscar Wilde and actor-managers made encouraging noises and she postponed her return passage indefinitely. Although a highly experienced actress, she was unknown in Britain. A tough couple of years understudying, playing mediocre roles, and surviving shabby digs are recollected in her memoir 'Both Sides of the Curtain'. Her fortunes changed as Ibsen's prose dramas reached the British stage. Captivated by 'A Doll's House', by January 1891 she was herself playing the role of the young widow, Mrs Linden. But it was her production of and leading part in 'Hedda Gabler' three months later which made Robins and Ibsen household names among the British theatregoing public. She and the American actress Marion Lea raised money to produce it at the Vaudeville Theatre. The 'Sunday Times' called it 'One of the most notable events in the history of the modern stage' (26 April 1891). Even anti-Ibsenites acknowledged the power of her performance. 
Another pioneering Ibsen role (and Robins's personal favourite) was Hilda Wangel in 'The Master Builder' (1893), which she also stage managed with help from her lover, the Ibsen translator William Archer (1856-1924). Mrs Patrick Campbell called her performance 'the most intellectually comprehensive piece of work I had seen on the English stage' (B. S. Campbell, 'My Life and some Letters', 1922, 65). Both women acted in 'Little Eyolf' (1896), in the Ibsen-Echegaray subscription series launched by Robins and Archer to promote non-commercial European theatre with decent roles for women. This aim found fuller expression in their founding of the New Century Theatre. 
Anxious about being typecast as an Ibsenite actress, Robins also acted in plays by other dramatists, such as her compatriot Henry James's 'The American'. Their companionship was celebrated in her book 'Theatre and Friendship' (1932). This additionally paid tribute to her friend Florence Bell. Robins and Bell co-scripted anonymously 'Alan's Wife' (1893), a play about infanticide, based on a Swedish story. 
Robins's best-known play was 'Votes for Women!' (1907), credited with inaugurating suffrage drama. Researching this turned her from interested observer into committed participant and produced the novel 'The Convert' (1907). Reprinted in the 1980s, this book helped revive Robins's name after a period of neglect. 
In the 1890s her incipient feminism had been fuelled by witnessing the exploitation of actresses by actor-managers and by Ibsen's depiction of strong-minded women. Yet not until the Edwardian period was she prepared to name herself a suffragist. Even then she moved cautiously from constitutionalist to militant. Although on the executive of the Women's Social and Political Union between 1907 and 1912, she never participated directly in militancy. Nevertheless, she penned some vitriolic prose, which can be sampled in her book 'Way Stations' (1913), one of the first histories of the cause. She had retired from the stage in 1902 but was an inspiring platform speaker. 
Now earning her living entirely by writing, Robins was first president of the Women Writers' Suffrage League. Aware of the precariousness of the stage as a profession for women and supporting her impecunious family, she had been writing and selling stories since the 1880s. Her early novels, such as 'George Mandeville's Husband' (1894), published by her admirer William Heinemann, were pseudonymous but C. E. Raimond's identity was revealed after her first real success, 'The Open Question'. Robins published fourteen novels and two collections of short stories. Although her fiction tackled 'risque' social issues such as suicide and prostitution, her best-seller was an innocuous adventure story of gold-seeking men. 'The Magnetic North' (1904), written after her own intrepid journey to Alaska to find her brothers Saxton and Raymond, was based on the latter's experience in the Klondike. 
Raymond Robins became a prominent human rights activist. From 1904 to 1925 he and his sister co-owned Chinsegut, a home in Florida. She initially visited frequently but after he married Margaret Dreier (president of the American Women's Trade Union League), relations became more strained. 
Robins had a wide circle of friends including politicians such as Sir Edward Grey and writers like John Masefield and Virginia and Leonard Woolf. In 1909 she purchased a fifteenth-century house in Henfield, Sussex. Her constant companion during her last forty years was the pioneer doctor Octavia Wilberforce, whose professional development owed much to Robins's unstinting support. In 1927 they converted Robins's home into a rest place for women recuperating from stress and illness, administered by the Backsettown Trust until 1989. Robins moved to Wilberforce's home in Brighton. In the 1920s she was one of the original directors of the feminist periodical 'Time and Tide' and a vice-president of the Six Point Group. Her non-fiction included an anonymous polemic, 'Ancilla's Share' (1924) and the pamphlet 'Ibsen and the Actress' (1928). The latter was published by the Hogarth Press, and Virginia and Leonard Woolf knew her well in later years. Virginia thought her a great, but essentially a pre-First World War writer, and enjoyed reading her manuscript reminiscences, published as 'Both Sides of the Curtain' by Heinemann in 1940. 
Robins retained American citizenship. Somewhat disillusioned with the modern world, she spent the Second World War in the USA. Physically weak yet determined to keep going, at the age of eighty-eight she flew across the Atlantic. She had begun a diary in 1876. It had grown into a crucial, though carefully crafted, part of her daily life (over seventy volumes of it have been preserved in her papers at the Elmer Holmes Bobst Library of New York University). It continued until just before her death at her home, 24 Montpelier Crescent, Brighton, on 8 May 1952, in her ninetieth year. Her body was cremated in Brighton. 


@@@@@


doc= 37904


Robinson, Sir John, first baronet (bap. 1615, d. 1680), merchant and financier, was baptized on 10 January 1615, the third but second surviving son of William Robinson DD, of Long Whatton, near Loughborough, archdeacon of Nottingham (1635-42), and his wife, Sarah, daughter of William Bainbridge of Lockington. He began life with strong connections with the church: his father was half-brother to Archbishop William Laud. Robinson spent the years of the civil war and interregnum building up business interests and achieving prominence in City politics. During the 1650s he served as master of the Clothworkers' Company and an assistant of the Levant Company. He married in December 1654 Anne (died 1699), daughter of Sir George Whitmore of Balmes, Hackney, Middlesex, lord mayor of London in 1631-2. They had four sons (the eldest of whom died in 1679) and five daughters. From 1655 until his death he was an alderman of London, and was sheriff in 1657/8. 
Robinson was, nevertheless, as his connections might suggest, a royalist, and after the death of Oliver Cromwell he worked to promote a Stuart restoration. He was involved in the royalist plot of 1659, and in February 1660 negotiated with General George Monck (later first duke of Albemarle) on the City's behalf during its confrontation with the Rump Parliament. On 26 May 1660 he was knighted, and he was created baronet the following month. Robinson established a close relationship with Monck and was himself returned to the Convention Parliament for London. 
Robinson and his allies in London were spectacularly defeated in the election of 1661. He was returned in November for Rye instead, and was also elected to the 1679 parliament for the same seat. But Robinson was more important to the restored monarchy as financier and metropolitan administrator. He was one of the most regular lenders to the government, and in 1662 he became head of a syndicate which contracted to farm the excise for London, Middlesex, and Surrey. His appointment as lieutenant of the Tower in June 1660 placed him in a position vital to the maintenance of order in the City. In 1662/3 he served as lord mayor of London. During the 1660s and 1670s he was one of the principal means by which the government sought to influence City politics. His position, both in the City and at the Tower, impelled him into political controversy, particularly during the exclusion crisis, when he was accused of suppressing information on the Popish Plot, and when his removal was demanded by the House of Lords and his conduct inquired into by the House of Commons. The king succumbed to the pressure and dismissed him in May 1679. 
Robinson continued an active City merchant. He was a member of the new Company of Royal Adventurers trading into Africa from its inception, and was an assistant in 1666-8 and 1670-71; he was a committee member of the East India Company in 1666-7, 1668-74, and 1675-7; deputy governor of the Hudson's Bay Company in 1670-75; and an elder brother of Trinity House from 1670 to his death. Samuel Pepys regarded him as boastful and empty-headed; but his bombast must have concealed political shrewdness and commercial acumen. Robinson died in February 1680 and was succeeded by his second son, John ('b'. 1660). 
Paul Seaward', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37905


Robinson, John George (1856-1943), mechanical engineer, was born on 30 July 1856 in Newcastle upon Tyne, the younger son and second of three children of Matthew Robinson, divisional locomotive, carriage, and wagon superintendent of the Great Western Railway (GWR), and his wife, Jane Armstrong. His elder brother, James Armstrong Robinson, became works manager and divisional locomotive superintendent of the GWR at Wolverhampton. John was educated at Chester grammar school and in 1872 became a pupil of Joseph Armstrong, locomotive superintendent of the GWR. He trained at the Swindon works. In 1878 he became assistant to his father in Bristol. He was appointed in 1884 assistant locomotive, carriage, and wagon superintendent of the Waterford, Limerick, and Western Railway of Ireland, and became superintendent in the following year. He introduced several new locomotive types on this Irish cross-country railway. 
In 1900 Robinson was appointed locomotive and marine superintendent of the Great Central and two years later also took control of the carriage and wagon department, with the title of chief mechanical engineer. The Great Central, formerly a cross-country line, was the last main-line railway to enter London in 1899, and within two years Robinson had introduced new and more powerful locomotives for this service. In the following twenty years he was responsible for the design and building of many new types of main-line and suburban passenger and freight locomotives of large dimensions, which gave excellent service and whose elegance and symmetry of outline were greatly admired. At least as important was the unusual sturdiness of construction which contributed to the remarkable longevity of several classes, especially the 2-8-0 freight design. 
In 1910 carriage building was transferred from the locomotive works at Gorton, Manchester, to a new works at Dukinfield, where main-line and suburban carriages (which were among the most comfortable in Britain) were produced and from 1915 onwards fitted with Robinson's anti-telescoping fenders, which gave improved protection from accidents. Robinson also sponsored a new and widely used design of locomotive superheater and an automatic train-stop system to prevent overrunning of signals, and carried out extensive trials with locomotives burning oil and pulverized coal with a view to reducing fuel costs. 
During the First World War Robinson was a member of the railway workshops manufacturing committee. He was responsible for producing large numbers of gun carriages and mountings at Gorton and for the design and building of ambulance trains at Dukinfield for overseas and home service. In 1917 his 8K class 2-8-0 locomotive design was ordered in large numbers -- over 500 were built -- for military supply and troop-train service in France. After the war large numbers were purchased by the London and North Eastern Railway (LNER), GWR, and London, Midland, and Scottish Railway (LMS), while others went to railways in China and Australia. In the Second World War ninety-two were sent for service with the railways of Persia (Iran) carrying supplies to the USSR. 
Robinson was an able engineer and administrator who took a keen interest in his men and their working conditions, especially those of locomotive footplate staff, whose spartan conditions he improved considerably. In 1922, prior to the incorporation of the Great Central into the LNER group, he was sounded out as to whether he would undertake the post of chief mechanical engineer. However, he preferred to retire and recommended H. Nigel Gresley of the Great Northern, who was twenty years younger. Robinson was appointed CBE in 1920. He was a member of the institutions of Civil (1902) and Mechanical (1891) Engineers. 
In 1884 Robinson married Mary Ann (1858-1938), daughter of Richard Hillyard Dalton, a mining engineer of Helston, Cornwall. They had three daughters and one son, Matthew, who followed his father's profession and was for many years superintendent of the LNER locomotive depot at Neasden, London. Robinson died at his home, Koyama, West Cliff Road, Bournemouth, on 7 December 1943. After a funeral service at St Michael's Church, Bournemouth, his cremated remains were buried at Bournemouth north cemetery on 11 December. 
George W. Carpenter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37906


Robinson, William (1838-1935), horticulturist and publisher, was born on 15 July 1838 in Ireland, the son of William Robinson and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' Farrell ('c'.1818-1892). While reticent about his origins, Robinson did acknowledge that he came from Ireland: he 'kept an affection for his native land, but seldom came back to Ireland' (Moore, 459). Consequently many inaccurate statements have been published about his birthplace, training, and family background. Allan (1982) stated that he had a brother, James, as well as a sister (unnamed), but their existence has not been confirmed. 
No information can be traced about William's childhood and education until he became a garden-boy at Curraghmore, co. Waterford, 'his first job being that of carrying water from the... river... to the glasshouses' ('The late William Robinson', 202). He would have served subsequently, for two years each, as an apprentice and a journeyman, but it is not known in which gardens he worked. Eventually he was engaged as foreman gardener at Ballykilcavan, near Stradbally, in Queen's county, by the Revd Sir Hunt Johnson-Walsh. A story, which cannot be verified, relates that one night, following a violent disagreement with Johnson-Walsh, Robinson 'drew out all the fires in the glass-houses and opened every window' (Taylor, 'A great nineteenth-century gardener', 923) and then left Ballykilcavan and walked to Dublin. He obtained a 'recommendation' from David Moore, curator of the Royal Dublin Society's Botanic Gardens, Glasnevin, Dublin, and proceeded to London, where, early in 1862, he found employment in the Royal Botanic Society's gardens at Regent's Park, under Robert Marnock. Before long Robinson was appointed foreman of the educational and herbaceous department there. He resigned in June 1866 'to devote himself to the study of our Great Gardens and to the Literature of Horticulture for a year or two' (Allan, 50). He had already written articles for the 'Gardeners' Chronicle', and in January 1867 -- with commissions from that periodical, 'The Field', and 'The Times' -- travelled to France, where for seven months he studied horticultural practices, visited gardens and nurseries, and attended the Universal Exhibition. Two books resulted: 'Gleaning from French Gardens' (1868) and 'The Parks, Promenades and Gardens of Paris' (1869). Later he travelled more extensively in Europe. 
By May 1868 Robinson had a house in Kensington, London, where he employed a housekeeper and gardener. In 1870 there appeared one of his more famous works, 'The Wild Garden', as also did 'Alpine Flowers' and 'Mushroom Culture'. That autumn he visited the United States of America, journeying by rail as far west as San Francisco. Another tale relates that Robinson's brother accompanied him because the two were intent on finding, and demanding money from, their father, who allegedly had eloped there with a lady of the St George family. In fact William travelled alone, and the story about his father's infidelity cannot be verified. 
In 1871 Robinson published 'A Catalogue of Hardy Perennials', 'Hardy Flowers', and 'The Subtropical Garden'. By that year he had sufficient capital to establish a weekly, illustrated periodical devoted to horticulture. 'The Garden' started publication on 25 November 1871; Robinson edited it until 1899 and owned it until 1919. Other periodicals followed: 'La Semaine Francaise' (1878-83); 'Gardening' (1879; later entitled 'Gardening Illustrated'); 'The Garden Annual, Almanack and Address Book' (1881); 'Farm and Home' (1882); 'Woods and Forests' (1883; merged with 'The Garden', 1886); 'Cottage Gardening' (1892-8); and 'Flora and Sylva' (1903-5). He also started, 'in a fit of pique' (Taylor, 'Some Nineteenth Century Gardeners', 76), a very short-lived daily newspaper called 'London'. His most important work is 'The English Flower Garden' (1883), which has been described as 'the most widely read and influential gardening book ever written' (Allan, 137). It was not, however, solely by Robinson; many of the sections were the acknowledged work of others. Nor was it entirely original, because Robinson drew substantially on his earlier books, notably 'Hardy Flowers'. Fifteen editions, some reprinted several times, appeared during Robinson's lifetime. 
Robinson was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society of London on 19 April 1866 and a fellow of the Royal Horticultural Society about 1903. Despite his undoubted influence and stature he never received, or never accepted, any honours -- he refused the Victoria medal of honour from the Royal Horticultural Society, and a knighthood 'freely offered him [was] graciously declined' (Allan, 227). 
His publications were generally profitable, and soon Robinson was wealthy, able to invest in property in London and, eventually, to purchase Gravetye Manor estate, Sussex. He took up residence at Gravetye in August 1885 and lived there until his death. Robinson remodelled the Elizabethan manor house, remade the garden, and enlarged and planted the estate. He wrote about Gravetye in several books, including 'Gravetye Manor' (1911) and 'My Wood Fires' (1917). 
Robinson was a vegetarian. He was a bachelor, although in the 1860s he was briefly engaged to be married. In 1909 he fell, injuring his spine; this caused a flare-up of latent syphilis and he became paralysed and was confined to a wheelchair for the rest of his life. He died at Gravetye on 12 May 1935 and was cremated at Golders Green on 15 May. As early as 1880, in 'God's Acre Beautiful', Robinson himself had promoted this rite, and he had designed the layout of the grounds at Golders Green crematorium. 
His books and periodicals provided Robinson with platforms from which to promote his own philosophy of gardening, and in this he was pre-eminently successful. Robinson, it is widely claimed, was 'responsible for sweeping away... carpet-bedding' (Allan, 138) and promoting a more relaxed style using hardy plants. He was a belligerent and capricious character with strongly held, sometimes (especially in later life) contradictory, views, who was not afraid to criticize his contemporaries, especially landscape architects. Opinions about him were, and remain, discordant. For example Mitchell averred he was 'sensitive' and 'a saint', while Edwin Lutyens found him boring and cantankerous. In 1933 R. H. Crane eulogized him as 'The father of the English flower garden' (Allan, 224), and Taylor concluded that he was the 'greatest of English gardeners' ('A great nineteenth-century gardener', 924). The obituarist of the 'Gardeners' Chronicle' cautioned against 'ascribing to him almost supernatural powers that he did not possess' (18 May 1935), a view echoed by Elliott, who argued that 'Robinson was not a revolutionary figure, but a popularizer... [who] to a considerable degree... engineered the creation of his own myth' ('Some sceptical thoughts', 217). 


@@@@@


doc= 37907


Rocque, John (1704?-1762), land surveyor and cartographer, was born in France, one of four children of a Huguenot family which settled in Geneva after fleeing France. He probably arrived in England in 1709, though his life before his publishing career began in 1734 is obscure. He always remained in close touch with the French protestant community in London and many of his works have bilingual titles. 
Between 1734 and 1740 Rocque established his name as a 'dessinateur des jardins', publishing elaborate plans of gardens, generally including views of the aristocratic houses to which they belonged and drawings of other garden features. These estates were mostly around London and included the royal parks and gardens at Richmond (1734), Kensington (1736), and Windsor (1738). His brother Bartholomew was a horticulturist and landscape gardener in Walham Green, Fulham. From the late 1730s he began to develop a more ambitious career in cartography. His works reflect his travels; as he gained commissions as an estate surveyor he would use the opportunity to survey for county maps and town plans. In addition to original surveys his business in London maintained a steady production of general maps and atlases, notably plans of foreign towns, including Paris and Rome. It is this breadth of output which established his reputation as one of the most prolific and innovative map makers of the eighteenth century. 
Rocque's survey of London was planned with George Vertue, surveyed from 1738, engraved by John Pine, and published in twenty-four sheets in 1746. It was the outstanding plan of the capital in the eighteenth century. He also published large-scale plans of other towns based on original surveys (Bristol 1743, Exeter 1744, Shrewsbury 1746, Dublin 1756, Kilkenny 1758, and Cork 1760). His six county surveys (Shropshire 1752, Middlesex 1754, Armagh 1760, Dublin 1760, Berkshire 1761, and Surrey 1768; projected surveys of Kent, Oxfordshire, and Buckinghamshire came to nothing) were innovative in their portrayal of land use and vegetation. His distinctive contribution was to apply the conventions of estate and garden plans to county maps. His estate surveys included the Barnard lands in Shropshire (1746-8) and the earl of Kildare's estates (1755-60). 
Rocque lived in Great Windmill Street on the edge of the French quarter in Soho until 1743, in Piccadilly opposite Green Park until 1749, and in Whitehall until a fire on 7 November 1750 destroyed his possessions. After purchasing new stock in Paris he re-established his business in 1751 in the Strand, at the centre of the London map trade. There he remained at three successive addresses until his death. 
From 1751 Rocque styled himself chorographer or topographer to the prince of Wales and from 1760 to the king, but his modest means came chiefly from printselling and, in common with many of his trade, his cartographic projects were often financially precarious and consequently protracted. 'The French school of Rocque' (as it was called in the nineteenth century) earned an outstanding reputation in Irish cartography, but his chief memorials are his county maps and, above all, his plans of London and Dublin. The latter so impressed George II that he had it hung on the walls of his apartment, and it was reprinted as late as 1821. 
Rocque died on 27 January 1762. His widow, Mary Ann, carried on the business with the assistance of her late husband's associates, including Pierre Andre, who with John Chapman began a large-scale map of Essex 'for Mrs. Rocque'. 
Paul Laxton', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37908


Meuland, Roger de (c.1215-1295), bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, was a kinsman of Henry III. He is once referred to by the chronicler Matthew Paris as Master Longespee (Paris, 'Chron'., 5.644), prompting speculation that he was the son of William Longespee, earl of Salisbury (died 1226), Henry III's uncle, but there is no supporting evidence for this and his paternity remains uncertain. The reason why Roger was styled de Meuland (Meuleng, Meulent, and Molend are among the variant forms of his name) is unclear, although it probably indicates some connection with Meulon in Normandy. Perhaps it was there that he was born or brought up. 
Nothing seems known of Meuland's early career. By 1257 he was a canon of Lichfield and a papal chaplain. He owed his election to the bishopric of Coventry and Lichfield, in the January of that year (his consecration followed on 10 March 1258), to the influence of the king's brother, Richard, earl of Cornwall. Later in 1257 Meuland went out to Germany with Richard, where the latter had been elected king. He repeated the journey in 1258. Meuland was no mere creature of Henry III and his brother, however. In 1259 he incurred Henry's wrath by attempting to subject the royal free chapels in his diocese to episcopal control, a dispute that rumbled on until Meuland's final capitulation in 1281. 
On the other hand, Meuland cannot be ranked as one of the episcopal supporters of Simon de Montfort. In July 1263 the king empowered him, with Richard of Gravesend, bishop of Lincoln, and Henry of Sandwich, bishop of London, to reach a settlement with Montfort, but the reimposition of the provisions of Oxford that resulted reflected the realities of the political situation rather than Meuland's own political stance. The latter is seen more clearly in March 1264 when Meuland represented Henry III in the abortive negotiations before the final outbreak of hostilities. He was prepared to co-operate with the subsequent regime of Simon de Montfort -- in December 1264 he helped to arrange a temporary settlement with the marcher barons -- but he was not one of the bishops suspended from office after the battle of Evesham. Between 1258 and 1272 Meuland, like previous bishops of Coventry and Lichfield, was frequently appointed to be the king's representative in negotiations with the Welsh. After 1272 this and any other political activity ceased. Despite being, as Henry III expressed it, 'bound to the king by right of blood ['iure sanguinis'] before all other prelates of the realm' ('Close Rolls', 10.486), Meuland appears to have played but a modest part in affairs of state. 
As bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, Meuland's record was mixed. In 1282 Archbishop John Peckham, after a visitation of the bishopric, wrote him a blistering letter of criticism. Peckham had discovered the prevalence of incest, an infinite multitude of children lacking confirmation, the appropriation of churches to the great damage of the cure of souls and Meuland himself, 'as though not caring about these things and others', living outside the diocese. Meuland was ordered to appoint a suffragan bishop 'knowing the language' (Martin, 2.479-80), a hint perhaps that Meuland himself (who may have been brought up in France) did not. While there is evidence to support some of Peckham's accusations, especially over appropriations, they were made when Meuland was already a sick man in decline: when he died, on 16 December 1295, he was described as of great age. On the more positive side, Meuland and his officials ordained or enlarged at least five vicarages. He was also the first bishop of Coventry and Lichfield to keep an episcopal register (later lost). 
If Meuland did neglect his diocese, he certainly spoke of his 'devotion to his spouse, the church of Lichfield' (Savage, 164) and did much to display it. 'For the increase of divine worship' (though also to provide patronage for his proteges), he created three new prebends, one endowed with land he himself had acquired. One of his last acts was to issue new statutes governing the conduct of the chapter, which increased the daily provision for each prebendary. Earlier, in 1278, when Meuland permitted the appropriation by Stafford Priory of the church of Stowe by Chartley, he made no stipulation about the creation of a vicarage, but he did obtain an annual pension of 10 marks for the dean and chapter of Lichfield's common fund. Likewise, when he secured an annual pension of 30 marks from the church of Wigan, he assigned 10 marks to the fabric fund of the cathedral and 20 marks to the sacrist, of which half was to be assigned to six boys appointed by the bishop. 
The reference to the fabric fund is significant. It was during Meuland's episcopate that the whole of the present nave of Lichfield Cathedral was built, together with the lower part of the great west front. Meuland may have played a significant part in raising funds for the enterprise. He may also have inspired certain elements of the design. In particular, the unique clerestory windows, consisting of three trefoiled circles, were modelled on the external triforium windows of Henry III's Westminster Abbey, perhaps a graceful tribute by Bishop Roger to his royal kinsman. Roger de Meuland's record, both as a political and as a diocesan bishop, was mediocre. As a builder he has at least a claim, albeit an unprovable one, to fame. 
D. A. Carpenter', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37909


Rogers, Frederick (1846-1915), bookbinder and trade unionist, was born on 27 April 1846 in Gower's Walk, Whitechapel, London, the eldest in the family of four sons (one of whom died in infancy) and two daughters of Frederick Rogers (died 1908), sailor, draper's assistant, labourer, and painter, and his wife, Susan Barltrop (died 1907). Rogers left school at ten or earlier and became an errand-boy. He was plagued by ill health in his youth but recovered to enter the vellum bookbinding trade, with which he was associated in a variety of capacities for nearly forty years. 
Outside his work, Rogers's principal interests lay in education, religion, and trade unionism. He was an outstanding example of a working-class autodidact, and, with Alfred Milner, was co-secretary of the university extension movement in east London from 1877. An Oxford lecture which he delivered in 1883 influenced the subsequent founding of Toynbee Hall, the east London settlement in whose affairs Rogers was long active. He contributed to many newspapers and magazines, among them the 'Weekly Dispatch', in whose pages he was in 1885-6 an early advocate of the formation of an Independent Labour Party. 
Originally a nonconformist, Rogers was later converted to Anglo-Catholicism by the ritualist curate Arthur Henry Stanton. His religious beliefs marked him deeply and inspired a number of publications, including two short books entitled 'The Seven Deadly Sins' (1907) and 'The Church in the Modern State' (1914). 
After helping to lead an unsuccessful strike by the Vellum Binders' Society in 1891-2 for the eight-hour day, Rogers became the union's president. He failed in three attempts to secure election to the Trades Union Congress's parliamentary committee, but he represented the vellum binders at the foundation conference of the Labour Representation Committee in February 1900, and was elected to its executive. He served for three years, originally as chairman, and it was as the first chairman of what was to become the Labour Party that he achieved his principal prominence in Labour history. In later years he drifted away from his original Liberalism and his later Labour ties, and in 1910-11 served as a Conservative nominee as alderman on the London county council. 
Rogers's principal political achievement was his work as secretary of the National Committee of Organised Labour, a body established in 1899 to work for universal old-age pensions. It was a lengthy and difficult task, marked by the indifference and even antagonism of the movement in whose name he nominally acted, but his speaking, organizing, and writing skills (he produced fifteen pamphlets and a co-authored book), and tireless travelling until victory was achieved in 1908, made him the 'ideal secretary' described by F. H. Stead, the warden of the Browning Hall settlement and his collaborator in the pension struggle. It is notable that despite Rogers's high Anglicanism he worked harmoniously with the Congregationalist Stead and was actively involved with the interdenominational Browning Hall. 
Rogers's most important literary work was his autobiography, 'Labour, Life and Literature' (1913). Towards the end of his life he was an enthusiastic supporter of British involvement in the First World War, for which he made recruiting speeches. 
Rogers was somewhat reserved and shy in private life and an obituary notice by his old acquaintance, Canon Henry Scott Holland, described him as suggesting 'something strange and blurred' ('Commonwealth', December 1915). Holland, Stead, and others wrote warmly of him, but in a wider circle he was more respected than loved. His educational achievements, lack of a major trade union base, and personal idiosyncrasies inhibited his effectiveness as a labour leader, but did not prevent him from making significant contributions to his class and time. He died on 16 November 1915 at his home, 29 Bousfield Road, New Cross, London, to which he had moved from Whitechapel in 1901, and he was buried in Nunhead cemetery. He was unmarried. 
David Rubinstein', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37910


Rolfe, Frederick William, styled Baron Corvo (1860-1913), writer, was born at 61 Cheapside, London, on 22 July 1860, the eldest of the four sons and three daughters of James Rolfe ('c'.1827-1902), piano maker and tuner, and his wife, Ellen Elizabeth Pilcher ('c'.1837-1928/9). He was educated at the North London Collegiate School until, aged fourteen, he had a cross tattooed on his breast in token of a momentous religious experience, and became a teacher. He started work at the Stationers' Company School, London, in 1874, and by the time he took up a post at Grantham grammar school in 1884 he had already taught in Saffron Walden, Winchester, Newbury, and Cambridge. During this time, Rolfe had discovered his passion for writing, painting, and photography. His first work, 'Tarcissus: the Boy Martyr of Rome', was published in 1880. 
Rolfe was received into the Roman Catholic church in 1886. Later that year he accepted the invitation of the third marquess of Bute to become headmaster of his cathedral choir school in Oban. To coincide with this, he relaunched himself as the Revd Father Rolfe, a nominal mutation which coupled the enigma and scoundrel in Rolfe and was the first of many pseudonyms he would assume. He left Oban after a couple of acrimonious months and, following a spell as a private tutor, enrolled at St Mary's College at Oscott, Aston, near Birmingham, in October 1887. Here Rolfe neglected his religious studies and was dismissed in 1888 for developing his aesthetic interests. Just over a year later, in December 1889, Rolfe entered the Scots College, Rome. Once again it was his self that he cultivated, rather than the seminarist's vocation, and he was expelled in May 1890. Adrift and in debt, Rolfe was taken in by the duchess of Sforza-Cesarini, who conferred on him the title Baron Corvo before he returned to England later in the year. Rolfe took up residence in Christchurch, before the fraudulent offer he made for his hosts' house marked the end of his credit and credibility in Hampshire. A cantankerous sojourn in Aberdeen ended when he was forcibly evicted from his lodgings. 
Rolfe next moved to Holywell, near Chester, in 1895, where he began to paint and write more steadily. He painted a series of sacred banners for the local church, which were paraded throughout the town on St Winifred's day, 1896. 'Stories Toto Told me' was published in 1898 and Rolfe also contributed six tales to the 'Yellow Book' and one to 'The Butterfly'. Yet Rolfe's fortunes worsened when, in November of that year, three anonymous articles appeared in the 'Aberdeen Evening Gazette', vilifying Rolfe and his murky past. They were reprinted in the 'Catholic Times', and distributed throughout Britain. In January 1899, shattered in mind and body, he entered the Holywell workhouse. A month later he discharged himself and trudged south to London, where he published 'Chronicles of the House of Borgia' in 1901. 
The same tenacious vanity which enabled Rolfe to survive the next nine years of penury wrecked his chances of succeeding as a writer. Rolfe's most successful work, 'Hadrian the Seventh', was published in 1904. A combination of thinly veiled autobiography and wish-fulfilment fantasy, it charts the rise to pope of a forlorn seminary drop-out. It is a bizarre if masterful document of exotic descriptions, erudite vocabulary, and obscure scholarship, which situates Rolfe firmly in traditions of 'fin de siecle' decadence. Translated into French and Italian, and ultimately adapted for the stage, it earned Rolfe the posthumous praise of D. H. Lawrence, W. H. Auden, and Graham Greene. A similar, although less successful novel, 'Don Tarquinio: a Kataleptic Phantasmatic Romance', followed in 1905. 
In August 1908 Rolfe left for Venice and never returned, living out a kind of degenerate and vituperative envoi to his earlier years. His squabbles with publishers and his vicious exploitation of those who befriended him continued as before. He began to compose detailed fantasies about mystic cults signed 'Frederick of Venice', and embarked upon a series of sexual relationships with adolescent boys. 'Don Renato' appeared in 1909, but was immediately suppressed. 'The Weird of the Wanderer', the last novel published in his lifetime, was brought out in 1912 in collaboration with Harry Pirie-Gordon. Rolfe then established residence at the Albergo Cavalletto, where he died of heart failure on 25 October 1913. He was unmarried, and his Venetian will left his estate to his brother, Alfred, a schoolteacher in Australia, who was unable to claim it for fear of creditors. The estate, consisting mostly of 'incriminating' letters, photos, and manuscripts, was confiscated by the British consul, and most of it was destroyed. Rolfe was buried on 30 October 1913 in a pauper's grave in San Michele cemetery, Venice, where he was reinterred in 1924. His last novel, a homoerotic fantasy, 'The Desire and the Pursuit of the Whole', was published in 1934 to critical acclaim. 
David Bradshaw', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37911


Rolt, (Lionel) Thomas Caswall (1910-1974), engineering historian, was born on 11 February 1910 at Eaton Road, Chester, the only child of Lionel Caswall Rolt, a minor country gentleman, and his wife, Jemima Clarke (subsequently Timperley). He was distantly related to Kyrle Willans, the son of Peter Willans, inventor of the enclosed vertical central valve steam engine, and himself a mechanical engineer. Willans advised Rolt's parents to apprentice him as a mechanical engineer, and it was with great enthusiasm that in 1926 the boy left Cheltenham College, where he had been miserable, to serve as a pupil at Bomfords, an agricultural engineering firm at Pitchill, near Evesham. In 1928 he began a three-year apprenticeship at Kerr, Stuart & Co. Ltd, locomotive engineers of Stoke-on-Trent, but the firm collapsed before his term had been completed, and he finished his apprenticeship with R. A. Lister & Co. Ltd of Dursley. He then moved to a succession of short-term jobs until in 1934 he joined some friends in establishing a garage near Basingstoke specializing in veteran and vintage cars. By now he had become an enthusiastic car owner and repairer, and with his colleagues he formed the Vintage Sports Car Club. This was his first substantial contribution to the preservation of the artefacts of industrial history. In 1939 he married Angela Orred, daughter of a retired army major. She left him in 1951 and joined Billy Smart's circus. His second wife was Sonia (1919-2014), former wife of George Smith, a working canal boatman, and daughter of a colonial civil servant. She had worked on the canals during the Second World War. They had two sons. 
Rolt had acquired an affection for canals as a result of joining the Willans family for holidays on their narrow boat 'Cressy'. In 1939 he bought the 'Cressy' and abandoned his career as a practising engineer in favour of a life spent writing on board a canal narrow boat. He and his first wife lived on the 'Cressy' until 1951. The voyage which they made in 1939 resulted in the publication in 1944 of 'Narrow Boat', a passionate evocation of the British canals and of the lives of those who lived and worked upon them. It was largely responsible for the formation of the Inland Waterways Association in 1946, with Rolt as its first secretary. The 'Cressy' had been moored at Tardebigge for four years while Rolt undertook various forms of engineering war work, but when peace returned he threw himself into the task of preserving the canal system. He envisaged a restoration of commercial activity on the canals, and was not at first sympathetic to their conversion into a leisure amenity. This and other more personal disagreements among the founders of the Inland Waterways Association led in 1951 to his withdrawal from the association. 
In 1950 Rolt became involved in the effort to revive a narrow gauge quarry railway in north Wales -- the Talyllyn Railway. This was a great success, setting the pattern for many other preservation schemes. He and his second wife settled in the family house at Stanley Pontlarge, Gloucestershire, and here he resumed his literary programme, writing over forty books, covering canals, railways, motor cars, and many other aspects of engineering history. His most impressive works were biographies of the great engineers, especially the outstanding 'Isambard Kingdom Brunel' (1957). All these books were lucidly written, illuminating the technical principles of engineering in a way which was comprehensible to the non-technical reader. 
Rolt was not content to pursue only a literary career, but took an active part in the burgeoning preservation movements of the 1950s and 1960s. He became a vice-president of the Newcomen Society for the study of the history of engineering and technology; he became a member of the Science Museum advisory council, and helped to establish the Railway Museum in York; he advised the National Trust on industrial archaeology; and he was chairman of the Council for British Archaeology research committee on industrial archaeology. The discipline of industrial archaeology, which emerged in the 1950s, was largely inspired by his writings, and it was entirely appropriate that he should become the first president of the Association for Industrial Archaeology in 1973. His work was a formidable contribution to the growth of interest in the conservation of industrial buildings and machines. He died at Stanley Pontlarge on 9 May 1974, and was buried there on 14 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 37912


Roos, Sir Richard (c.1410-1482), courtier and poet, was the fifth son in the family of five sons and four daughters of William, seventh Baron Ros of Helmsley ('c'.1369-1414), and his wife, Margaret (died 1438), daughter of Sir John Arundel (died 1379), naval commander. His kneeling figure appears in the St William window ('c'.1423) in York Minster, which commemorates his father. In 1435-9 he is heard of lodging in the 'cornertowre' at a property in Penshurst, Kent. He was serving in France in December 1436 under John Talbot, first earl of Shrewsbury (died 1453), at Gisors, and was by then a knight. In November 1444 he was among the knights in the English party that went to France to witness the proxy wedding of Henry VI with Margaret of Anjou, and is mentioned as a participant in the dress rehearsal of her royal entry into Rouen in 1445. Later in that year, after the queen had been escorted to England, Roos was appointed constable of St Briavels Castle, Gloucestershire, for life, and, in December, received a grant from the king of 1500 livres tournois for the defraying of the expenses of his French journey. His name appears among the 'promoters of the establishment' at the foundation of Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1448. 
Early in the 1450s Roos married Margaret, daughter of Sir Richard Vernon of Haddon (died 1451). She may have been the widow of Richard Longueville. In 1454 he was aulnager for Northamptonshire and Rutland, charged with examining the measurement and quality of woollen goods in those counties. There are records of various annuities and grants, and of the burglary of his house in Baynard's Castle ward, London, in November 1445. The events of the last part of his life remain obscure, but his will, drawn up on 8 March 1482 and proved on 1 April 1482, implies that he held some post at the court of Edward IV. It shows him to be a man of sufficient moveable property but with hardly any land. There are benefactions to the church of St Peter Paul's Wharf in Thames Street and to the Carmelites in Fleet Street, in whose church, the Whitefriars', he directs that his body be interred. He bequeaths a number of books: a 'little booke of praiers' and service books belonging to his chapel, 'my saulter clasped with silver', and 'my grete booke called saint Grall' (Seaton, 547-50). The last volume survives in the British Library as Royal MS 14 E.iii. His wife, Margaret, survived him; they had a daughter, Mary, who married Sir Giles Capel. 
Roos is usually taken to be the author of a polished English version of Alain Chartier's poem of 'c'.1424, 'La belle dame sans mercy', a fashionable contribution to the courtly debate about love provoked by the 'Roman de la rose'. It was printed in Pynson's edition of Chaucer's 'Boke of Fame', and in other early editions of Chaucer, but Bodl. Oxf., MS Fairfax 16, in which it appears, was produced 'c'.1450 (a contemporary hand has written 'anno 1450' on folio i 'recto'). This manuscript belonged to the Stanley family: the Stanley coat of arms which it contains has been identified as that of the elder branch of the Stanleys of Hooton. The manuscript was possibly commissioned by Sir John Stanley, who was Roos's wife's brother-in-law; Sir John's death 'c'.1469 would provide a 'terminus ad quem'. In BL, Harley MS 372, the work is ascribed to Sir Richard Roos, and this has been generally accepted. If it is not, a claim could be made for his nephew, Richard Roos, esquire (1429-1493?), a correspondent of the Pastons, who seems to have been a respected figure, but was never knighted. An erudite attempt by Ethel Seaton to prove (by the use of anagrams and hidden word play) that Sir Richard was the author of a number of other fifteenth-century poems has not won acceptance. 
Douglas Gray', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37913


Rose, John (1619-1677), gardener and nurseryman, was born in Amesbury, Wiltshire, the younger son of Stephen Rose, yeoman farmer. His gardening career may have started at Amesbury House, the property of Sir William Seymour, later second duke of Hertford and second duke of Somerset. The duke's London residence was Essex House, the property of his brother-in-law, Robert Devereux, third earl of Essex, another of Rose's employers, who encouraged him to the extent of sending him to France for the first time, probably early in the 1640s. 
This visit proved to be the perfect preparation for importing the influence of French garden design to England, and after the restoration of Charles II in 1660 both Rose and his master were ready to follow some of the examples given in the work of Andre Le Notre, particularly at Versailles. On 14 October 1661 Rose was appointed the king's gardener at St James's -- that is, the person in charge of establishing a garden between the Mall and the backs of houses in Pall Mall, a garden disturbed about 1709 for the building of Marlborough House and Carlton House. Later Rose also took charge of St James's Park across the Mall. Just before his royal appointment Rose may have been the 'Mr Rowse' looking after the gardens at Woburn Abbey from about 1658 to 1661. 
In 1666 the first edition of Rose's little book, 'The English Vineyard Vindicated', was published, with no indication on its title-page of the contribution to it by John Evelyn, though his identity was revealed in the preface by 'Philocepos', who mentioned Evelyn's recent 'Sylva'. Evelyn's material came from Rose, for 'He reason'd so pertinently upon the Subject (as indeed he does upon all things which concern his hortulan Profession)', as the preface says (Rose, 8). Rose dedicated the book to the king, 'the Prince of Plants to the Prince of Planters' (ibid., 4). Although 'Vineyard' had little effect on the planting of vines in England, it was popular enough to be reprinted four times as an appendix to Evelyn's translation of Nicolas de Bonnefons's 'The French Gardiner', in successive editions from 1669 to 1691. Rose used the book to sell vines too, 'my self also with so plentiful a Stock of Sets and Plants of all those Sorts which I chiefly recommend, that those who have a desire to Store their Grounds, may receive them of me at very reasonable Rates' (ibid., 36). 
The gardener presenting a pineapple to the king in a painting attributed to Hendrik Danckerts, possibly painted about 1670 (later in the collection at Houghton House), is said to be John Rose, and several copies of this picture -- at Ham House and elsewhere -- demonstrate an interest in this exotic fruit. Although pineapples from Barbados were first brought to England in 1657 and West Indian ones were given to the king in 1661 and 1668, it is unlikely that the fruit was grown successfully in England until about 1690, at Hampton Court, then in the charge of George London, Rose's pupil, who succeeded him as the royal gardener. London's later partner in the Brompton Park nursery, Henry Wise, was another of Rose's apprentices, whose influence on the design of formal gardens was handed on in this way to the next generation. Though Rose is most often associated with vines and pineapples, he also planted dwarf fruit-trees, especially pears, in the garden at St James's, and earlier in his career he exchanged rare auriculas, anemones, and other flowers with gardeners as eminent as Sir Thomas Hanmer and John Rea. 
Rose died on 10 September 1677 and was buried in his parish church of St Martin-in-the-Fields a week later. His wife Mary, daughter of Thomas Chamberlain, died in December 1676 and was buried in the same church. His will, which mentions no immediate family, left bequests for the establishment of schools for boys and girls in Amesbury, where Rose's grammar school survived into the nineteenth century. 
Sandra Raphael', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37914


Rosenberg, Isaac (1890-1918), artist and poet, was born at 5 Victoria Square, The Temple, Bristol, on 25 November 1890, the second child and second son in the family of four sons and two daughters of Barnett (formerly Dovber) Rosenberg ('b'. 1859/60), a Lithuanian who had emigrated from Moscow to avoid conscription into the Russian army and settled in Bristol, working as a pedlar, and his wife, Hacha, daughter of an innkeeper called Davidov of Drinsk in Lithuania. The family moved to London in 1897, and Rosenberg was educated at the Baker Street board school in Stepney, where his natural gift for both drawing and writing so impressed the headmaster that he allowed him to spend most of his time on them. Out of school, he read poetry and drew with chalks on the pavements of the East End. 
In 1904 Rosenberg was apprenticed to the firm of Carl Hentschel, engravers, in Fleet Street. His parents hoped that this might prove a stepping-stone to a painter's career, but Rosenberg hated the work, deriving consolation only from his reading of such poets as Byron, Keats, Shelley, and, most importantly, William Blake; from his own writing; and from evening painting classes at the art school of Birkbeck College. At last, his apprenticeship completed, he was free and, in 1911, three generous Jewish women undertook to pay his tuition fees at the Slade School of Fine Art. There he came to know the painters Mark Gertler, D. G. Bomberg, W. P. Roberts, C. R. W. Nevinson, and Stanley Spencer, but continued to write poems, ten of which were privately printed as a pamphlet, 'Night and Day', in 1912. 'Art is not a plaything,' he wrote, 'it is blood and tears, it must grow up with one; and I believe I have begun too late' ('Collected Works', xxii). Even so, he was a capable draughtsman and painted some impressive landscapes, portraits, and allegorical scenes, a few of which were exhibited at the Whitechapel Gallery's exhibition of twentieth-century art in 1914. 
Rosenberg had hoped to earn a living from his portraits, but that year he learned that his lungs were weak and was advised to seek a warmer climate. Having a married sister in Cape Town, he sailed for South Africa in 1914, where he painted some pictures, gave a series of lectures on modern art, and published a few articles and poems. 
In 1915 Rosenberg returned to England, where he published a second small pamphlet of poems, 'Youth', and enlisted in the army. Hating the idea of killing, he had hoped to serve with the medical corps but instead was assigned to the Bantam battalion, being, as he said, 'too short for any other' ('Collected Works', 219). The antisemitism that he there encountered made him more conscious of the Jewishness that had not been particularly important to him before. He wrote a play, 'Moses', published in a pamphlet of that title shortly before he crossed the channel with the King's Own Royal Lancaster regiment in June 1916, and a poem, 'The Jew', following his arrival in France. 
Rosenberg's poems from the front show him to have absorbed the great tradition of English pastoral poetry, but his tone is different: more impersonal, informal, ironic, and lacking the indignation characteristic of the work of Wilfred Owen and Siegfried Sassoon. In such poems as 'Break of Day in the Trenches', 'Returning we Hear the Larks', and his masterpiece, 'Dead Man's Dump', Rosenberg succeeded in his intention of writing 'Simple 'poetry' -- that is where an interesting complexity of thought is kept in tone and right value to the dominating idea so that it is understandable and still ungraspable' ('Collected Works', 238). 
Rosenberg was killed on the western front near Fampoux, north-east of Arras, on 1 April 1918 and buried in an unmarked grave. His remains were discovered eight years later and reinterred under a headstone in the Bailleul Road east cemetery in Flanders. Examples of Rosenberg's paintings are in the Carlisle Museum and Art Gallery, Tate Modern, and the National Portrait Gallery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 37915


Ross, Robert Baldwin (1869-1918), journalist and gallery owner, was born in Tours, France, on 25 May 1869, the youngest of seven children of John Ross (1818-1871), attorney-general of Upper Canada, and his second wife, Augusta Elizabeth ('c'.1832-1905), the daughter of Robert Baldwin (1804-1858), a former prime minister of Upper Canada. His father was of Irish descent; his mother was Canadian. After the death of his father, his mother took Ross and his siblings to London in accordance with his late father's wishes. Illness marred much of Ross's early life and he was educated by a private tutor. He went to King's College, Cambridge, in 1888 to read history, but, apart from writing for 'The Gadfly' and 'Granta', his academic career was undistinguished. On leaving Cambridge at the end of his first year, he went to Edinburgh as a trainee journalist on the 'Scots Observer', then under the editorship of W. E. Henley. 
In 1886 Ross became acquainted with Oscar Wilde. Frank Harris later made the scurrilous and uncorroborated suggestion that the two men had met in a public lavatory, but it is much more likely that Alex Ross, Robert's elder brother and a literary critic, made the introduction, possibly at the Savile Club: Alex Ross was a member of the Savile, and Wilde dined there occasionally. The friendship developed slowly, but in 1895, when Wilde was sentenced to two years' hard labour for homosexual crimes, Robert Ross was his most constant and loyal friend. After Wilde's release in 1897 and during his exile in France, Ross continued to befriend and support him, and to act as intermediary between Wilde and his estranged wife and her advisers. Ross was with Wilde when he died in Paris on 30 November 1900. Before his release from Reading gaol, Wilde had appointed Ross his literary executor; but, with Wilde's estate bankrupt, it was not until 1905 that Ross was able to pay Wilde's creditors and annul the bankruptcy. In 1905 Ross published 'De Profundis', an abridged version of Wilde's tormented prison letter to Lord Alfred Douglas. In 1908 Ross published, in fourteen volumes, 'The Collected Works of Oscar Wilde'. 
From 1901 to 1909 Ross was director and administrator of the Carfax Gallery, a small avant-garde art gallery in Ryder Street, London, which, under his direction, gained a reputation for showing the work of unknown artists. Between 1908 and 1912 Ross was art critic on the 'Morning Post'. He held very firm opinions on the role of a critic, believing that it was his function to stimulate intelligent interest in paintings and to equip viewers to make their own independent judgements. He was never afraid to praise or damn: his love of the French impressionists was combined with trenchant criticism of post-impressionism. At the opening of the Post-Impressionist Exhibition of 1910 he blithely dismissed Cezanne as a failure. Ross joined the National Art Collections Fund and was elected to the executive committee in 1912; he also became a member of the Contemporary Art Society. In 1912 he was appointed London director of the new Johannesburg Art Gallery and was valuer of pictures and drawings for the Board of Inland Revenue from 1912 to 1914. 
From 1913 to 1915 Ross was plagued by several exhausting litigations with Lord Alfred Douglas and the journalist T. W. H. Crosland. In 1915, however, Ross finally won a judgment against Crosland. D. S. MacColl, keeper of the Wallace Collection, and Sir Edmund Gosse, angered at the damage the court appearances had done to Ross's high reputation, organized a testimonial. Ross insisted that the money raised should be given to the Slade School of Fine Art, University College, London, for a Robert Ross memorial prize. In 1917 he served as an additional trustee to the Tate Gallery, and as London buyer for the Felton bequest of the Melbourne Art Gallery. 
During the years of the First World War Ross's London apartment became a sanctuary for war-weary young men, including the war poets Siegfried Sassoon and Wilfred Owen. In Ross's delightful and witty company, for a few precious hours, they could forget the horrors of trench warfare. Although these men were not among his partners, Ross was clearly homosexual and had two long-term relationships. He shared a house for fifteen years with (William) More Adey; a shorter partnership, with Frederick (Freddie) Stanley Smith, ended in 1917, when Smith took up a diplomatic appointment in Stockholm. Ross discouraged discussion of his sex life, and maintained a lifelong silence about the exact nature of his relationship with Wilde, deriving much satisfaction during his long legal battles with Douglas from the failure of lawyers and inquiry agents to find evidence of a liaison between himself and his famous friend. 
Ross died suddenly on 5 October 1918 at his home, 40 Half Moon Street, Mayfair, London, but even then his delicate sense of humour did not desert him: he left instructions in his will that he was to be cremated -- a most unusual request for a Roman Catholic (he had converted in 1894) -- and his ashes taken to Pere Lachaise cemetery in Paris and placed within Oscar Wilde's tomb. His family arranged his cremation, which took place at Golders Green, but his ashes were not taken to Paris until 30 November 1950, the fiftieth anniversary of Wilde's death. 


@@@@@


doc= 37916


Ross, William Henry (1862-1944), whisky distiller, was born on 19 June 1862 in Gowanside, Carluke, Lanarkshire, the youngest son of John Ross, tenant farmer, and his wife, Euphemia Forrest. A year later the family moved to a farm near South Queensferry, outside Edinburgh. After attending the local school Ross went to George Watson's College in Edinburgh (1873-7). 
After leaving school at fifteen, Ross went to work as a clerk at the Grassmarket, Edinburgh, branch of the City of Glasgow Bank. When this collapsed in 1878, he got a post as a junior clerk with the Distillers Company Limited (DCL), which had been formed a year earlier by six of the largest Lowland patent distillers to rationalize production. Through hard work and attendance at night school to learn bookkeeping, he quickly gained promotion, becoming accountant and cashier in 1884 and company secretary in 1889. He was appointed general manager in 1897, and managing director in 1900. When the large whisky-blending house of W. and G. Pattison collapsed fraudulently the following year, he tried and failed to arrange a rescue package, but DCL did provide financial help to firms unwittingly caught up in the crash. 
After 1900 the whisky trade slipped into deep recession, exacerbated by the 'What is whisky?' debate between the pot malt distillers and the patent distillers. Ross organized the patent distillers' campaign and was largely responsible for their victory before the royal commission on whisky that reported in 1909. In the meantime, he had been pursuing a policy of rationalizing the trade by buying patent and grain distillery businesses that were in difficulty, collaborating closely with the large blending houses. He displayed considerable skill in matching supply to the much reduced demand by working plant at below capacity. 
From the 1909 budget, and throughout the First World War, the government was antagonistic to whisky, imposing large duty increases and restrictions. Ross became the unofficial leader of the whole trade, working hard to ensure survival. Scottish Malt Distillers was formed under his chairmanship in 1914 to acquire five Lowland pot distilleries. He was appointed OBE for his services during the war, when he acted as intermediary between the government and the distillers for the supply of alcohol for munition purposes. After the war, with the anti-drink lobby gaining ground worldwide, he led the campaign to restructure the industry and diversify DCL into other activities, particularly the production of industrial alcohol. His crowning achievement was the 'big amalgamation' of 1925, which brought DCL together with the three largest blending houses, John Walker & Sons, James Buchanan & Co., and John Dewar & Sons. Ross was appointed chairman of the enlarged company. Other amalgamations followed. 
Ross was also concerned to develop the international market for whisky, making several sales tours overseas. It was on one of these to Australia in 1929 that his sight was severely damaged in an accident. He fought hard to overcome his disability, and established the W. H. Ross Foundation for the Study and Prevention of Blindness in Edinburgh in 1935. He retired from DCL in that year. 
On 21 August 1888 Ross married Annie Gilmore Pollock Dalglish, daughter of David Dalglish, cotton-mill manager. They had two sons and one daughter. Increasingly infirm, he married as his second wife his nurse, Florence Ridley, and, when she died, he married her successor, Gladys Murdoch (who survived him). Ross died on 22 August 1944 at his home, Stanmore, Barnton Avenue, Davidsons Mairs, in Edinburgh. 
Michael S. Moss', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37917


Roth, Cecil (1899-1970), historian, was born on 5 March 1899 in Dalston, London, the youngest of the four sons of Joseph Roth, manufacturer of builders' supplies, and his wife, Etty, 'nee' Jacobs; his third brother, Leon, became a philosopher of distinction. Educated at the City of London School, he saw active service in France in 1918 and then read history at Merton College, Oxford, obtaining a first class in modern history in 1922, and a DPhil in 1924; his thesis was published in 1925 as 'The Last Florentine Republic'. In 1928 he married Irene Rosalind, daughter of David Davis, property developer. They had no children. 
Roth soon turned to Jewish studies, his interest from childhood, when he had a traditional religious education and learned Hebrew from the Cairo genizah scholar Jacob Mann. Roth supported himself by freelance writing until in 1939 he received a specially created readership in post-biblical Jewish studies at the University of Oxford, where he was also mentor and host to Jewish students. After retiring from Oxford in 1964, he settled in Israel and divided his last years between New York, where he was visiting professor at Queens' College in City University and Stern College, and Jerusalem. 
Roth's output was immense: bibliographies in his Festschrift, 'Remember the Days' (1966), and in 'Transactions of the Jewish Historical Society', 25 (1977), list 779 items by him, including translations of his works. Some were, of course, ephemeral, including books and articles written in the 1930s when he lived by his pen. But he wrote the definitive 'History of the Jews in England' (1941) and 'History of the Jews in Italy' (1946), 'The History of the Marranos' (1932) and 'The Jews in the Renaissance' (1959), and comprehensive, popular works such as 'The Short History of the Jewish People' (1936) and 'The Jewish Contribution to Civilization' (1938). His style was vivid, and he had a penchant for colourful, even shady, characters, and a zest for historical detection. He produced works of precise scholarship, especially bibliographical works and studies of painting, and he applied his historical skills to the Dead Sea scrolls, identifying the Qumran sect with the Zealots against the more commonly proposed Essene identification that is now generally accepted (1958, 1965). His approach to economics and sociology tended to concentrate on personalities or small groups, rather than broader analysis, and he took but a limited interest in the philosophical aspects of history. 
Roth was always interested in art, and especially in Jewish incorporation or adaptation of the motifs of Western art forms in Jewish ceremonial contexts. He made a scientific study of illuminated medieval 'Haggadot' (service books for the home on Passover eve); he also collaborated with the Polish artist Artur Szyk in the most sumptuous of modern printed editions of the 'Haggadah' (1940). He was an avid collector, particularly of illuminated 'ketubbot' (marriage contracts), silver ritual objects, rare printed books, and manuscripts. These collections, which formed the setting of his home in Oxford, are now in the university library at Leeds (books and manuscripts) and in a museum attached to the Beth Tzedec Synagogue, Toronto (art collection). Both reflect his abiding interest in Italy and its Jewish communities, among which, until the massacres attendant upon the Second World War, he was a familiar figure. 
Roth's crowning achievement was the editorship of the 'Encyclopaedia Judaica', which he held from 1965. The sixteen volumes of this appeared in the year of his death. He planned the allocation of space, edited contributions, and wrote much himself, displaying powers of leadership, administration, and editorial conciliation. Roth's influence was less as a teacher, there having been during his lifetime much less scope than later for Jewish studies in Britain, than as a writer and lecturer. He was much in demand for lecture tours in Europe, America, and Africa. With hair parted in the middle, he retained the appearance of a youthful student almost to the end. 
The academic world in his youth was hardly prepared to acknowledge the presence of a specifically Jewish factor in European economic and political history. The fact that it was later more generally recognized is in part due to the attention which Roth's scholarly and semi-popular writings attracted; and that his findings have not always survived the scrutiny of able younger scholars itself attests to his own success in helping to put Jewish history on the academic map. Most of his contemporaries in Oxford and elsewhere assumed that the only appropriate approach to Jewish studies was through Semitic philology and biblical studies, and Roth never received in Britain the academic recognition that his publications and his international standing (especially in America and Israel) merited. A contributory factor, perhaps, was his concealment of a warm and generous nature behind a self-assertive manner. In 1969 the Italian government made him commander of the order of merit for services to Italian culture. Roth died in Jerusalem (where his home was 21 Balfour Street) on 21 June 1970; he was survived by his wife. 
V. D. Lipman', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37918


Rotz, Jean (b. c.1505, d. in or after 1560), hydrographer, was born in Dieppe. His father, David Ross, was one of a number of Scotsmen who went to Dieppe to seek a living. His mother was French, probably Dieppoise, and he was known in France as Jehan Roz. In his early years he sailed in the ships of the Dieppe 'armateur' Jean Ango. He may have been on the expedition from Dieppe to Sumatra under the command of Jean Parmentier in 1529-30. He was in Guinea and Brazil in 1539. From 1540 to 1542 he appears to have resided in Paris, where he studied the maritime sciences. He moved to London with his wife, Coleta, and his children in 1542 to seek service under Henry VIII. In September he was appointed royal hydrographer, and he and his wife and children were made denizens of England under royal warrant. 
Rotz's first gifts to Henry were a navigating instrument of his own invention, the 'differential quadrant' (a combined magnetic compass and universal dial), and a navigational treatise for its use, 'Traicte des differences du compas aymante' (BL, Royal MS 20.B.vii). Rotz then presented to the king the 'Boke of idrography', 1542 (BL, Royal MS 20.E.ix), comprising a magnificent illuminated atlas of the world. Vignettes drawn 'ad vivum' depict the lives of the inhabitants of the distant regions, such as a raja's procession in Sumatra and a Tupinamba village in Brazil. A remarkable geographical feature is the 'Londe of Java', a land mass which may represent the Portuguese discovery of Australia in 1528. A further example of Rotz's work has been identified in an anonymous chart of the English Channel, 'c'.1543 (BL, Cotton MS I.ii.65.66). 
In January 1547, when Henry was dying, Rotz sought the help of the French ambassador Odet de Selve to secure his return to France. In order to win the favour of the French king he became a secret agent, and provided political and military intelligence and maps of England and Scotland. He effected his escape to France in June 1547 and became the leading merchant captain of Dieppe. In 1551 he was rewarded with a grant of ennoblement. In 1559 he was in charge of the naval operations for the abortive invasion of Scotland under the command of Rene of Lorraine, marquis d'Elboeuf. He makes a final appearance with two ships at Middleburg, the port of Zeeland, on 8 June 1560. 
Rotz was acclaimed in 1568 by Nicolas de Nicolay, 'premier Cosmographe du Roy', as one of the greatest French navigators, and, although his role as a hydrographer is not recorded in the early chronicles of Dieppe, his 'Boke' ranks as one of the greatest maritime atlases of the Renaissance. 
Helen Wallis', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37919


Rowley, John (c.1668-1728), maker of scientific instruments and mechanic, was born in Lichfield, Staffordshire, the youngest of three sons and a daughter of William Rowley (died 1673), sword cutler of Lichfield, and his wife, Elizabeth. On 20 October 1682 he was bound apprentice to the London mathematical and optical instrument maker Joseph Hone in the Broderers' Company, and he took his freedom in that company on 26 February 1691. Soon afterwards he established his own business, opening a shop in 1704 at the sign of the Globe, in Fleet Street in the City of London; he took five apprentices between 1699 and 1710. On 18 April 1697 he married Catherine Harding (died 1756) at Wooburn, Buckinghamshire. Their daughter Elizabeth was baptized at St Bartholomew-the-Less, West Smithfield, London, on 31 May 1698. 
From 1704 to 1708 Rowley enjoyed the patronage of Prince George of Denmark. He also supplied Christ's Hospital mathematical school, the Office of Ordnance, and other corporate bodies with a wide range of mathematical, drawing, surveying, and gunnery instruments. His sextant, made in 1708 and figured in John Harris's 'Lexicon technicum' of 1710, together with the other instruments which he provided for the observatory at Trinity College, Cambridge, commended him to the Royal Society, which in 1711-13 asked him to report on the instruments of John Flamsteed, astronomer royal, at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich. In 1710 he made four large sundials for Blenheim Palace and three for St Paul's Cathedral, which further enhanced his reputation. 
Rowley worked in brass, silver, and ivory to produce some extremely fine pieces and he was recognized as the most skilled maker of mathematical instruments and models of his day. Other craftsmen emulated him, and he was praised by scientific writers. He became the principal supplier of instruments to Charles Boyle, fourth earl of Corke and Orrery, who assembled one of the finest collections of the age. About 1712 Orrery commissioned from Rowley a mechanical model of the earth-sun-moon system, of a type constructed by the clockmaker George Graham, but larger and more sophisticated. Perhaps as a pun on the word 'horary', Rowley named it an 'orrery', still the current term for a mechanical planetarium. Rowley also made magnificent orreries for the Habsburg emperor Charles VI in 1712-13, for Peter the Great in 1714, and for the East India Company in 1714-15. George I commissioned his most elaborate model, the 'great solar system', in 1722, at a price of $1000; this may have been remodelled in 1733 by one of Rowley's former apprentices, Thomas Wright, who was also noted for his grand orreries. 
On his appointment in 1715 as master of mechanics to George I, Rowley relinquished his shop to Thomas Wright and concentrated on business for the offices of Ordnance and Works, the latter being responsible for the royal palaces and other official buildings. He was charged with making and repairing water and fire engines at Kensington Palace, Hampton Court, the House of Commons, and Windsor Castle. The 'great water engine' which he built at Windsor in 1718 functioned until 1758; Rowley was its keeper by royal warrant of 1721, backdated to 1718. He constructed engines for the Tower of London and numerous fire engines for the Office of Ordnance. Appointed inspector to the Chelsea Waterworks Company, he constructed in 1725-6 a water engine which lasted until 1775. Between 1704 and 1723 he supplied the Board of Ordnance with many weighing and measuring devices, among which 'Rowley's Tower yard' later played an important part in standardizing the English yard. His techniques for gauging cannonball weight and dimensions also led to the standardized calibration of land and sea cannon in 1715. 
Rowley joined two of the earliest known art clubs, the Rose and Crown and the prestigious Society of the Virtuosi of St Luke. George Vertue has described an untraced portrait of him, painted by Jacob van Schuppen in Vienna about 1718. The 'learned and curious' often met at Rowley's Johnson's Court house, off Fleet Street, and Samuel Johnson praised him for his perpetual-motion experiments. Rowley died intestate on 14 January 1728 in London and was buried on 19 January at St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street. 


@@@@@


doc= 37920


Rucker, Sir Arthur William (1848-1915), physicist, was born on 23 October 1848 at 3 Nelson Terrace, Clapham Common, Surrey, the eldest in the family of three sons and three daughters of Daniel Henry Rucker the younger (1816-1890), merchant of colonial produce, of London, and his wife, Mary Antoinette (1825-1905), eldest daughter of John D. Williams, a merchant of Coolock, co. Dublin. Educated at Clapham grammar school, Rucker went to Brasenose College, Oxford (1867), with an open mathematical scholarship, taking first-class honours in mathematical moderations and the junior university mathematical scholarship (1869), and first-class honours in mathematics (1870) and natural science (1871). 
Awarded an open mathematical fellowship at Brasenose in 1871, Rucker was appointed mathematical lecturer at Brasenose and demonstrator at the Clarendon Laboratory, but when the Yorkshire College of Science was founded in Leeds in 1874 he moved to become their professor of mathematics and physics, and in 1876 he gave up his fellowship on marrying, on 5 July, Marian (1852-1878), second daughter of John Deakin Heaton, physician, of Claremont, Leeds. She died following the birth of their daughter Olive in 1878. In 1886 Rucker was appointed professor of physics at the Royal College of Science, London. He subsequently assisted the incorporation of the greater London colleges within London University and, as a result, became the first principal in 1901, holding the position until retirement in 1908. 
Rucker's research topics included thermal expansion of liquids (1876-84); properties of thin liquid films (1877-93), jointly with A. W. Reinold; and electromagnetism (1855-1901). His major contribution was undoubtedly to undertake, jointly with Thomas Thorpe, a series of magnetic surveys of the British Isles (1883-92) which significantly advanced contemporary interpretation methods, and to obtain the first measurements of the magnetic susceptibility of rocks (1890-98). 
A good-humoured, patient man of great personal charm, Rucker was an energetic and skilled administrator and an excellent public speaker. His hobbies included rambling, ornithology, sketching, photography, horticulture, and astronomy, and he acquired a competency in the Welsh language. He stood unsuccessfully as a Liberal Unionist candidate for parliament in the 1885 and 1886 elections in North Leeds and the Pudsey division of Yorkshire. 
In recognition of his work on thin films and terrestrial magnetism Rucker was awarded the royal medal of the Royal Society in 1891 and became president of the permanent committee on terrestrial magnetism and atmospheric electricity of the International Meteorological Conference in 1896. He was awarded the honorary degrees of doctor of science from Oxford, Cambridge, Manchester, Leeds, and Belfast and LLD from Glasgow and Edinburgh; he was knighted in 1902. Elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1884, he was on the council (1887-9, 1894, 1898-9) and secretary (1896-1901). He was also treasurer of the British Association (1891-8) and its president (1901), and president of the Physical Society (1893-5). Rucker married, on 7 September 1892, Thereza Charlotte Story Maskelyne (1863-1941) ['see 'Rucker, Thereza Charlotte], third daughter of (Mervyn Herbert) Nevil Story-Maskelyne of Wroughton, Wiltshire, keeper of minerals at the British Museum. They had one son, Sir Arthur Nevil Rucker (1895-1991). In retirement Rucker and his wife concerned themselves with the teaching of home science at King's College for Women. Rucker died on 1 November 1915 at his home, Everington House, Everington Lane, Yattendon, Berkshire and was buried on 5 November in the church of St Peter and St Paul, Yattendon. 
Richard J. Howarth', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37921


Rudd, John (c.1498-1579), Church of England clergyman and cartographer, was born in Yorkshire. In 1515 he entered Clare College, Cambridge, and by 1520 had taken the degrees of BA and MA. Ordained to the priesthood in 1521, he subsequently became a fellow of St John's College, Cambridge, and graduated BTh in 1530. 
During the religious changes of the 1530s Rudd initially adopted a clear anti-reformist stance, and in 1534 he was briefly imprisoned on the order of Thomas Cromwell. However, with the ascendancy of the conservative faction in the 1540s Rudd began to achieve a modest prominence, being nominated clerk of the closet, which brought him into close personal contact with Henry VIII. Before 1547 he had become vicar of the collegiate church of Norton in co. Durham, and a prebendary of Beverley, Burton upon Trent, and St Stephen's in Westminster, appointments which (with the exception of Norton) were lost owing to the dissolution of these colleges in 1548. However, Rudd appears to have gained the patronage of John Dudley, later duke of Northumberland, and he was compensated with a royal chaplaincy and prebends in the cathedrals of Durham (1550) and Winchester (1551). In 1551 he demonstrated his increasing devotion to the new doctrines by taking a wife, though this was to ensure deprivation from all his livings under Mary in 1554. However, after confessing his fault at Paul's Cross he was once more rewarded, this time with three Yorkshire livings, the vicarages of Dewsbury (1554) and Hornsea-cum-Riston (1557), and the rectory of Thornhill (1558). 
Elizabeth's accession allowed Rudd to receive back his wife, along with his Durham prebend and the vicarage of Norton, on the resignation of Hornsea. In 1570 he resigned Dewsbury, having been presented to the wealthy Richmondshire rectory of Romaldkirk in 1569. It is difficult to penetrate Rudd's religious views with any certainty. Whether his survival was that of a cynical trimmer or one who had a paramount belief in the idea of the royal supremacy is impossible to determine, but he cannot have been a good parochial pastor because of his persistent plurality. 
Rudd's promotions were probably attempts to remunerate a man who was of more value to the Tudor state as a cartographer than as a cleric. While he was imprisoned in 1534 he was working on a map of the Holy Land which was sent to Cromwell's confidant, Rowland Lee, in an attempt to secure his release. Rudd claimed that it was more accurate than any that had been made before, and there is a strong possibility that it is to be identified with the map which appears in the 1535 English 'Bible' of Miles Coverdale. Released from prison, Rudd travelled round the country undertaking surveys and checking information at first hand. In 1561 he received a royal dispensation to be absent from his Durham prebend to finalize a map of England 'both fairer and more perfect and truer than it hath been hitherto' (Durham chapter records, register B, fol. 135). One of his assistants in this task was Christopher Saxton, who came from Dunningley near Dewsbury and who was working as his servant in 1570. The completed work was possibly the map of the British Isles published by Gerardus Mercator in Duisburg in 1564. 
Rudd married Isabel Whildon in 1551. They are known to have had three sons and three daughters. The eldest son, Edmund, died as a fellow of Clare College, Cambridge, in 1576. When an inventory was made of Edmund Rudd's possessions it included maps, and, perhaps significantly, an unfinished map and a drawing table, but it is not clear whether he was a cartographer in his own right, or was merely in possession of items 'on loan' from his father. John Rudd died at Durham in 1579 and was buried in the cathedral: his wife died at Durham in 1582, her inventory recording 'three maps' and 'one old map' among her possessions. 
David Marcombe', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37922


Rudyerd, John (fl. 1703-1709), builder of the second Eddystone lighthouse, was one of a large and poor family. Little is known of his origins, except that he was born in Cornwall, probably near Plymouth. There he was in the service of a gentleman, who caused him to be educated. 
In the early eighteenth century Rudyerd was in business as a silk mercer in Ludgate Hill, London, when he was engaged by Captain John Lovel or Lovet, the lessee, to act as 'architect and surveyor' for a lighthouse on the Eddystone Reef near Plymouth, to replace the one built by Henry Winstanley, which had been swept away by a storm in 1703 after only five years. Assisted by Norcott and Smith, Woolwich shipwrights, he carried out a tremendous feat of engineering. Using a shore base at Empacombe, he first anchored his structure to the rocks in a novel and successful way. Then, using layers of oak balks between much thicker layers of granite to give mass for stability, he built the tower round a central timber mast, to a height of 61 feet. The whole was encased in heavy oak timbers, caulked and pitch-covered like a ship, to a total height of 92 feet. 
The light, which had twenty-four candles, was first shown on 28 July 1708, and the lighthouse was completed in 1709. It stood successfully in its very exposed position until December 1755; it was then totally destroyed by fire, which started in the lantern roof and, despite the efforts of the keepers, spread down through the timbers, driving the men out upon the rocks, whence they were rescued next day. 
John Smeaton expressed the greatest admiration for Rudyerd's work, which greatly benefited him when he built the third Eddystone light. Rudyerd was the builder of the first successful sea-rock lighthouse in the world, but nothing more is known of him. Smeaton presumed that he died soon after completion of the work. 
James Hodge', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37923


Rundell, Philip (1746-1827), jeweller and millionaire, was born on 15 January 1746 and baptized on 8 February 1746 at Norton St Philip, near Bath, Somerset, one of the large family of Richard Rundell, victualler or maltster, and his wife, Ann Ditcher. Shortly after his fourteenth birthday, on 10 May 1760 Rundell was apprenticed in Bath to the jeweller William Rogers. After serving his time he found employment in the late 1760s, probably through the influence of family connections in the City of London, with William Pickett, the retail goldsmith of the Golden Salmon, Ludgate Hill. The youthful Rundell appears to have shown his aptitude for business so rapidly that within three or four years Pickett, admittedly increasingly preoccupied by aldermanic affairs on his way to becoming lord mayor in 1789, made him a partner. Rundell was made free of the Drapers' Company by redemption on 15 May 1771. 
The firm of Pickett and Rundell survived until February 1786, when Rundell, taking sole charge, agreed to buy Pickett out. In December the following year the firm's name was altered from Philip Rundell to Rundell and Bridge upon John Bridge becoming the new partner. Under these two men the concern became pre-eminent in the British goldsmiths' trade. For nearly forty years they formed what seems to have been the perfect working partnership, each attending to that part of the business to which their very different characters suited them best. Rundell, hard-working, often irascible, and steadfast in striking a bargain, and also regarded by London contemporaries as the keenest judge of diamonds, superintended the firm's jewellery and other manufacturing departments. Bridge, on the other hand, was possessed of an urbanity of manner which proved of the greatest importance, especially in the firm's dealings with George III and other members of the royal family. 
About 1798 Rundell arranged to purchase the old-established jewellery business of John Duval, Sons & Co.; by this means Rundell and Bridge became the crown jewellers. A further change occurred in 1804-5 when the firm's style was altered to Rundell, Bridge, and Rundell following the admission of the senior partner's nephew, Edmund Waller Rundell (1768?-1857), son of Maria Eliza Rundell, into the business. By now Rundells was in a dominant position with many of the finest workshops, including that of Paul Storr, at its disposal, together with the services of artists such as William Theed, John Flaxman, and Thomas Stothard. Besides a stock of both new and antique silver, much of Rundells' business depended upon the sale and purchase of precious stones, pearls, jewellery, gold boxes, and objects of virtu. By 1812-13 Rundell was furthermore actively engaged in buying a steam engine for a diamond-cutting subsidiary in Spitalfields. 
Although never married, according to the article on him in the 'Annual Biography and Obituary' for 1828 Rundell 'always manifested much pleasure in the enjoyment of female society, for which the comeliness of his person, his conversational powers, and his habitual attentiveness, naturally fitted him. He was unassuming in his manners, and when relieved from the cares of business, was a cheerful and agreeable companion. He was fond of music, had a tolerable voice, and sang with taste. (p. 323)' During the last twenty years of his life, however, he suffered from increasing deafness and the effects of an internal complaint, in consequence of which 'he withdrew much from society, and lived very retired' (p. 324). Other, less charitable accounts of Rundell's character, conduct, and the acquisition of his great personal wealth have survived, the more unpleasant of which, perhaps significantly, were written by former employees. 
Rundell retired on 29 September 1823. Throughout most of his working life he lived above the shop at 32 Ludgate Hill, although latterly he occupied a house nearby in The Crescent, New Bridge Street, Blackfriars. On his retirement he took up residence in a small house at South Bank, Regent's Park, in order, according to one authority, to be near his medical advisers. Others claim that this was the abode of Rundell's mistress, Mrs Elizabeth Wartridge. His health began to deteriorate seriously towards the end of 1826 and he died at South Bank on 17 February 1827. He was buried in Hendon parish churchyard, the grave being marked by a stone tomb erected in his memory by Joseph Neeld junior. 
John Culme', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37924


Rushout, John, second Baron Northwick (1769-1859), collector and art connoisseur, was born on 16 February 1769, the eldest son in the family of two sons and three daughters of Sir John Rushout (died 1800), later first Baron Northwick, and his wife, Rebecca, daughter of Humphrey Bowles of Wanstead in Essex. He was descended from a Flemish family, who moved to London as merchants in the reign of Charles I and settled at Northwick, Worcestershire. Rushout's father chose an unconventional education for him: instead of a public school followed by university, he was sent to a school in Hackney and then to Neufchatel. 
Rushout spent a year in Spain before travelling in September 1793 to Italy, where he remained until 1800 as an attache to the ambassador to the king of Naples. He travelled extensively throughout Italy; his 'voyage de catalogue' (priv. coll.) records places and dates but gives little information about the impression the cities made on him. He made friendships among many of the most eminent men of the day, including Edward Gibbon, Horatio Nelson (Viscount Nelson), Sir William Hamilton and his wife, Richard Payne Knight, Antonio Canova, and Vincenzo Camuccini. He later wrote that he had developed: 'an unbounded admiration for the works of the most refined art in painting, sculpture and architecture, with which [Rome] then abounded... These were the seductive amusements of my youth: they have clung to me through a long life, and they are now the solace of my old age. (Ingamells, 830)' The classical scholar J. B. S. Morritt recorded that when he met Rushout in Naples in 1795 the latter's collection of medals had already reached 12,000, and that Rushout had given up 'his whole time to it [collecting] from morning to night' (ibid.). 
Rushout returned to England on succeeding his father as second Baron Northwick in 1800, and was able to devote himself to the formation of the collection for which Northwick Park became famous. In his introduction to the catalogue of Northwick pictures (1921), Tancred Borenius wrote that Lord Northwick was a: 'collector of very high intelligence and discrimination. Living at a time when the value of works of art in the market was one of taste and appreciation rather than of mere commerce, he was able to avail himself of an ample fortune to buy the finest specimens of the Fine Arts which came into the market.' He also planted beeches, firs, and larches on the Northwick estate, and created ornamental cascades along the brook which flowed through his woodlands. 
Northwick was a catholic collector, and bought actively at auctions for over half a century. He acquired pictures of all schools, especially Italian pictures from all periods, Flemish pictures, and contemporary British paintings. His pioneering interest was in Italian pictures of the fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries. So extensive did his collection become that he built a special picture gallery at Northwick Park in 1832, and some years later acquired Thirlestane House in Cheltenham, the guide to which in 1846 listed over 500 pictures. By 1859 the collection exceeded 1400 pictures; sculpture, bronzes, antique gems and cameos, enamels, coins, carvings, miniatures, and manuscripts also formed part of the collection. Of liberal disposition, he opened Thirlestane House to the public and it became one of the greatest attractions of Cheltenham. Northwick was an initial subscriber to the British Institution, founded in 1805; a member of the Society of Dilettanti; and a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. 
Northwick died, unmarried and intestate, at Northwick Park on 20 January 1859. He was succeeded as third Baron Northwick by his nephew, George Rushout-Bowles MP. As his property had to be divided equally among his nearest kin, it was necessary for Thirlestane House and the famous collections to be sold. The auction was conducted by Harry Phillips, auctioneer of New Bond Street, London, in July and August 1859 and raised some $95,000 in eighteen days: four pictures were bought by the National Gallery, and others by collectors of the calibre of William Douglas, eleventh duke of Hamilton, Walter Scott, fifth duke of Buccleuch, the fourth marquess of Hertford, and Baron James de Rothschild. However, a considerable part of the collections was bought by George, third Baron Northwick, and was taken to Northwick Park. 
Charles Sebag-Montefiore', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37925


Russell, George William Erskine (1853-1919), politician and writer, was born in London on 3 February 1853, the youngest of six children (two sons and four daughters) of Lord Charles James Fox Russell (son of John Russell, sixth duke of Bedford), and his wife, Isabella Clarissa, daughter of William Davies of Pen-y-lan, Carmarthenshire. Lord Charles was an MP from 1832 until 1848, and was then appointed serjeant-at-arms attending the House of Commons, and Russell's childhood was spent in the official lodgings in Speaker's Court. It was there, he said, that he acquired the three enthusiasms of his life -- politics, religion, and books. He was a lame and sickly child; at Harrow School, where he was sent as a home-boarder, he could play no games. He went as a scholar to University College, Oxford, in 1872; there he combined studiousness with acquiring a reputation as a 'riding man', and was elected to Vincent's Club. In 1874 his physical ailments were compounded by myelitis; he described himself as 'maimed for life, with all hope of academic distinction at an end'. He took a pass degree at Oxford. 
Russell was elected to parliament as member for Aylesbury in 1880. Although born in the very purple of whiggery, he displayed independence of judgement, and, in spite of his personal admiration for W. E. Gladstone (tempered by a certain irreverence), he attached himself to the radical section of the Liberal Party. This caused him many difficulties with the duke of Bedford, and his constituents. He wrote articles for the 'Fortnightly Review', favoured the disestablishment of the Church of England, and was sympathetic to the 'unauthorized programme' of Joseph Chamberlain. In June 1883 he was appointed as parliamentary secretary to the Local Government Board; his investigations of the London slums were partly responsible for the appointment of a royal commission on the housing of the poor in 1884. 
Russell lost his seat in 1885. In 1889 he was chosen as an alderman of the newly established London county council, in the Progressive interest. He served until 1895, being particularly active in the movement to raise the tone of the London music-halls by prohibiting sales of alcohol on the premises. He was re-elected to parliament in 1892, as member for North Bedfordshire, and was appointed under-secretary for India, and then, in 1894, under-secretary in the Home department. He retired from politics in 1895, and devoted himself to his other two enthusiasms, religion and books. 
From early life Russell was deeply interested in evangelical Christianity (he published, anonymously, a religious tract at the age of fourteen), and he had an abiding belief in personal social service. While at Oxford he taught at a Sunday school in Cowley and a night school at St Frideswide's Church. After Oxford he was influenced by the Christian socialists, especially Charles Kingsley and F. D. Maurice. He was a regular workhouse and hospital visitor, conducted 'Bible' classes, and was active in Christian missions. A prominent figure in purity movements, he was chairman of the National Vigilance Association in 1885, and one of the founders of the White Cross Society. After he retired from parliament, he was invited by Edward Talbot, bishop of Rochester, to do practical work in south London. In 1898 he became a diocesan lay reader. He maintained excellent relations with the dissenting movements, and spoke frequently at PSA (Pleasant Sunday Afternoon) meetings. He was strongly in favour of Church of England services for men only, as a means of introducing working men to church. 
Russell wrote throughout his adult life (he first appeared in print at the age of thirteen, with some verses on a volunteer encampment). He was a regular contributor to many of the leading newspapers and periodicals; his weekly articles for the 'Manchester Guardian' were republished in two series of 'Collections and Recollections' (1898). His religious opinions were set out in 'A Short History of the Evangelical Movement' (1915), and his personal interpretation of whig philosophy in 'Politics and Personalities' (1917). He edited the letters of Matthew Arnold, and wrote a number of biographies and memoirs, including those of Gladstone, Sydney Smith, E. B. Pusey, Bishop King of Lincoln, and H. P. Liddon. 
Russell was one of the founders of the National Liberal Club. He was awarded an LLD by the University of St Andrews in 1899, and became a privy councillor in 1907. He died, unmarried, on 17 March 1919 at his house, 18 Wilton Street, London. 
G. H. L. Le May', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37926


Sabatini, Rafael (1875-1950), novelist, was born on 29 April 1875 in Jesi, Italy, the only son of Maestro-Cavaliere Vincenzo Sabatini and his English wife, Anna Trafford, both opera singers. He was educated at the 'ecole cantonale' in Zug, Switzerland, and in Portugal at the 'lycee' of Porto and at Coimbra. He settled in England as a young man, and married Ruth Goad Dixon ('b'. 1875/6) on 9 August 1905; he became a British citizen in 1918. His first novel, 'The Tavern Knight', was published in 1904, and for the next forty-five years his books appeared with almost annual regularity to an increasingly receptive public, while his short stories found a ready market in popular magazines. He was adept at using the same basic plot in various forms, and a number of his short stories were eventually expanded into full-length novels. 
Sabatini's early work showed the influence of the late Victorian romancers, Stanley Weyman in particular. As his writing matured and he acquired that extensive knowledge of European history which informed all his work, he developed a highly distinctive narrative technique in which the romantic element, while always present, was often the handmaiden of the history which was his passion. Fiction was his forte, but he also produced two notable historical works: 'The Life of Cesare Borgia' (1912), and 'Torquemada and the Spanish Inquisition' (1913). There was biography too: 'Heroic Lives' (1934), and three volumes of short studies, 'The Historical Nights' Entertainments' (1918, 1919, and 1938), in which he investigated numerous historical controversies and personalities. He wrote six plays, none of which proved as popular as his books. 
It was while Sabatini was serving in War Office intelligence during the First World War that he had his first major success, with 'The Sea Hawk' (1915), a swashbuckler 'par excellence' about an Elizabethan Englishman who becomes a leader of Barbary corsairs. It established Sabatini not only as a leading historical novelist, but as the foremost exponent of the pirate story, a reputation confirmed in 1922 with 'Captain Blood', and its two sequels, 'The Chronicles of Captain Blood' (1931), and 'The Fortunes of Captain Blood' (1936). 
In 'Captain Blood' Sabatini demonstrated his mastery of the art of blending fiction with soundly researched historical fact. It is based on two real lives, that of Henry Pitman, an English surgeon who escaped to the West Indies after being condemned by Judge George Jeffreys for complicity in the Monmouth rising, and of Sir Henry Morgan, whose piratical exploits Sabatini adapted from Alexander Esquemelin's firsthand account, 'The Buccaneers of America', and attributed to his fictional hero, Dr Peter Blood. He used this technique time and again -- 'history disguised as fiction', as his publicists called it, not unjustly, for if he took occasional liberties with the letter of historic truth, he was never false to its spirit. The backgrounds to his stories, the detail of customs and manners, no less than the greater matters of politics, religion, and warfare, were as accurate as long study and careful research could make them. 

'Scaramouche' (1921), which is rivalled only by 'Captain Blood' as Sabatini's most popular work, is a case in point. The story of a young lawyer who, in pursuit of vengeance on a murderous aristocrat, becomes in turn a political agitator, an itinerant actor, and a fencing-master, provides a genuinely instructive survey of the early days of the French Revolution; it also earned Sabatini a curious accolade. He was meticulous about opening and closing sentences, and Yale University inscribed on a college building the first words of 'Scaramouche': 'He was born with a gift of laughter, and a sense that the world was mad.' 
While there were few periods from the thirteenth century to the Victorian era which Sabatini did not touch, the French Revolution was one of his favourite settings, as was Renaissance Italy. Nowhere was he more at home than among the 'condottieri', whose subtleties and stratagems were reflected in his own ingenious plots, and if there was a historic figure he admired, perhaps to excess, it was Cesare Borgia. 
In 1927 Sabatini's son and namesake, Rafael, was killed in a car accident, and in 1932 Sabatini and his wife were divorced. On 5 March 1935 he married Christine, 'nee' Wood ('b'. 1891/2), formerly the wife of Hugh Wainwright Dixon. They made a home for themselves at Clock Mills, Clifford, Herefordshire, where Sabatini enjoyed fishing in the River Wye, although he also retained his memberships at the Garrick, Savage, and Author's clubs in London. 
The success which Sabatini's books enjoyed was immensely enhanced by motion pictures. 'The Sea Hawk', 'Scaramouche', and 'Bardelys the Magnificent' were made into successful silent films, but it was with the sound version of 'Captain Blood' (1935), starring the fledgeling Errol Flynn, that Sabatini reached a worldwide audience. There followed 'The Black Swan' (1942), and remakes of 'The Sea Hawk' (1940) and 'Scaramouche' (1952), featuring such leading players as Tyrone Power, George Sanders, Flora Robson, and Stewart Granger. 
Sabatini's popularity did little for his literary reputation. The critical establishment tended to dismiss him as a romantic swashbuckler, but he was admired and respected by fellow authors for his mastery of narrative and plot construction, the accuracy of his character studies (among them a merciless portrait of Frederick the Great in 'King in Prussia', another of James I in 'The Minion', and memorable cameos of Wellington, Elizabeth I, Danton, Drake, Henry VIII, and many others), and his inimitable style. It was urbane, sardonic, faintly academic, and occasionally elaborate, but always clear, the style of a man who knows exactly what he is talking about and assumes, without condescension, that his reader knows too. These were virtues enough to set against the charge of romanticism, but his greatest gift was the ability to bring the past to life in vivid and convincing colours, and to enthuse millions of readers with his own love of history. 
'Admirers who met Sabatini in the flesh found a tall, well-built, likable, approachable and unaffected man with reddish hair, flashing hazel eyes, and the features of one of his own Cesares' (Kunitz and Haycraft, 1218). Sabatini died after a skiing accident on 13 February 1950 at the Nevada Palace Hotel, Adelboden, Switzerland. He was survived by his wife, Christine. 


@@@@@


doc= 37927


Sadleir, George Forster (1789-1859), army officer and explorer in Arabia, was born on 19 January 1789 in Cork, the younger son of James Sadleir, a cotton manufacturer, and his wife, Joanna, daughter of George Forster of Cork. In April 1805 he was commissioned ensign in the 47th regiment of foot, being promoted lieutenant in 1806 and captain in 1813. In 1807 he was in the expedition that failed to take Buenos Aires and subsequently went with his battalion to India. Towards the end of 1812 Sadleir commanded a party sent to Tabriz to join a military mission engaged in training the Persian army. His services were recognized both by the shah, who presented him with a sword, and by the governor-general, Lord Hastings. After leaving Persia in 1815 Sadleir took part in campaigns in India on the political staff of Sir John Malcolm. 
In the early nineteenth century the followers of Shaykh Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Wahhab troubled the British by preying on commerce in the Persian Gulf and raids off the Indian coast. In August 1818 Ibrahim, son of Mehmet Ali Pasha, viceroy of Egypt, captured the Saudi capital of Dir'iyyah. Lord Hastings determined to send an envoy to Ibrahim to propose an alliance, together with Muscat, to destroy the Qawasim pirates. The envoy was also to present a letter of congratulations and a sword and gather military and geographical information. Sadleir was chosen, received formal instructions on 14 April 1819, and sailed at once from Bombay. 
The first part of Sadleir's mission was a failure because Sa'id ibn Sultan, imam of Muscat, although receiving him affably, was unwilling to co-operate with the Egyptians. Sadleir arrived at Qatif on 21 June at a time when no European had been more than a few miles inland and no maps existed of the interior. He went inland to Hufuf, where he was informed that Ibrahim was near Dir'iyyah, and decided to join a convoy that was going to his camp. He arrived to find that Ibrahim had recently departed and was at Rass, another ten days away in the very centre of the peninsula. At Rass he heard that Ibrahim was evacuating all but the Hejaz, and had withdrawn to Medina. Sadleir felt that he had done enough and wished to return to the coast. The Egyptian commander, however, said that the journey would need a large escort which he could not provide, so Sadleir had no choice but to continue. Near Medina he at last found Ibrahim, who expressed delight at the sword but declined to discuss politics. Sadleir then went down to the Red Sea coast at Yanbu' al-Bahr, which he reached on 20 September. 
There was no other crossing of the peninsula until 1914, when Captain W. H. I. Shakespear travelled from Kuwait to 'Aqabah. Sadleir's 'Diary of a Journey across Arabia' (1866) describes a critical period of history for which there are no other accounts in European languages and few in Arabic. It is a valuable geographical document, noting wells, compass readings, and periods on the march. In 1904 D. G. Hogarth wrote that it was still the only source for many places. Sadleir is unique among Arabian explorers, for his journey was involuntary and he loathed both the place and its 'turbulent barbarians'. He resolutely refused to conform to local customs and made not the slightest effort to understand the people. He showed himself stubborn, but also resilient, conscientious, brave, and not devoid of humour. 
Sadleir continued to serve in India, took part in the First Anglo-Burmese War, and returned to England in 1828. He retired as a major in 1837 and became a sheriff of Cork in the same year. He married a Miss Ridings of Cork in 1847 or 1848 and then emigrated to New Zealand, where he died in Auckland on 2 December 1859. 
Robin Bidwell', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37928


Sadler, James (bap. 1753, d. 1828), balloonist and chemist, was born in Oxford and baptized there on 27 February 1753. He was the elder son of James Sadler (1718-1791), cook and confectioner of (now 84) High Street, and his wife, Elizabeth (1718-1802), probably 'nee' Blakeney. Sadler followed his father into the family business at this shop, with brother Thomas (1756-1829) at another in St Clement's. On 7 July 1779 James was admitted a freeman of Oxford, by which time he had married Mary. Their son John Sadler ['see below'] was the eldest of four children born before 1785. 
Sadler first released a 36 foot hydrogen balloon in Oxford, probably from the St Clement's residence of John Sibthorp, on 9 February 1784. On 4 October 1784 he made the first ascent by any English aeronaut with a 170 foot hot-air balloon he had constructed himself. He rose from Oxford to a height of 3600 feet, landing 6 miles away after a half-hour flight. The most remarkable aspect of Sadler's ballooning was that he was 'sole projector, architect, workman and chymist' in all his experiments (Cavallo, 176-7). In May 1785 he ascended with the statesman William Windham. A letter written soon afterwards noted that Sadler, 'a prodigy[,]... is oppressed, to the disgrace of the University... from pique and jealousy of his superior science' (Hodgson, 'History', 148). 
Although Sadler abandoned ballooning for some years after this, he continued with other experiments and about 1785 was one of the first to use coal gas as an illuminant. By 1786 he was experimenting with driving wheeled carriages by steam engine. This brought early hostility from Boulton and Watt in Birmingham, who claimed a monopoly of such use. From about 1788 to 1790 Sadler was technical operator in the chemical laboratory at Oxford University. Whether he had held this post earlier (and thus whether his aeronautics were with or without the help of the university) is unknown. In 1789 and 1790 he gave public performances 'of philosophical fire-works' in Oxford town hall. A contemporary called him 'a clever, practical, and experimental manipulator in chemistry and as such... patronised... by the few scientific men then at the University' (Cox, 3). 
From 1788 Sadler was closely involved with Thomas Beddoes, reader at Oxford University, who in April 1791 described his 'very valuable assortment of chemical apparatus... constructed by a pastry cook of this place, a perfect prodigy in mechanics' (Beddoes to Joseph Black, 15 April 1791, Edinburgh University Library). Beddoes and his friend William Reynolds encouraged Sadler to experiment further with his steam engine which, as it did not condense in the cylinder, laid it open to claims of infringement from Boulton and Watt. It worked at a pressure of 19 pounds per square inch and was self-contained and direct acting. Several Sadler engines were built and erected at Coalbrookdale, Shropshire, and in London from 1792 to 1799, despite threats of prosecution from Boulton and Watt from 1791. Because of these threats, Sadler's only patent (no. 1812 of June 1791) was for another, quite different, steam turbine. 
Beddoes finally left Oxford in 1793. Sadler had intended to accompany Sir George Staunton as engineer to the Macartney embassy to China, but went with Staunton only to Italy in search of Chinese interpreters in 1792. Sadler's friend the Revd Dr Henry Peter Stacy was not appointed as Beddoes's replacement at Oxford as they both hoped, but was later involved with Sadler in gun boring experiments in London. In 1793 Beddoes sent Sadler to London to set up his Pneumatic Institution, but Bristol was soon chosen instead. 
Sadler's technical skills were next put to use as barracks master at Portsmouth, at an annual salary of $300 in 1795. In 1796 he was appointed chemist to the board of naval works in London, at $400 a year. His first wife probably died in or after 1791; he settled in Pimlico, where his second wife, Martha Hancock, whom he had married on 24 October 1795 in the church of St Augustine the Less, Bristol, bore him (William) Windham Sadler (1796-1824) in October 1796. Sadler also started a mineral water factory near Golden Square. In 1799 he erected the Admiralty's first steam engine at Portsmouth, having been from 1796 much involved in improving naval ordnance. Sadler researched copper sheathing of ships (with Humphrey Davy), distillation of sea water, seasoning of timber, and gunpowder combustion, and constructed air-pumps, signal lights, and apparatus for disengaging oxygen. Outside his naval work Sadler tried to improve alum making. He was elected a life subscriber to the Royal Institution in 1799. 
Sadler's relationship with the inspector-general of the naval board, Samuel Bentham, was not happy. Sadler had had to build his own laboratory and by 1802 Bentham noted that he had in very few cases applied to Sadler, who thereafter disappeared from naval records. But Sadler continued in post, under great difficulties, until 1809, when he was dismissed without compensation and left deep in debt. 
Sadler resumed aeronautics professionally in 1810 aged fifty-seven, soon using his balloon trademark to sell soda water. He was joined by his son John until 1814 and, from 1813, his youngest son, Windham. By 1815 Sadler had achieved his forty-seventh ascent. His ascents thereafter are impossible to distinguish from those of his youngest son. His second wife having died, on 3 April 1824 Sadler was nominated brother of the London Charterhouse by the king. These were gentlemen in decayed circumstances who received a civil resident pension. Sadler lived in the Charterhouse from the second quarter of 1824 to the end of 1827. He was much affected by the death of his son Windham in a ballooning accident in September 1824. Finally Sadler moved back to Oxford to live with his family (who received his Charterhouse allowance). There he died on 26 March 1828, in George Lane. He was buried four days later at St Peter-in-the-East, Oxford, where he had been baptized. His obituarist rightly noted that, as an aeronaut, he was 'architect, engineer, chemist and projector' ('Jackson's Oxford Journal'), as well as the pilot. He was honoured in Oxford in the twentieth century by a restored gravestone and two tablets, tributes to his pioneering and brave aerial exploits all over Britain and Ireland. John Coxe Hippesley noted in 1812 that Sadler 'has been harshly used... there is not a better chymist or mechanic in the Universe, yet he can hardly speak a word of Grammar' (BL, Add. MS 40221, fol. 270). Sadler's life was of deeds, not words, and left great problems for any biographer. 




@@@@@


doc= 37929


Sadler, John (1720-1789), printer, was born in Aintree on 9 January 1720, the eldest son of Adam Sadler, printer and engraver, and his wife, Elizabeth Beeby. John entered the family printing business and learned the art of printing from his father, who owned a prosperous printing firm in the New Market in Liverpool. By 1740 he had established his own printing business in Harrington Street. Like his father, he was a great music lover and among the many works he published was a collection of over 300 songs set to music, entitled 'The Muses' Delight' (1754). In 1757 he founded the 'Liverpool Chronicle and Marine Gazetteer', which he printed for two years. 
More importantly John Sadler is credited with inventing a method of transfer-printing onto earthenware tiles, although it now seems unlikely that he was indeed the first to use this process. The idea apparently occurred to him from observing children sticking waste prints onto pieces of broken earthenware. It is not clear when his experiments began, but an affidavit made out by Sadler and his assistant Guy Green states that on 27 July 1756 they printed 1200 earthenware tiles of different patterns in six hours, and that the process had taken upwards of seven years to perfect. 
Sadler, an astute businessman, did not proceed with the costly patent application, realizing that his process was safer if kept a closely guarded trade secret. In addition to his tile business, he also transfer-printed onto enamelled copper and porcelain, which he sold to other retailers and from his own shop in Harrington Street. From the middle of 1761 Guy Green became his business partner and in September of the same year Sadler entered into an agreement with Josiah Wedgwood to transfer-print the Wedgwood creamware. 
In 1766 Sadler sold his presses and equipment to John Gore and William Everard, who had just begun to publish the 'Liverpool General Advertiser'. Four years later, in September 1770, he retired, possibly because he was not in the best of health. However, his abiding passion for collecting recipes and formulas kept him experimenting for a further twenty years, perfecting the transfer-printing process. 
In 1777 Sadler married Elizabeth Parker (died 1842), the daughter of a business associate, a watchmaker who owned a toy shop in Seel Street, and the niece of Mr Fazackerley, silversmith of Pool Lane. They had three children, a daughter, Elizabeth Mary ('b'. 1782), and two sons: John Adam ('b'. 1778) and James ('b'. 1786). John Sadler died in Liverpool on 10 December 1789 and was buried in Sefton. 
J. M. Stephens', rev. ' 


