@@@@@


doc= 37930


Salmon, Joseph (fl. 1647-1656), Ranter, was briefly prominent as a Ranter between March 1650 and 1651 although his earliest work, 'Antichrist in Man' (1647), indicates that he was first a Seeker in religion. His origins remain obscure: he was known in Coventry and Wiltshire, and later in Kent. He may have come from Essex, as a Joseph Salmon led a riot in Great Burstead (Billericay) in the mid-1640s. Salmon served in the New Model Army, probably between 1647 and 1649, as a soldier and chaplain in the regiment of Commissary-General Henry Ireton. 'A Rout, a Rout', published in 1649, carries two dedications, one to the commanders and one to the soldiers -- or 'the fellowship (of SAINTS scattered) in the ARMY' (Smith, 'Collection', 191). In it he expressed a belief shared by many others that the New Model was an instrument of God that would execute the 'beast' of monarchy and so herald the imminent second coming of Christ (Smith, 'Collection', 193). 
Salmon preached in Coventry on 10 March 1650, where the Ranter Abiezer Coppe had been imprisoned since January. Salmon was imprisoned too, along with Andrew Wyke, and was released on condition that he publish a recantation, which appeared in August 1651 under the title 'Heights in Depths'. During his imprisonment Salmon is purported to have preached through the gratings of the prison and to have composed his most Ranterish tract, 'Divinity Anatomized'. The leading Quaker George Fox visited him and disputed with him. After his release Salmon lived in Kent, preaching regularly in Rochester Cathedral and laying the foundations for what became the Quaker community there. The parish registers of St Nicholas, Rochester, record the birth of his daughter, Hephzibah, on 10 September 1652. Salmon recommended Richard Coppin as his successor and emigrated to Barbados about 1655, where he may later have been investigated for organizing conventicles. He was listed for the receipt of tenement rates in the parish of Mary Magdalene, Old Fish Street, London, in February 1655. 
Doubts have been raised concerning the precise nature of Salmon's religious identity and experiences, but the salient details are unproblematic. Like many radical religious figures in this period, Salmon 'crept out of the shell of Episcopacy' and, during the early and mid-1640s, passed through presbyterian, Independent, and Baptist forms of worship (Smith, 'Collection', 210). Eventually he found all forms of religion involving 'externals' and ordinances unsatisfying, and he describes how he became aware of the sufficiency of a personal and inward inspiration '(as one inspired with a supernatural life) sprang up farr above my earthly center, into a most heavenly and divine enjoyment' (ibid., 211). This sense of transcendence from earthliness coincided with his appreciation of the power of God, which had moved successively through monarchy, parliament, and New Model Army, each time effecting a further spiritual refinement of terrestrial life. 
From these perceptions developed the inversions of accepted moral behaviour in the name of spiritual liberty which were labelled 'Ranter' by contemporaries. In Coventry Salmon is reported to have committed 'wicked Swearing, and uncleaness, which he justified and others of his way, 'That it was God which did swear in them, and that it was their liberty to keep company with Women, for their Lust'' (Smith, 'Collection', 13). The reliability of this report has been questioned, and the situation has not been aided by the fact that Salmon's one definitely Ranter publication does not survive. Nevertheless Salmon did know and correspond with other Ranters and sectarians associated with them, and he was imprisoned with Coppe and Wyke. Also, his writings dating from the Coventry period that do survive show the figural playfulness characteristic of Ranter discourse. Even if he was less transgressive than the more notorious Ranters Coppe and Laurence Clarkson, he was associated with them and expressed a form of their antinomianism at the height of Ranter activity. His later position was less socially provocative but no less mystical. It is not difficult to see from Salmon's publications why more orthodox contemporaries saw atheistical or extreme heretical ideas in them, although his four pamphlets, which were read widely in radical religious circles ('Antichrist in Man' went through four editions while 'A Rout, a Rout' went through two), were really a highly personal attempt to articulate a nearly inexpressible sense of union with the divine. 


@@@@@


doc= 37931


Salomons, Sir David Lionel Goldsmid-Stern-, second baronet (1851-1925), mechanic, was born on 28 June 1851, at 18 Brunswick Terrace, Hove, Sussex, only son of Philip Salomons (1796-1867), gentleman-at-arms, and his wife, Emma Abigail (1830-1859), daughter of Jacob Montefiore, merchant of Sydney, New South Wales. He had two younger sisters. He was educated privately at Brighton, and attended University College, London, before reading the natural science tripos at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge (BA 1873). In 1873 he succeeded by special remainder (dated 1869) his uncle, Sir David Salomons, as second baronet, and inherited the Broomhill estate near Tunbridge Wells. In 1874 he was called to the bar at the Middle Temple and was unsuccessful Liberal parliamentary candidate for Mid Kent. He contested St George-in-the-East as a Liberal in 1885, but seceded from that party in 1910 and was a convinced tariff reformer by 1912. He was active in Kentish affairs, as a magistrate (1874), high sheriff (1881), and mayor of Tunbridge Wells (1895), and serving for fifteen years on the county council. He succeeded another Kentish landowner, Lord Brabourne, on the board of the South Eastern and Chatham Railway (1895), and was a director of its successor, Southern Railway (1922). Salomons's life was, however, notable less for his public and official services than for the distinction of his private avocations. 
From the earliest age Salomons played with clockwork engines, building blocks, and tools. In adolescence he wandered around Clerkenwell and Soho looking into tool shops. At the age of fourteen he befriended a working watchmaker who taught him practical mechanics: he retained a lifelong interest in watchmaking, became a member of the Clockmakers' Company, and published a monograph in 1921 on the French watchmaker Breguet, of whose work he amassed a large collection. After his succession to the baronetcy he installed private workshops, laboratories, and electricity at Broomhill in 1874, and investigated electromotive force and electric conductors in association with Sir Charles Wheatstone. In 1876 he built a waterworks at Broomhill and fitted a telescope to its water-tower. Within a few years he had thousands of tools in his workshop and was constantly devising experiments. He took out patents for railway signalling, electric lamps, current meters, electric circuits, electric magnets, pressure gauges, vacuum tubes, electric torches, and electromotor apparatus. He was one of the founders of the Institution of Electrical Engineers, serving as vice-president and treasurer, but, as a non-professional electrical engineer, he was judged ineligible for its presidency. His textbook, 'Electric Light Installations', passed through eleven editions during the 1880s and 1890s. Salomons was first chairman of the City of London Electric Lighting Company established in 1891 with an electric-lighting franchise for the City of London and the St Saviour's district of Southwark. 
As well as his lifelong delight in gadgetry Salomons enjoyed tandem and four-in-hand driving. In 1874 he built a tricycle powered by a 2 hp electric motor, and later imported from France the second petrol-driven car to appear in England. He organized trial demonstrations of early automobiles from 1895 (Lord Salisbury was nervous on a joyride with Salomons at Crystal Palace), and as president of the Self-Propelled Traffic Association was instrumental in removing the legal restrictions which until 1896 compelled horseless carriages to be preceded by a man waving a red flag. Salomons was a founder of the Royal Automobile Club and wrote pamphlets, articles, and lectures on motor cars, including a chapter 'The motor stable and its management' in the volume on motoring edited by Lord Northcliffe for the 'Badminton Library series'. He later developed a comparable interest in aviation. 
Salomons had a practical as well as theoretical interest in radium, and made donations of radium and radioactive equipment to several hospitals. He gave monetary or other endowments both to Cambridge colleges and to learned societies. He served on the jury of the Universal Exhibition at Paris in 1900 and donated the pavilion to exhibit contemporary British art at the Venice Exhibition of 1909. 
The versatility of Salomons's interests is attested to by the many learned societies that honoured him. He was a fellow of the Royal Astronomical, Chemical, and Geological societies and of the Physical Society of London. He was a gold medallist of the Royal Photographic Society, an associate member of the Institution of Civil Engineers, an honorary member of the International Society of Electricians, president of the Society of Engineers (1901), and honorary colonel of the Kent (fortress) Royal Engineers. He was master of the Coopers' Company in 1893. His sponsors for the Athenaeum in 1901 were Lord Alverstone, Lord Avebury, A. J. Balfour, Joseph Chamberlain, and Lord James of Hereford. 
Salomons married in 1882 Laura Julia (1855-1935), younger daughter of Hermann de Stern, a London banker and Portuguese baron, and sister of the first Baron Michelham. He assumed by royal licence the surname of Goldsmid-Stern-Salomons in 1899. He had one son (Reginald, who died at Gallipoli) and four daughters. He died after an operation on 19 April 1925, in a nursing home at 4 Dorset Square, St Marylebone, and was buried in his family's private chapel ground at Lower Green, Tunbridge Wells. His baronetcy became extinct. His will included bequests to Gonville and Caius College, to Cambridge University, and to the Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris. 


@@@@@


doc= 37932


Salt, Henry Shakespear Stephens (1851-1939), classical scholar and publicist, was born in Naini Tal, India, on 20 September 1851, the son of Thomas Henry Salt, lieutenant in the Bengal artillery, and his wife, Ellen Matilda 'nee' Allnat. He was a king's scholar at Eton College (1866-71) and went in 1871 to King's College, Cambridge, where he was a Browne's medallist (Greek epigrams) in 1874 and gained a first in the classical tripos in 1875 (BA 1875). From 1875 to 1884 he taught classics at Eton. 
In 1884, disenchanted with his life at Eton -- he alleged Eton masters 'were but cannibals in cap and gown' (Venn, 'Alum. Cant.') -- Salt decided to live at Tilford in Surrey and concentrate on a simple vegetarian life, following his many interests in the field of humanitarianism. For the next thirty-five years he published a spate of pamphlets and books on the subjects about which he felt strongly and the authors whom he admired deeply or disagreed with emphatically. In 1888 he published 'Flesh or Fruit? An Essay on Food Reform' and in 1892 'Animals' Rights Considered in Relation to Social Progress'. 'The Ethics of Corporal Punishment' appeared in 1907 and he returned to this theme in 1916 in 'The Flogging Craze: a Statement of the Case Against Corporal Punishment'. 
In 1891 Salt published a pamphlet entitled 'Humanitarianism', a subject on which he frequently lectured, since it embraced all those matters about which he held strong opinions. In that year he founded the Humanitarian League, which became a channel for the promotion of his ideas. He worked as its honorary secretary until its demise in 1919 when, according to his own view in his 'Seventy Years among Savages' (1921), 'It ended as it began in its character of Forlorn Hope; we had the good will of the free-lances, not of the public or the professors'. Salt in his care for natural beauty and condemnation of the spoliation of the countryside was in advance of his time. 
In politics Salt was a socialist and became a member of the Fabian Society shortly after it was founded in 1884. He had a wide variety of friends, including J. Ramsay MacDonald, W. H. Hudson, and M. K. Gandhi. In one of his letters to Salt Gandhi wrote that he had become a confirmed vegetarian after reading Salt's essays published under the title 'The Logic of Vegetarianism' (1897). 
In the preface to Stephen Winsten's 'Salt and his Circle' (1951) G. B. Shaw said that 'Salt was a born naturalist and never went out of doors without a binocular to watch the birds'. Salt himself expressed his love of natural beauty in books such as 'On Cambrian and Cumbrian Hills: Pilgrimages to Snowdon and Scawfell' (1908) and 'Our Vanishing Wild Flowers' (1928). 
Salt's biographies and works of literary criticism include 'The Life of Henry David Thoreau' (1890), 'Tennyson as a Thinker: a Criticism' (1893), 'Percy Bysshe Shelley: Poet and Pioneer' (1896), and 'De Quincey' (1904). He could not resist the urge to criticize the Eton of his time; hence 'Eton under Hornby: some Reminiscences and Reflections' (1910) and 'The Nursery of Toryism: Reminiscences of Eton under Hornby' (1911). He also continued to demonstrate his early understanding of classical authors by translations of Lucretius (1912) and his masterly verse translation of Virgil's 'Aeneid' (1928). 
In 1879 Salt married Catherine Leigh Joynes (died 1919), author of studies of Shelley, De Quincey, and Richard Jefferies, the daughter of the Revd James Leigh Joynes, a master at Eton. According to Salt's friend George Bernard Shaw, she refused to sleep with her husband and had a number of affairs with her women friends. In 1927 Salt married Catherine, daughter of Frederick Mandeville of Brighton. Salt died at Brighton Municipal Hospital, Elmgrove, Brighton, on 19 April 1939, survived by his second wife. 
H. F. Oxbury', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37933


Samwell, William (bap. 1628, d. 1676), architect, was baptized at Westminster on 14 September 1628, the eldest son of Anthony Samwell ('bap'. 1604, died 1656) of Dean's Yard, Westminster, and his wife, Anne Heynes. He was the grandson of Sir William Samwell of Upton Hall, Northamptonshire. He was admitted to the Middle Temple in 1648, and lived in chambers until 1656, but he never practised law. After the Restoration he bought the manor of Watton in Norfolk, and remained its owner until his death. Samwell was a gentleman architect of considerable accomplishment, whose achievement has been undervalued, although John Aubrey considered him 'an excellent architect, that has built several delicate howses' ('Brief Lives, Chiefly of Contemporaries, Set Down by John Aubrey, between the Years 1669 and 1696', ed. A. Clark, 1898, 1.293). These were distinguished by the sophistication of their planning, in which a balance was struck between the grand public rooms and convenient private ones. In their exploitation of spatial possibilities, his designs are at least as accomplished as those of the better-known gentleman architects Sir Roger Pratt and Hugh May. 
Samwell's first authenticated building, the King's House in Newmarket (1668-71), designed for Charles II, was partly demolished in 1814: the south-east block survives as Palace House Mansion. It was criticized by John Evelyn, visiting in 1670, as 'mean enough', apart from the cellars, '& hardly capable for a hunting house' (Evelyn, 'Diary', 542). At Grange Park, Hampshire, built about 1670 for the lawyer Sir Robert Henley, Samwell's house was swallowed up by the neo-classical remodelling by William Wilkins, but despite alterations and the threat of demolition, the shell of his house substantially survives, concealed within the later work. It is on this building, and on his long-demolished Eaton Hall, Cheshire (1675-82), built for Sir Thomas Grosvenor, that any assessment of his work must rest. In both designs he brought to the Restoration house an unexpected elegance of arrangement, combining corner suites in the French manner, comprising bedchamber and closets, the private suites linked with each other by corridors which opened onto grand, formal staircases and provided access directly to the major public rooms. In this sophisticated satisfaction of complex spatial and social requirements, Samwell achieved a synthesis premonitory of the great houses of the eighteenth century. Although at Grange Park Samwell did not introduce to England the Imperial staircase of three open flights, there is little doubt that his was grander than its precursor at Gunnersbury by John Webb. 
Samwell's other work included the doubling of the central range of Ham House, Surrey, for John Maitland, first duke of Lauderdale, and his wife, Elizabeth Murray, in 1672-4, to create a plan more in keeping with contemporary expectations of convenience and grandeur, and the addition of a wing for William Windham at Felbrigg Hall, Norfolk (1674-86); both these works survive. Roger North considered the reforming of Ham to be: 'the best of the kind I have seen... For I doe not perceive any part of the old fabrick is taken downe, but the wings stand as they were first sett,... joyned with a strait range intirely new. And there are all the rooms of parade, exquisitely plac'd. ('Of Building: Roger North's Writings on Architecture', ed. H. M. Colvin and J. Newman, 1981, 144)' This new range was innovative in incorporating the first large-scale use of the sash-window in England. Samwell was also responsible for the design of a coach house (1673-4; dem.) in the Royal Mews, Charing Cross, commissioned by George Villiers, second duke of Buckingham, master of the horse. 
Samwell married Anne (1648-1720), daughter of Sir Denner Strutt of Little Warley, Essex; they had two daughters. He died in London in 1676 and was buried on 23 May at Upton, Northamptonshire, as he had directed in his will. 


@@@@@


doc= 37934


Sanger, Sophy (1881-1950), internationalist and labour-law reformer, was born on 3 January 1881 in Westcott, near Dorking, Surrey, the youngest of the three sons and three daughters of a wealthy London businessman, Charles Sanger, and his wife, Jessie Alice Pulford; Sophy was the sister of C. P. Sanger (1871-1930), the legal authority on wills and friend of Bertrand Russell. She was educated at Dr Elizabeth Dawes's school, Weybridge, and at Newnham College, Cambridge, where she read mathematics (1899-1902) and then moral sciences, narrowly missing a first in 1903. She was converted to pacifism by the Quaker Hilda Clark while at university during the South African War. 
From 1903 to 1909 Sophy Sanger worked with Mary Reid Macarthur (later Anderson) and Margaret Bondfield for the Women's Trade Union League, setting up its legal advice bureau while studying labour law at University College, London, mastering insurance regulations for workers' compensation and interviewing women factory inspectors on conditions in the workplace. At the age of twenty-three she was called to give evidence on workmen's compensation before a parliamentary commission in the House of Lords and she also helped Labour MPs prepare their case for the 'Shops Bill'. 
Sophy Sanger soon realized that many of the worst evils of working life -- occupational disease, industrial injury, and sweated labour -- could be combated only by effective international action. Therefore, in 1905, she set up a British section of the International Association for Labour Legislation, and soon, with the help of volunteer translators, was bringing out an English edition of its French and German 'Bulletin'. Between 1909 and 1919 Sophy Sanger edited and largely wrote the quarterly 'World's Labour Laws', which campaigned internationally on such issues as the abolition of child labour, the prohibition of the use of white phosphorus and lead, and the prevention of anthrax. It was Sophy Sanger's belief that by co-operating internationally for such practical, specific reforms, human beings might evolve into peaceful internationalists. The First World War, therefore, came as a terrible blow, but she persevered in keeping alive both the British section of the International Association for Labour Legislation and the 'World's Labour Laws' -- to such effect that in February 1919 it was she who wrote the draft to the Paris commission on the basis of the International Labour Office to be established by the Versailles treaty. When the ILO was set up in Geneva, Sophy Sanger was appointed chief of its legislative section, a post she held until 1924, when she was edged out of the organization by Albert Thomas, the director. 
On her return to Britain in 1924, Sophy Sanger read for the bar at Gray's Inn, qualifying in June 1928. However, she never practised, and neither did she publish more than an (authoritative) article on labour law for the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. She had been an exemplary, modest public servant, hoping to build a more just world. Her life's motto was Goethe's 'Law alone can give us freedom.' She died on 7 December 1950 in Cambridge, nursed by her lifelong companion, Maud Allen. She was unmarried. 
Sybil Oldfield', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37935


Sargant, Ethel (1863-1918), botanist, was born at 45 Regent's Park Road, London, on 28 October 1863, the third daughter in the family of three daughters and three sons of Henry Sargant, barrister and conveyancer of Lincoln's Inn, and his wife, Catherine Emma (died 1912), daughter of Samuel Beale, MP for Derby. One of her brothers was Sir Charles Henry Sargant. She was educated at North London Collegiate School and, from 1881, at Girton College, Cambridge. She obtained a second class in part one of the natural sciences tripos (1884) and a third class in part two (1885). 
Ethel Sargant spent one year (1892-3) at the Jodrell Laboratory at Kew Gardens, studying under D. H. Scott. There she gained valuable training in research methods, especially in plant anatomy. From 1893 onwards she worked at home, first in a laboratory built in the grounds of her mother's house in Reigate, and later at her home in Girton village, Cambridge. For some years she took care of her mother and an invalid sister. From time to time she acted as research adviser to the Cambridge students who came to her laboratory for instruction. She was elected to an honorary fellowship of Girton College in 1913. Ethel Sargant carried out research in two separate areas -- cytology and anatomical morphology. Her earliest work in cytology concerned the presence of centrosomes in higher plants; she then moved to a general study of oogenesis and spermatogenesis in 'Lilium martagon'. Her most important results, demonstrating the existence of the synaptic phase in living cells, were published in the 'Annals of Botany' in 1896 and 1897. 
Constant use of the high power microscope proved a strain on Sargant's eyes, and this was part of the reason that she began to concentrate on anatomical and phylogenetic questions. Her best-known work concerned the anatomy of seedlings. Her theory of the origin of monocotyledons, put forward in 1903, was based on her extensive investigations of the anatomical structure of very young monocotyledonous seedlings. She offered a new interpretation of the relationship between monocotyledons and dicotyledons, suggesting that both had evolved from a common ancestral stock, and that the single seed-leaf in the monocotyledon was homologous to the pair in the dicotyledon. The implications of these findings were discussed in three major papers published between 1903 and 1908. 
Ethel Sargant was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1904, and was the first woman to serve on its council. At the 1913 Birmingham meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science she was elected president of section K (botany), thus becoming the first woman ever to preside over a section. Though primarily a research botanist, she gave a course on the ancestry of the angiosperms at the University of London in 1907. She published over twenty papers. All her writings are characterized by an outstanding clarity and vigour of presentation, a reflection of her keen interest in English literature. As president of the Federation of University Women she gave much time near the end of her life to compiling the register of university women for war work. She died, unmarried, on 16 January 1918 at 4 Clifton Place, Sidmouth, Devon, after a short illness, and was buried at Sidmouth. 
Mary R. S. Creese', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37936


Saunders, Edith Rebecca (1865-1945), botanist, was born in Brighton on 14 October 1865, one of at least two children of John Saunders, hotel keeper, and his wife, Jane Rebecca Whitwell of Islington. Orphaned at an early age, she and her brother were brought up by an aunt, who gave them a secure and comfortable home. She was educated at Handsworth Ladies' College and at Newnham College, Cambridge, where she took both parts of the natural sciences tripos (1887, 1888), obtaining first-class honours. She held a Bathurst studentship from 1888 to 1889. She was an alpine climber as a young woman, and throughout her life an excellent skater. In 1889 she was appointed demonstrator in botany at Newnham College, and along with her colleague Marion Greenwood she organized the Balfour Laboratory, of which she became director in 1899. For more than twenty years she taught most of the practicals in the natural sciences for the women students of Newnham and Girton colleges. She was recognized as a stimulating teacher who demanded high-quality work. 
Saunders's research was in two areas, plant genetics and floral morphology. Early in her career she undertook collaborative research with William Bateson on plant breeding experiments on 'Biscutella laevigata'. The work involved a study of what came to be known as dominant and recessive characters; the results were published in 1898 and 1902. The rediscovery in 1900 of Gregor Mendel's work gave a special impetus to these investigations; by 1902 Saunders and Bateson had established the existence of Mendelian inheritance in 'Lychnis', 'Atropa', and 'Datura', and it is likely that they had rediscovered some of Mendel's laws before his work was known to them. 
From about 1902 Edith Saunders and Bateson were the leading members of the team which started the modern study of plant genetics in Britain; indeed, she has been called the mother of British plant genetics. Her later research in this area involved a study of the complex genetic interactions in 'Matthiola incana', on which she published twenty-two papers. Her selection as president of section K (botany) of the British Association in 1920 reflected her prominent position in the field. 
By the 1920s, stimulated largely by observations on plant structure made during her genetics work, Edith Saunders was turning increasingly to problems in floral morphology: in a long series of papers in the 'Annals of Botany' and the 'New Phytologist' she recorded her observations on vascular and carpellary structure in a wide range of flowers. Her results and theories were summarized in her two-volume work 'Floral Morphology' (1937-9). The overall impact of her morphological work was to some extent diminished by the fact that she held to her theory of carpel polymorphism, despite the overwhelming criticism levelled against it. Nevertheless, her contribution to floral anatomy is regarded as important and her papers were frequently cited many years after her death. 
Edith Saunders enjoyed travelling, and went with the British Association to Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, China, Japan, and North America. She was one of the first women to be elected to the fellowship of the Linnean Society (1905). She later served on its council (1910-15), and was vice-president from 1912 to 1913. She was president of the Genetical Society in 1936. The Royal Horticultural Society awarded her the Banksian medal in 1906. 
Edith Saunders was a well-known and highly respected figure in Cambridge for many decades. With the outbreak of the Second World War she gave up her research and worked in the Cambridge offices of the YMCA and WVS, and also in Addenbrooke's Hospital Library (1940-43). In addition she was honorary treasurer of the WVS Services Club from 1941 to 1945. She was in the process of resuming her scientific work when she died, unmarried, on 6 June 1945 in Cambridge, following a bicycle accident. Her passing, at the time of the end of the war in Europe, received comparatively little notice for a person of her scientific stature. 
Mary R. S. Creese', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37937


Saunders, Thomas Harry (1813-1870), paper manufacturer, was born in Limehouse, London, on 19 September 1813, the youngest in the family of two sons and three daughters of John Saunders, hoop bender, and his wife, Mary. Very little is known about his early life. He seems to have entered the paper-making trade in the late 1830s at a boom time and eventually owned six paper mills in Kent and Buckinghamshire, branching out from the family businesses of coal and timber merchants and, especially, seed crushing. His first partnership in a paper mill was in 1840 in Hawley, south of Dartford on the Darent. On 11 July 1844 he married Mary, daughter of Thomas Bold Marchant of Brenchley in Kent. There were no children. 
Saunders's mills had a reputation for supplying everything from newsprint (for 'The Times' in the 1850s and 1860s) to security paper, in which he built up a huge export business to Europe, the British empire, and South America for stamps and banknotes (his customers included almost all the best-known banks). His name is first found in the watermark of a postage stamp for Barbados as early as 1840. The quality of his paper is confirmed by the fact that he exhibited, and won some twelve prize medals, at international exhibitions from 1851 onwards, though not at the more parochial trade shows. In the run-up to the Great Exhibition of 1851 he produced sample sheets with a watermarked light and shade portrait of Queen Victoria: later these exquisite watermarks became part of his stock-in-trade and were described as a 'degree of perfection... the quintessence of the papermaking craft'. More prosaically it was predicted that they could 'form a valuable addition to bank note paper for the prevention of forgery'. 
Saunders's business expanded entirely by acquisition. One of his mills was probably the largest in the country by the 1880s, though it seems not to have been a paper mill when he acquired it. He rebuilt the Phoenix mill in Dartford as one of the major industrial buildings in the south-east of England. During his career he created an 'immense, flourishing and progressive business' of six mills with some eighteen hand-making vats and three paper machines. 
On the national scene, during the 1860s Saunders was twice in small deputations to the prime minister, the third Viscount Palmerston, concerning controversy about the abolition of paper duties and the continuing import duties on rags. His evidence to the parliamentary select committee revealed that he was not one of those who believed that straw could ever be an adequate substitute for rags. In 1862, with his mill manager, he took out a patent on an improved way of drying machine-made paper and of regulating the supply of pulp to the paper machine. He was an active nonconformist of Baptist tendencies and employed a metropolitan missionary to preach indoors and out. His substantial charitable activities included strong support of the Shaftesbury Society (though this did not stop his widow owning a public house next to one of the mills). He was also a member of the Royal Society of Arts. 
Saunders died on 5 February 1870 at Spring Wood, Dartford, following a debilitating stroke two years earlier which had put an end to his trade activities. His estate was valued at under $120,000. 
Colin Cohen', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37938


Schnadhorst, Francis (1840-1900), political organizer, was born on 24 August 1840 in Birmingham, the younger son and second of the three children of John Edward Schnadhorst, a draper of German extraction, and his wife, Amelia (1807/8-1872). His father died while he was still young and he was brought up by his mother and paternal grandfather, Andrew Schnadhorst, who owned a tailor's shop in Moor Street, Birmingham. He was educated at King Edward VI's Grammar School, Birmingham, and at the age of sixteen, following the death of his grandfather, he took charge of the family business. 
Schnadhorst was brought up as a nonconformist and as a young man he acted as secretary to the Revd R. W. Dale, the pastor of Carr's Lane Congregational Church. Dale officiated at his marriage there, on 26 September 1865, to Mary Anne (1845/6-1912), daughter of Edward Thomas, provision merchant. The alliance between nonconformity and radicalism was particularly close in Birmingham, so Schnadhorst joined the Birmingham Liberal Association soon after its formation in 1865 as a matter of course. He first became involved in the active work of the association in 1867, when he was elected vice-chairman and joint secretary of the St George's ward committee. In 1870, as secretary of the Central Nonconformist Committee he was engaged in educational reforms, especially with respect to endowed schools. In 1872 he served briefly on Birmingham town council, being elected to fill a casual vacancy in October only to be defeated at the municipal elections a month later, but by this time it was apparent that he was a talented organizer and in 1873 he was appointed full-time secretary of the Birmingham Liberal Association in succession to William Harris. 
The Birmingham Liberal Association was already regarded as a model of efficiency, following the success of its 'vote as you are told' campaign at the 1868 general election, which had secured the return of Liberal members for all of Birmingham's three seats, but Schnadhorst fine-tuned its organization to an even higher pitch. He quickly engineered the overthrow of the Conservative and Anglican majorities on the town council and the school board and put in place a political machine which carried all before it for well over a decade. This was the heyday of the 'Birmingham caucus' and to its detractors Schnadhorst, with his Teutonic name and 'spectacled, sallow, sombre' features, was the perfect embodiment of its sinister power. 
In 1877 Schnadhorst was appointed part-time secretary of the newly formed National Liberal Federation (NLF), while retaining his post with the Birmingham Liberal Association. The work involved in the dual appointment eventually proved too onerous even for someone of his energy and dedication and in 1884 he resigned the Birmingham post to become full-time secretary of the NLF at a salary of $800 per annum. Two years later the Liberal Party organized a national testimonial for him and over $10,000 was raised. 
In 1885 Schnadhorst was given a seat on the standing committee of the Liberal Central Association, the party headquarters, and in July 1886 he was appointed secretary of this body. He remained secretary of the NLF, thus becoming the link between the leadership and the constituency associations and hence the key figure in rebuilding the party following the split over Irish home rule and the defection of the Liberal Unionists. Schnadhorst's achievement in keeping the NLF Gladstonian rather than Chamberlainite in 1886 was of considerable importance to the Liberal Party. He reorganized the NLF to make it more responsive to the needs of local associations, so encouraging affiliations, and revolutionized the Central Association's conduct of elections, the improvements being reflected in a series of favourable by-election results at the end of the 1880s. The work of co-ordinating the activities of the NLF and the Central Association proceeded more slowly but some progress was made, most notably in candidate selection. In 1889 Schnadhorst's own candidature in Newcastle under Lyme was approved but he stood down in the following year because of ill health. In 1891 he secured a donation of $5000 to the Liberal party from Cecil Rhodes, whom he visited in Kimberley, and details of which were later made public ('The Times', 12 Oct 1891). 
Schnadhorst's health continued to decline and within two years of masterminding the Liberal victory at the 1892 general election, so enabling Gladstone to form his fourth ministry, he resigned all his offices with the party. He had always been very highly-strung and eventually suffered a complete mental and physical breakdown before dying at The Priory, a private lunatic asylum in Roehampton, on 2 January 1900. He was survived by his wife, two sons, and a daughter. 
Eric Taylor', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37939


Schorne, John (d. in or before 1315), reputed saint, should not be assumed to have come from the village in Kent of that name. Unlike other English 'saints' of his time, Schorne was neither political in his appeal nor of reported charisma in his life, of which next to nothing is known. There was a minor, uninfluential theme in his posthumous reputation that he had come by abnormally horny knees from long hours in prayer. Schorne's real fame in picture and text lay invariably in his exploit of trapping the devil in his boot, but what, if any, incident or allegory underlay this celebration remains completely obscure. He was evidently a magister by 1273 (of Oxford University, according to the fifteenth-century antiquarian William Worcester), when he was presented to the rectory of Steppingley, Bedfordshire, by Dunstable Priory. This he vacated by May 1282. Perhaps it was then, rather than in 1290 as often supposed, that the priory presented him to the rectory of North Marston, Buckinghamshire, where his cult was to develop, and which he held until his death. One of his name and style was acting as deputy for the absentee archdeacon of Buckingham (the brother of the future Pope Adrian V) in Chesham on 11 May 1280. 
Since Schorne was described in an episcopal record in 1273 as a subdeacon and became an incumbent with cure of souls at that time, it is probably wrong to identify him with the namesake collated by Archbishop John Pecham to the rectory of Monks Risborough, Buckinghamshire, on 24 September 1289, a man who had been ordained subdeacon on the title of that benefice just twelve days earlier in Kent. (This man became a deacon on 17 December 1289 and a priest on 27 May 1290 and still held that rectory in 1294.) In what purports to be his will (BL, Lansdowne MS 762, fol. 2; dated 9 May 1313), which is singular in style, Schorne speaks of old age and renders to God what was God's (his soul), to the earth what was the earth's (his body, in a tomb he had designated before the high altar of North Marston), and his goods to be divided between intercessors and the poor, for the welfare of his soul. While some very local cult developed quickly, it spread only in the mid-fifteenth century, from which time come all the extant depictions of him (complete with diabolical captive), in groups from Norfolk (Cawston, Suffield, Gateley), Suffolk (St Gregory's, Sudbury, and possibly Bury St Edmunds Abbey), and Devon (Hennock, Alphington, and Wolborough); two texts of a lengthy invocation to him; and the prosecution (in 1448) of the then vicar of North Marston for counterfeiting his head from an exhumed skull. (Three bloody wounds were a regrettable excess of artistic licence.) 
The perpetual spring Schorne had divined for his parish in time of drought came replete with gypsum, Epsom salts, and carbonic acid, and thereby lent considerable support to his posthumous reputation, principally as a healer of rheumatic and eye afflictions, but with an occasional talent in respect of dead oxen and the drowned. So substantial was his fame and profitability that on 7 April 1478 Richard Beauchamp, bishop of Salisbury and dean of Windsor, secured a licence from Pope Sixtus IV to relocate his bones. In fact, in 1480 the chapter of Windsor secured the appropriated rectory of North Marston itself, presumably to control and maximize the market. Schorne's lavish new shrine was the first part of St George's Chapel, Windsor, to be built, in the prime south-east corner. Even without his well, he proved the reliable crowd-puller and money-spinner he had been thought to be, although neither records nor general report substantiate the enormous revenues and popularity sometimes claimed for him. He continued also to thrive at North Marston, where the chapter took pains to market their investment with a modish development of the church. Although deplored by Lollards and reformers such as Erasmus (and later John Bale and John Foxe), pilgrimages to both shrines were used by the church as a reputable penance and remained popular, in southern England, down to the Reformation. 
Despite the fame of the boot, Schorne's cult seems to have been a sensitive one, neither coarse nor exhibitionist. It may be compared with the gentle popularity in Exeter of Bishop Edmund Lacy. Significantly, both escaped the long pre-Reformation decline of saints generally. Schorne's image at North Marston was sent to London for destruction by the commissioner to Thomas Cromwell, Dr John Stokesley, in September 1537. In 1585 his chapel at Windsor was redeployed as a tomb for Edward Clinton, earl of Lincoln. Schorne had died by February 1315. 
R. G. Davies', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37940


Schweppe, (Jean) Jacob (bap. 1740, d. 1821), artificial mineral water manufacturer, was baptized in the Liebfrauenkirche in Witzenhausen, Hesse, on 16 March 1740, the son of Conrad Schweppe, a peasant. Believing that their son lacked the strength for agricultural life his parents turned him over to a travelling tinker when he was only eleven or twelve years old. Before long the tinker brought him back, explaining that the boy was so adept at mending pots that he should be put to the silversmiths' craft; the same then occurred, the silversmith recommending that he learn the jewellers' craft. Schweppe soon moved to Geneva, a centre for this trade, was formally accepted as a resident of Geneva -- the first step to naturalization -- and on 4 October 1767 he married, in a protestant church, Eleonore (died 1796), the daughter of Antoine Roget and his wife, Susanne Bertrand. Of their nine children only one daughter, Nicolarde (1777-1836), known as Colette, survived infancy. 
For nine years from 1777 Schweppe was in partnership with Jean Louis Dunant, during which time he submitted his master-work and was admitted 'maitre-bijoutier' in the jewellers' guild of Geneva. He was an enthusiastic amateur scientist and a keen reader of the literature of physics, where he encountered the works of Joseph Priestley, who had been experimenting with mildly aerated waters. About 1780 Schweppe began developing apparatus for making artificial mineral water, and was the first to use a force pump to carbonate under pressure. He gave these waters to any whom the doctors thought would benefit from them. Demand grew and eventually he was persuaded to accept payment, thus by 1783 establishing a commercial enterprise. His continuing experiments to improve the pump brought him in touch with Nicolas Paul, son of Geneva's leading scientific instrument maker, and Henry Albert Gosse, a noted pharmacist. The three men entered into a nine-year partnership in 1790 and decided to establish a second factory in London, to be managed by Schweppe. 
Schweppe arrived in London on 9 January 1792 with an introduction from Professor Marc-Auguste Pictet of Geneva, and established his factory in Drury Lane. Initially he found few customers, for mildly aerated waters were widely available. Business was so slow that the partners recalled him in December, but matters became confused by the political situation in France, which permeated adjacent parts of Switzerland, and came to a head when France declared war on Britain in February 1793. Schweppe feared that he and his daughter, who had now joined him, would be expelled, and appealed to the government to be allowed to remain in London. After considerable wrangling the partnership was dissolved in 1796; Schweppe traded his share of the Swiss partnership for the London business -- his factory and home were now in Margaret Street. His wife died in Geneva in 1796 at a time when he and Colette were unable to travel there. 
By this time Schweppe's assorted mineral waters were being drunk for their curative powers and as refreshing beverages, sometimes mixed with syrup or wine. Medical practitioners were impressed by their high carbonation and Erasmus Darwin specifically recommended Schweppe's waters in his treatise 'Zoonomia' (1794-6). About 1796, in preparation for his retirement, Schweppe sold three-quarters of his interest to three Jerseymen, keeping one-eighth each for himself and Colette, later yielding half of this residue to their manager, Stephen DeMole, against his promise not to divulge the secrets of manufacture. 
The French annexation of Geneva in 1798 meant that Schweppe found himself a French citizen when he returned about 1802; he settled near Geneva at Les Petits Crets, in Bouchet, Petit Saconnex. Colette married in 1806 and lived in Geneva near her father. He occupied himself with gardening, agriculture, and mechanics. A skilled clockmaker, he constructed, in his eightieth year, a detailed and intricate orrery to replace an earlier one which annoyed him by the clicking of its wheels. 
Two contemporary diarists recorded their impressions of Schweppe. Charles de Constant, cousin of the more famous Benjamin, French writer and politician, said of him in 1816, 'his great age, his white hair, contrast strongly with his vivacity and his energy; he has an originality of expression and a fire which belong only to genius'. Gilbert Elliot, second earl of Minto, while staying in Geneva in 1821, recorded an account of Schweppe given him by J. J. Huber, the blind Swiss naturalist, an old friend of Schweppe in Bouchet. Huber described him as a man of very great genius and originality; a man of learning but also of much modesty and simplicity of character. Schweppe had at that time suffered an apoplectic attack from which he died at Les Petits Crets, on 18 November 1821. 


@@@@@


doc= 37941


Scott, Geoffrey (1884-1929), writer and architect, was born on 15 June 1884 in Hampstead, London, the fourth son and the youngest of seven children of Russell Scott (1837-1908) and his wife, Jessie Thurburn (1844-1921); he was the nephew of Charles Prestwich Scott, the distinguished editor of the 'Manchester Guardian'. His father was a flooring manufacturer whose success in business, along with family money, allowed him to provide a comfortable home for his wife and family. Scott spent his early childhood at home in Hampstead and attended local schools, including (for a year) the Highgate School. In 1898, he matriculated at Rugby School. There he distinguished himself among his classmates as someone who was interested in aesthetics. Success at Rugby led to New College, Oxford, which he entered in the autumn of 1902 after spending a year at St Andrews. He studied under the eminent classicist Gilbert Murray and gained some recognition by winning the Newdigate prize in 1906 and the chancellor's essay prize in 1908. The latter, entitled 'The National Character of English Architecture' (1908), provided the groundwork for his later work, 'The Architecture of Humanism'. 
Scott's life changed in March 1906 when, accompanied by John Maynard Keynes, he visited the Villa I Tatti, the home outside Florence of the art connoisseurs Bernard and Mary Berenson. Scott quickly developed an intense relationship with Mary, nineteen years his senior, writing to her about his great enthusiasm for classicism and revealing to her the most intimate details of his life at Oxford, including his homosexual relationships. Mary fell in love with Scott and willingly supported him emotionally and even financially. She helped him at the beginning of his career when, having achieved only a second in Greats, he was unable to proceed with his plans to become a classical scholar. In 1907 she introduced him to the young architect Cecil Pinsent ['see below']; after Scott worked with the American interior designer Ogden Codman on his uncompleted 'catalogue raisonne' of French chateaux, Scott and Pinsent formed an architectural partnership in Florence. Scott's interest in and knowledge of architecture had begun at an early age, under his father's influence, and had developed during his extensive travels and study in Italy, especially with the Berensons. Scott had little formal architectural training, apart from a few months in 1907-8 at the Architectural Association School in London. 
The first to commission Scott and Pinsent were the Berensons, who asked them to renovate the interior of the Villa I Tatti and to design its gardens. Soon their work was in demand among the many rich Anglo-Americans in Florence. Their first major project, completed in 1913, was the Villa Le Balze in Fiesole, designed in a Renaissance style for John D. Rockefeller's son-in-law, the American philosopher Charles Augustus Strong. At the same time he was designing buildings and gardens Scott was writing his architectural 'magnum opus', 'The Architecture of Humanism', published in August 1914. The book is often cited as one of the most important treatises on architecture of the twentieth century. A defence of Renaissance architecture as a standard for all architecture, Scott's book is also an attack on the many styles that had emerged during the nineteenth century. Beautifully constructed and original in many respects, it depends on previous work by Berenson, Vernon Lee, Adolf von Hildebrand, and Theodor Lipp. 
Scott's emotional life before the First World War was as tumultuous and ill-defined as his career. After affairs with a number of women, Scott married Lady Sybil Marjorie Cutting (1879-1943) on 23 April 1918. Lady Sybil, the daughter of Hamilton Cuffe, fifth earl of Desart, was the rich Anglo-Irish widow of the American diplomat William Bayard Cutting and the mother of the historian Iris Origo. The marriage precipitated a rupture with Mary Berenson, who, as a result, had a nervous breakdown, and led to tension in his friendship with Edith Wharton. Scott himself was forced to spend the summer and autumn of 1919 in Lausanne under the care of the well-known psychologist Dr Roger Vittoz. 
It was during this time in Switzerland that Scott began his biography of the eighteenth-century novelist Madame de Charriere. 'The Portrait of Zelide' was his most celebrated book: considered by many to be among the most beautifully written of twentieth-century biographies, it reflects the influence of Lytton Strachey in its brevity and its appeal to a general reader. Because of his difficult home life, he took five years to complete this short biography. For several years after the war he also worked in the British embassy in Rome as the head of its press office. With the beginning of a most complicated love affair with Vita Sackville-West (1892-1962) in October of 1923, which was as much a literary friendship as an emotional involvement, Scott was able to finish his book. It was published to much critical acclaim in 1924. When it won the James Tait Black memorial prize in 1926, Scott's reputation as a writer was firmly established. 
The relationship with Vita Sackville-West precipitated Scott's divorce from Lady Sybil in 1926; she later married the writer Percy Lubbock. Now Scott began his work for the American businessman Colonel Ralph Isham who had recently bought the Boswell papers, probably the most important literary discovery of the century, from Boswell's descendants. Scott went to America in October 1927 as the first editor of the Boswell papers and spent almost two years on Long Island working on them. He died suddenly of pneumonia on 14 August 1929 at the Rockefeller Institute, New York, after the publication of the first six volumes to much acclaim and the signing of a very lucrative contract with Houghton Mifflin to write a full-length biography of Boswell. His ashes were brought back to New College, Oxford, in the same year. 
Scott was a polymath whose interests extended beyond his success as a biographer, aesthetician, architect, and editor. He wrote poetry, magazine articles, and book reviews, did numerous caricatures and some interior design (including a bed which is now at the Victoria and Albert Museum). His brilliant mind and superb classical education allowed him to excel in a variety of fields. He was, moreover, sought out by many for his conviviality: Mary Berenson, Edith Wharton, Gerald Wellesley (the future duke of Wellington), any number of other literary and artistic figures, American plutocrats, and European aristocrats all found him to be a delightful companion. He was known not only for his witty conversation and erudition but also for his temperamental behaviour and his snobbery. Today, Scott's work is remembered by a small group of serious readers who admire the elegance of 'The Architecture of Humanism', 'The Portrait of Zelide', his edition of the Boswell papers, and his unpublished letters. 
Scott's architectural partner, 


@@@@@


doc= 37942


Scott, Sir Harold Richard (1887-1969), civil servant and commissioner of police, was born in Banbury on 24 December 1887, the youngest of three sons of Richard Scott, a skilled craftsman, and his wife, Hannah Hopecroft. The family moved to Taunton, and Scott won a scholarship to Sexey's School, Bruton. From there he went on to Jesus College, Cambridge, the first from his school to get a Cambridge scholarship. There he took three triposes in different subjects, securing a first in natural sciences (1907), a second in history (1908), and, after taking his BA, a first (with distinction) in modern languages (French) in 1909. In 1910 he took the first division examination for the civil service and secured a place in the Home Office, which he joined in 1911. Scott found that he and a contemporary were the only non-public-school boys in the administrative class in the department. He was soon caught up in the wartime expansion of government activity, being concerned mainly with the regulation of foreign trade. In 1916 he married Ethel Mary, daughter of James Golledge of Bruton, gentleman. They had a son and two daughters. After a brief spell in the newly created Ministry of Labour Scott returned to the Home Office in 1919. 
There followed a period of ten years of overwork and stagnant promotion, but his career took off with his promotion first to assistant secretary and then as the chairman of the Prison Commission (1932-9). Scott threw himself with enthusiasm into this exacting assignment. He had already established a good personal relationship with Alexander Paterson, whose influence on penal reform in the post-war period was outstanding, and he stood firm in the face of some ministerial pressure in the difficult period of unrest following the recent Dartmoor mutiny. Scott extended the scope of prisoners' employment, established the first open prison camp, and set up the Imperial Training School for prison officers at Wakefield, a pioneer effort in public service training. 
When Sir John Anderson, the former head of the Home Office, was put in charge of a hastily improvised London civil defence organization during the Munich crisis, he appointed Scott as his chief staff officer, and when Anderson became minister for civil defence he made Scott responsible for the urgent task of accelerating London's civil defence arrangements, with the title of chief administrative officer for the London civil defence region, as from February 1939. Although London was bound to be the main target for attack, its preparations were seriously inadequate. The next two years were probably the most fruitful of Scott's public life. With a small administrative and professional staff he quickly imposed his personality and capacity for decision on the chaotic scene of London's local government. With the support of Herbert Morrison, the leader of the London county council, he brought together the most influential councillors and officers. For operational purposes the ninety-five local authority control centres were co-ordinated through nine group centres, working through an efficient communications system to the London regional headquarters established in the Geological Museum in South Kensington. 
By the time war broke out the civil defence machine was ready to operate, although there was still much ground to make up, and good use was made of the unexpected respite before bombing started a year later. When the raids died down after May 1941 Scott was moved to the Ministry of Home Security, first as deputy (1941-2) and then as permanent secretary (1942-3). He then served for nearly two years as permanent secretary of the Ministry of Aircraft Production (1943-5). At the end of 1944, most unexpectedly, Scott was asked by the home secretary, Herbert Morrison, to become commissioner of police of the metropolis. 
Scott's years as commissioner (1945-53) were generally regarded as successful. There were no startling innovations, as Scott found that his main task had to be the adaptation of the wartime organization of the Metropolitan Police to meet peacetime conditions, and he was hampered throughout by a manpower shortage for which it seemed that no solution could be found. Scott had the disadvantage, as commissioner, of looking like a civil servant in uniform, although in fact, with his powers of quick decision, he had no use for bureaucracy. He was respected as a fair-minded chief and a humane disciplinarian. He dealt firmly with industrial disputes and efficiently with the problems created by Marshal Tito of Yugoslavia's state visit, as well as with the great occasion of the coronation. He retired to the west country in 1953 after eight years. He wrote a highly successful book, 'Scotland Yard' (1954), and a memoir, 'Your Obedient Servant' (1959). Scott was an honorary fellow of Jesus College, Cambridge. He was appointed CB in 1933, KBE in 1942, KCB in 1944, and GCVO in 1953. 
Scott was good-humoured, approachable, and unflappable. Confronted with a problem he would reduce it to its essentials, get on with producing a solution, and see that it was put into effect. He died on 19 October 1969 in Minehead, Somerset. 
Kenneth Parker', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37943


Scott, Mackay Hugh Baillie (1865-1945), architect, was born at Beard's Hill, St Peter's, Broadstairs, Kent, on 23 October 1865, the first of the fourteen children of Mackay Hugh Baillie Scott, a Scot whose considerable wealth seems to have come mainly from sheep farms in Australia, and his wife, Martha Waters, who was English. While he was a child his family moved to Worthing in Sussex, where he went to school. From 1883 to 1885 he attended the Royal Agricultural College in Cirencester, with a view to managing his family's property in Australia. But shortly before he was due to leave for Australia Scott decided to become an architect, and from 1886 to 1889 he was articled to C. E. Davis of Bath. On 16 February 1889 he married Florence Kate Nash (1862-1939). They went to the Isle of Man for their honeymoon, and then settled there, in Douglas, where Scott got a job with a surveyor. A daughter was born in 1889 and a son in 1891, and in 1892-3 Scott built a house for his family in Douglas. He set up in practice there on his own and continued to work there until 1901. The Isle of Man probably did not offer great prospects to an architect of Scott's abilities, but he quite soon found a way of furthering his career without leaving the island. 
In January 1895 Scott published an article entitled 'An ideal suburban house' in 'The Studio', the leading progressive art magazine of the day. It was followed by several others on the design of middle-class houses. He wrote about homeliness, the quality he saw in old cottages and farmhouses; about simplicity and the clearing away of genteel clutter; and about the fireplace as the focus of family life. His most radical idea was the 'houseplace', a single large room in middle-class houses, with alcoves off it for eating, reading, talking, and so on, instead of the several small rooms of middle-class propriety. He wrote in an easy, middlebrow way and the illustrations, from his own designs, showed gleaming hearths, timber-framed inglenooks, and ornament drawn from nature and romance: the home as refuge. In the articles he published between 1895 and about 1900 Scott found his subject matter and his way of operating professionally. 
For the articles are interwoven with the development of Scott's early houses on the mainland. Bexton Croft at Knutsford, Cheshire (1895-6), was published as 'An ideal suburban house', the subject of his first article, while Seven Gables, Cambridge (1897-8), appeared as 'A small country house' in 'The Studio' for December 1897. Others, such as Blackwell, Windermere (1898-1900), and the White House, Helensburgh, near Glasgow (1899-1900), were more loosely related to the articles, but had the timber-framed, double-height halls, generous inglenooks, and rich natural ornament which clients had seen illustrated there. At Blackwell much of Scott's decoration in plaster, metal, wood, textiles, and glass survives, showing his unusual judgement in the combination of colours, the geometry which disciplines and invigorates his natural ornament, and the interplay of plain and decorated elements. The furniture he designed from the mid-1890s, much of it made by the firm of John P. White in Bedford, has these qualities: simple, sturdy pieces with plank-like members against which are set panels of concentrated natural ornament, painted or inlaid. With these houses and this furniture Scott's work reached its early maturity. 

'The Studio' was widely read in Europe and America. Early in 1897 Scott was asked to decorate and furnish two rooms in the Neues Palais at Darmstadt, Germany, for the grand duke of Hesse and by Rhine, a grandson of Queen Victoria. This was followed, later in 1897, by tiny, fantasy-laden interiors in a tree house on the royal estates for Princess Marie of Romania, the grand duke's sister: Scott devised a decorative symbolism of sunflowers for the sitting-room, poppies for the bedroom, and lilies for the oratory. His 1901 competition design for a country house for a connoisseur, sponsored by the German magazine 'Zeitschrift fur Innendekoration', won second prize when no first was awarded, principally because of his interiors, which glowed with ornament and hangings in pinks and blues and greens. Over the next decade Scott designed (and in most cases built) about a dozen houses and interiors in Europe and the United States, of which Landhaus Waldbuhl at Uzwil in Switzerland (1907-11) was probably the most elaborate. It survives with its full complement of furniture and interiors. Probably no British architect working in the domestic field was better known in Europe before the First World War than Scott. 
In 1901 Scott moved to Bedford, and converted two early nineteenth-century cottages just outside the town into a house for his family and an office. By now he had a considerable reputation, but he did not go to London, and chose not to move in architectural circles. He was an important figure within the arts and crafts movement, but he never became a member of the Art-Workers' Guild, its principal London organization. He was a modest-looking moustachioed figure, gentle and often droll, but little is known about him as a man, because of the lack of documentary evidence. An assistant's recollections of his office at this time give a glimpse of him: 'a long, low cottage, pink washed, with a mossy tiled roof... At the rear facing an acre of orchard, projected at one end, Scott's office (originally the detached washhouse), smothered in ivy; at the other end a wooden wing housed the staff... Red turkey twill curtains hung at the windows, and the brick floor had strips of brightly coloured matting... Two or three times a day, Scott would stroll across slowly from his room to ours, generally with a cat in his arms. (Kornwolf, 250-51)' All the time he was keeping the architectural papers supplied with illustrations of his work, maintaining that combination of journalism and remoteness which he had discovered on the Isle of Man. In 1906 he published a book, 'Houses and Gardens', a detailed account of his ideas on house design and a fetchingly illustrated survey of his work. It seems to have brought him many clients. 
Scott's houses in these years have strong, defining roofs, a clear disposition of parts, and a feeling for the texture of brick, stone, wood, and plaster. Of the groups of smaller houses he built in the new garden suburbs, those on the south-east corner of Meadway and Hampstead Way in Hampstead Garden Suburb (1908-9), or 36-38 Reed Pond Walk, Gidea Park, Essex (1910-11), are good and accessible examples. From about 1903 onwards he would often design a garden for a new house, laying it out as a series of compact outdoor rooms, along axes that run through the house as well. His interiors in these years generally took their cue from the forms and finishes of the exterior, and thus are plainer, more traditional, than those of the 1890s. The techniques and materials of English vernacular building were, increasingly, Scott's benchmark in design. Here was a language in which he could express his enduring ideal of homeliness without recourse to the extravagance of symbolism and elaborate decoration, a way of building that was ordinary and to hand. He worked in this way for the rest of his life. 
In March 1911 Scott's house and office were almost completely destroyed by fire. For some years he wandered with his wife and family from place to place, running the office as best he could until he closed it down in 1914. The Scotts did not have a permanent home until 1921, when he bought Ockhams at Edenbridge, a Kentish farmhouse which he repaired and lived in for the next twenty-one years. 
In 1919 he opened an office in partnership with A. E. Beresford, who had worked for him since 1905 and took care of the business side of the practice. Their office was in Holborn, so Scott was working in London for the first time. But he resisted its pressures. Beresford was always in the office punctually, Scott was often late. Sometimes he did not come in at all, but preferred to work among the fields of Kent. They took up where he had left off in 1914 (though commissions no longer came from Europe), and in the 1920s their output equalled that of the pre-war years. Their houses were mostly neo-Tudor in style, some in a free neo-Georgian, and all handled with the reverence for traditional building which Scott had absorbed in the Bedford years. Old ways of working were cultivated, old materials were reused; tiles were brought to the site with the lichen still on them. These houses have not been studied as closely as Scott's earlier work because they seem so traditional. But Diane Haigh's study of Church Rate Corner, a modest house in Cambridge of 1924, shows Scott's traditionalism as spare, refined and intelligent, a sensibility honed down to the pleasure of materials and the good sense of using familiar methods for familiar purposes. 
From about 1935 Scott began to play less part in the practice. He was then aged seventy and near the end of a long and remarkably focused career. He had put up several hundred buildings, over almost fifty years. He had re-established his career after the First World War, which left many of his contemporaries adrift. The great majority of his buildings were detached, middle-class houses, and his whole career had been bound up with a building type typical of his time, the single family house within commuting distance of a city. Throughout his work he had concentrated on the expression of domesticity, and the criticism sometimes made, that his houses are sentimental, perhaps arises from this: they say 'Home sweet home' so sweetly. Scott, whose intellectual blandness was his strength, would have turned this criticism round, by pointing, as he did in all his writings, to the importance of feelings in the experience of houses. But one should also say that the reputation of his best work rests on other qualities besides, on skilful planning, and a handling of masses that is, remarkably, most effective in his smallest buildings. 
Commuting, which combines participation in the city with emotional distance from it, is perhaps a good image for the whole strategy of Scott's career, for the consistency with which he kept personally aloof from the metropolitan centre of architecture while keeping his work always in the professional press. Between the wars he became a commuter himself. But when John Betjeman, who got to know him at this time, went to visit him at Edenbridge, he seemed like an 'unassuming countryman', not like an architect at all (Betjeman, 'Mackay Hugh Baillie Scott', 78). 
In 1939 Scott's wife died. His partnership with Beresford came to a formal end with the outbreak of war. In 1942 he sold Ockhams. He was by now an invalid, looked after by a permanent nurse, and spent the next two years in nursing homes or rented cottages in Devon and Cornwall. He died on 10 February 1945 in Brighton Municipal Hospital, and was buried at Edenbridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 37944


Scott, Robert Henry (1833-1916), meteorologist, was born in Dublin on 28 January 1833, one of the six children (five sons and a daughter) of James Smyth Scott QC, a prominent Dublin lawyer, and his wife, Louisa, daughter of Charles Brodrick, archbishop of Cashel, and sister of the sixth and seventh viscounts Midleton. His elder brother Charles (died 1894) was headmaster of Westminster School from 1855 to 1883. Scott was educated at Rugby School and Trinity College, Dublin, where he was classical scholar (1853), graduating senior moderator in experimental physics (1855), MA (1859), and honorary DSc (1898). He also obtained a diploma from Dublin School of Engineering. From 1856 to 1858 he studied chemistry, physics, mineralogy, and meteorology in Germany, working under Heinrich Dove in Berlin and Justus von Liebig in Munich. 
Scott undertook the translation of Dove's famous book 'Das Gesetz der Sturme', which was published in Britain as 'The Law of Storms' (1862). Dove dedicated the book to Admiral Robert FitzRoy, head of the meteorological department established under the Board of Trade in 1854, and FitzRoy ensured its acceptance within Britain by including it in his series of 'Meteorological Papers'. FitzRoy died in 1865 and two years later the department was reconstituted as the Meteorological Office under a meteorological committee appointed by the Royal Society. 
Scott had begun teaching in Dublin in 1859. He applied unsuccessfully for the chair of technology at Edinburgh, and in 1862 was appointed keeper of minerals to the Royal Dublin Society. He married Susan Louisa (1842/3-1901), daughter of the Hon. Walter George Stewart, island secretary of Jamaica, on 9 August 1865. There were no children. 
Scott's meteorological output was confined to the translation of Dove's book but in 1866 he was approached by his intimate friend Edward Sabine, then at the height of his influence as president of the Royal Society and prospective chairman of the new meteorological committee, and was offered the directorship of the Meteorological Office. There were no other candidates and Scott was appointed director in January 1867. It was a clear case of personal patronage, but he was to remain executive head for thirty-three years. The office's constitution changed in 1877, control passing to a meteorological council. Scott's role and salary remained unaltered, although his designation became secretary to the council, a position he occupied until his retirement in 1900. He was succeeded by William Napier Shaw. 
Scott was never a leading scientific thinker and probably owed his election as fellow of the Royal Society in 1870 to Sabine, but he was a capable administrator. His most important legacy to meteorology was as secretary of the international meteorological committee from its inception in 1873 until 1900. Meteorology is one of the most international of the sciences, and Scott played a significant part in establishing the tradition of co-operation between countries that became the norm. He retained an interest in mineralogy and served as president of the Mineralogical Society 1888-91. He joined the Meteorological Society in 1871 and was its foreign secretary from 1873 until his death, apart from 1880-81 when secretary and 1884-5 when president. Heavily bearded, Scott was a witty and apparently sociable man but became increasingly pedantic and intolerant of views divergent from his own. Doubtless this contributed to the personality problems within the British meteorological establishment during the later nineteenth century. 
Scott published two books, 'Weather Charts and Storm Warnings' (1876) and 'Elementary Meteorology' (1883), the latter becoming a standard text and running into nine editions. He also contributed over eighty papers and articles to a diversity of publications. Scott died on 18 June 1916 at 6 Elm Park Gardens, Chelsea, London, and was buried at Peper Harow, Godalming, then the Surrey seat of the Brodrick family. 
Jim Burton', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37945


Scott, Thomas (c.1566-1635), landowner and politician, was the eldest in a family of four sons and two daughters of Charles Scott (died 1596), a puritan landowner and justice of the peace, of Godmersham near Canterbury, and his wife Jane, daughter of Sir Thomas Wyatt of Boxley, executed for rebellion in 1554. Scott's education is uncertain but it seems likely that he attended the cathedral school, Canterbury, and afterwards went to Cambridge University. 
Scott inherited the family estate in 1596, the year in which he married his first wife, Elizabeth, the daughter of John Webbe, a prominent Canterbury merchant; they had one child, Jane. His second wife, whom he married in 1602, was Mary, the daughter of John Knatchbull of Mersham, a substantial Kentish landowner; they had a son, Thomas (who predeceased him), and three daughters. 
From 1612 until towards the end of his life Scott lived for a good part of the year in Canterbury. In 1613-14 he was in conflict with Archdeacon Charles Fotherby over an amalgam of personal and religious issues. Increasingly involved in local politics, in 1614 he supported Sir Edwin Sandys as a candidate in the county elections to the Addled Parliament. In 1618 he obtained the freedom of the city of Canterbury and shortly after became a member of the common council, though he was soon removed, owing to the hostility of the corporation ruling group. A zealous though conformist puritan, Scott acquired a reputation in the early 1620s as an opponent of the city leaders and as a critic of royal policy. 
In 1624 Scott was elected MP for Canterbury in a fierce campaign inflamed by anti-Catholicism. He also stood in the 1625 and 1626 elections, but was defeated by the corporation's candidates. He was re-elected as MP for Canterbury in 1628, with wide freeman and puritan support. Little is known about his activities in parliament, but in 1628 he opposed the billeting of troops and was summoned before the privy council; four years later he was in conflict with the authorities again over musters. 
The principal evidence for Scott's radical opinions comes from his extensive diaries and other unpublished writings. In 1626 he wrote on the need for parliamentary reform, calling for the expulsion of non-resident borough MPs whom he regarded as illegally elected, and also for a major redistribution of seats in the House of Commons. In 1627 he produced a radical and wide-ranging indictment of royal policy, denouncing George Villiers, first duke of Buckingham, identifying Charles I as a tyrant, and espousing resistance theory. 
Scott's life was dominated by an intense commitment to godly religion, which involved searing spiritual experiences and recurrent bouts of melancholic despair. But he also showed a striking interest in international developments, particularly the progress of the protestant cause in France and Germany during the Thirty Years' War. He was a passionate, combative, choleric, and difficult man, frequently embroiled in legal disputes. Thomas Scott died in Godmersham in May 1635. His heir was Dorothea Scott ['see 'Gotherson, Dorothea], a friend of several of the regicides and a Quaker pamphleteer and preacher during the 1650s. 
Peter A. Clark', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37946


Scrope, Emanuel, earl of Sunderland (1584-1630), nobleman, was the only child and heir of Thomas Scrope, tenth Baron Scrope ('c'.1567-1609), and his wife, Philadelphia (died 1627), lady-in-waiting to Queen Anne and daughter of Henry Carey, first Baron Hunsdon, a cousin of Queen Elizabeth I. He was born probably in Hunsdon, Hertfordshire, on 1 August 1584, matriculated from Queen's College, Oxford, on 25 June 1596, and succeeded his father as eleventh baron, and as steward of the royal honour of Richmondshire, in 1609. The Scropes owned extensive estates in Wensleydale (whose value had been increased in the late sixteenth century by mineral exploitation) and at Langar in Nottinghamshire. Scrope was much more the courtier than his father had been -- a participant in court masques and festivities and notorious as a gamester, burdened with large gambling debts. He had Catholic sympathies, however, and came to be regarded in the north as a patron of recusants. As a result, in January 1619, during one of the pro-Spanish phases of James I's foreign policy, he was appointed lord president of the council in the north, replacing Edmund, third Baron Sheffield, lately a persecutor of Catholics, probably at the prompting of the Spanish ambassador, Gondomar. 
Scrope now headed an institution already discredited by the involvement of its late president, Sheffield, and secretary, Sir Arthur Ingram, in the hated alum monopoly, regarded as responsible for the depression in the West Riding clothing industry. His pro-recusant policies increased the council's unpopularity, particularly among the puritan clothiers, whose formidable leader was the late parliamentary oppositionist, Sir John Savile. The lord president tried to attract support by embarking on a reform of the council, particularly by a reduction in its fees, but could make little progress against the obstructionism of Secretary Ingram, who had the backing at court of the lord treasurer, Lionel Cranfield. Scrope relied almost exclusively on George Villiers, first duke of Buckingham, but consequently had to adapt himself to the tergiversations of the latter's policies. By 1627 Buckingham's pro-Catholic foreign policy had collapsed and he was bent on a French war; the need now was for the service of men with enough local influence to raise money for this purpose. Sir John Savile, Scrope's principal opponent, was therefore introduced into the council as its vice-president but effective head, Scrope's presidency retaining only a titular significance. He was compensated by being raised, on 19 June 1627, to the earldom of Sunderland. However, this arrangement too collapsed when the assassination of Buckingham in August 1628 led Charles I to call a parliament. In this Sir Thomas Wentworth, Savile's old Yorkshire enemy and rival, played a leading role in the House of Commons. There charges of corruption were successfully brought against the vice-president, and in November 1629 his resignation from the office was forced. Scrope followed suit in December, receiving $3000 for his office, and Sir Thomas Wentworth succeeded him as lord president. 
Irrespective of his merits, the weakness in Scrope's position made success in his office unlikely. He was hampered by his Catholic sympathies, his inadequate local following, and his lack of independent political weight at court. He was already in poor health at the time of his resignation, and he did not long survive it; he died on 30 May 1630 and was buried at Langar on 6 June. He left no children from his marriage to Lady Elizabeth Manners (died 1654), daughter of John, fourth earl of Rutland. The barony of Scrope devolved on the representative of his niece Mary but was not taken up; the earldom of Sunderland became extinct. Scrope had a liaison with his servant Martha Jeanes, with whom he had a natural son and three daughters. John, the son, became a fellow-commoner of Trinity College, Oxford, and died unmarried. Two of the daughters, Mary and Annabella, eventually inherited the Scrope estates. A third daughter, Elizabeth, married Thomas Savage, Earl Rivers. 
Mervyn James', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37947


Segrave, Sir Henry O'Neal de Hane (1896-1930), land and water speed record-holder, was born in Baltimore, Maryland, on 22 December 1896, the only child of Charles William Segrave, Anglo-Irish landowner of co. Wicklow, later of co. Tipperary, and his first wife, Mary Lucy, daughter of James Kemp Harwood, officer in the US Navy; she died in 1898. Educated, unremarkably, at Eton College and, briefly, at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, Segrave was commissioned into the Royal Warwickshire regiment. Wounded in France in May 1915, he transferred to the Royal Flying Corps (RFC) in October, and gained his wings in January. Twice shot down, wounded, and now a captain, he was grounded first at the War Office, later with the RFC headquarters in France, and finally at the Air Council before a posting to Washington (now a major) with the British aviation mission in June 1918. On 4 October 1917 he married Doris Mary, a comedy actress, daughter of George Stocker. There were no children. 
A keen owner of fast motorcycles and cars since he was fifteen, Segrave set out after the war to be a racing driver. On his showing at the Brooklands circuit with a pre-war 41/2 litre Opel and by persistent importuning, he was accepted, in 1921, as a team driver by Louis Herve Coatalen, designer and racing manager to Sunbeam (soon to be the Anglo-French concern Sunbeam-Talbot-Darracq), the only British competitor in international events. That year Segrave won the Brooklands 200 mile race from his team-mates Kenelm Lee Guinness and Malcolm Campbell. In 1923 he became, at Tours, the only Briton until 1938 (and Sunbeam the only British car until 1957) to win a European grand prix. He raced successfully with Sunbeam, preferring roads to track, and winning three further grands prix, until the end of 1927, when he retired, believing that 'owing to the near state of perfection which the automobile has reached... the need for carrying out experiments along unorthodox lines has diminished. Therefore the need for constructing specialized cars will automatically diminish also... the curve of what is physically possible will intersect the curve of what is practically worthwhile. (H. O. D. Segrave, 'The Lure of Speed', 1928, 24, 262)' The proper place for fast engines would, in the future, be where they operated most efficiently -- in the air.Segrave then took to record-breaking. Already, briefly, holder of the world's flying-start kilometre (152.33 m.p.h. on Southport Sands in 1926), he was the first person to travel at 200 m.p.h. over the mile: on 29 March 1927 at Daytona Beach, Florida, driving the huge chain-driven Sunbeam, powered by two First World War Matabele 221/2 litre aero-engines, designed by Coatalen, he averaged 203.988 m.p.h. over the mile. Two years later, again at Daytona, on 11 March 1929, he recaptured the record from the American Ray Keech at 231.362 m.p.h. in 'Golden Arrow', designed by Captain J. S. Irving with a 900 hp aero-engine hired from Napier and originally designed for the Schneider trophy-winner Supermarine seaplane. For this feat he was received by President Herbert Hoover and knighted by George V. 
In May 1927 Segrave had started racing boats. After limited success with 'Miss England I' in America, he returned to the challenge in 1930 in 'Miss England II', using two Rolls-Royce racing aero-engines. On Windermere on Friday 13 June 1930, he took the world mile record at 98.76 m.p.h., beating the record of the American holder, Commodore Garfield Wood, by 6 m.p.h. On a third run, the boat hit a floating object, capsized at speed, drowning a mechanic and mortally wounding Segrave, who died at Belle Grange, near Hawkshead, hours later, the holder of both land and sea records. 
Though of independent means, Segrave worked first with KLG sparking plugs in 1920, as competition manager, then for Sunbeam from 1924, as head of their London sales department. In 1927 he joined the Portland Cement Company, who denied him car-racing rights but went on to be a sponsor for 'Golden Arrow'. In 1927 and 1929 he designed stylish bodies for the Hillman 12 hp and then Straight Eight chassis; as technical adviser to the Aircraft Investment Corporation, which he joined in 1929, he shared in the design of the Segrave Meteor, an advanced four-seater, twin-engined monoplane. 
Serious-minded and highly practical, Segrave trained hard for everything he did. Cool foresight and a quick mind enabled him to react swiftly in an emergency. He never crashed a car while racing -- a rare distinction. Handsome and articulate, a keen patriot, he was greatly liked on both sides of the Atlantic. Brave, adventurous, single-minded, he died a national hero. As a 'Times' leader put it: 'A man of genius in his own field, he must be counted among those who have deserved well of their kind, and his name will be remembered in honour' ('The Times', 13). After cremation at Golders Green crematorium his ashes were scattered over Eton playing fields from his own plane. His wife survived him. 
H. G. Pitt', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37948


Selous, Edmund (1857-1934), ornithologist and author, was born on 14 August 1857 in London, at Holgate Lodge, Gloucester Road, Regent's Park, the younger son in the family of two surviving sons and three daughters of Frederick Lokes Slous (or Selous), a wealthy stockbroker, and his third wife, Ann Holgate Sherborn, daughter of John Sherborn. He was the brother of Frederick Courteney Selous, the hunter and African explorer, and the nephew of the artist Henry Courtney Selous and the dramatist Angiolo Robson Selous. Educated privately, he matriculated at Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1877 (leaving without a degree); he was admitted to the Middle Temple in 1878 and called to the bar in 1881. After trips to southern Africa and India he practised briefly as a barrister and settled down to the life of a gentleman, pursuing the two great passions of his life: the study of natural history and that of great literature (French, German, and Spanish, all read in the original languages, as well as English). In 1886 he married Fanny, daughter of John Maxwell, publisher, and his wife, the novelist Mary Elizabeth Braddon. They had a son (Gerald Holgate Selous, diplomat and Arabist) and twin daughters. 
A conventional Victorian naturalist at first, Selous developed an aversion to blood sports and to all forms of scientific collecting involving cruelty to animals, against which, as a self-styled 'life-loving naturalist', he campaigned for the rest of his life, earning the enmity of certain important figures in the ornithological establishment of the day. In 1898 he began observing the habits of wild birds in earnest, making detailed notes on the spot; he became a key pioneer (as observer and interpreter) in the ethological study of bird behaviour, introducing the words 'bird-watcher' and 'bird-watching' into the language and producing a large output of influential scientific papers and books. The latter included 'Bird Watching' (1901), 'The Bird Watcher in the Shetlands' (1905), 'Bird Life Glimpses' (1905), 'Realities of Bird Life' (1927), 'Thought-Transference -- or what? -- in Birds' (1931), and 'Evolution of Habit in Birds' (1933), as well as many essays (mostly in the 'Saturday Review'), and several other books on popular natural history and for children. 
Most of Selous's observations were made within walking or cycling distance of his various homes in England and abroad, but he also visited the Shetlands, Sweden, the Netherlands, and Iceland. Bird display was his speciality and he made a number of seminal studies. He was one of the first to seek evidence in the field for the concept of natural selection held by Charles Darwin, maintaining (then heretically) that a species' behaviour was as characteristic of it as any morphological feature. 
Selous also championed the Darwinian idea of sexual selection, once more against the tide of contemporary scientific opinion. He obtained evidence of female choice in two species (the ruff and the black grouse) in which mate-selection is made communally, thus earning the later approbation of the distinguished geneticist Sir R. A. Fisher. Also obsessed by the problem of the co-ordinated flight manoeuvres of flocking birds, Selous sought the explanation in some form of extrasensory facility such as telepathy. Selous went on bird-watching and writing nearly to the end of his life and died at his home in Weymouth, Lydwell, Buxton Road, on 25 March 1934. 
K. E. L. Simmons', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37949


Shanks, James (1800-1867), chemical engineer, was born on 24 April 1800 in Lochwinnoch, near Johnstone, Renfrewshire, the eldest of at least nine children of William Shanks, millwright and engineer. His mother was Isabel Anderson. In 1821, after assisting in his father's engineering works for several years, he went to Glasgow University, where he studied chemistry, under Andrew Ure, and medicine to qualify as a doctor. He returned to Johnstone and practised medicine for three years, during which time he also gave scientific lectures at Johnstone's Mechanics' Institute. He then abandoned medicine in favour of the chemical industry. He started a small chemical works in Paisley, manufacturing alum and potassium chromate. This did not prove a success and he subsequently accepted positions in Worcester, and later in Newcastle upon Tyne. 
In 1836 William Gossage appointed him, together with George Elliott, to assist in the erection and development of Gossage's absorption towers (patented in 1836) at the British Alkali works in Stoke Prior, Worcestershire. In 1841 he moved to St Helens and erected Gossage towers for Gamble and Crosfields. When the Gamble and Crosfields partnership was dissolved in 1845, Shanks became a partner in the new firm, Crosfield Bros. & Co., a position he held for the rest of his life. The firm became Crosfield and Shanks. 
Shanks took out the first of several patents for alkali manufacture in the spring of 1841, for improvements in the manufacture of carbonate of soda. In September 1858 he patented a process for preparing chlorine using calcium chromate, for which he was awarded a medal at the 1862 international exhibition. His final patent, taken out in 1863, for improvements in the manufacture of caustic soda and caustic potash, seems never to have gone beyond the experimental stage. 
Shanks's name is permanently associated with the system of vats, known as 'Shanks's vats', introduced in 1861 for the extraction of the soda from black ash in the Leblanc method for the production of alkali, but these were never the subject of a patent. Although there is a claim that these vats were introduced by Charles Tennant Dunlop and Heinrich Buff of Giessen, it is generally accepted that Shanks was responsible for their development. 
Shanks was president of the Mechanics' Institute of St Helens. He also assisted the St Helens Permanent Building Society. An upright and honest man, he was a Baptist and regularly attended the Myrtle Street Chapel in Liverpool, where the Revd Hugh Stowell Brown was minister. He also worked hard to promote the formation of a Baptist church in St Helens. 
Shanks was married twice but had no children. The maiden name of one of his wives (probably the second) was Watt. He died on 13 August 1867 in St Helens. His estate, valued at under $16,000, was distributed between his numerous nephews and nieces. 
Ann K. Newmark', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37950


Sharp, Evelyn Jane (1869-1955), children's writer and suffragette, was born in Denmark Hill, London, on 4 August 1869, the ninth of eleven children, nine of whom survived beyond childhood, of Jane ('nee' Bloyd) (1829?-1915) and John James Sharp ('c'.1827-1903), slate merchant. Her brother Cecil Sharp was the folk song and dance expert. In 1928 Evelyn wrote a book on the origin of dance, 'Here we go round'. 
The youngest of the four girls, Evelyn Sharp was taught by sisters until she was about twelve, then attended school in London for three years; she studied at the College de France, Paris from 1890. Many of her children's stories from 'The Youngest Girl in the School' (1901) onwards reflect her own happy schooldays as a boarder. Her family discouraged her wish to go to university. Neither did they approve of this clever young woman with big, expressive brown eyes earning her own living in London. In 1894 she taught, writing stories at night in her London hostel -- perhaps similar to the one depicted in her novel 'The Making of a Prig' (1897). She had already written one novel at home. In 1895 John Lane published 'At the Relton Arms', its jacket designed by Beardsley, and the first of six short stories appeared in the 'Yellow Book'. Evelyn joined the group of writers associated with these infamous volumes. 
Evelyn Sharp's first publication had been a non-fictional defence of fairy tales. Her appeal to children's imaginations, to 'the marvellous in their minds' (E. Sharp, 'Fairy Tales as they are, as they were and as they should be', 1889, 2) lay behind much of her subsequent success. 'Wymps and other Fairy Tales' (1896) was the first of over twenty books and hundreds of short stories which treated children as creative, intelligent beings. Despite (or perhaps because of) the fact that Evelyn never had children of her own, she appeared to possess empathy with the child's perception of the world, depicting 'grown ups' as the mysterious, irrational ones. Her fairy stories and schoolgirl tales were neither patronizing nor moralistic though they reflect her own increasingly progressive views on gender, class, internationalism, and peace. In the 1920s she wrote an account of educational opportunities for London children and in 1931 reported on the International Conference on African Children in Geneva run by Save the Children International Union. Evelyn became a prolific journalist, writing for papers such as the 'Manchester Guardian' (as its first regular women's page writer), 'Daily Herald' (on their staff between 1915 and 1923), and 'Daily Chronicle' (supplying daily features and stories for children in the 1930s). She became a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature. Her stories combined a strong social purpose with a persistent sense of humour. 
Evelyn Sharp had been converted to women's suffrage in 1906 after a speech given by the writer and former actress Elizabeth Robins. She now found that 'freedom, directly you discover you haven't got it, will not wait another minute' (Sharp, 'Unfinished Adventure', 128). From the non-militants she graduated to the Women's Social and Political Union, lectured for them in Denmark and became secretary of the Kensington branch. She was briefly imprisoned in 1911 and 1913, recuperating from forcible feeding with the physicist Dr Hertha Ayrton. In 1926 she published a 300-page memoir of Dr Ayrton at the request of her daughter Barbara Gould. Barbara, along with Dr Louisa Garrett Anderson, was one of many friends Evelyn gained in the suffrage years: she carefully included friendships among her list of recreations. She worked with Barbara Gould in the United Suffragists which played a pivotal part in securing the partial victory of votes for some women in 1918. 
During the war Evelyn Sharp edited the women's suffrage journal 'Votes for Women'. She also refused to pay taxes. Her furniture was distrained. She was only discharged from bankruptcy in 1918 once she was assured of taxation 'with' representation. She also joined the Labour Party. She had been refused permission to go to the Women's International Congress at The Hague. The war had confirmed her pacifist tendencies. Although she never joined the Society of Friends, she worked for them in war-ravaged Germany in 1921, also visiting famine areas of Russia in the 1920s with their relief committee. 
Since the early 1900s Evelyn Sharp had enjoyed a close relationship with her fellow journalist and lover of social justice and travel Henry Woodd Nevinson (1856-1941). Whether on excursions organized by their Saturday walking club, urging women's suffrage, denouncing the excesses of the Black and Tans in Ireland or reporting from Germany in 1923 on the French occupation of the Ruhr, they were constant companions. Continually confounding expectations, Evelyn ended her autobiography, written in her sixties, with the observation that she might now be expected to 'put on a cap and settle down to enjoy a spinster's twilight'. Instead, on 18 January 1933, the day she completed this book, she married the seventy-five-year-old Henry who had recently been widowed. They spent seven years together in Hampstead before bombs drove them to the Cotswolds where Henry died in 1941. Evelyn returned to living alone in London flats as she had done for most of her adult life. Depression and failing eye sight made her final years tough ones. She died in Methuen Nursing Home, 13 Gunnersbury Avenue, Ealing, London, on 17 June 1955. 


@@@@@


doc= 37951


Shaw, Hester (bap. 1586?, d. 1660), midwife, was probably baptized in Allhallows parish, London, on 11 April 1586, the only recorded daughter of Nicholas Essex, gentleman. She began practising midwifery in London about 1610 and was licensed by the bishop of London before 1634. In that year Mrs Shaw and Mrs Whipp led a petition of sixty midwives of the City in opposition to Peter Chamberlen the elder, a man-midwife who planned to incorporate the midwives under his governorship. The petition, which was presented both to the king and to the College of Physicians and referred to the archbishop of Canterbury, alleged that Chamberlen had pecuniary interests in keeping midwives ignorant so that he could take on their difficult cases. The petition was successful in aborting Chamberlen's scheme; however, it did not result in an improvement of the ecclesiastical licensing system, as the midwives had hoped. 
In January 1650 Hester Shaw's house in Tower Street was destroyed by a gunpowder explosion while she was attending a childbirth. Sixty-seven people were killed, including her son-in-law and three grandchildren. Shaw claimed to have lost all her midwifery earnings in the explosion, and a total of over $3000. She also claimed that her minister, Thomas Clendon, had attempted to confiscate three bags of her money, worth $953 6's'. 8died These had been blown out of her house and taken into his for safe keeping. She explained the minister's ill treatment of her as revenge for her withdrawal of an annual gift of $8 to the parish church when she found out that he had attempted to publish her charity. In 1653 Clendon complained of her allegations in his pamphlet 'Justification Justified' and she returned with 'A Plaine Relation of my Sufferings' and 'Mrs. Shaw's Innocency Restored'. Affidavits taken before the lord mayor, a personal friend of hers, indicate that public opinion was on her side. She was described by Clendon as a woman 'by many reputed Religious, having by her good education, and volubility of tongue, and natural boldness, and confidence, attained some ability in prayer, and in speaking of matters of Religion'. 
Hester was married to John Shaw, the churchwarden of Allhallows parish, before 1 April 1610, when their daughter Elizabeth was born. Elizabeth became Dame Bludden, and Hester had at least one other daughter, who married George Farrington. John Shaw died before 1643. Hester Shaw was buried in Allhallows parish on 18 June 1660. 
Ann Giardina Hess', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37952


Shaw, Sir John, first baronet (c.1615-1680), customs farmer, was the second in the family of three sons and two daughters of Robert Shaw, wine merchant, of Southwark, Surrey, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of John Domelawe, wine merchant, of London. His father, who was descended from an armigerous Cheshire family, was ruined by taking a share in the wine-licensing patent of 1631. Shaw settled in Antwerp before the civil war as factor to the great Somerset clothier John Ashe of Freshford, whose daughter he married before 1654. Ashe was a prominent parliamentarian; but Shaw advanced $1810 for the purchase of arms for the king's army, and during the interregnum he provided the principal channel of communication between the English royalists and the exiled court. According to Edward Hyde, earl of Clarendon, without him the king at one time could not have got bread. 
After returning to England at the Restoration, Shaw became MP for Lyme Regis and one of Clarendon's chief business advisers. He held such a multiplicity of posts that Sir William Coventry described him sarcastically as 'a miracle of a man' (Pepys, 8.398). He was a commissioner of customs, trade, and plantations, and joint paymaster of the Dunkirk garrison until 1662, when he took a share in the great farm of the customs. On obtaining a lease of the crown manor of Eltham, Kent, in 1663, he employed Hugh May to build him a house. He was fortunate to have been accepted as a member of the new customs syndicate in 1667 before Clarendon's fall deprived him of his patron; but the lease was cancelled four years later, when the farmers sought guarantees against the heavy defalcations to be expected in the imminent Dutch war. Thenceforth Shaw held only minor offices, but was still reckoned a government supporter, though 'apt to make the gout his excuse' (Browning, 3.104) for absence from the House of Commons. 
Shaw was knighted in 1660 and created a baronet, with three of his partners, in 1665. He and his first wife, Sarah Ashe, who died in 1662, had a son, who succeeded to the baronetcy, and a daughter. On 24 December 1663 he married Bridget, daughter of Sir William Drury of Besthorpe, Norfolk, and widow of a Cheshire landowner, Charles, fourth Viscount Kilmorey; they had two sons and another daughter. He died in his town house in Bloomsbury Square on 1 March 1680, and was buried at Eltham. His younger children were well provided for, and his heirs retained the lease of Eltham until 1839. His widow married as her third husband the royal physician, Sir John Baber. 
John Ferris', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37953


Sheppard, Sir John Tresidder (1881-1968), classical scholar and college head, was born on 7 November 1881 in Peckham, London, the fourth of the five children (three sons and two daughters) of Alfred Henry Sheppard (died 1930), a wool broker's clerk of Peckham, London, and his wife, Harriet Winifred, daughter of the Revd James Sears, a Baptist pastor and printer. He was educated at Dulwich College from 1895 to 1900 and was taught Greek there by A. C. Pearson who in 1921 was preferred to his pupil for the regius chair at Cambridge. Among his school friends were P. G. Wodehouse and Alic Halford Smith, later warden of New College, Oxford. When Sheppard was provost of King's he and Smith revived the 'amicabilis concordia' between the two colleges. 
After winning a scholarship in 1900 to King's College, Cambridge, Sheppard came under a brilliant scholar, Walter Headlam, and a born teacher, Nathaniel Wedd. But he often said that he owed as much to Oscar Browning, who had to get his Baptist parents' permission to take him to the theatre. He was an Apostle and a prizeman, though his zeal as president of the union condemned him to a second in part two (1904) after a first in part one (1902) of the classical tripos. In 1906 he won a fellowship at King's. The electors ignored a referee who wrote, 'Mr S. has an unfortunate lightness of touch. This might be cured by a year in a German seminar' (Morris, 62). In 1911 he published his book 'Greek Tragedy'. His best work was his edition of the 'Oedipus tyrannus' (1920) which won him a Manchester honorary LittD at the age of forty; and 'The Pattern of the Iliad' (1922) was based on his Manchester lectures on Homer. He held the Brereton readership from 1931 to 1947. 
When A. E. Housman went to Cambridge in 1911 he said to Sheppard, 'I hear your lectures are very well attended, so I know they must be bad' (Wilkinson, 'JTS: a Memoir', 21). They were in fact remarkable. Never using notes, he would sit on a table swinging his legs, his long underpants showing between his trousers and boots, or perch on a chair at an angle so perilous that disaster threatened. He became the characters in Homer or the tragedies, and made his audience feel they were seeing the drama as well as listening to an interpretation. More than any scholar of his generation (Gilbert Murray apart) he kept Greek literature alive at a time when it had ceased to be a compulsory subject in many schools. A school had only to ask and he would talk to the boys and girls, and dozens of boys went to King's because he had met them in a train or at school. He produced the triennial Greek plays eleven times and was made knight commander of the order of the Redeemer by the Greek government. Peggy Ashcroft acted in his 'Electra' and Joyce Carey in 'Oedipus'. He was a mercurial producer and rehearsals were exhausting. 'First you are a flame, then you are a lily', he told the Cassandra of 1921, an Etonian athlete (Wilkinson, 'A Century of King's', 89). In 1950 he was knighted for his services to Greek (he had been appointed MBE in 1919). 
Sheppard's other passion was King's. Like Oscar Browning he treated undergraduates as equals and Sheppard developed that tradition -- and invented a good many others -- steering many benefactions in their direction. He knew every undergraduate and undertook long post-mortems on scholarship as well as tripos examination results. Elected vice-provost in 1929, he was a unanimous choice as provost in 1933; and such was the hold he established over the college that the fellows prolonged his tenure as provost for two years so that he retired in 1954. 
Sheppard was an exacting colleague, and college meetings lasted for hours as he reminisced about the past; but it was his way of educating the fellows in the traditions of the college. He had no enthusiasm for the natural sciences, and as little for research. He wanted each branch of the humanities to fertilize the others. As a young don, the friend of J. Maynard Keynes, Bertrand Russell, G. Lytton Strachey, and Lady Ottoline Morrell, he had been an iconoclast, but as he grew older he preferred the company of the innocent to the clever. He was proud to be 'ex officio' senior fellow of Eton and was much moved by the visit of George VI, Queen Elizabeth, and Princess Margaret to the college. 
In later years Sheppard visited the four dominions, for each of which he established a graduate studentship; and Melbourne and New Zealand followed St Andrews in conferring honorary degrees. He created an 'amicabilis concordia' with Queen Mary College, London (evacuated to King's during the war), and another with Berkeley College, Yale, where his contemporary at King's, Charles Seymour, was president. 
Sheppard was a character. His mane of white hair brought him dignity which he masked with clowning. Shrewd yet naive, tough yet appearing to be tottering on the verge of senility, tirelessly interested in people, helping them by stealth, histrionic in the highest degree, quick to spot the comic and to mock the pompous, the possessor of a gargantuan ego that was directed almost entirely to good ends, he was one of the most remarkable dons of his day. He died unmarried, of a cardiac arrest, at Northumberland House, 237 Ballards Lane, London, on 7 May 1968. His remains were cremated at Golders Green on 19 May 1968; on 10 February 1969 his ashes were placed in a vault of King's College chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 37954


Sherland, Christopher (1594-1632), lawyer and politician, was born in Easton Maudit, Northamptonshire, and baptized on 28 April 1594, the first son of Thomas Sherland esquire of Milden, Suffolk, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Sir Christopher Yelverton of Easton Maudit. He matriculated from Queen's College, Oxford, on 8 May 1607 aged thirteen and he graduated BA on 31 January 1610. He was admitted to Gray's Inn on 1 November 1604, was called to the bar on 26 June 1617, and he became a bencher in 1627. At an unknown date he married Jane, daughter of Edward Oglethorpe of Smithfield, London. 
According to Sherland's contemporary biographer, Richard Sibbes, preacher at Gray's Inn, the dominant influence on Sherland's early years was his uncle Sir Henry Yelverton, who persuaded him to set aside his early inclination to become a divine and to pursue his studies in the law. It was also on his uncle's recommendation that Sherland was appointed recorder of Northampton on 23 June 1623. During the late 1620s he lived in the town, representing the borough in the parliaments of 1624, 1625, 1626, and 1628-9, and acting as legal adviser to the corporation and to local gentry families, such as the Drydens and the Knightleys. He also formed close links with the network of local puritan ministers, including Thomas Ball of Northampton, Robert Bolton of Weekley, John Dod of Fawsley, and Andrew Perne of Wilby, whom he described in his will as 'my reverend and pious friends' (TNA: PRO, PROB, 11/10, Audley, 1632). He was among those who defaulted over payment of the forced loan at Northampton in 1627. 
At a national level Sherland was closely involved with the leading puritan opponents of crown policies. He was one of the four lawyers among the feoffees for impropriations established in 1625, and by his will he left $400 to the feoffees 'for furtherance of the preaching of the gospel' (TNA: PRO, PROB, 11/10, Audley, 1632). He was also a founding member of the Providence Island Company, set up in September 1630, and, in the same month, he joined William Fiennes, first Viscount Saye and Sele, Sir Nathaniel Rich, John Pym, and John Crewe as members of a trust established by Richard Knightley to support John Dod. He made 'my good friend' John Hampden executor of his will. 
In the absence of correspondence, the clearest impression of Sherland's attitudes and concerns is provided by his contributions in parliament, where he was a prominent speaker and committee man. His main priority was the defence of Calvinist orthodoxy. Sibbes described him as someone well versed in 'controverted points of divinity' and, with the exception of John Pym, no MP in the late 1620s was more vigorous in his efforts to demonstrate the dangers presented by Arminianism. His first significant speech was in August 1625 when he opposed a grant of subsidies and suggested that proper enforcement of the recusancy laws would provide the king with a more than adequate revenue. In 1626 he reported to the Commons on the outcome of the York House conference, at which George Villiers, first duke of Buckingham, had declared his support for Arminianism, and when he delivered one of the Commons charges against Buckingham in the Lords he added his own gloss that he was 'the principal patron of a semi-pelagian, semi-popish faction, dangerous to church and state, lately set on foot among us'. 
In 1628, like other leading lawyers, Sherland was much involved in the debates leading to the petition of right, but again his main concern was religion. In the debate on the remonstrance against Buckingham in June he argued that the Arminians 'run in string with the papists and flatter greatness to oppress the subject', thereby making what has been described as a new and crucial intellectual link between the alteration of religion and the alteration of government. In 1629 he was again at the forefront of discussions on Arminianism, proposing the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' of 1562 as a basic standard of religious orthodoxy and denouncing the evil influence of Arminian advisers close to the king. Sherland died in February 1632. He had no surviving children. He was regarded by Sir John Eliot as one of the ablest and most articulate critics of Charles I's government. 


@@@@@


doc= 37955


Shore, John (c.1662-1752), trumpeter, was born in London, the son of Matthias Shore (died 1700), trumpeter, one of a family of three celebrated trumpeters at the court of the late Stuart and early Hanoverian sovereigns. Already one of the trumpeters-in-ordinary from 30 March 1688, he seems to have joined the court band as a musician-in-ordinary in 1695; he became sergeant-trumpeter in 1707 on the death of William Shore, his uncle or, less probably, brother, and he lived to serve George II. He was also appointed lutenist of the Chapel Royal in 1715. 
Shore significantly developed a style of playing by which the trumpet escaped from the restrictions of a purely military style and took its place in England as an orchestral instrument, so giving valuable stimulus to Henry Purcell and making it possible for English trumpeters to meet the requirements of the music of G. F. Handel. He is said to have produced 'a tone as sweet as that of a hautboy'. In view of the technical advance implied it is thought that it was probably he who was the 'Mr Showers' who was complimented in the 'Gentleman's Journal' of January 1692 for having played in hitherto impossible keys and 'with all the softness imaginable'; but at that date the reference might conceivably be to his father or, less probably, his kinsman William. Be that as it may, his playing attracted the attention of Purcell before 1694. He was a minor composer for the instrument. 
It was Sir John Hawkins, writing in 1776, who stated that John Shore devised the tuning-fork, which he used in preference to the pitch-pipe when tuning his lute. The precise form of the appliance is not stated. Shore died in London on 20 November 1752. 
Watkins Shaw', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37956


Shuttleworth, Joseph (1819-1883), agricultural engineer, was born at Dog Dyke on the Witham River in Lincolnshire on 12 July 1819, the son of John Allenby Shuttleworth of Coningsby, a boat builder, and his wife, Rebecca Newton. He was baptized Joshua. He left school at the age of fourteen to follow his father's trade, and two years later in 1835 took over the management of a boat-building yard at Lincoln, which his father had acquired. Within a few years the increased prosperity of the yard had so impressed John Shuttleworth that he turned the business over to his son. 
Nathaniel Clayton was working in adjoining premises as an iron-founder and steam-packet owner, and in 1842 he and Shuttleworth established the firm of Clayton, Shuttleworth & Co. Iron-founding soon became their main interest, with the railway boom at first providing a rapidly expanding market. This was followed by the start of their rise to prominence as agricultural engineers. With some financial backing from a local firm of corn merchants and millers they began the manufacture of portable steam engines in 1845, and steam threshing machines in 1849. They were one of the first, and certainly one of the most successful, manufacturers of steam-powered farm machinery. They were not outstanding, however, as technical innovators, preferring simply to adopt, or in some cases adapt, the best of the available designs and put their efforts into efficient manufacture, a high standard of materials and workmanship, and competitive marketing. At an early stage in their expansion they came to realize the opportunities presented by overseas markets, and they established an office and works in Vienna in 1857 to serve the countries of central and eastern Europe. A decade later they developed a substantial export trade to Australia and South America. By the time of Shuttleworth's death the firm had manufactured 19,000 portable steam engines and 17,000 threshing machines, as well as finishing machines, straw and hay elevators, and portable grinding mills. 
Shuttleworth's other business interests included, at various times, directorships of the Metropolitan Railway, the Great Northern Railway, the Sutton Bridge Dock Company, and the Agricultural Hall Company, and he was a valued member of the council of the Royal Agricultural Society. He was elected a vice-president of the Agricultural Engineers' Association when it was formed in 1875. He was active also in the volunteer militia (forerunner of the Territorial Army), in which he rose to the rank of captain. For many years he was a member of the town council of Lincoln, and in 1858-9 was chief magistrate. He was a JP and deputy lieutenant of the county of Lincoln, and in 1881 was elected high sheriff of Bedfordshire. The local charities found in him a generous benefactor. 
In 1842 Shuttleworth married Sarah Grace, daughter of the elder Nathaniel Clayton and sister of his partner. They had two sons. His first wife died in 1849, and in 1861 he married Caroline Jane, daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Richard George Ellison of Boultham Hall. They had no children. He died at home at Hartsholme Hall, Skellingthorpe, near Lincoln, on 25 January 1883. 
Ronald M. Birse', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37957


Siddal, Elizabeth Eleanor (1829-1862), painter, was born at 7 Charles Street, Hatton Gardens, Holborn, London, on 25 July 1829, the third of eight children of Charles Siddall (died 1859), ironmonger, and his wife, Elizabeth Eleanor Evans (died 1892). Of respectable working-class background with some pretensions to gentility, without formal education, she nevertheless possessed an instinctive refinement of manner. Her deportment, said to be 'like a queen', was perhaps formed by her work at the dressmaking and millinery shop in Cranborne Alley, Leicester Square, to which she journeyed from Southwark, where her family was living. In 1850 she was noticed by the artist Walter Deverell, who asked her to act as a model for him and a group of young friends who were beginning to distinguish themselves as the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood. She agreed, and sat for Deverell, William Holman Hunt, and for John Everett Millais as the drowned Ophelia. Within a short time she was sitting only for Dante Gabriel Rossetti (1828-1882). 
Siddal's features are apparent in nearly all Rossetti's work until her death, most notably in 'Beata Beatrix' ('c'.1860-64; Tate), 'Regina cordium' (1860; Johannesburg Art Gallery), 'A Christmas Carol' (1857-8; Fogg Art Museum, Harvard University), and 'Writing on the Sand' (1859; British Museum). By pen and pencil he conveyed in his innumerable studies of this quite ordinary girl, the fragility of an idealized beauty, and the paths of ill health, for in an enfeebled frame she seemed to carry the seeds of consumption. These studies, rare in quality, present a unique series; Sir John Ward considered that there was nothing comparable in European art. The pathos of her strange beauty is recorded in heavy lids drooping over agate-coloured eyes, wings of copper-red hair framing a face singular in its remoteness. Languor informed every portrayal, whether sleeping, reading, or (rarely) standing. In these representations 'stamped with immortality', she seemed to Ford Madox Brown 'thinner & more deathlike & more beautiful & more ragged than ever' ('The Diary of Ford Madox Brown', ed. V. Surtees, 1981, 101). Guggum or the Sid were her pet names; the final 'l' in her surname was discarded to please Rossetti. 
Rossetti fostered Siddal's slight talent for drawing, largely derivative from his own work, and saw genius in her strangely haunting imagery. She worked hard and for a short time attended an art school at Sheffield. Her early drawings, 'Pippa Passes' and 'Lovers Listening to Music' (both 1854; Ashmolean Museum, Oxford), show some technical proficiency, while the slightly later watercolours executed as her strength diminished are those of an amateur. The figures are awkwardly flattened, without any semblance of life, and are dependent on the emotional context of the subject. These -- taken from medieval lore, border ballads, and from works by Keats, Browning, and Tennyson -- are placed within tightly enclosed spaces and illustrated by strangely remote figures largely imbued with her own melancholic nature. Examples include 'Sir Patrick Spens' (1856; Tate collection), 'St Agnes Eve' ('c'.1856; Wightwick Manor, Wolverhampton), and 'Clerk Saunders' (1857; Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge). Her 'Self-Portrait' (1853-4) is in private hands, as too are 'Lady Clare' (1857) and 'The Quest of the Holy Grail' (1855). Some of her designs were included in the 1857 Pre-Raphaelite exhibition in Russell Square. John Ruskin praised her watercolours and wished to settle money on her in exchange for any work her health permitted. 
Siddal also wrote verse of a disillusioned and morbid character, echoing her own sense of neglect, for the passionate love of the early years had turned to disenchantment. With sadly impaired health and frustrated by Rossetti's reluctance to commit himself to marriage, and his too apt inclination to infidelity, she resorted to ever-increasing doses of laudanum. Finally, on 23 May 1860 Rossetti married her at St Clement's Church, Hastings; a year later a child was stillborn. Elizabeth Siddal committed suicide on 11 February 1862 with an overdose of laudanum, in their rooms at 14 Chatham Place, Blackfriars. She was buried on 17 February with other members of the Rossetti family in Highgate cemetery. Rossetti's complex feelings of remorse and guilt for the discords and disillusions of their life together fluctuated with the years though the haunting recollection of his wife was translated into a few lines, scribbled in his notebook: '
As much as in a hundred years, she's dead: 

Yet is to-day the day on which she died. 
('The Collected Works of Dante Gabriel Rossetti', ed. W. M. Rossetti, 1886, 1.380)' In October 1869 Siddal's coffin was opened by her husband's wish and a book of his poems, laid beside her at death, was removed. These he published in 'Poems' (1870). 


@@@@@


doc= 37958


Siferwas, John (fl. 1380-1421), manuscript artist, was active in the late fourteenth and early fifteenth centuries. He depicted himself several times in the habit of a Dominican friar, and is probably identifiable as the 'John Cyfrewas' of the Dominican community in Guildford who was ordained acolyte at Farnham on 19 May 1380 by William Wykeham, bishop of Winchester, and as the 'Johannes Sifirwas, brother of the Order of Preachers' to whom the widow Joan Elveden, from Muchelney (Somerset), bequeathed 'one pair of jet praying-beads' in her will dated 4 September 1421. After his ordination Siferwas perhaps moved from Guildford to the Dominican community in Salisbury or Ilchester. All his surviving work was done for religious houses in the south-west. 
Siferwas's work survives in three manuscripts: a 'Pentateuch' commentary from Glastonbury Abbey, at Trinity College, Cambridge; the Sherborne missal, in the British Library (Add. MS 74236); and the fragmentary Lovell lectionary, in the British Library (Harley MS 7026). His work on the missal is datable within the period 1396-1407: one of the patrons of the manuscript was Bishop Richard Mitford of Salisbury, whose episcopate spanned those years. Siferwas depicted John Whas, the scribe of the missal, as a Benedictine. Whas probably belonged to the Benedictine abbey of Sherborne, for which the missal was made, and Siferwas may have resided at Sherborne while decorating the manuscript. 
Siferwas must have completed the decoration of the lectionary before 1408, the year of the death of John, fifth Baron Lovell of Titchmarsh, who commissioned the manuscript for Salisbury Cathedral. On folio 4 verso, Siferwas depicted himself presenting the manuscript to Lovell. The picture is among the finest examples of early English portraiture. 
The sumptuous Sherborne missal represents the high point of Siferwas's art. He decorated most of the first half of the 700-page manuscript himself, leaving much of the rest to assistants of lesser ability. His own contribution comprises a full-page crucifixion, historiated and ornamental initials, and elaborate borders densely populated with biblical scenes, angels, 'portrait' heads, scenes of courtly life, drolleries, and representations of flora and fauna both conventionalized and naturalistic. His sensitive depictions of birds are justly famous for their realism. Several borders include a pinnacled tabernacle containing figural scenes. These tabernacles are a hallmark of his art, and recur in the Lovell lectionary. 
Siferwas painted in the international Gothic style established in England, probably under north-German influence, in the late fourteenth century. Characteristic of the style are the use of rich, warm colours, skilful treatment of architecture, and painterly modelling of the human figure. The Sherborne missal is the masterpiece of the style. Yet because Siferwas worked outside the main centres of manuscript production, his influence was less than his achievement merited. 
Timothy Graham', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37959


Simmonds, Martha (bap. 1624, d. 1665), Quaker and author, was baptized at Meare, Somerset, on 28 January 1624, the daughter of George Calvert (died 1628), vicar of Meare, and his second wife, Ann Collier; she was the younger sister of the booksellers George and Giles Calvert. Giles's shop at the Black Spread Eagle in St Paul's Churchyard, London, was the leading outlet for the works of early Quakers until 1656. Although perhaps a Seeker from about 1640 Martha was an early convert to Quakerism about 1654-5, writing several pamphlets, three of which were published by her brother Giles: 'When the Lord Jesus Came to Jerusalem' (April 1655); 'A Lamentation for the Lost Sheep of the House of Israel' (October 1655); and 'O England, thy Time is Come' [n.d., 'c'.1656-7]. The first two were printed together in a second edition of 'A Lamentation' (1656). 
At the time of her conversion Martha had been living in London since probably the 1640s (most likely at her brother's shop) and in 'A Lamentation' she describes many years of spiritual seeking. About 1655 she married Thomas Simmons or Simmonds ('b'. 'c'.1618) who had recently returned to London after several years as a bookseller in Birmingham. In March 1655 the Quakers established the Bull and Mouth as their main London meeting place, where Thomas opened his bookshop; he became their principal publisher the following year. During his Birmingham years he had connections with George Calvert, and Giles Calvert may have supported the London venture as an extension of his own Quaker publishing. Martha, however, soon left London for Essex. By December 1655 she had been imprisoned several times in Colchester for interrupting church services and enacting signs, and walking through the town in sackcloth and ashes. She also visited Ware and Hertford and in 'O England' writes of almost two years spent in crying repentance 'in thy Cities, Towns, and Market-Streets' (1-2). 
Martha's part in the events of summer 1656 has been variously interpreted as female hysteria, witchcraft, or a challenge to male Quaker leadership. A group of women including Martha began in 1656 to interrupt Quaker meetings led by Francis Howgill and Edward Burrough, singing and chanting 'innocency'. The women, condemned by Burrough, William Dewsbury, and Richard Hubberthorn, turned to James Nayler for justice. Martha's powerful appeal triggered a spiritual crisis in Nayler, who stayed at her house for three days, an episode leading to accusations by George Fox of witchcraft. In July, Friends tried to part Nayler and Martha forcibly by taking him to Bristol, though George Bishop later denied her account of being thrown downstairs. Nayler proceeded towards Exeter, where shortly afterwards he was imprisoned, while Martha returned to London and offered herself as nurse to Major-General John Desborough's wife, a sister of Cromwell. As reward for her services she obtained an order for Nayler's release which, with her husband and Hannah and John Stranger, she delivered to Exeter in October. 
Now began the series of events which would culminate in Nayler's trial for blasphemy, Martha's ostracism by London Friends, and serious damage to the reputation of the Quaker movement. While Thomas Simmons returned to London, the rest of the Exeter group -- Nayler, Martha, Hannah and John Stranger, Dorcas Erbury, Timothy Wedlock, Samuel Carter, and Robert Crab -- set off for Bristol, passing in procession through Wells and Glastonbury where they strewed the way with their garments. On 24 October they reached Bristol, entering the city in what many interpreted as a blasphemous re-enactment of Christ's entry into Jerusalem: the men went bareheaded, Nayler riding on horseback while Martha and Hannah walked at either side, singing 'Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Israel'. Ending their procession at the city's high cross they then met local Friends at the White Hart, whereupon they were immediately arrested, imprisoned, and questioned by Bristol magistrates. Martha's testimony that her actions were inspired by the Lord and that 'James Nayler will be Jesus, when the new life is born in him' confirmed suspicions of Nayler's blasphemy (Deacon, 27). A letter to Martha from her husband laments the rashness of the group's actions at Bristol: 'If there was such a glory amongst you; why were you not silent, and have let the people cry Hosanna'. His suggestion that Martha was 'the chief leader in that action' is suggestive: Martha's preoccupation with the biblical episode of Christ's entry is clear from her first publication. Thomas's postscript offers an analogy with the Levellers: 'part of the Army that fell at Burford, was your figure' (Farmer, 21). 
News of the incident quickly spread and a parliamentary committee, set up on 31 October to consider Nayler's misdemeanours and blasphemies, sent for the prisoners; they left Bristol for London on 10 November. Nayler was found guilty of blasphemy and after debate the committee rejected the death penalty. On his first appearance in the pillory, on 18 December, he was whipped 300 times. Protests at this brutality included a petition to parliament that his next punishment be postponed; the only stationer who signed was Giles Calvert, Martha's brother. On 27 December, when Nayler's tongue was bored and his forehead branded, Martha, Hannah Stranger and Dorcas Erbury sat at the foot of the pillory in a tableau recalling the three Marys at the foot of the cross, while Robert Rich put up a sign reading 'This is the King of the Jews' above Nayler's head. The following day a sympathetic and noisy Quaker demonstration gathered at the Rose in the new market place, Westminster, where Martha and the other women were in custody. 
A report that Martha, the Strangers, and Dorcas Erbury, still undischarged and under custody, went to Westminster Abbey and listened quietly to sermons seems unreliable. 'O England' (with texts by Martha, Nayler, Hannah Stranger, and William Tomlinson) is defiantly celebratory of Nayler's Christ-like suffering, and letters from Friends indicate that, with Nayler imprisoned in Bridewell, the women continued to disrupt Quaker meetings. On one occasion Martha and Mildred Crouch sang a psalm, read from 'Ezekiel' and performed a parodic communion. In April 1657 they attempted reconciliation with the Quaker movement: 'The Agents of J[ames] N[ayler] have come creeping on their Bellies to be owned yea: Martha their Miserable Mother, this day hath been [at?] us, & all her witchery & filthy enchantments is set at Naught' (Swarthmore MS 5.27). The group probably fragmented for, in August, Salisbury Friends 'received some hurt by some of Martha Simmonds company which came there about to dwell' (Swarthmore MS 2.129). By autumn Hubberthorne detected 'something of God stirring' in Martha (Caton MS 3.391). Although Thomas Simmons continued publishing for Quakers until 1661, Giles Calvert thereafter published few Quaker authors other than Nayler. The exact details of Martha's death in 1665 are unclear: a letter of 7 April 1665 reports her death 'en route' for Maryland but her death in St Mary Magdalen's parish, Bermondsey, on 27 September 1665 and burial the same day in Southwark are also recorded. 


@@@@@


doc= 37960


Simms, Robert (bap. 1761, d. 1843), businessman and Irish nationalist, was baptized in Belfast on 20 March 1761, the fifth child in the family of five sons and two daughters of Robert Simms, merchant and tanner, and his wife, Elizabeth Stevenson of Belfast. With his brother William Simms he owned a tan yard in North Street, Belfast (until 1794), a flour mill in Crumlin (until 1798), and a paper mill in Ballyclare (from 1798). He subscribed to Belfast's New White Linen Hall in 1782 -- a gesture marking him out as one of that group of successful and civic-minded merchants for which Belfast was then noted. On 8 August 1786 he married Mary Gilliland (died 1832) of Colin, near Belfast. They had four daughters and a son. 
The Simms family were members of the Third Presbyterian Congregation in Rosemary Street, and as such not opposed to subscription to the Westminster confession of faith. Already a supporter of political reform in the 1780s, in October 1791 Simms was one of the thirteen founders of the Society of United Irishmen and a proprietor of its newspaper, the 'Northern Star'. From the outset he was the society's key leader in the north. In May 1794 he and his brother were tried for, and acquitted of, publishing a seditious address in the 'Northern Star'. By May 1797, when the paper was finally suppressed, they were its sole remaining proprietors. 
After 1795 -- when the United Irish Society went underground as an armed, revolutionary movement -- Simms remained prominent. He was one of fewer than a dozen leaders conversant with the society's policy of seeking French military help, and in 1796 he was appointed to the movement's first national executive committee. He was arrested and detained in Newgate prison in Dublin from February to June 1797. In late 1797 he was elected adjutant-general for co. Antrim, and preparations began for a rising. When it erupted prematurely in Leinster the following May he refused to lead another in Ulster before the expected French help arrived, and resigned his command. Five days later the Ulster rising went ahead under new leaders and was savagely suppressed. Simms maintained his silence on the reason for his withdrawal, and in 1842 he refused to give an interview to R. R. Madden, then writing his history of the United Irishmen. This is why we know so little about Robert Simms, though most contemporaries thought him too moral a man to have acted dishonourably. He was nevertheless arrested in 1798 and transferred in 1799 to Fort George in Scotland. He was released back to Belfast in December 1801. Although the government continued to suspect him he seems not to have taken any further part in rebellious activities and tried to dissuade his old friend Thomas Russell from organizing another rising in 1803. 
Simms was on the committee for the Belfast Harpers' Festival of 1792 and maintained an interest in Irish traditional music throughout his life. He was secretary to the Belfast Society for Promoting Knowledge (the future Linen Hall Library) from 1794 to 1796 and assistant secretary to the Royal Belfast Academical Institution from 1812 to 1843. His personal character is difficult to fathom but he had a capacity for deep and long-lasting friendships. Affectionately nicknamed 'the Tanner' in the journals of Theobald Wolfe Tone, he appears as a person of wisdom and integrity. He died in Belfast, at Franklin Place, on 23 June 1843. 
Marianne Elliott', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37961


Simms, William (bap. 1763, d. 1843), businessman and Irish nationalist, was baptized in Belfast on 6 June 1763, the sixth child in the family of five sons and two daughters of Robert Simms, merchant and tanner, and his wife Elizabeth Stevenson of Belfast. With his elder brother Robert Simms he owned a tan yard in Belfast, a paper mill in Ballyclare, and a flour mill in Crumlin. He was a member of the Third Presbyterian Congregation in Rosemary Street, a noted reformer in the 1780s, one of the founders of the Society of United Irishmen and its secretary in 1791, and a proprietor of its newspaper, the 'Northern Star'. His house, The Grove, on the Shore Road in Belfast, became one of the meeting-places of the society, and with his brother he subscribed heavily to its finances. In May 1794 he was tried for, and acquitted of, publishing a seditious address in the 'Northern Star', of which he remained a proprietor until its suppression in May 1797. 
William Simms is overshadowed by his brother Robert but he too was a dedicated revolutionary. Indeed some thought him more active than Robert but that he escaped notice, being 'more artful and cunning'. He was detained in Newgate prison in Dublin in 1797 but he appears to have taken little part in the 1798 rising and was not among the state prisoners incarcerated after its suppression. He does not figure in R. R. Madden's history 'The United Irishmen, their Lives and Times' (7 vols., 1842-6) and has been neglected in consequence. Although the government continued to think him dangerous -- and there are signs that he may have remained in the revamped United Irish movement during his brother's imprisonment -- in 1803 he advised Thomas Russell against rebellion and there is no evidence of treasonable activity thereafter. 
Simms was married with a son and four daughters, all of whom died before the age of ten. He was named one of the managers of the Belfast Academical Institution in 1810. He died at his Belfast home on 2 August 1843 and was buried in Knockbreda. 
Marianne Elliott', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37962


Simpson, Archibald (1790-1847), architect, was born on 4 May 1790 at 15 The Guestrow, Aberdeen, the fifth of five sons and the youngest of nine children of William Simpson (1740-1804), clothier in Aberdeen, and his wife, Barbara ('c'.1750-1801), eldest daughter of the Revd Francis Dauney, minister of Banchory Ternan. He was educated at Aberdeen grammar school and then briefly at Marischal College in 1803-4. His maternal uncle William Dauney had been an architect in Aberdeen. He received his initial training in architecture from James Massie (died 1816), an Aberdeen builder. In 1810 he moved to London and found employment with Robert Lugar and David Laing, for whom he prepared plans of a house in Aberdeen. His struggles in London, in spite of letters of introduction, are recorded in two letters to his family. In 1813 he returned to Aberdeen after a tour of Italy. 
It was an opportune moment to return, because the citizens of Aberdeen had embarked on a series of ambitious street improvements at the same time as the technology had developed to enable the exploitation of the plentiful local granite for building purposes. Simpson was to emerge as the leading architect of the city, which he stocked with a fine series of public buildings, distinguished not only by his skill in seizing town-planning initiatives but also by the splendour imparted by their finely jointed and polished granite masonry. In these works he had to endure the rivalry of the city architect, John Smith (1781-1852), who had the advantage of being longer established in their profession. 
Simpson's first public building was the Gothic St Andrew's Chapel of 1816. His skill as a classical designer in the Greek revival style found expression in the Medico-Chirurgical Hall of 1818 and the porticoed county assembly rooms of 1820. These were followed by a wide range of commissions which display his inventive powers, including the Gothic Marischal College of 1837, the New Market of 1840, and in the same year his headquarters of the North of Scotland Bank, with its quadrant corner screen and richly decorated interior incorporating the Parthenon frieze. In 1843 he designed his celebrated 'triple kirks' for three Free Church congregations whose financial constraint is reflected in their brick spires. Simpson also dominated architecture in the north-east of Scotland. He added to many existing houses and castles, but his finest design is probably Stracathro House, Forfarshire, of 1828 with its noble Corinthian portico. He also designed elegant classical villas such as Park House, Aberdeenshire, of 1822. St Giles's Church, with its portico and tower, is a powerful essay in the Greek revival style and provides the focal point at the heart of Elgin. 
Simpson was of slight build and 'shy and retiring' in character. He was remembered as 'a little, active man, always to be seen carrying plans under his arm'. He loved music and played the violin. He died intestate on 23 March 1847 at his home, 1 East Craibstone Street, Aberdeen. He was unmarried. He was buried in the East Church of St Nicholas, Aberdeen. 
Ian Gow', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37963


Simpson, John (1614/15-1662), Fifth Monarchist preacher, was baptized on 25 April 1615 at St Dunstan-in-the-East, London, the son of Fabian Sympson, gentleman, of St Dunstan-in-the-East, London. He matriculated at Exeter College, Oxford, on 2 December 1631, graduating BA on 30 April 1635 and proceeding MA on 18 January 1638. From 22 March 1642 he held lectureships at St Dunstan's, and from 29 April at St Botolph, Aldgate, London, and soon became notorious as one of the leading antinomian preachers in the city. 
On 9 October 1643 the Commons took away Simpson's lectureship at Aldgate and banned him from preaching. The ban was not lifted until October 1646, but Simpson ignored it. Parliament ordered his arrest in February 1644 after he clashed at Paul's Cross with the presbyterian Cornelius Burges, and he was soon in trouble again for preaching, allegedly, that Christ was to be found even 'in Hogs and Dogs, or Sheep' (Greaves, 101). In 1647 Simpson became pastor of the gathered congregation at All Hallows-the-Great, London, founded by the antinomian Walter Cradock. Invited to preach to the Commons on 13 March 1651, at the suggestion of Major-General Thomas Harrison, he used the occasion to champion lay preaching by soldiers, when inspired by the spirit, and to damn the professional clergy and human learning. His sermon produced uproar in the house, and he was denied the customary vote of thanks. In 1653 he visited some thirty gathered churches on a preaching tour of Essex and East Anglia, in the company of his friend Henry Jessey. He did not, however, withdraw from the public ministry. He remained a frequent lecturer in the parish church of All Hallows, and in March 1652 he was appointed to the sequestered rectory of St Botolph without Bishopsgate. 
When Charles II and the Scots invaded England in 1651 the gathered churches raised forces to fight under Harrison against them. Simpson served as a major in this campaign, which culminated in the victory at Worcester. But by then he had already come to doubt whether parliament shared the commitment he felt, with Harrison, to the kingdom of Christ on earth. In December 1651 he joined Christopher Feake in calling a meeting at All Hallows to rally support for the millenarian cause. It was here that the Fifth Monarchist movement was born, with All Hallows its centre and Feake and Simpson its first leaders. Unlike many radicals, Simpson placed no trust in Oliver Cromwell as the instrument of God. He reported visions in which God had revealed to him Cromwell's lust for power and his impending ruin. When Cromwell became protector in December 1653 Simpson and Feake attacked him ferociously at All Hallows. They were arrested in January 1654 and held in Windsor Castle. At first they continued to rail against the regime, but Simpson's ardour had cooled enough by July for the council to order his release, on condition that he did not come within 10 miles of London. In December, flouting the order, he reappeared at All Hallows and denounced Cromwell's church settlement. Summoned before the protector, Simpson boldly accused him to his face of treason, for taking the government upon himself. Cromwell, remarkably, dismissed him with merely a caution, though the appointment at St Botolph without Bishopsgate was formally revoked a few months later. 
Simpson's militancy reached a new peak in December 1655, when he denounced the protector at All Hallows as a tyrannical usurper, and allowed the subversive tract 'A Word for God' by Vavasor Powell to be read out to the congregation. He promptly went into hiding but was eventually captured. He was soon released, however, and the news spread that he had abruptly reversed his political stance and was now willing to accept the regime; whether prison or Jessey's advice lay behind the change is unclear. This conversion, welcomed by the government, provoked anger among some of his former supporters. When he preached restraint at All Hallows in February 1656 the meeting broke up in confusion. A considerable part of his gathered congregation, already suspicious after his release in 1654, accused him of apostasy, and in 1656, following an acrimonious dispute, seceded to form a new church. In January 1657 he clashed with Feake at All Hallows over his old ally's continued intransigence. He was also involved in a long-running dispute at St Botolph, Aldgate, with Zachary Crofton, its presbyterian minister. In 1657 Crofton tried to bar him from the pulpit as a heretic and troublemaker. Simpson had the backing of an unlikely alliance of radicals and moderates, driven together by Crofton's rigid principles and choleric nature, and Cromwell and the council upheld his claims. The council even suggested resolving the dispute by building a meeting-house next to St Paul's for him and his followers to use. 
Simpson's rehabilitation soon went further. In 1658 he was allowed to preach at Bishopsgate once more, as a Sunday lecturer, and in August 1659 the restored Rump, after much dispute and delay, voted to re-install him as rector. But his triumph proved short-lived. He was forced out of the Aldgate lectureship soon after General George Monck arrived in London, and a new rector was appointed at Bishopsgate on 10 August 1660, shortly after the Restoration. The return of monarchy rekindled Simpson's old militancy. In October 1660, at Bishopgate, he boldly defended the regicides, and at All Hallows he repeatedly urged the godly to stand firm. He was arrested in November 1661 but released after taking the oaths of allegiance and supremacy, which aroused further suspicions of apostasy. He died a few months later, and was buried on 27 June 1662. He seems to have had a wife and at least one child, but nothing is known about them. 
Simpson's collected sermons set out the antinomian creed he never retracted. In 1660 he defended free grace in two public disputations at All Hallows against John Goodwin, the champion of free will. He later attacked the Quakers. He was generally known as an Anabaptist, but though he ridiculed infant baptism he insisted that adult or believer's baptism was also unnecessary. His gathered church, like Jessey's, allowed members to decide the issue for themselves. He attached no importance to outward forms, condemning the linking of salvation to ordinances or church membership. Many contemporaries were bewildered by Simpson's volatile and passionate nature and thought him mad. Even a funeral sermon, 'The Failing and Perishing of Good Men' (1663), which described Simpson as 'a Moses', was apologetic about the controversies which had dogged his erratic career (sig. B2'v'). But his power as a preacher was widely recognized, and he remained true to his faith in the Holy Spirit as the sole guide for believers. 
Bernard Capp', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37964


Sims, George Robert (1847-1922), journalist and writer, was born on 2 September 1847 at 8 Newton Terrace, Kennington, London, the eldest among the six children of George Sims and his wife, Louisa Amelia Ann Stevenson ('bap'. 1823). Sims's paternal grandfather was a friend of the scientist Michael Faraday (they were fellow Sandemanians), and his maternal grandfather was a Chartist. In different facets of his life Sims reflected both traditions, though an indulgent sense of fun and panache often made him appear trivial. His father, a wine merchant, became 'a wholesale and export cabinet manufacturer and plate-glass factor' (Sims, 'Life', 31-2) in Aldersgate Street in the City. His mother was president of the Women's Provident League. Sims grew up in comfortable circumstances in Hamilton Terrace, Islington. His parents entertained a cosmopolitan circle, including the political refugee Karl Blind, the art historian George Zerffi, the theosophist Anna Kingsford, the poet Augusta Webster, Samuel Butler, and the suffragists Frances Power Cobbe and Lydia Becker. This earnestness did not outlaw amusement: from six, Sims accompanied his mother to theatres. 
After preparatory schooling in Eastbourne, followed by Hanwell College, a crammer for army cadets, Sims was dispatched to France and Germany to complete his education. He was recalled after developing a 'pronounced partiality for the roulette-tables of Ems and Wiesbaden' (Sims, 'Limelight', 157). He acquired some linguistic fluency, however. At Bonn he dabbled in play writing, adapting Benedix's comedy 'Dr Wespe'; and in 1874 Chatto and Windus published his translation of Balzac's 'Contes drolatiques'. This offended the strait-laced and was withdrawn, until reissued in 1903. Back home, he entered his father's office, but was not cut out for ordinary business. In the firm's time he scribbled stories and verse. 'Fun' began accepting his copy in 1874; among fellow contributors were W. S. Gilbert and Ambrose Bierce, with whom Sims became friendly (Nash, 112-14). On 3 October 1876 while living in London at 24 Addington Square, Camberwell, Sims married Sarah Elizabeth Collis ('b'. 1850/51). 
Sims's satire strayed into the libellous in 1876. His open letter 'To a Fashionable Tragedian', while comically charging Henry Irving with inciting mass murder by overdoing the gore in his stage Shakespeare, unwisely accused the actor-manager of bribing hacks to flatter his performances. This landed Sims and his editor Harry Sampson in court. They apologized and Irving withdrew the suit. In 1877 Sampson started a Sunday sports and entertainments paper, 'Referee'. Sims wrote its 'Mustard and Cress' columns under the pen-name Dagonet. So successful was Sims's miscellany -- particularly the verses which, collated as 'The Dagonet Ballads' (1879) and 'Ballads of Babylon' (1880), sold in hundreds of thousands and were reprinted over the next thirty years -- that 'Punch' sought to poach him. Dagonet's droll travelogues were also popular, but the literati thought Sims facile. In 1892 the 'National Observer', mouthpiece of the manly imperialist coterie led by W. E. Henley, sardonically nominated Sims to succeed Tennyson as laureate. More obvious in its attack was Charles Whibley's profile of Sims in the paper's 'Modern man' series in 1889, which even Henley -- who normally did not flinch when applying the lash -- thought 'a trifle acid' (Connell, 167, 258). Sims fared no better in the estimation of Wildean aesthetes, whose patronizing contempt was echoed in Robert Hichens's spoof 'The Green Carnation' (1894). 
A solitary line from 'The Dagonet Ballads' nevertheless ensured Sims entry into practically every dictionary of quotations: 'It is Christmas Day in the workhouse'. Its sentimentality and social concern struck a chord and betokened Sims's crusading zeal. The characteristics that coloured his literary confections now enlisted public support for his campaigning, especially an eye for that graphic and pathetic detail which dramatized the plight of the suffering victim. Not just evident sympathy but omnipresent wit and reasonableness spared Sims's ethical scorn and solemn warnings from seeming humbug. His articles in the 'Sunday Dispatch', 'Pictorial World', and 'Daily News' in 1879-83 -- 'The social kaleidoscope', 'The three brass balls', 'The theatre of life', 'How the poor live', and 'Horrible London' (all later published in book form) -- derived from observation of London's slums. The burgeoning debate about landlord-tenant relations and the role of public authorities further involved Sims as a member of an inquiry into social conditions in Southwark in 1882 and as a witness before the royal commission on working-class housing in 1884. He also campaigned against the white slave traffic in articles in the 'Daily Telegraph' (published as 'London by Night', 1906, and 'Watches of the Night', 1907); and he was active in the National Sunday League, seeking to dispel sabbatarian gloom by opening museums and galleries and providing concerts. He also wrote tracts against the maltreatment of children, such as 'The Black Stain' (1907); he abetted the boys' clubs movement and, with Mrs E. W. Burgwin, headmistress of a Southwark board school, he founded the 'Referee' Children's Free Breakfast and Dinner Fund (1880), which by 1900 was generating $4000 a year. It was the capital's largest such charity, whose work anticipated the public provision of free school meals for necessitous children in 1906. 
Sims's fascination with London's variety merits for him a place alongside Henry Mayhew, Walter Besant, and Charles Booth. His 'Living London', published by Cassell in thirty-six parts, and as a three-decker book in 1901-3, has been too little regarded. Probably it was his 'Bitter cry of the middle classes' campaign in 'The Tribune' in 1906 that forfeited him the goodwill of progressives, for he argued that the clerk, the small independent tradesman, and others of the straitened lower-middle classes were the over-taxed casualties of a new social order which enthroned organized labour, big business, and statism. 
That Sims's campaigning involved sensationalism is unsurprising, because this quality made him a star writer of melodrama, burlesque, pantomime, and comic opera. For 'Who's Who' he recited some twenty-eight titles of which he was author or part-author. Mostly adapted from continental stock or following formulas, they were of doubtful originality. Sims did not even bother to list his first hit, 'Crutch and Toothpick', modelled on a French farce, which opened at the Royalty on Easter Monday 1879 and ran for 240 nights. Rightly he began his credits with 'The Lights o' London', which Wilson Barrett produced at the Princess's on 10 September 1881. It stayed for 286 nights, then took hold in the provinces and earned record receipts in America. By 1916, when it was being staged in Copenhagen, it had been playing somewhere in the world non-stop for thirty-five years. 'Romany Rye', which opened at the Princess's on 10 June 1882, was a similar box-office smash. J. M. Barrie and Somerset Maugham are usually credited with the feat of having four plays running concurrently in West End theatres; but it was Sims who first achieved that in the early 1880s -- with, additionally, a dozen touring companies performing his work. His play-writing collaborators were numerous (Wilson Barrett, Sydney Grundy, Clement Scott, and Arthur Shirley), and his union with Henry Pettitt was particularly profitable, starting with 'In the Ranks', which opened on 6 October 1883 and ran for 457 nights at the Adelphi; it was followed by 'The Harbour Lights', which played there for eighteen months from 23 December 1885. Their 'Faust Up-To-Date', scored by the Gaiety's musical director Meyer Lutz, was the rage for several years after opening on 30 October 1888; and it inaugurated a new meaning of 'up-to-date' in the language, that of being 'abreast of the time in respect of qualities of style, knowledge, presentation of facts' ('Oxford English Dictionary'). 
Sims's craftsmanship should not be disparaged. Writing in the 'Contemporary Review' in November 1891 D. Christie Murray expected great things of Sims in what he considered to be a new epoch in the theatre, alongside Arthur Pinero and Robert Buchanan. The latter collaborated with Sims to write five Adelphi melodramas. Typical was 'The Trumpet Call'; its plot, mused 'The Globe''s reviewer, advanced from improbability to impossibility. Mrs Patrick Campbell (1865-1940) ['see 'Campbell, Beatrice Stella] played the tempestuous Gypsy villainness. This was before she established her credentials with intellectuals by her title role in 'The Second Mrs Tanqueray'. 'The Trumpet Call' gave her a different sort of fame when one night her costume collapsed and she was exposed in her drawers. This perhaps extended the play's run. Moreover, Sims and Mrs Campbell became lovers, but Sims's ardour persisted after hers cooled. She accused him of parading her as a trophy 'fruit of his labour for his fellow men to envy' (Peters, 92). 
On 17 March 1888, as a widower, Sims had married Annie Maria Harriss ('b'. 1859/60). On 15 August 1901, again a widower, he married Elizabeth Florence Wykes ('b'. 1873/4). There were no children from any marriage, and all three ceremonies were held in register offices. Sims's parents were Anglicans, but his religious life appears to have been void. From the early 1890s his home was 12 Clarence Terrace, Regent's Park, London, the address of a man who had made it; and he cut a figure in the royal parks driving his trotting ponies. Attending sporting events was a passion, horse-racing and boxing matches especially. Sims exercised at badminton and by strenuous walks; as a patriot he bred prize-winning bulldogs. The Devonshire ranked foremost among his clubs, though he incurred members' jibes when his marketing of a hair-restorer, Tatcho, supposedly a miracle cure of his own invention, failed to defeat his advancing baldness. What profit he gained from this unorthodox enterprise, wedded to his vast literary earnings, is not known, but his income approached $150,000 in 1898. That he left only $7111 at his death was probably due to his admitted gambling, a recklessness he shared with Buchanan who, despite their money-spinning play writing partnership, died bankrupt. Sims died at 12 Clarence Terrace on 4 September 1922 from cancer of the liver; his third wife outlived him. 
Sims's ideal was to win 'the admiration of the literary school of critics without sacrificing the commercial approval of the general public' (Sims, 'Limelight', 57-9); but, forced to choose, he preferred instant cash and popularity to critical reputation or literary immortality. That Sims's sketches and verses, plays and pantomimes added to the sum of human happiness in his day is plain. Unexpectedly, it is in the history of legal reform that Sims found an enduring place. Intrigued by the psychology of crime for the social pathologies it revealed, as well as for its fictional possibilities -- he wrote ingenious detective stories, one, 'Dorcas Dene' (1897), involving a pioneering woman detective -- Sims enjoyed discussing cases with Conan Doyle, Max Pemberton, and Churton Collins at Arthur Lambton's Crimes Club. He became so wrapped up in the Whitechapel murders that some suspected him of being Jack the Ripper. More pleasingly, it was his campaign, fought through the 'Daily Mail', to release, pardon, and compensate a Norwegian, Adolf Beck, twice imprisoned owing to mistaken identity, that helped to get the court of criminal appeal established in 1907. His dedication was recognized in a knighthood of the order of St Olaf, first class, awarded by the king of Sweden and Norway in 1905. 
Sims never received a native honour. His literary output was too prolific and ephemeral, and his social crusading, while spirited and arresting, was spread across too many causes. Yet he possessed uncommon flair and imagination, together with curiosity and concern about people. Sims prompted some indecision when selections were being made in 1934 for inclusion in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' supplement. 'G. R. Sims I find we rejected, reconsidered, and again rejected', the secretary to the press R. W. Chapman told the essayist E. V. Lucas on 1 August: 'Do you say that this was wrong, and if so do you want to write a short life of him, (in which I am afraid you must not identify him with Jack the Ripper), or will you very kindly suggest a writer? I have always been very vague about the importance of G.R.S. (Oxford University Press archives, PB/ED/12916/OP1722)' Presumably Lucas was vague too because it was not until 'Missing Persons' (1993) that Sims became securely lodged in the public memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 37965


Sinclair, Sir Hugh Francis Paget (1873-1939), intelligence officer, was born on 18 August 1873 in Southampton, the son of Frederick Sinclair, gentleman, and his wife, Agnes May. Sinclair began his career in the Royal Navy at the age of thirteen. His service record before the First World War, a period during which he specialized in torpedo work, repeatedly commended him as a 'most zealous officer' with 'excellent tact and judgment' (Andrew, 'Secret Service', 421). In 1907 he married Gertrude, daughter of William Sydney Attenborough, of independent means. During the First World War Sinclair served successively as assistant director of the mobilization division on the Admiralty war staff (1914-16), commander of HMS 'Renown' (1916-17), and chief of staff of the battle-cruiser force (1917-19). 
Sinclair's first major involvement in intelligence came as director of naval intelligence from 1919 to 1921. In 1919 he was also given responsibility for founding the new signals intelligence (sigint) agency, the Government Code and Cypher School (GC and CS). Sinclair was promoted rear-admiral in 1920, and after a tour of duty as chief of the Submarine Service from 1921 to 1923, he was appointed chief of the secret service (in which he was known as CSS or C) in succession to Sir Mansfield Cumming. In addition to becoming operational head of the Secret Intelligence Service (SIS), Sinclair also became non-operational director of GC and CS; he was promoted vice-admiral in 1926. 
SIS between the wars was a small, under-funded, foreign intelligence agency, staffed mainly by men with a service background. During Sinclair's first decade as CSS, its main priority was intelligence gathering from Soviet Russia. Sinclair himself had a deserved reputation as 'a terrific anti-Bolshevik' (Andrew, 'Secret Service', 422). His priorities were changed by the rise of Adolf Hitler. By the mid-1930s the Soviet menace had slipped into fourth place in the SIS 'order of priorities' behind Germany, Italy, and Japan. 
As the Nazi menace grew, Sinclair's influence in Whitehall increased. He was promoted admiral (retired) in 1930 and dined regularly with Sir Robert Vansittart, permanent under-secretary at the Foreign Office from 1930 to 1937; Vansittart described the political intelligence from SIS in 1936 as 'invaluable' (then probably a somewhat exaggerated estimate of its real significance). Helped by his immense clubbability, Sinclair's influence in the higher reaches of Whitehall by the mid-1930s extended well beyond the Foreign Office. He won the support and friendship of the two most powerful civil servants of the time: Sir Maurice Hankey, cabinet secretary from 1916 to 1938, and Sir N. F. Warren Fisher, permanent secretary at the Treasury and head of the civil service from 1919 to 1939. Sinclair was appointed KCB in 1935. 
By the time of the Munich agreement in September 1938, Sinclair also had the ear of the prime minister, Neville Chamberlain. He was a convinced appeaser, pressing strongly that the Czechs accept 'the inevitable' and surrender the Sudetenland to Germany. Sinclair also urged Chamberlain to beware of a pact with Russia, insisting that the Red Army 'could do nothing of real value' (Andrew, 'Secret Service', 593). As war approached, SIS reports on German intentions, like those from other sources, became increasingly confused. Vansittart's successor as permanent under-secretary at the Foreign Office, Sir Alexander Cadogan, complained that 'we had no means of evaluating their reliability' (ibid., 591). Soon after the outbreak of the Second World War, Sinclair was taken in by a deception operation mounted by the German 'Sicherheitsdienst' (the SS security service) which led to the capture of two of his officers in the Dutch border town of Venlo. 
Sinclair had a reputation as a bon viveur as well as a fine sailor. A large crocodile-skin cigar case was usually close at hand, and he had a justly celebrated wine cellar. Even during the First World War, Sinclair prided himself on offering his guests delicacies such as Californian peach-fed ham. He derived his nickname, Quex, from the play 'The Gay Lord Quex', by Sir Arthur Pinero. Like his namesake, playfully described as 'the wickedest man in London' (Andrew, 'Secret Service', 422), Quex had, until his middle years, a stormy private life. In 1920, embarrassingly soon after becoming naval aide-de-camp to George V, Sinclair was divorced. He had two sons and did not remarry; his sister Evelyn subsequently kept house for him. He died at 8 Beaumont Street, Portland Place, London, on 4 November 1939, five days before the Venlo incident. 
Christopher Andrew', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37966


Sinclair, Mary Amelia St Clair (1863-1946), novelist and philosopher, was born on 24 August 1863 in Thorncote, Rock Park, Rock Ferry, near Birkenhead, Cheshire, the youngest of six surviving children of William Sinclair (1829-1881), part owner of a Liverpool shipping business, and Amelia (1821/2-1901), daughter of a Belfast merchant, John Hind. In the late 1860s William Sinclair's business began to fail, and about 1870 he became bankrupt, and the family was dispersed. May lived with her mother in Ilford, Cheltenham, and Fairford, Wrexham, Salcombe Regis, and London. She had tuition at home, piano lessons, and access to her father's library, where she read widely in classical and English literature, history, and philosophy. She learned German, Greek, and French before being sent for a year to Cheltenham Ladies' College in 1881, where the influential Dorothea Beale took an interest in her. In that year her father, who had become an alcoholic, died. The family tragedy continued relentlessly with the early deaths of her four brothers from heart failure between 1887 and 1896. 
Sinclair's original ambition was to be a poet and philosopher. Her first book, 'Nakiketas and other Poems' (1886), was published under the pseudonym Julian Sinclair. 'Essays in Verse' (1892) was her first publication as May Sinclair. Her first essay on idealism came out in the 'New World' in 1893 (she became the first woman member of the Aristotelian Society after publishing 'A Defence of Idealism', 1917). In 1893 Sinclair met and fell in love with Anthony Charles Deane. However, he was ordained in that year and then married someone else in 1898. When her first novel, 'Audrey Craven', was published in 1897, Sinclair was poor and trapped, looking after her mother in London lodgings at Christchurch Road, Hampstead. The novel's psychological complexity and frankness became her hallmark, as did the relative sexual explicitness of her second, 'Mr. and Mrs. Nevill Tyson' (1898). 'The Divine Fire' (1904), ironically a critique of the bookselling industry, was her first major success, establishing her reputation not only in Britain, but in America, where it was a best-seller. Like much of her fiction it deals with the emotional and psychological lives of artists. 
When Joseph Walter, her last surviving brother, died in 1905, Sinclair assumed responsibility for his children, and then for those of her brother William when his widow died in 1906. In August 1907 she took a flat at 4 The Studios, Edwardes Square, Kensington, London. Her friends included H. G. Wells, Ford Madox Ford (then Hueffer), Wyndham Lewis, W. B. Yeats, and Thomas Hardy. Sinclair concentrated on novels exploring the difficulties women faced in sexual, domestic, and intellectual arenas in 'The Helpmate' and 'The Judgement of Eve' (1907), 'Kitty Tailleur' (1908), and 'The Creators' (1910). From 1907 to 1914 she published a series of fine introductions to the 'Everyman Library' editions of the Bronte novels (she wrote a full-length study in 1912, and her novel 'The Three Sisters' draws on the Bronte story). In 1912 she wrote 'Feminism' for the Women Writers' Suffrage League, of which she was a member. She was also a member of the militant Women's Freedom League. She supported new literary, social, and intellectual movements such as Tagore enthusiasts, imagists, and vorticists. She championed Ezra Pound, and also wrote essays on her friends T. S. Eliot (who published her in 'The Criterion'), Violet Hunt, H. D., and Richard Aldington (whom she may have loved platonically). She had a particularly intense friendship with Charlotte Mew, who was in love with her. 
In October 1913 Sinclair attended the inaugural meeting of the Medico-Psychological Clinic of London, 'the first clinic in England to include psychoanalysis in an eclectic array of therapeutic methods' (Boll, 104). Sinclair wrote the prospectus, and was elected as one of the twelve founder members, and as a member of the board of management. 'The Three Sisters' (1914) is the first of her novels to explore psychoanalytic concepts such as unconscious motivation. In May 1914 she was also elected to membership of the Society for Psychical Research, which combined interests in scientific psychology and mystical or paranormal phenomena; her 'Uncanny Stories' (1923) and 'The Intercessor, and other Stories' explore mystical or psychic themes. 
Sinclair moved to 1 Blenheim Road, St John's Wood, London, in March 1914. At the outbreak of the First World War she joined Dr Hector Munro's volunteer ambulance corps as secretary, treasurer, banker, financial supporter, and publicist. They left London on 25 September 1914 for Ostend, Bruges, and Ghent. After two and half weeks Sinclair was sent back to England for more funds, and was shocked to discover Munro had replaced her. The proximity of mortal danger had an intense effect on her, which can be gauged in her war fiction, especially 'The Tree of Heaven' (1917) and 'The Romantic' (1920). 
In 1916 Sinclair was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature. In the same year William Lyon Phelps hailed her as 'the foremost living writer among English-speaking women' (quoted in 'The Times', 15 Nov 1946), and she published 'Clinical lectures on symbolism and sublimation', one of the few accounts to appear in an English journal of a schism between Jung and Freud. She was among the earliest novelists to explore psychoanalytic ideas in fiction and criticism, and in 1918 was the first to apply William James's term 'stream of consciousness' to literature in an essay on Dorothy Richardson's 'Pilgrimage'. In 1919 she published 'Mary Olivier: a Life', a work of experimental modernism, and one of her best novels. Much of her family life formed the basis of this novel: the heroine's love for her brother Mark (Frank); her struggle against the tyranny and religious orthodoxy of the mother, who rejects her daughter's love in favour of her sons; her fear of hereditary madness, alcoholism, and physical weakness; her intense, unconsummated, renounced love for several different men; and the drive to individuation and creativity seeking to escape the trammels of heredity, family, environment, society, and religion. All can be read as fictionalized spiritual biography. By 1920 Sinclair was at the pinnacle of her achievement, and was described by Thomas Moult as 'the most widely known woman artist in the country and America'. 'The Life and Death of Harriett Frean' (1922), the only novel to continue the modernist experiments of 'Mary Olivier', was considered by Sinclair to be 'one of the best books I have done' (Boll, 143). It is certainly her most spare and poignant novel, a powerful though understated portrait of female disappointment and repression. 
Though her fiction was controversial, Sinclair was personally modest, anxious, fastidious, considerate, fair, and a teetotaller with a passion for being driven in motor cars. Her self-effacing nature -- Mark Twain, who sat next to her during a dinner in 1905 in New York in his honour, thanked her for her 'remarkably interesting silence' -- gave her a particularly sharp eye for arrogance and egotism, especially in the male, which perhaps accounts for some of the controversy. 
From 1919 Sinclair began to use Stow on the Wold in the Cotswolds as a writing retreat. Florence Bartrop joined her then as companion, nurse, and housekeeper, replacing her twin sister Nellie, who had been with Sinclair since 1914, and staying with her for the rest of her life. By 1920 Sinclair began to show signs of Parkinson's disease. She disappeared from literary London, and was forgotten. Her last novels are slight and repetitive, and received poor reviews. She wrote nothing after 1927, and lived as a recluse in childlike dependence on Bartrop. She gave up the rented cottage at Stow for another in the Cornish village of Constantine, next to Dorothy Richardson; then she took a permanent room in the White Hart Hotel in Stow. After living in Little Tingewick, Buckinghamshire, from 1932 to 1936, she finally settled with Bartrop at The Gables, 96 Burcott Lane, Bierton, near Aylesbury, where she died on 14 November 1946. She was cremated at Golders Green, London, on 18 November. 
Feminist scholarship recovered Sinclair's importance as a transitional figure in the 1970s. There have been two biographies, by Theophilus Boll (1973) and Suzanne Raitt (2000), who acclaimed Sinclair as 'one of the few brilliant women philosophers of her time' (Raitt, 42). 


@@@@@


doc= 37967


Singer, Simeon (1848-1906), rabbi, was born in London on 5 November 1848, the youngest son of Julius Singer, a clothier from Raab in Hungary, and his wife, Frederica Wolff of Hamburg. Singer went to the Jews' College School, London, where he subsequently became a teacher. In 1867 he became minister to the Borough New Synagogue, south London, a post which he combined with a variety of Jewish and non-Jewish charitable and philanthropic endeavours, while busying himself also as a prison visitor. On 21 April 1868 he married Charlotte, the youngest daughter of Samuel Pyke; they had five sons, including the medical historian Charles Joseph Singer, and one daughter, Frederica 
(Freda; 1869-1959)
, who married the scholar and historian Israel Abrahams, who later edited his father-in-law's 'Literary Remains'. In 1878 Singer was appointed minister of the New West End Synagogue, then in the course of erection in St Petersburgh Place, west London; he served as its minister for the remainder of his life. 
Singer thus moved from one of the poorest to one of the wealthiest of the Jewish congregations in London; the transition coincided with a turning point in the development of the Anglo-Jewish ministry. In 1870 the lay leaders of the Ashkenazi congregations in London had established the United Synagogue, over which 'the cousinhood' -- and pre-eminently the Rothschilds -- presided. Nathan Marcus Adler, the chief rabbi, became the supreme ecclesiastical authority of this body; ministers of its constituent synagogues were not intended to be rabbinical authorities, but merely preachers and pastors. Singer was an enthusiastic supporter of the concept of the United Synagogue; he moved easily within the world of wealth with which the New West End was associated, enjoyed the friendship of the Rothschild family, and acquired an unrivalled reputation as a preacher of great power and eloquence. At the same time he immersed himself in public service beyond as well as within the Jewish and Anglo-Jewish worlds. 
Singer edited, in conjunction with Solomon Schechter, 'Talmudical Fragments in the Bodleian Library' (1896). In 1890 he had published, with Nathan Adler's authority, the 'Authorised Daily Prayer Book', which combined accuracy of Hebrew with a vibrant and intelligible English translation. That same year the rabbinical diploma was conferred on him by Rabbi Weiss, lector in Vienna. Singer undertook this study partly as a protest against the lowly status of the Anglo-Jewish preacher, and partly to demonstrate that Anglo-Jewish scholars were capable of securing the rabbinical qualification. 
As a Jewish theologian, however, Singer stamped himself as a radical and, in some respects, as a rebel. Though a supporter of Jewish settlement in Palestine, and one of Theodor Herzl's earliest Anglo-Jewish patrons, he opposed Herzl's scheme for a Jewish state as impractical, contrary to the divine will, and subversive of the attachment of the Jew to the state of which he was a citizen. Though Orthodox in his religious beliefs, Singer deplored the division between the Orthodox and Reform camps, preached in the Reform synagogue in Manchester, and was a supporter of the Jewish Religious Union, forerunner of the Union of Liberal and Progressive Synagogues; it was only under intense pressure from within the United Synagogue that he broke off this association. 
Singer died at his London residence, 52 Leinster Square, on 20 August 1906, and was buried in the United Synagogue cemetery, Willesden. He was survived by his wife. 
Geoffrey Alderman', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37968


Sisley, Alfred (1839-1899), landscape painter, was born at 19 rue des Trois Bornes in the 11th 'arrondissement' of Paris on 30 October 1839, into a family of Anglo-French descent, the younger son and second of four children of William Sisley (1799-1879), a dealer in imported luxury goods, and his wife and cousin, Felicia Sell (1808-1866), daughter of a saddler from Lydd, Kent. He was educated in Paris. Sisley retained the British nationality inherited from his parents, although he made two unsuccessful attempts in 1889 and 1898 to become a naturalized French citizen. He lived in France all his life and, apart from three years spent in London (1857-60) studying commerce, when he may have become aware of the work of Constable, only visited Britain for short painting expeditions on three other occasions in 1874 (July-October), 1881 (June) and 1897 (July-September). On the first of these brief visits Sisley explored the River Thames, painting for example 'Bridge at Hampton Court' (Wallraf Richartz Museum, Cologne) and 'Molesey Weir -- Morning' (NG Scot.). 
From 'c'.1860 to 1863 he attended the atelier of the Swiss painter Charles Gleyre in Paris. He then moved out of Paris and lived in villages near the River Seine to the west of the capital -- Louveciennes, Marly-le-Roi, and Sevres -- but in 1880 he returned to the area south-east of the forest of Fontainebleau, where he had first painted during the 1860s, and subsequently lived in a series of villages near the confluence of the rivers Loing and Seine -- Veneux-Nadon, Les Sablons, and Moret-sur-Loing. These movements are significant for an understanding of Sisley's work. 
Sisley was an impressionist painter and exhibited in five of the eight impressionist exhibitions held at irregular intervals between 1874 and 1886. During the 1890s he occasionally exhibited with Les Vingt in Brussels and more regularly with the Societe Nationale des Beaux-Arts in Paris. Neither during his lifetime nor since have Sisley's paintings achieved the popularity of those by Monet, Renoir, or even Camille Pissarro, with all of whom he helped to develop the impressionist style. Consequently, he experienced considerable financial hardship which was exacerbated towards the end of his life by illness. For sales he relied upon dealers in Paris such as Paul Durand-Ruel, Georges Petit, and Goupil Boussod-Valadon, as well as upon a small group of patrons such as Francois Depeaux of Rouen, Henri Vever, and Edmond Decap, but financial success eluded him. On the other hand, certain young critics, especially Adolphe Tavernier (1853-1945), did extol the virtues of Sisley's work. Tavernier remains one of the principal sources for our appreciation of Sisley's style and technique. 
Sisley was principally a landscape painter and there are very few still lifes or portraits in an 'oeuvre' that amounts to some 900 pictures. Drawings and prints by his hand are limited in number, although he was an able practitioner in pastel, which he began to use during the 1880s. Several of Sisley's early paintings dating from the second half of the 1860s were accepted for display in the official Salon, but during the 1870s he began to paint in a fully fledged impressionist style characterized by pure colours applied with broken brush strokes and intense light. Several of his finest works date from these years. Like many of the impressionists, Sisley experienced stylistic difficulties towards the end of the 1870s, but he remained faithful to the technique of impressionism. His mature landscapes are notable for the broad, low horizons, expansive skies, fugitive effects of light, vibrant colours (blue, violet, yellow, red), and rhythmical brushwork. Sisley often painted motifs in series, notably the church at Moret-sur-Loing in 1893 and 1894, inspired by Monet's views of the facade of Rouen Cathedral. During the last two decades of his life Sisley remained independent, although not unaware, of developments in Paris. His work retained a pronounced individuality and originality that has perhaps yet to be properly acknowledged. 
During the early 1860s Sisley met (Marie Louise Adelaide) Eugenie Lescouezec (1834-1898), with whom he had one son, Pierre ('b'. 1867), and one daughter, Jeanne ('b'. 1869). The couple were not formally married, however, until 5 August 1897 in Cardiff. Sisley died of cancer of the throat at his home, 19 rue Montmartre, Moret-sur-Loing, on 29 January 1899, his wife having predeceased him in October 1898. He was buried in Moret-sur-Loing cemetery on 1 February 1899. 


@@@@@


doc= 37969


Sisson, Jeremiah (bap. 1720, d. 1783/4), maker of mathematical instruments, was born in London and baptized at the Presbyterian chapel in Carter Lane, Blackfriars, on 14 December 1720, the son of Jonathan Sisson, also a maker of mathematical instruments. By 1740 he was one of his father's workmen. According to the French astronomer Joseph de Lalande, writing in 1763, the elder Sisson was so infirm in his last years that it was Jeremiah who actually made the large mural quadrants for the observatories of Bologna, Paris, and Pisa, and for George Parker, second earl of Macclesfield. 
When his father died in June 1747, Jeremiah took over a thriving business and the premises at the corner of Beaufort Buildings, Strand. Though his reputation as a craftsman equalled, if not exceeded, his father's, as a businessman he was a failure, being declared bankrupt in 1751. Lalande wrote of him in 1763: 'Sisson has been several times in prison for failing to pay his workmen; he starts many things and finishes nothing: he takes his instruments to the pawnbroker, where they have been seen selling for a tenth of their value. He is obliged to work in great haste, and so achieves nothing worthwhile, but nevertheless there is no one who has as much ability as he.' Though Sisson's main stock-in-trade was probably small surveying and drawing instruments, it was his large astronomical instruments that made his reputation. He made the zenith sector that Nevil Maskelyne took to St Helena in 1761; all the larger instruments for the king's private observatory at Kew; and instruments for St John's College in Cambridge, Naples, Geneva, Milan, and Mitau in Latvia. In 1759 he prepared drawings and a model of a water-pump to be sent to Italy. In 1772 he was appointed mathematical instrument maker to the Board of Ordnance. His duties included the servicing of the instruments at the Royal Greenwich Observatory and making two new equatorial sectors. 
In 1775 Sisson was again declared bankrupt and lost the ordnance appointment. However, Maskelyne, who had a high opinion of his abilities, lent him considerable sums and secured for him commissions for instruments, not only for his own observatory at Greenwich, but also for new instruments for Eger in Hungary, Mannheim, and Florence. Then, in 1780, Sisson was forced to vacate his premises in Beaufort Buildings and to make over the lease and mortgage of his house in Southwark to Maskelyne. 
Of Sisson's first marriage nothing is known, but he was described as a widower when he married Ann Sidebotham at St Clement Danes on 1 January 1761, and again when he married Grace Plampin at St Anne's, Soho, on 14 February 1774. Of his death, the only reference found is the entry in Maskelyne's account book for 13 March 1784: 'Recd of Mrs Grace Sisson, thro' the hands of Mr Henry Robin Auctioneer my dividend for $88.14.11 due to me from the Estate of the late Jerh Sisson -- $15.0.0 -- and gave it to the Widow.' 
Derek Howse', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37970


Sisson, Jonathan (1690?-1747), maker of mathematical instruments, was born in Lincolnshire, perhaps in 1690. He went from there to London and was established in a workshop on the corner of Beaufort Buildings in the Strand by 1722, probably having worked for George Graham, with whom he remained on very close terms. In 1725 he was employed by Graham to construct the framework of the 8 foot mural quadrant for Edmond Halley at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich. He was appointed mathematical instrument maker to Frederick, prince of Wales, in April 1729, by which time he had a high reputation, particularly as a maker of surveying instruments, being known especially for his accurate division of scales. He manufactured the wooden quadrants invented by John Elton in 1730 and had a considerable number of these in stock at his death. Edward Saul, in 'An Historical and Philosophical Account of the Barometer or Weather-Glass' (1735) wrote: 'it may perhaps be an Inducement to some of the Gentlemen of Lincolnshire, to deal with Mr Jonathan Sisson...; that he is their Country Man, and eminent for his great Skill, Accuracy and Fidelity, both in the Construction of his Barometers, and in whatever Work, he undertakes, or delivers out of his Hands.' It was to Sisson that John Hadley turned when he required a copy of his newly invented reflecting octant to be made in brass for the 1731 Admiralty trial in the Thames estuary in the yacht 'Chatham'. In 1736 Sisson was commissioned by Graham to construct a 9 foot zenith sector (the arc of which Graham divided himself) for the French Academie des Sciences expedition to northern Sweden under Pierre de Maupertuis to measure the length of a degree of the meridian. Also in 1736 Graham commissioned him to prepare brass rods and scales for the Royal Society and the Academie to show the relation between the English yard and the French half-toise. After each rod had been engraved with both yard and half-toise, and comparisons had been made in London and Paris, in 1742 Sisson divided each measure into three equal parts. The same year, a paper giving an account of a new spirit level invented and made by him was read at the Royal Society. 
By this time Sisson's reputation was such that he had begun to receive orders for large astronomical instruments, such as mural quadrants, zenith sectors, and transit instruments for observatories all over Europe: for Utrecht, Bologna, Leiden, Paris, and Pisa, as well as for the private observatory of George Parker, second earl of Macclesfield at Shirburn. Jonathan's son Jeremiah Sisson was working for his father at this time and about 1740 John Bird also worked for Sisson before setting up his own workshop near by in 1745. Jonathan Sisson was one of the most celebrated instrument makers of his time, fostering the high reputation which the London instrument-making trade acquired in Europe during the eighteenth century, ably followed by John Bird, Jeremiah Sisson, John and Peter Dollond, Jesse Ramsden, and Edward Troughton. Sisson died in London on 13 June 1747. 
Derek Howse', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37971


Siward, Sir Richard (d. 1248), mercenary and courtier, has obscure origins. In his earliest appearances he is Richard son of Siward, indicating English ancestry and the name of a father or earlier progenitor. It is probable that he was the young man of that name from Farnham in Lower Nithsdale, Yorkshire, who was accused of homicide late in John's reign, arrested, but later released into the military household of an unnamed Yorkshire magnate. Coincidentally, the first certain appearance of Sir Richard is about 1215 in the retinue of William de Forz, count of Aumale, lord of Holderness in Yorkshire's East Riding. Along with other former Aumale followers Richard Siward was retained in the household of William (II) Marshal, earl of Pembroke, and appeared with him in London in 1216, by which time he had achieved the status of knight. He was later reputed to have played a role in the sea battle off Sandwich in 1217. He again fought for the count of Aumale in his rebellion at the end of 1220. Siward escaped the siege of Bytham, and for a period of a week or two in February 1221 in the Forest of Cliff, Northamptonshire, he held off a royal army. He surrendered and left the kingdom, but was pardoned in September of that year. 
In 1223 Siward was once again in the retinue of Earl William Marshal and followed him over the next few years into Wales, Ireland, and Brittany. He received manors and rents from his patron. The Marshal connection also brought him into friendship with the Basset family of Headington and High Wycombe, for Gilbert Basset was a prominent Marshal banneret. In October 1229 Siward married Philippa Basset (d. 1265), Gilbert's cousin and daughter of Thomas Basset of Headington, only a few weeks after the death of her first husband, Henry (II) de Newburgh, earl of Warwick. This was the turning point of Siward's career, for Philippa brought him control of her share of the lands of Basset of Headington and her handsome dower settlement from the Warwick estates. 
The Basset connection brought Siward less profitable consequences in 1233, when Gilbert Basset fell into royal disfavour. Siward shared in his disgrace, being accused (wrongly) of marrying Philippa without royal licence. Siward and Basset found shelter in Gwent with Earl Richard Marshal, who then rebelled against Henry III. On the earl's behalf Richard Siward led several daring forays out of Netherwent and deep into England. One of these was in late September 1233, when Siward and several score of raiders rode across England into Berkshire and pillaged a manor of Bishop Peter des Roches. On 29 October Siward liberated the fugitive Hubert de Burgh from his sanctuary in Devizes church, leading his force of knights and Welsh mercenaries into the town in a fog, causing the Welsh to give their war-cry and the townspeople and besiegers to flee in the belief that Prince Llywelyn's men had come. The force and de Burgh returned, meeting boats at Aust, Gloucestershire, on the Bristol Channel, which ferried his party back safely to Chepstow and Earl Richard Marshal, despite encountering a hostile royalist fleet and military force from Bristol. This and like episodes made Siward's name synonymous with opposition to the obnoxious 'Poitevin' regime in 1233-4, and accounts for his subsequent fame. 
At the conclusion of the Marshal-Basset rebellion in May 1234 Richard Siward was pardoned, appointed to the king's council, and given temporary keeping of Glamorgan and the castle of Bolsover, Derbyshire. He had fees in Glamorgan from the king or the earl marshal, and in England from de Burgh. Alexander II of Scotland gave him the castle and lordship of Kellie, with other lands in Aberdour, Fife. However, Siward's career was uneven. In 1236 he had both the honour of carrying the sceptre at the queen's coronation, and the disgrace of imprisonment through the machinations of a court cabal. He survived this plot, and was retained in the royal household (for an annual fee of 100 marks), in 1242 serving as a banneret with the king's army in Poitou. It may be that at this time he was retained also by Simon de Montfort, earl of Leicester, who had awarded him a money fee before 1245. 
But difficulties began to close in around Siward. His friend Gilbert Basset died in 1241, and Philippa Basset, his wife, somehow managed to obtain a swift divorce from Siward by the autumn of 1242. After this he seems to have retired for a time to his Scottish estates. Siward received another blow when Richard de Clare, earl of Gloucester and Hertford, and lord of Glamorgan, had him arrested on 5 July 1245 while going, unsuspecting, to a meeting of the Glamorgan county court. The earl's avowed justification was that Siward had sided with a Welsh magnate of the area against him, but it is evident that the earl's chief purpose was to reclaim areas of his lordship abstracted from the St Quintin family by Siward while the earl was a minor. Siward's castle of Tal-y-fan and extensive lordship of Llanblethian were confiscated. He disputed the disseisin before the king in 1247 and was still in pursuit of justice in July 1248. He died soon after a crippling stroke, by the end of the same year. He left to the wardship of King Alexander an under-age son, also Richard Siward, whom he had with Philippa, and an adult bastard called Daniel, to whom he had given lands at Merthyr Mawr in Glamorgan before 1245. 
Siward's career is a remarkable story of social advancement based solely on military prowess. Like the career of the elder William Marshal, it shows the importance of finding the right patron. It is doubtful whether Siward would have risen far in a hostile and increasingly class-conscious world without such support. A marcher writer calls him Richard Severus, which would seem to be an ironic contemporary nickname for him among the literate clergy and laity, alluding to the great philosopher-emperor, whose urbanity, education, and piety Richard Siward must too obviously have lacked. 
David Crouch', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37972


Six, James (1730-1793), silk weaver and natural philosopher, was born in Canterbury, Kent, on 30 January 1730, and baptized there in the Walloon church on 26 February. He was the son of James Six (1695-1743) and his wife, Ester, daughter of Louis Ducaufour, and descended from the Huguenot refugee families who came to Britain in the sixteenth century and settled in Canterbury, where they engaged in the silk weaving trade. Six was brought up in the family business but declining trade prompted him to retire early and devote himself to the wide range of interests typical of an eighteenth-century intellectual, though there is no evidence that he ever received any formal training. He was a good artist, and he was certainly a competent amateur astronomer: he sent several observations of comets and of the planet Uranus to William Herschel, to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', and to the American Philosophical Society, which enrolled him as a foreign member in 1787. 
Six is best remembered for the self-registering thermometer which he invented, the first to record maximum and minimum temperatures on a single instrument. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1792 for this invention and his own temperature observations. His book on these subjects was published posthumously as 'The Construction and Use of a Thermometer' (1794); twenty-five experimental forms of air and marine thermometer made by him have been preserved. Six never patented his designs. He sent examples of the air thermometer to friends at home and abroad, and soon after his death it was adopted by the Royal Society and Kew observatory. Versions of his marine thermometer served for deep-sea measurements throughout the nineteenth century. Two centuries after its invention, 'Six's' remained a popular house and garden thermometer. 
All accounts of Six describe him as a competent yet modest and unassuming man of great integrity, and a devout Christian. With Robert Deane he founded and supported a Sunday school in the parish of Holy Cross in Kent, which offered religious instruction and taught reading and singing to poor children, and much of his time was devoted to this cause. On 21 May 1754 Six married Mary Riquebourg (1733-1801) of Canterbury; they had four sons, three of whom died in infancy and one in 1786, and a daughter. Six died on 25 August 1793 and was buried at Holy Cross, Westgate, Canterbury. He and his wife, who was also buried at Holy Cross, were commemorated in a tablet within the chancel. 


@@@@@


doc= 37973


Slessor, Mary Mitchell (1848-1915), missionary, was born on 2 December 1848 in Gilcomston, a suburb of Aberdeen, the second of seven children (four of whom reached adulthood) of Robert Slessor, shoemaker, of Buchan, and his wife, Mary Mitchell (1821-1885), weaver, of Old Meldrum. Robert Slessor's alcoholism lost him his job, and in 1859 the family moved to live at 17 Harriet Street, Dundee, to look for work. Mary, aged eleven, became a weaver in the textile mills and was soon the family's principal breadwinner. She received some education at night school, but was largely self-taught. 
Active in the local United Presbyterian church, Mary Slessor became a voluntary teacher at Queen Street mission and followed the activities of the church abroad. Her younger brother John's early death and the missionary fervour aroused by the death of David Livingstone in 1873 spurred her into applying for work further afield. Accepted by the foreign mission board as a teacher in Duke Town, Calabar, Nigeria, in August 1876 she sailed for west Africa after three months' missionary training at Moray House, Edinburgh. 
Quickly picking up the local Efik language and immersing herself in work among the women, Mary applied for a remote station where she could live frugally and send more of her annual $60 salary to her family in Scotland. Her move 3 miles up river to Old Town was the first step in a gradual journey into the district of Okoyong and away from the European settlement on the coast. When her mother died on 31 December 1885 and her sister Janie died the following year, Mary's last links with home were broken: 'Heaven is now nearer to me than Britain,' she wrote. Moving still further inland, she dispensed with the trappings of the colonial lifestyle -- she drank unboiled water, used no mosquito net, walked barefoot, and even went without the indispensable hat. Visitors commented upon the tiny Scotswoman's sunburnt face and unkempt appearance. When the traveller Mary Kingsley visited her at Ekenge in 1895, she found that: 'Miss Slessor... has lost most of her missionary ideas and bullies the native chiefs in their own tongue... and is regarded by the other missionaries as mad and dangerous.' Her insistence on setting up lone stations cut off from the central missionary settlement led her into conflict with the authorities, who often thwarted her persistent applications to go further up-country. 
In 1891 Mary Slessor was briefly engaged to Charles Morrison, a Scottish missionary teacher at Duke Town and eighteen years her junior. However, when the mission board refused to allow him to join her in Okoyong, the relationship was broken off. Her family became the twins she adopted, whose lives were in danger through local belief that twin births were the result of a coupling with evil spirits. Anxious about leaving her charges when she visited Britain, she began to take them with her, in 1883 first bringing Atim Eso to Dundee, where the six-month-old baby was christened Janie Slessor. 
In 1892 Mary was appointed vice-consul in Okoyong, presiding over the native court; later, in 1905, she became vice-president of the Ikot Obong native court. A natural meddler with an iron will, the role of magistrate suited her well. Even after her resignation she continued to petition the district officer concerning injustices and disputes, particularly on behalf of the women for whose rights she continually campaigned. It is said that no woman lost a case while Mary Slessor was presiding. 
A heroine of popular culture in Britain and heralded as 'the White Queen of Okoyong', she was shy of the publicity greeting her infrequent visits to her homeland and only reluctantly agreed to lecture to raise money for and to increase consciousness of pioneer missionary work. Back in Africa, by 1907 rheumatoid arthritis had almost crippled her and she suffered long periods of inactivity. However, she refused either to move to the comfort of Duke Town or to return to Britain. In 1913 she received the order of St John of Jerusalem. She died of fever and dysentery on 13 January 1915 in Calabar, and was buried in the cemetery there. 
D. J. Birkett', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37974


Slingsby, William Cecil (1849-1929), mountaineer, was born on 25 May 1849 in Bell Busk, near Gargrave, Yorkshire, the eldest in the family of three sons and two daughters of William Slingsby, mill owner of Carleton in Craven, and his wife, Mary Ann, daughter of Isaac Dewhurst of Skipton. He was educated at Cheltenham College. On leaving school in 1866 he entered his father's cotton mill at Carleton in Craven, where he later became a partner; he retired in 1906. He married on 21 June 1882 Alizon ('b'. 1859), daughter of William Farrer Ecroyd, a worsted manufacturer and Conservative MP for Preston, 1881-5. They had two sons and three daughters, of whom the youngest daughter, Eleanor, married the mountaineer Geoffrey Winthrop Young. 
Slingsby first visited Norway in 1872 and soon discovered that he was in a country whose temperament and customs were akin to his own. In their turn the Norwegians accepted him as one of themselves. Crossing the Jotunheim in 1872 he had seen Store Skagastolstind, the Matterhorn of the northern Alps, and resolved to make its first ascent. On 21 July 1876, accompanied by his friends Emmanuel Mohn and Knut Lykken, he attacked the mountain up the steep glacier later known as the Slingsbybrae, reaching the col under the final rock pillar; there the Norwegians refused to go on, considering the peak inaccessible. Slingsby climbed on and reached the summit alone. He made over fifty first ascents of peaks between the Jotunheim and the North Cape. In the early twentieth century he was sometimes known as the 'father of Norwegian mountaineering'. He promoted skiing as a sport and was among the first to introduce Norwegian skis to the Alps. 
Slingsby's book 'Norway, the Northern Playground' (1903) gives an account of his adventures and explorations, and also information about the folklore and way of life of the Norwegians. The composer Edvard Grieg was numbered among his many friends. In 1878 he first visited the Alps, where he took part in several first ascents, chiefly with A. F. Mummery. In 1885 he started climbing in the Lake District, where his name is perpetuated in Slingsby's pinnacle and Slingsby's chimney on Scafell. Slingsby died at his home, St Georges, Hurstpierpoint, Sussex, on 23 August 1929 and was buried at St Mary's Church, Carleton in Craven. His wife survived him. 
J. S. Winthrop-Young', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37975


Smith, Abel (1717?-1788), banker and merchant, was baptized on 14 March 1717, the third son of Abel Smith (died 1757) and his wife, Jane, daughter of George Beaumont of Chapelthorpe, Yorkshire. His grandfather Thomas Smith had added to a local mercer's business in Nottingham some banking activities, including remittances for the excise. This banking activity was considerably expanded by the elder Abel Smith and his brothers, but Abel's eldest son, Sir George Smith, baronet, used his inheritance to become a country gentleman. The younger Abel was placed at fifteen as an apprentice in a Hull merchant firm trading to the Baltic. At the conclusion of his apprenticeship he became a partner in this firm, thereafter Wilberforce and Smith. In 1745 he married Mary, daughter of Thomas Bird of Barton on the Heath, Warwickshire, a wealthy silk manufacturer; her sister Elizabeth was to marry his partner Robert Wilberforce, establishing close family ties between the Nottingham and Hull families. 
Abel Smith also became a partner in his family's bank in Nottingham, whose management he took over on his father's death in 1757. The firm's expanded volume of government and other remittances made close London connections indispensable. To gain them, in 1758 Smith entered into a partnership with John Payne, a London linen draper, to form the bank of Smith and Payne with offices in London and Nottingham. Smith was already well connected in London through cousins and through his elder brother John, a London merchant and director of both the East India and the South Sea companies. As John Payne was then chairman of the East India Company and his brother Edward a director of the Bank of England, Smith and Payne, almost from its inception, was a prestigious house that could attract the correspondence of country banks and desirable town and country business. (The Paynes' connections were also to prove useful in obtaining for Smith and Payne extraordinary re-discount facilities at the Bank of England.) Smith led in creating additional affiliated banks in Lincoln (1775) and Hull (1784). Despite the difficulties of wars, these precociously integrated firms experienced significant growth during the last decades of the century. 
The Nottingham bank attracted the business of neighbouring nobility and gentry as well as that of local hosiery manufacturers and traders. Through his close association with Henry Clinton, second duke of Newcastle, Smith was returned as MP for Aldborough (1774-8), and he later sat for St Ives (1780-84) through the interest of Humphrey Mackworth Praed. He shared in a government victualling contract during the American war, but broke with Lord North on being excluded from the underwriting of government wartime loans. He then supported William Pitt the younger, on whose recommendation he was returned by Edward Eliot as member for St Germans (1784-8). 
At his death, on 12 July 1788, in addition to his partnerships in the several Smith banks, in Wilberforce and Smith, and in several other firms, Abel Smith left extensive land holdings, particularly in Nottinghamshire and Lincolnshire, a sugar estate in Jamaica, and $59,953. Five of his six surviving sons (he had no daughters) became MPs. His son Robert Smith (1752-1838) was created Baron Carrington in 1796. Four of his sons became partners in the Smith banks. These firms survived and prospered until 1902, when they merged with the Union Bank, which in turn was absorbed by the National Provincial Bank. 
Jacob M. Price', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37976


Smith, Benjamin Leigh (1828-1913), Arctic explorer, was born in Whatlington, Sussex, on 12 March 1828, the eldest son of Benjamin Smith (1783-1860) ['see under 'Smith, William (1756-1835)], MP for Norwich, and Anne Longden (1801-1834), a milliner. His sister was the artist and women's activist Barbara Leigh Smith Bodichon, a co-founder of Girton College, Cambridge. His paternal grandfather was the politician William Smith. The family was wealthy and radical in its views. His parents were unmarried, his father believing that the marriage laws were unjust to women; but because the children were illegitimate many of their relatives refused to associate with them. After the death of his mother from tuberculosis in 1834, Benjamin was brought up by his father first at Pelham Crescent, Hastings, and then at his London home, 5 Blandford Square. Educated first at home by progressive tutors and then at the Unitarian Bruce Castle School, in 1848 Smith was elected a pensioner of Jesus College, Cambridge; he was senior wrangler in 1852. As a nonconformist he was not granted the BA degree until 1857, when he was the first dissenter to be admitted. He was called to the bar at the Inner Temple in 1856. 
Smith travelled widely in his youth. He took the Board of Trade licence to command his own ships and, probably inspired by James Lamont, from 1871 to 1882 he sailed in Arctic waters. In 1871 he took the yacht 'Sampson' to Spitsbergen and to the Seven Islands, reaching lat. 81 degree 30' N. In 1872 he could not get beyond the north-west capes of Spitsbergen. His interest was always scientific and not merely that of a hunter or traveller. He had invented an instrument for computing time at sea and, with Captain J. C. Wells, did valuable oceanographic work on the Gulf Stream during his two voyages. On his 1873 voyage he met A. E. Nordenskiold, the Swedish explorer and scientist, but bad weather forced him home. In 1878 he tried vainly to reach Spitsbergen but it was a close season. 
In 1880 Smith built the screw brigantine 'Eira' in which he sailed from Peterhead, but because of mist and pack ice failed to make Jan Mayen or east Greenland. Learning that ice on the north coast of Spitsbergen made it impossible to pass Amsterdam Island, he made for Franz Josef Land, recently discovered (in 1873-4) and only partly mapped. He reached and named May Island in August, adding the south-west coast of the new land to the chart. He also made some additions to the chart of the east coast of Spitsbergen. For these discoveries he was awarded the patron's medal of the Royal Geographical Society in 1881. His paper on the voyage of 1880 was read at a meeting of the society and its importance agreed. 
In 1881 the 'Eira' sailed from Peterhead and sighted Novaya Zemlya and Franz Josef Land, but on 21 August the yacht was nipped between pack ice and land floe off Cape Flora, and sank within two hours. The crew lived in a makeshift hut, built from materials they had previously deposited on Bell Island, for ten months, before taking to their boats in June 1882 for the homeward passage. They reached Novaya Zemlya where they met the 'Hope', commanded by Sir Allen W. Young, who had been sent to find them following considerable speculation in England as to their whereabouts. The whole crew landed safely at Aberdeen at the end of August 1882, having survived the winter because lack of provisions led them to live on a much healthier diet of fresh meat, and because of Smith's quiet leadership. 
Back in England, Smith gave $1000 to the Royal Geographical Society in gratitude for the mounting of the search party. In 1882 he was made an honorary fellow of Jesus College, Cambridge. He made no further Arctic expeditions, and revoked the bequest of $80,000 he had left to the Royal Geographical Society in 1887, in frustration at their neglect of polar exploration. None the less, in 1892 he worked with the society to promote scientific investigation of the Antarctic. 
In 1882 Smith married Charlotte Annette ('b'. 1862/3), daughter of Frederick William Seller, wine merchant of Paddington. They had two sons and two daughters, and lived quietly at Scalands, near Robertsbridge, Sussex. He died on 4 January 1913 at 43 Frognal, Hampstead, and was buried in Brightling, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 37977


Smith, Edwin William (1876-1957), missionary and anthropologist, was born on 7 September 1876 in Aliwal North, Cape Colony, where his father, the Revd John Smith (later president of the Primitive Methodist church), was serving as a missionary. He was one of five brothers and two sisters. He completed his education at Elmfield College, York, and returned to southern Africa in 1898 as a mission teacher of the Primitive Methodist church, in Basutoland. In 1899 he married Julia, daughter of James Fitch of Peasenhall, Suffolk; they had one daughter. In 1902 Smith moved to Northern Rhodesia, where he established Kasenga mission. Apart from his evangelistic work Smith made significant linguistic studies and in 1920 published (with Captain A. M. Dale) a classic ethnography, 'The Ila-Speaking Peoples of Northern Rhodesia'. 
After returning to Europe in 1915 Smith served for a year as a military chaplain in France before joining the British and Foreign Bible Society, first as its secretary in Rome and then in other capacities, rising to be its editorial superintendent (1933-9). During these years, when social and educational policy became important concerns of colonial administration in Africa, he emerged as an articulate spokesman of what might be called 'the progressive missionary outlook'. Smith strongly supported the work of the Phelps-Stokes commissions on African education in 1920-24, and the foundation of the International African Institute in 1926. He took a leading part in the epochal missionary conference at Le Zoute, Belgium, on which he based his study, 'The Christian Mission in Africa' (1926). 
Smith's most influential book, 'The Golden Stool' (1926), which went through five impressions in its first year, addressed the issue of 'culture contact' in Africa. Its theme of 'the disintegration of African social life' pointed to a concept of applied anthropology -- 'a dynamic science of man in the service of Africa' -- which Smith was to advocate over the next two decades. Other writings of his later years spoke more of the missionary in him: the influential symposium he edited, 'African Ideas of God' (1950), and a series of missionary biographies, of Robert Moffat (1925), the Mabilles of Basutoland (1939), Lindley of Natal (1949), and Price of Bechuanaland (1957). His 'Aggrey of Africa' (1929), a study of a leading African educator in the Gold Coast, is perhaps the best expression of his Christian, liberal, and multiracial ideals. 
Smith was elected president of the Royal Anthropological Institute for 1933-5. He was awarded the Rivers memorial medal in 1931 and the silver medal of the Royal African Society in 1939; he gave the Frazer lecture in 1946 and the Henry Myers lecture in 1952. Between 1939 and 1944 he spent several years teaching in North America, at Hartford Seminary and at Fisk University, and he received an honorary DD from Wesley College, Winnipeg. 
The variety of Smith's endeavours was informed by a vision of great coherence and simplicity. Tolerance and generosity were the keynotes of his relations with his colleagues and younger associates. He lived in retirement in Deal, Kent. He died in Victoria Hospital, Deal, on 23 December 1957. 
J. D. Y. Peel', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37978


Smith, Elizabeth (1776-1806), scholar and translator, was born on 27 December 1776 at Burn Hall, near Durham, the second child and eldest daughter in the family of four sons and three daughters of George Smith, banker, and his wife, Julia, daughter and sole heir of Richard Mott of Carlton, Suffolk. Sir Charles Felix Smith was her brother. Her extensive learning was acquired in spite of many disruptions in her life. In June 1785 the family moved to Piercefield Park, near Chepstow, Monmouthshire; when her father's business collapsed after the declaration of war by France (1 February 1793) the family and its valuable library were broken up. In 1794 her father took a commission in the army, serving for some years in Ireland. For a few months in 1796 she and her mother joined her father in Sligo; here she studied the Irish language. In summer 1799 they moved to Ballitor, co. Kildare, where she had access to a good library. Until they moved to Coniston in 1801 she did not have a settled home, spending much of her time visiting friends in London, Shirley, and Bath. 
Aside from a governess who taught her French and a little Italian, from six to eight years of age and again from ten to twelve, Smith was largely self-taught. In 1789 she became governess to her siblings and began an influential friendship with Henrietta Maria Bowdler. In 1794 she began learning Arabic and Persian from her brother's oriental dictionary; in 1796 she studied Hebrew from a 'Bible' belonging to Henrietta Bowdler's mother. Between 1795 and 1799 she learned Spanish, German, Arabic, Persian, Greek, Latin, Hebrew, some Syriac, and Erse, as well as music, mathematics, and astronomy. 
Henrietta Bowdler visited Coniston in 1802, introducing Smith to Elizabeth Hamilton, who much admired her. In 1803 Elizabeth Smith completed her translation of 'Job', and was encouraged to translate F. G. Klopstock's memoirs for publication. She dreaded being called a learned lady: her mother said that 'she was a living library; but locked up, except to a chosen few'. Hannah More, in 'Coelebs in Search of a Wife' (1804), praised her acquirements, which were 'beautifully shaded, by the gentle exercise of every domestic virtue'. In 1805 Elizabeth Smith caught a cold, from which she never fully recovered. She died, unmarried, on 7 August 1806 in Coniston. 
After Smith's death Bowdler published 'Fragments in Prose and Verse' (1808), a selection of Smith's works interspersed with an account of her life; it ran into many editions. The poems, some in imitation of Ossian, are graceful if unremarkable and her reflections conventional but lively. It is in her flowing translations and philological work that she shines. Also published from her papers were: 'Memoirs of Frederick and Margaret Klopstock' (1808); her translation of 'Job' (1810), edited by Francis Randolph; and 'A Vocabulary, Hebrew, Arabic, and Persian', edited by John Frederick Usko, vicar of Orsett, Essex, who supplied 'A praxis on the Arabic alphabet' (1814). Usko thought this the first systematic collation of these languages. Selections from her didactic writings appeared in 'The Lady's Monitor' (1828). 
Judith Hawley', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37979


Smith, Francis (bap. 1672, d. 1738), architect and builder, was baptized on 4 January 1672 in Tettenhall, Staffordshire, the youngest of the three sons of Francis Smith, a bricklayer of Tettenhall, and his wife, Elizabeth Hitchins. He was trained as a mason, and in 1697 he and his brother William contracted to rebuild the nave and tower of St Mary's Church, Warwick, which had been destroyed in the great fire of 1694, to the design of Sir William Wilson. The work was carried out between 1698 and 1704, and during the course of it Francis settled in the town, with which, as 'Smith of Warwick', he is particularly associated. 
Subsequently, continuing on occasion to work in partnership with his brother, Smith developed a business which made him one of the most successful of such craft-based figures in English history. The rebuilding of the town of Warwick after the fire presumably provided him with an initial opportunity, and he was later responsible for a further group of churches and other public buildings; but the predominant element in his practice was the building of country houses for the midlands gentry. Of these he produced a remarkably large number, in almost all the counties of the region, becoming unrivalled as the leading master builder there and establishing a reputation which extended well beyond it. As early as 1707 Hugh, first earl of Cholmondeley, was advised by a surveyor in London that the Smiths did a 'great deal of busness in the Contry and they have done a great deal of work thearabout & in Warwick you may easy hear of them' (Colvin, 'Archs'., 883); and when in the 1730s Sarah, duchess of Marlborough, was building a house as far away as Wimbledon, Surrey, she stipulated that 'Mr. Smith of Warwickshire the Builder may be employed to make Contracts and to Measure the Work and to doe every thing in his Way that is necessary to Compleat the Work as far as the Distance he is at will give him leave to do. (ibid.)' The scope of the operation which enabled Smith to achieve this position was complex and wide-ranging. Its basis appears to have been that, although himself a master of one building trade only, like other leading master builders of the period he was prepared to undertake the erection of a complete house, performing the masonry himself and subcontracting the work of the other trades; and he evidently built up a team of craftsman associates -- joiners, carpenters, painters, plasterers -- whom he called upon regularly in these circumstances. His favoured method of working was to provide detailed estimates of the costs and to charge a five per cent commission -- the usual fee of architects at the time when acting in a supervisory capacity -- on the actual expenditure. In addition, he acted as a supplier of set-piece marble masonry works such as chimney-pieces, and, occasionally, funerary monuments, and there is some evidence that he also dealt in timber. As for the actual designs, both he and his brother normally provided these themselves, but he also continued the practice of contracting to build to those of other architects: examples of this are Heythrop House, Oxfordshire (1705-8), designed by Thomas Archer, and a number of buildings by James Gibbs, notably Ditchley House, Oxfordshire (1720-42), and All Saints' Church, Derby (1723-5; later the cathedral) -- although in both these cases he appears to have had some influence on the design as well. Whatever role he was playing, however, it is clear that the foundation of Smith's success was a reputation for honesty and reliability. Lord Cholmondeley's correspondent referred to the Smiths as 'very good Workmen', and when Smith died in 1738 Sir Edmund Isham of Lamport, Northamptonshire, lamented the loss of 'our honest Builder Mr. Smith of Warwick' (Colvin, 'Archs'., 883). 
What in general cannot be claimed for Smith is a specially high level of distinction as a designer. His houses are always monuments of excellent craftsmanship, but as one eighteenth-century critic who had seen a number of them observed, although 'all of them [are] convenient and handsome... there is a great sameness in the plans, which proves he had but little invention' (Colvin, 'Archs'., 883). His typical product is a three-storey rectangular block, which represents in essence the standard late seventeenth-century 'double pile' brought up to date by the replacement of the hipped roof of the latter by an attic storey and crowning parapet. A repertory of ornament of a vernacular baroque character is applied with varying degrees of restraint, while the interiors, usually arranged with the hall and saloon across the centre and the staircase to one side, are enriched with fine joinery and plasterwork but little in the way of spatial incident. Examples among the many are Meriden Hall, Warwickshire ('c'.1720), and Davenport Hall (1726), Kinlet Hall (1727-9), and probably Mawley Hall (1730), all in Shropshire. Of the relatively few exceptions to the pattern, two which call for mention are Chicheley Hall, Buckinghamshire (1719-21), and Sutton Scarsdale, Derbyshire (begun 1724): the exotic facade of the former probably owes more to the taste of the patron, Sir John Chester, than to Smith's own devising; but Sutton Scarsdale, in part evidently inspired by Gibbs's unexecuted design of 1721 for the university buildings at Cambridge, is his finest work, a wholly convincing essay in the heroic grand manner, in which the giant Corinthian order is handled with total assurance. 
Smith suffered periodically from gout -- in 1720 he wrote that the drawing of a sketch 'at this time has occasioned me to make many a wry face by reason I could neither sit nor stand to do it' (Gomme, 'Architects and craftsmen', 87) -- and in his later years he put on weight: 'It is unlucky that Mr. Smith is grown so unweildy' (Colvin, 'Archs'., 884), commented Dr George Clarke of All Souls College, Oxford, in 1730. He bought a country estate at Knowle, Warwickshire, for $10,000 and he twice served as mayor of Warwick, in 1713-14 and 1728-9. 
Smith was married twice: first in 1695 to Mary Morteboys, and second on 13 October 1702 to Anne Lea, a native of Warwick: he had four sons and one daughter but only two of the sons survived their father. Of these the elder, William (1705-1747), to whom he left 'all my stock of Marble and Timber... in my Marble Yard in Warwick' (will), continued in his father's business and built some more country houses in the midlands. Smith was buried at Warwick on 9 April 1738. 


@@@@@


doc= 37980


Smith, Frederick Winston Furneaux, second earl of Birkenhead (1907-1975), biographer, was born on 7 December 1907 at 70 Eccleston Square, London, the only son and second of three children of Frederick Edwin Smith (1872-1930), known always as FE, who became in 1922 first earl of Birkenhead, and his wife, Margaret Eleanor (1878-1968), second daughter of the Revd Henry Furneaux, fellow of Corpus Christi College, Oxford. Freddie, as he was called, was a godson of his father's closest friend, Winston Churchill. He was educated at Eton College, where he was elected president of Pop and won the Rosebery history prize, and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he played tennis, squash, and fives for the university. He obtained a second class in modern history in 1931. His father was a powerful and dominant figure. Although devoted to his family and always kind to them, he expected and strongly pressed his only son to follow the legal and political career in which he had been such a brilliant success. Smith's talents did not lie in that direction. Although he inherited FE's dark, almost saturnine good looks and something of his addiction to alcohol, which he later overcame, he had neither his father's gift of oratory nor his boundless energy. He preferred literature to law and biography to politics. 
In 1930 Smith succeeded to the earldom and to an alarming load of debt. Although devoted to his father's memory he always resented his extravagance and improvidence. He wrote his father's life in two volumes (1933 and 1935) and produced a revised version, 'F.E.' (1959). He followed this in 1938 with an unmemorable life of Thomas Wentworth, first earl of Strafford. He wrote much better about people whom he knew, and the seventeenth century is a minefield for amateur historians. 
In 1935 Birkenhead married Sheila, daughter of William Ewert Berry, first Viscount Camrose, proprietor of the 'Daily Telegraph'. A year later his sister Pamela, later a great political hostess, married Camrose's second son, Michael (later Baron Hartwell). Birkenhead's marriage (of which there were a son and a daughter) put his finances and the succession to Charlton, near Banbury, his father's beloved country house, on to a secure basis. The place became after the Second World War a notable social centre for (suitably selected) members of the literary, academic, and political worlds. 
After a spell in the Oxford yeomanry, Birkenhead became attached to the British military mission to the Yugoslav partisans in 1944-5, along with Randolph Churchill and Evelyn Waugh. There are many anecdotes about this ill-assorted trio, some recounted by Birkenhead himself in his chapter in 'Evelyn Waugh and his World' (1973, ed. D. Pryce-Jones). After the war Birkenhead made biography his main occupation despite a major set-back. His plan, with the apparent co-operation of Mrs Bambridge, the heir and owner of the family papers, was to write a life of Rudyard Kipling, but he unwisely signed a contract with her which gave her sole control over the book as a condition of full access to the papers. After three years' work he submitted a draft only to have it irrevocably vetoed without any intelligible reasons given or any consideration of amendment. Many people read it in typescript. T. S. Eliot found it 'slight', but Sir Roderick Jones, Sir Desmond MacCarthy, Sir John Betjeman, and the author of this entry found her decision incomprehensible. The book was eventually published (as 'Rudyard Kipling') with much acclaim in 1978, after both parties to the dispute had died. 
Birkenhead's next book was a most entertaining and vivid memoir (1953) of his highly eccentric novel-writing, Gypsy-loving elder sister, Eleanor (who believed quite wrongly that the family had Gypsy blood). He then embarked on the serious biographies which made his name. The first was of Professor F. A. Lindemann, Viscount Cherwell, Churchill's friend and scientific adviser, 'The Prof in Two Worlds' (1961). This was followed by a life of E. F. L. Wood, first earl of Halifax, whom he had served as parliamentary private secretary from 1938 to 1939, published as 'Halifax' (1965). Four years later he produced 'Walter Monckton' (1969). All three are models of serious 'first' official biographies, carefully researched and admirably written. When he died in Oxford on 10 June 1975 after a long illness, Birkenhead was engaged on a biography of his famous godfather. It was published in 1989 as 'Churchill, 1876-1922'. The plan had been for his son (Frederick William) Robin ('b'. 1936), who succeeded as third earl and was himself the author of an excellent life of William Wilberforce, to complete it. But he died suddenly in 1985. His draft, ending in 1940, has been privately published. Robin never married and the earldom became extinct. 
Robert Blake', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37981


Smith, John (1825-1910), dental surgeon, was born in Edinburgh on 24 February 1825, the son of John Smith (died 1851), a dentist in Hyndford's Close, Edinburgh. He was educated at the Edinburgh Institution and then studied medicine at the University of Edinburgh, where he graduated MD and LRCS in 1847. After graduating he travelled to Paris, and was there during the 1848 rising. On his father's death in 1851 John took over his dental practice at 12 Dundas Street, Edinburgh; however, he did not entirely forgo his medical interests, since in 1859 he proposed the foundation of what was to become the Royal Edinburgh Hospital for Sick Children. In 1853 he married Elizabeth Marjory, daughter of Dr Peters of Arbroath; they had three sons and two daughters. 
In 1856 Smith delivered a comprehensive course of lectures on the teeth at the Edinburgh medical school, the first such lectures to be held in Scotland. He was appointed surgeon dentist to the Royal Public Dispensary in 1857, but resigned two years later to establish an institution devoted to dental treatment, the Edinburgh Dental Dispensary, which opened in 1860. Following his representations the dispensary was recognized as a training centre for the diploma in dental surgery of the Royal College of Surgeons, London, in 1865. The dispensary was incorporated into the Edinburgh Dental Hospital and school in 1879, with Smith, who was regarded as the school's creator, as consulting surgeon dentist. In 1871 he was appointed surgeon dentist in Scotland to Queen Victoria, a post he held until her death in 1901. 
An advocate of dental education and the advance of the profession, Smith was a member of the dental reform committee inaugurated in 1876 to promote the regulation and professional education of dentists in Britain. Elected in 1879 to the representative board, which was to be responsible for the foundation of the British Dental Association (BDA), he was subsequently appointed to the first editorial committee of the 'Journal' of the BDA, and was BDA president in 1884. As well as numerous articles he published 'A Handbook of Dental Anatomy and Surgery' in 1864 (revised 1871). 
Smith was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh in 1861 and held the office of president in 1883-4. For many years he was a member of the president's committee, and he was an examiner for the triple qualification and the fellowship. He was enrolled as a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1871, and served as president of the Odontochirurgical Society of Scotland in 1881-3. He was awarded an LLD degree by Edinburgh University in 1884. 
Smith had an amiable, courteous, and considerate personality, and was gifted in various fields other than dentistry. He wrote numerous songs, many of a medical nature; dramatized 'Waverley' by Walter Scott; and wrote three successful pantomimes, which were produced at the Edinburgh Theatre Royal. Smith was a talented painter, and he also enjoyed angling and shooting. He was a Conservative, and a staunch adherent of the Church of Scotland. Smith died in Edinburgh on 15 April 1910; he was survived by his wife. 
M. A. Clennett', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37982


Smith, John Frederick (1806-1890), novelist, was born on 12 March 1806 and baptized on 28 March 1806 at St Stephen's, Norwich, the son of James Smith, manager of the Norwich Theatre circuit, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Taylor ('b'. 'c'.1768), the widow of William Coatsworth (died 1794). Elizabeth had had twin boys prior to her marriage to James Smith on 23 November 1801; these were always described as James Smith's sons, and in addition to these two brothers, John Frederick Smith had two sisters, one of whom died in infancy. Although the family was Anglican, Smith was educated at 'Mr Harvin's Presbyterian school', probably because of its liberal ethos and Unitarian leanings; it was favoured by many literati of Norwich. The early years of Smith's Bohemian adult life remain obscure, although it is known that he worked as an actor in England and travelled widely on the continent. Partly educated by a Jesuit, he spent some years in Rome, and rendered services to Pope Gregory XVI, but later he left the Roman Catholic church. 
Smith had previously written some plays and two novels -- 'The Jesuit' (1832) and 'The Prelate' (1840) -- but his break came when he returned from a continental tour in 1849 to write for the 'London Journal'. Smith raised the 'Journal's' circulation to 100,000 copies that year, first with his short story 'Marianne, a Tale of the Temple' and then with instalments of his most ambitious novel, 'Stanfield Hall'. Subsequently published as a three-decker (1888-9), the novel traces the fortunes of the Stanfield family from the middle ages to the Restoration, and combines historical romance, influenced by Sir Walter Scott, with anachronistic treatment of Victorian inventions. 'Minnigrey' (1851-2), illustrated by John Gilbert, is said to have increased sales of the 'London Journal' to half a million copies, for which newsagents had to send special wagons to the station. 
Other novels include 'Amy Lawrence, the Freemason's Daughter' (1851), 'Woman and her Master' (1854), 'The City Banker' (1856), 'Milly Mogue' (1859), 'Warp and Weft' (1863), and 'Sir Bernard Gaston' (1867). When Smith was enticed away to 'Cassell's Illustrated Family Paper' in 1855 he ended his current story by blowing up all the main characters on a Mississippi steamboat. He returned to the 'London Journal', however, ten years later. 
Smith's habit was to write in the printing office itself. He would closet himself with a bottle of port and a cigar or pipe, read the end of the previous instalment, and then write the next, drawing his fee when he handed over the text. He raised the tension from episode to episode until the mill girls of the north and midlands had to buy their own copies rather than wait to borrow one. But neither the formulaic quality of his fiction (virtue, for example, is always rewarded) nor the sensationalist action of the weekly instalments was suited to the form of the novel republished in volume format. 
Although for a time earning the salary of a parliamentary under-secretary and writing thrilling romances of fashionable life, Smith lived quietly in a Bloomsbury lodging-house, cut off from society through his deafness. Later in life he moved to America, and there England's most popular novelist of the mid-nineteenth century died in obscurity and want, in March (before 4 March) 1890, in New York. He was unmarried. 
Michael Wheeler', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37983


Smith, Samuel (1765-1841), dean of Christ Church, Oxford, was born in Westminster, London, on 20 September 1765, the eldest in the family of two daughters and five sons (one of whom died young) of Samuel Smith (1731/2-1808), headmaster of Westminster School from 1764 to 1788, and his first wife, Anna Jackson. He was a pupil at Westminster School from 1772, and (as captain of the school) matriculated from there at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1782; his college tutors were John Randolph and Phineas Pett, later his canonical colleagues. Smith himself was for a few years a tutor at Christ Church, but in 1803 he resigned his studentship to become incumbent of Daventry (a Christ Church living). On 9 August that year he married Anne Brady (1781/2-1826), daughter of William Barnett of Arcadia, Jamaica, where the Smiths sold four slaves in 1825. 
Smith returned to Christ Church as a canon in 1807. Appointments as subdean (1809) and treasurer (1813) suggest that he was early marked out for appointment as dean; this came in 1824, when he succeeded the handsome but incapable C. H. Hall, other candidates being Edmund Goodenough, headmaster of Westminster, and Charles Lloyd, another canon of Christ Church. Smith's wife died on 23 February 1826, shortly after the birth of their thirteenth child; this loss made him for some time anxious to resign, and may help to account for the relative lack of distinction of his period of office. 
Smith has been dismissed as 'Presence of Mind Smith' from his alleged remark on returning without his companion from a disastrous outing on the river: 'If I had not with great presence of mind hit him on the head with a boathook both would have been drowned', but the story comes from 'Reminiscences of Oxford' (1st edn, 1900) by William Tuckwell, who in his second edition (1907) consigned it to oblivion; moreover, there was no charge of murder. As dean, Smith attempted to revert to the practices and manners of Hall's great predecessor, Cyril Jackson, but he lacked the ability to manage those with whom a dean of Christ Church had to deal. He was worsted by George IV in a tussle over appointments to studentships; a riot in 1825 led the duke of Wellington to transfer his two eldest sons to Trinity College, Cambridge, and Smith failed to mobilize chapter and common room to achieve the desired result in the by-election following the resignation of Robert Peel early in 1829, the lead being taken by Charles Lloyd. The Revd Frederick Oakeley, later a convert to Rome, a graduate at Christ Church while Smith was dean, thought him 'remarkable for nothing but his good nature' and 'the most irregular and unpunctual attendant' at college services; however, 'the moral and religious state of Christ Church... was in a state of progressive improvement' under Smith (Quiller-Couch, 319, 329-30). These are tendentious claims: it is clear that men prominent in the political, ecclesiastical, legal, and learned life of later Victorian England were admitted to Christ Church in Smith's day. Gladstone's diary for his Christ Church years suggests that in Smith's period as dean, though there were many distractions, a man of exceptional powers could find like-minded friends at Christ Church and read hard and widely; it was Smith who nominated Gladstone to a studentship. Smith published nothing, and at Christ Church he built nothing. However, in Smith's short reign nine men were admitted to Christ Church who achieved a place in the 'DNB'. 
Smith exchanged the deanery for the 'golden stall' at Durham with Thomas Gaisford in 1831. At Dry Drayton, near Cambridge, he had succeeded his father as patron and incumbent in 1808, presented his own eldest son, Samuel, in 1829, and himself for the second time in 1831. Like his father Smith was fond of gambling on horses, though with marked lack of success; he shared this propensity with few or no other deans of Christ Church. He had six sons, one of whom died young and four of whom became Anglican clergymen, and seven daughters. Smith died on 19 January 1841 in Dry Drayton, Cambridgeshire, where he was buried. In his last ten years at Durham Smith, though conscientious, was not a prime mover in the origins of the new University. 
J. F. A. Mason', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37984


Smith, Sir Swire (1842-1918), promoter of technical education, was born on 4 March 1842 at Wagon Fold, Keighley, Yorkshire, the elder son of the four children of George Smith (1812-1902), a machine maker, and his wife, Mary Swire, of yeoman stock. He was educated at the local national school and at Wesley College, Sheffield, before serving an apprenticeship with a Keighley worsted manufacturer. By the age of twenty he was in business on his own account. 
Smith was deeply stirred by his chance attendance in 1867 at an address on technical education by Samuel Smiles, whose theme, 'that the Germans and French, through their superior general education and by their application of the principles of science and art to manufactures and crafts, were making enormous progress in their industries' (Smith, 'Technical Education') to the future detriment of Britain, was to form the bedrock of his life's work. He promptly undertook the secretaryship of a drawing class at the Keighley Mechanics' Institute, and, shortly afterwards, the secretaryship of an ambitious new Keighley trade school council and of the Mechanics' Institute itself. In 1872, after he and several colleagues had investigated schools and polytechnics in France, Germany, and Switzerland, he published anonymously, for private circulation, 'Unofficial Comments on Education at Home and Abroad'. This was followed in 1873 by his signed and more widely circulated 'Educational Comparisons'. Realizing that elementary education formed an essential forerunner of any technical advance, he also became prominent in the fight in 1875 for a Keighley school board, and served as chairman for the first three years of its existence. 
Smith's local agitation, together with his practical and commercial experience of textiles -- almost to the end of his life he operated the substantial Springfield mills at Keighley in two different partnerships and later single-handed -- led to his being invited to represent the woollen industry on the royal commission on technical instruction formed in 1880. Its report, presented to parliament four years later, stressed the superiority of European industrial training and in 1889 instigated the 'Technical Instruction Act', which, in Smith's words, 'did largely for technical education what 'Forster's Act' of 1870 did for elementary education'. His own services were recognized by a knighthood in 1898. Other honours testified severally to the national, regional, and local regard for his work: he received the freedom and livery of the Clothworkers' Company of the City of London, a doctorate of laws from Leeds University, and the freedom of the borough of Keighley. 
An indefatigable committee member of the National Association for the Promotion of Technical and Commercial Education, Smith continued to utilize every opportunity for propagating his cause in articles, lectures, and addresses. He was in demand at prize-giving ceremonies of the fledgeling technical schools and colleges; prepared the textile sections of the catalogues for the London International Inventions Exhibition and the Chicago World Fair; and served as vice-chairman of a royal commission on international exhibitions. An outspoken authority also on free trade -- together with technical education he thought this 'necessary for promoting the highest welfare and efficiency of the nation and enabling it to resist competition and attack in the industrial sphere' -- he was a founder of the West Riding Free Trade Federation and an executive member of the national Free Trade Union. 
In 1915, at the age of seventy-three, Smith became Liberal MP for the Keighley division; he made his maiden speech, typically, on 'the real German rivalry' in technical training. At the age of seventy-five he visited the battlefront, coming under fire at Vimy and finding the experience strangely exhilarating. 
Fair and lively, Smith always looked younger than his actual age. Although he had an eye for the ladies, he never married. He enjoyed many travels and friendships with such famous contemporaries as John Bright, Lord Morley, and Andrew Carnegie (the last presented Smith's home town with the first Carnegie library in England), yet Keighley remained his permanent residence. 'The townspeople loved him', said his local obituary, 'not only for what he did, but for what he was, genial, buoyant, companionable, with a mirth in his nature that was almost frolicsome' ('Keighley News', 23 March 1918). He contributed jokes to 'Punch', sang in the choir of his local Congregational church, and up to the year of his death entertained a variety of homely gatherings with humorous recitations. 
Smith died of congestion of the lungs in a nursing home at 2 Beaumont Street, London, on 16 March 1918, following an operation on his prostate gland. He was buried four days later in Keighley cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 37985


Smythe, Thomas (1522-1591), merchant and financier, was the second son of John Smith, clothier and minor landowner of Corsham, Wiltshire, and his wife, Joan, daughter of Robert Brouncker of Melksham. Supported by a small inheritance from his father, who died in 1538, Smythe gained his freedom of the Haberdashers' Company and subsequently of the Skinners, the company of Sir Andrew Judde, a wealthy City merchant and Kent landowner, whose daughter, Alice (died 1593), he married about 1555. Secure in business and society -- he was a merchant adventurer, Muscovy merchant, and MP at the time of his marriage -- Smythe abandoned a conventional career in commerce when he took up the collectorship of the subsidy on imports at the port of London in 1558. Through his association with the customs, which earned him the title of 'customer', Smythe entered the realms of government finance, court patronage, and politics. The move was highly profitable, particularly after the negotiation of his first lease of the duties on imported goods at London in 1570. Over eighteen years it is estimated that the farm yielded around $50,000 net profit. 
Throughout this period Smythe enjoyed the confidence of the lord treasurer, William Cecil, Baron Burghley, and Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, from whom Smythe subleased the farm of the duties on the import of sweet wines after 1573. The relationships were indeed so close that suspicions arose that Burghley, who helped Smythe to clear a substantial profit on an alum deal in 1578, and Leicester, who referred in his will to his 'great love' of the 'customer', shared in the profits of the farm. Sir Walter Ralegh was not alone in believing that they were, in his words, 'pensioners to Customer Smythe'. Some of the profits of the farm were put into land in Kent, where he added substantially to properties acquired through marriage, and in Wiltshire, where he built a fine house at Corsham. Smythe also invested in industrial and overseas enterprises. He was particularly active in the affairs of the societies of the Mines Royal and of the Mineral and Battery Works, either as manager or as lessee of their rights. By comparison his interest in overseas enterprise was slight. Shares were bought in the venture of Sir Humphrey Gilbert in 1578 and in the 'troublesome voyage' of Edward Fenton in 1582, but the Thomas Smythe (c.1558-1625) who was associated with the Roanoke voyages and with the Levant Company was almost certainly his son and namesake. Mr Customer Smythe did however acquire a dubious reputation for dealing in prize goods. 
Smythe died a wealthy man on 7 June 1591 and was buried at Ashford church. He was survived by Alice and their six sons and six daughters. The eldest son, John, was ancestor of the lords Strangford; Thomas, the second son, was eminent in commerce and colonization. According to the monument erected by John in Ashford parish church his father had cherished 'the professors of true religion' and promoted literature. The mathematician Thomas Hood was one who acknowledged a debt to Smythe. Mention is also made of his lease of the customs and the way 'he presided over them with singular liberality towards those of higher rank'. Of several portraits the finest is in the possession of Queens' College, Cambridge. 
Brian Dietz', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37986


Smith, William (1790-1847), merchant navy officer and Antarctic explorer, was born on 11 October 1790 in Seaton Sluice, Northumberland, the elder child of William Smith, joiner, of Seaton Sluice, and his wife, Mary Sharpe, of Earsdon, Northumberland. Nothing is known about his early years and education but he was probably apprenticed aged fourteen to the east coast coal trade. In 1811 he became owner and master of the 'Three Friends' of Blakeney, Norfolk, and in 1812 master of the brig 'Williams' of Blyth, newly built for him. In the years 1812-18 he traded to Europe and South America. 
Smith sailed from Buenos Aires in mid-January 1819. In rounding Cape Horn he was driven into a high latitude, and on 19 February 1819 he wrote in his journal, 'in latitude 62 degree 40' S and longitude per Chronometer 60 degree 00' West, Land or Ice was discovered ahead bearing SEbS distant about two leagues, blowing hard gales with flying showers of snow' (Jones, 448). He named the place New South Britain, a name later changed to New South Shetland. What he had seen was Williams Point on Livingston Island, a black promontory that stood out from the ice cap. On returning to Valparaiso on 11 March 1819, he obtained no credence -- 'all ridiculed the poor man for his fanciful credulity and his deceptive vision' (Miers, 369). On his second voyage, in the winter (May-June 1819), he saw nothing of New South Shetland. On his third voyage, from Montevideo, Smith saw the same point again on 15 October 1819, as well as Desolation Island. He took soundings, made a landing on North Foreland in King George Island, where he took possession, and examined the northern coast of the islands from east to west. 
Smith returned to Valparaiso, where Captain William Shirreff RN ordered Edward Bransfield, a master in the Royal Navy, and three midshipmen to accompany Smith to survey the new land. On his fourth voyage Smith examined the north and south coasts of New South Shetland and, from 30 January 1820, part of the Antarctic continent, the Trinity Peninsula. They had thus sighted the continent a few days later than Bellingshausen's sighting in longitude 2 degree 15' W. Bransfield's manuscript chart is in the hydrographic department of the Admiralty. From this, in 1941 Lieutenant-Commander R. T. Gould RN was able to plot Smith's course in great detail, round New South Shetland and from Tower Island to the South Orkneys. In 1821 Smith made a fifth voyage to New South Shetland, but found British and American ships there, killing fur seals, which were almost exterminated in the next five years. He returned to London with the 'Williams', arriving with 30,000 sealskins worth $7500. His owners were in difficulties and he was bankrupted. Smith published no account of his voyages, which were recorded only in his manuscript memorial and logbook and in a contemporary account by John Miers. 
In 1824 Smith was a Thames pilot, and his licence was later extended to the Downs. The Trinity House records of the time describe him as 5 feet 8 inches tall, with black hair and dark complexion. In 1827-30 he was master of the 'William and Ann', owned by James Weddell, in the Davis Strait's whale fishery; he had little success and did not go again. In these years he often changed his address in the East End of London. In 1838 he was rejected for a place in the Trinity House almshouse, being under age. In 1839 his pilot's licence was withdrawn as 'a pilot reduced by age and infirmity', and he was superannuated. Petitions to the Admiralty for remuneration for his discovery brought nothing. He died in May 1847 at 2 Hungerford Street, St George-in-the-East, London, the exact date not being known. His estate, valued at $100, was left to his wife, Mary, about whom nothing is known. It is not known whether they had any children. 
A. G. E. Jones', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37987


Smith, Sir William Alexander (1854-1914), founder of the Boys' Brigade and businessman, was born on 27 October 1854 at Pennyland House, near Thurso, Caithness, the eldest in the family of three sons and a daughter of David Smith of Pennyland, a director of the Labuan Coal Company in China, and his wife, Harriet, daughter of Alexander Fraser, merchant, of Glasgow. He was educated at the local parish school, the Miller Institution, later Thurso Academy, but little is known of his academic record. In 1868, when he was thirteen, his father died in China; the widowed Harriet Smith sold the Pennyland property and moved with her family into Thurso, accepting the offer of her brother, Alexander Fraser, to take William into his home and warehouse business in Glasgow. He soon settled into the routine of prosperous, middle-class, protestant business life, attending YMCA lectures, revival meetings led by the Americans Dwight L. Moody and Ira D. Sankey, sailing trips, and soirees. 
A growing estrangement led to Smith's departure from his uncle's home and business in 1878 to establish the exporting firm of Smith, Smith & Co. with his younger brother Donald. A major factor in his Free Church uncle's disapproval of his nephew's way of life was Smith's enrolment in the 1st Lanarkshire rifle volunteers (he reached the rank of lieutenant-colonel before retiring in 1908), which ran counter to Fraser's pacifist views. In 1881 James G. Findlay, a friend and colleague, entered into partnership with Smith to form the firm Smith, Findlay & Co., dealing in a variety of shawls, plaids, and tartans for export. 
Smith was also a Sunday school teacher and, hard pressed, he started the first company of the Boys' Brigade (BB) on 4 October 1883 at the North Woodside mission hall of the wealthy College Free Church in the west end of Glasgow. He used military discipline and drill, acquired in the rifle volunteers, and a simple uniform of haversack, belt, and cap, to instil Christian manliness into unruly boys. The BB, a church-based, interdenominational youth movement, was started twenty-five years before the Boy Scouts first appeared on the scene. 
In 1888 Smith, a conscientious and outwardly austere man, gave up his business to become the first full-time secretary of the BB, his salary being donated by prominent Scottish businessmen. The success of the BB, as the world's first voluntary uniformed youth organization, owed much to his tireless stewardship during its first thirty-one years. He toured Canada in 1895 to oversee BB progress at the invitation of his friend and supporter John Gordon, seventh earl of Aberdeen, the governor-general. 
On 5 March 1884 Smith married Amelia Pearson (1858/9-1898), daughter of the Revd Andrew Sutherland, a former Presbyterian chaplain to the British army in Gibraltar. They had two sons, both later prominent in the BB. Amelia died in 1898 and eight years later, on 10 April 1906, he married Hannah Ranken (1855/6-1907), daughter of William Campbell, wholesale and retail merchant of Glasgow, a cousin of the British prime minister, Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman. Smith inspected the United Boys' Brigades of America with her in 1907 but she died in the same year from the effects of an accident, not long after their return. Two years later, in July 1909, Smith absented himself for the shortest possible time during the annual 1st Glasgow company camp at Tighnabruaich to receive his knighthood in London. On 8 May 1914 he attended a meeting of the BB executive in London but was taken ill and admitted to St Bartholomew's Hospital, where he died on 10 May 1914. 
John Springhall', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37988


Smythson, Robert (1534/5-1614), master mason and architect, was aged seventy-nine when he died in 1614, according to his memorial tablet in the parish church at Wollaton, Nottinghamshire, but neither the date nor the place of his birth is known. In the 1660s, at the time of the heralds' visitation of Derbyshire, his great-grandson John Smythson stated that he had 'Armes belonging to his family of Westmorland'. No arms or descent was subsequently registered, but it is possible that Robert was connected with the Smythsons who were tenant farmers in Crosthwaite and Crosby Ravensworth in Westmorland, and who were certainly not armigerous. The fact that his memorial carries the arms of the Masons' Company of London suggests that it was in and around London that he served his apprenticeship, acquired experience, and learned to draw. 
Smythson's first recorded appearance is at Longleat House, Wiltshire, where he went to work for Sir John Thynne as a master mason in March 1568. He brought with him his own group of masons and a letter of introduction from Humphrey Lovell, the queen's master mason, according to which he had previously been working for Sir Francis Knollys, probably at Caversham House, near Reading. Smythson stayed at Longleat on and off until 1580. Together with a French master mason, Alan Maynard, he was largely responsible for remodelling the exterior of the house, and for much internal detail; in both cases the design, as well as the execution, was probably due to them. In 1576 there is evidence that he was involved with alterations made at Wardour Castle, Wiltshire, for Sir Matthew Arundell. It may have been this connection that took him to Nottinghamshire in 1580, to work for Arundell's brother-in-law Sir Francis Willoughby at Wollaton Hall. His position at Wollaton was that of surveyor of the work, rather than a practising mason. The surviving building accounts and his own drawings make clear that he was responsible for the execution and design of this remarkable house. In the 1590s he took on his son John ['see below'] as assistant and draughtsman, and a number of the drawings of this period are by John, or at least lettered up in his hand. Robert Smythson stayed on in the service of the Willoughby family, and was employed by them on administrative and financial business, as well as in his capacity as a surveyor. He is described on his monument at Wollaton as 'architector and survayor unto the most worthy house of Wollaton, and diverse others of great account'; this is the first known occasion on which he was called an architect, a term and function then still only in embryo in England. 
Some 150 drawings by Robert Smythson and his son John survive in the drawings collection of the Royal Institute of British Architects, now held in the Victoria and Albert Museum. A proportion of these are surveys, but many are original designs (some of them drawings of considerable beauty), and besides including designs relevant to Longleat and Wollaton they supply evidence about several of the 'diverse other' houses mentioned on his monument. They include Worksop Manor, Nottinghamshire (remodelled 'c'.1585), Hardwick Hall, Derbyshire (1590-97), Burton Agnes, Yorkshire ('c'.1601-1610), and designs, only partially carried out, for remodelling Welbeck Abbey, Nottinghamshire. The stylistic evidence of drawings and documented buildings, supported by patronage links and geographical proximity, enables a number of other houses to be attributed to him, including Worksop Manor Lodge, Nottinghamshire, Fountains Hall, Yorkshire, Wootton Lodge, Staffordshire, and possibly Barlborough Hall, Derbyshire, and Doddington Hall, Lincolnshire. There is no evidence that at any of these houses Smythson was involved on the same day-to-day basis as at Longleat and Wollaton; his contribution must often have been limited to the provision of a set of plans and elevations, which were liable to alteration at the whim of the patron and executive craftsmen. 
Even allowing for these limitations, Smythson's is the strongest architectural personality to have survived from the Elizabethan and Jacobean age. This is partly because more is known about him, and because his drawings and those of his younger contemporary John Thorpe (a high proportion of which are survey drawings) are the only large collections from this period that still exist, but it is also because of the distinctive and remarkable character of the houses with which he can be connected. Both his drawings and the buildings show that he had, for the Elizabethan period, a capable grasp of the language of classical ornament; he knew and used the works of Serlio, possibly of Palladio, and of the Flemish mannerist Vredeman de Vries, whose designs were extensively adapted at Wollaton. But his drawings and buildings also show an interest in the native Gothic tradition. His achievement was to draw on these two strains, and on the contemporary Elizabethan taste for the kind of ingenious conceits known at the time as 'devices', to produce a creative synthesis. In the resulting buildings classical detail and a considerable degree of classical order can be found joined with dramatic combinations of towers, bay windows, and great expanses of glass, derived from the Gothic tradition, and with the complex and ingenious plans which were the architectural expression of the device. At Longleat, where he worked with Maynard, bay windows and lavish glazing were serenely combined with rich classical detail. Wollaton is the most extraordinary of his houses, but it suffers from an over-abundance of motifs. Hardwick, in its combination of high drama, spatial ingenuity, and classical restraint, must be considered his masterpiece. Robert Smythson died in Wollaton on 15 October 1614. 
Nothing is known about Smythson's marriage, but his son 
A memorial tablet in the church at Bolsover records the 'skill in architecture' of John's son, Huntingdon Smythson (died 1648), but no work by him has been securely identified. 


@@@@@


doc= 37989


Snell, Charles (bap. 1667, d. 1733), writing-master, was born in London and was baptized on 27 February 1667 at St Giles Cripplegate, the son of Berry Snell (died in or before 1675), vintner, and his wife, Winifred. In 1675 he was admitted to Christ's Hospital from St Giles Cripplegate; he left the school in 1681 to be apprenticed to the writing-master William Brooks, in the City of London. Here he made his own career as a writing-master; he also published books on bookkeeping and was occasionally employed as an auditor. With his wife, Susannah, he had a son, Charles, who was baptized on 20 October 1698 at Christ Church, Greyfriars, and who predeceased his father. 
Snell became a bright star in a contemporary galaxy of writing-masters. In 1694 he published his first copybook, 'The Pen-Man's Treasury Open'd'. This contained his first critical attack, following the current practice of vituperation between writing-masters, on the over-elaborate style of 'his brother Quills'. He claimed to have avoided 'the Starch'd affected Flourishes, and illiterate copies that senseless Pretenders have imposed on the world... Such Empericks, by their barbarous Copies, both Written and Printed, have led youth into a Labyrinth of Errors' (Heal, 104). 
In 1700 Snell succeeded John Seddon as master of the Sir John Johnson's Free Writing School, where he remained until his death thirty-three years later. The year 1712 saw his second copybook, 'The Art of Writing in its Theory and Practice', with a similarly critical preface. In 1715 he published his own writing rules, rigid and meticulous in form, entitled 'The Standard Rules of the Round and Round-Text Hands'. This book became the focus of a notable quarrel with another distinguished writing-master, John Clark, which, with criticisms and counter-criticisms, lasted for several years, incidentally increasing Snell's copybook sales. In 1711 he produced handwriting plates included in 'Penmanship in its Utmost Beauty and Extent' (1731), by George Bickham. 
Snell has been criticized for causing a decline in handwriting by promoting his dull copperplate style, but his practice and teaching of a simpler and standardized mode of handwriting most effectively met the needs of clerks in the growing number of commercial houses. That is his principal claim to fame. He died at his London home in Sermon Lane in 1733, survived by his wife. 
Patrick Nairne', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37990


Sobhuza II (1899-1982), king of Swaziland, was born at Zombodze, Swaziland, on 22 July 1899, one of four sons born to his predecessor, King Ngwane V 
(Bhunu; 'c'.1875-1899)
and Lomawa Nxumalo or Ndwandwe (died 1938), the monarch's chief wife. His father died a few months after his birth and his grandmother Queen Labotsibeni then ruled as co-regent with his uncle Prince Logcogco. He was educated at the Swazi National School, Zombodze, and at the Lovedale Institution in South Africa before assuming the Swazi throne as paramount chief at the age of twenty-two in 1921. In the course of his long life Sobhuza took many wives, and had more than sixty recognized sons and a similar number of daughters. 
Throughout his long reign Sobhuza presided over the transformation of his country from British protectorate to independent statehood within the Commonwealth. His survival as a traditional monarch was exceptional in a period when, elsewhere in Africa, tribal authority was denigrated and often pushed aside as an antique obstacle in the path to modernization and national self-determination. Sobhuza, however, possessed political skills in abundance, and he cunningly blended appeal to tribal custom with a capacity to manage economic and social change for his kingdom without weakening his autocratic power base. The following year he led a delegation to London, though to little avail. 
He also took his case against Allister Miller, who occupied land that included the site of an ancient royal Kraal, to the privy council in 1929, holding that all land occupied by white settlers was held subject to his own sovereign rights. He was defeated by the terms of the 'Foreign Jurisdictions Act', which effectively placed the actions of British administrations in protectorates beyond the reach of the British courts. After these failures to achieve any change on the land issue, Sobhuza and his advisers began to embark on a deliberate programme of ethnic mobilization and the development of an ideology that eventually emerged as Swazi 'traditionalism'. In doing this he enlisted the support of sympathetic officials such as A. G. Marwick, resident commissioner from 1935 to 1937, and social anthropologists including Bronislaw Malinowski, Isaac Schapera, Winifred Hoernle, and, above all, Hilda Kuper. 
Sobhuza's role during the years of British rule was essentially ceremonial; for his people -- a largely agricultural community -- the king was a source of ritual, ensuring rain and a fertile crop. Yet as early as 1922 Sobhuza demonstrated his political leadership of the Swazi nation by petitioning the British government to nullify a proclamation increasing the land available to the white-settler community. 
In the early 1960s the king became a major actor in the events that led to independence for his country in 1968. He strongly opposed the orthodox post-colonial constitution proposed by the British government, in which he was assigned the role of constitutional monarch presiding over a Westminster-style parliament. As he emphasized, 'Western democracy is not suitable for my people... my rule through the tribal council is best for them.' Sobhuza organized an unofficial referendum on the British constitutional proposals -- widely seen as a contest between himself and the resident commissioner, Sir Brian Marwick, the nephew of A. G. Marwick -- and founded his own party -- the Imbokodvo ('grinding stone') National Movement -- which in the pre-independence elections of 1967 won all twenty-four seats in the legislative council and 80 per cent of the popular vote. The nationalist opposition had split into competing factions in the years before the election, and it never effectively challenged Sobhuza's rule thereafter. In the 1972 election the Ngwane National Liberatory Congress won three seats, and this modest revival in nationalist fortunes so disturbed Sobhuza that he promptly abrogated the constitution, banned political parties, and for the next six years ruled by decree through the national council, a traditional body of tribal advisers. Sobhuza was appointed KBE in the 1966 new year's honours. 
In 1978 a new constitution was promulgated which provided for an elaborate reversion to a tribal mode of rule involving an electoral college of eighty members chosen by forty local councils ('tinkhundla'), dominated by tribal elements. The parliament (which opened in 1979) was in effect a gathering of the 'king's men' issuing instructions to the cabinet and civil service -- 'the administrative agents of traditional authority'. Thus, by the time of his diamond jubilee in September 1981, Sobhuza had successfully restored and indeed strengthened the monarch's role as the chief arbiter of decision-making in his kingdom. 
The Swazi economy prospered under Sobhuza's leadership. Swaziland is rich in natural resources, and much of the land and mineral wealth originally owned by non-Swazi interests was brought under indigenous control during Sobhuza's reign. His foreign policy displayed a mixture of caution and commitment to the details of the Organization of African Unity. Neighbouring South Africa was the dominant state in the region, and -- at Pretoria's insistence -- Sobhuza kept a tight grip on the activities of the exiled African National Congress (ANC). A secret accord was signed with South Africa in 1982 which in effect deprived the ANC of sanctuary within Swaziland. Yet, at the same time, Sobhuza maintained cordial relations with his Marxist neighbour, President Samora Machel of Mozambique. 
Old and infirm, Sobhuza died on 21 August 1982 in Mbabane, Swaziland. The choice of his successor according to Swazi custom threatened to be prolonged and difficult. He left a stable polity and an economy that, by African standards, was a model of successful, if unbalanced, growth. His achievement was considerable; his intuitive understanding of his people's preference for traditional ways enabled Swaziland to avoid the upheavals characteristic of much of post-war Africa. He was shrewd enough to realize that Western-style government could not easily be grafted onto a chiefly structure profoundly resistant to rapid and uneven modernization. He kept in check the political and economic expectations of his people, but in so doing he may well have placed a burden on his young and untried successor, the fourteen-year-old Makhosetive, his son with Ntombi la Tfwala, who was queen regent of Swaziland from 1983 (following a power struggle in which Queen Dzeliwe was deposed) until the prince was installed as King Mswati III in April 1986. 
J. E. Spence', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37991


Solly, Henry (1813-1903), social reformer and founder of working men's clubs, was born on 17 November 1813 in the City of London, the youngest of the ten children of Isaac Solly (1768-1853), a trader and company director, and his wife, Mary, the daughter of John Harrison, a London solicitor. His father was descended from Daniel Neal, the historian of the puritans. Samuel Solly was his elder brother. The Sollys were religious dissenters, closely associated with the English Presbyterian meeting-houses at Walthamstow and Hackney. Henry was educated by the nonconformist minister Eliezer Cogan (1762-1855) and then in Brighton under Dr John Morell. Solly was one of the first students to be admitted to the nondenominational University College, London, which he attended from 1829 to 1831. 
A career in commerce proved uncongenial, and on the advice of the Unitarian minister Robert Aspland in 1840 Solly briefly attended the General Baptist Academy under Revd Benjamin Mardon. This decision was taken in the light of his father's financial ruin in 1837, an occurrence which had far-reaching effects. Unable afterwards to rely on family money, the search for regular income was a dominant factor in his career. Solly entered the ministry of the Unitarian chapel at Yeovil in 1840, though he always disliked the Unitarian label. He came into contact with workers, especially in the glove factories, which made him sympathetic to Chartism, and he was one of the two dissenting ministers who served as a representative (for Yeovil) at the Birmingham Chartist conference of 1842. His novel, 'James Woodford, Carpenter and Chartist' (1881), embodies his experiences at this time. 
On 22 April 1841 Solly married his cousin, Rebecca (1812-1893), the daughter of Samuel Shaen, a barrister and landowner of Crix, Essex, at the Presbyterian chapel of High Street, Stourbridge. She loyally supported her husband whatever the financial consequences, and they had one son and four daughters. 
Solly became a strong advocate of, and activist in, radical causes: universal suffrage and education, anti-corn law agitation, the co-operative movement, early closing for shops and Sunday opening of museums, anti-slavery, and much else. This commitment to radicalism did not endear him to the leaders of Unitarian congregations. He was forced out of Yeovil in 1842, and had a succession of short-term pastorates at Tavistock (1842-4), Shepton Mallet (1844-7), Cheltenham (1847-51), Carter Lane, London (1852-7), and Lancaster (1858-62). At the end of his London ministry, Solly concluded: 'I could not help feeling that my London pastorate, and work there generally, had been rather a failure, and the back of my life at five and forty seemed broken' (Solly, 'These Eighty Years', 2.140). He never held a pastorate again in any denomination. 
Solly returned to London in 1862 with little money and little hope of a pulpit. However the twenty years which followed showed him to be one of the most remarkable social innovators of his time. As William Beveridge, the architect of the welfare state, put it: 'He was a restless, inventive, constructive spirit, part author of at least three large living movements; charity organisation, working men's clubs, and garden cities' (Beveridge, 170). Solly was not a socialist, however, and saw himself as a gentleman. He believed in the class order of British society, but was involved in almost every radical initiative to benefit the working class. He formed numerous associations with this aim, the majority of which failed soon after their creation. The centres of his concern were the condition of the respectable working classes and the fostering of a sense of fellowship between the classes. These he expressed in the Working Men's Club and Institute Union, which was founded in London, chiefly at his initiative, on 14 June 1862; he became its first paid secretary in 1863. An ardent teetotaller, Solly became convinced when at Lancaster that working men needed clubs for recreational purposes. Travelling incessantly, he created clubs all over the country and it was soon a genuinely national organization. An excellent organizer and fund-raiser, the movement he created soon became an established part of British life. His infectious enthusiasm led Henry Fawcett to state: 'Here is Henry Solly, who thinks heaven will be composed of Working Men's Clubs' ('The Inquirer', 7 March 1903). Despite his success in establishing the club movement, his flamboyant and domineering style, along with his insistence that the clubs should maintain a high moral tone, soon led to trouble. He was first forced out in 1867, but returned a few years later only to sever finally the connection with his creation in 1873 following disputes about his salary and the sale of alcohol in the clubs. 
Turning next to the indigent element in society, Solly was chiefly instrumental in creating the Charity Organization Society (COS) in 1869. Thrift was at the heart of the doctrine of self-help that was pressed on the Victorian working man. However 'ultimately self-help and charity might be in conflict... the 1860s were inspired with the belief that the poor could be helped, by intelligent charity, to help themselves' (C. L. Mowat, 'The Charity Organisation Society 1869-1913', 1961, 14). Solly in his usual practical style set out this opportunity in a well-attended public lecture which he gave in 1868 that proved to be a trumpet call for action. The London Association for the Prevention of Pauperism and Crime was in operation by November the same year, and from this the COS was formed. 
The society's central doctrine was the high responsibility which it attached particularly to the spending of charitable money, and the need to accompany it with personal care. Serving as its first secretary and guiding force, Solly helped the society become a leading body in the administration of charity in London, and the promotion of social casework throughout Britain. Once again, Solly's insistence on more money for himself and control over the organization resulted in his being ousted from the COS. 
In the belief that artisans should be well housed, Solly's last initiative was to set up the Society for the Promotion of Industrial Villages in 1884. This venture soon failed, but the novel idea was later considered to have been an important precursor of the work of Sir Ebenezer Howard in the so-called Garden City movement. 'This Society was the last of my forlorn attempts to promote social reforms by means of an organised association, and I mean it to be the last; for which those friends who have helped me, and those whom I have also worried but who have not helped me, will be devoutly thankful' (Solly, 'These Eighty Years', 2.566). 
Solly wrote and lectured extensively on numerous subjects, often in a provocative way in order to engage as many people as possible in support of his causes. He had a tempestuous period as joint editor, with the trade unionist George Potter, of 'The Beehive' from 1869 to 1870. He was always an earnest enthusiast, impatient and difficult to deal with except on his own terms. He cheerfully and vigorously forced himself and his causes before the attention of the great and the good. To the distress of his family, later in life he rejected the Unitarian name but not the ministerial title, although others, as he admitted, 'only saw [him] as a Unitarian minister' (Solly, 'These Eighty Years', 2.504). His grandson, J. H. Wicksteed, who followed his father as a Unitarian minister, wrote of Henry: 'to him, wrong and suffering were not symptoms of false ideas, but definite evils to be fought with and removed now and on the spot' (Wicksteed, 5). 
Solly's vision and obstinate determination led him to found social organizations well in advance of their time. These same qualities, however, rendered him unfit and unable to stay with them and develop their potential, and by 1900 he was a forgotten figure. Solly died of a brain haemorrhage on 27 February 1903 at Childrey, near Wantage, Berkshire, at the home of his daughter and son-in-law, the Revd Philip Wicksteed, with whom he felt a great affinity; he was buried in Childrey churchyard on 4 March. Solly lived long beyond his time but some belated recognition came with his death. The then secretary of the Working Men's Club and Institute Union (B. T. Hall) aptly wrote in 1904: 'If the work that the Clubs do, if their influence on personal character and their contribution to the sum total of human happiness be correctly appreciated... then shall the investigator reckon Henry Solly amongst the constructive statesmen of our time' (Wicksteed, 214). 


@@@@@


doc= 37992


Somerset, Lord Charles Henry (1767-1831), colonial governor, was born at Badminton, Gloucestershire, on 12 December 1767, the second son in the family of nine sons and four daughters of Henry Somerset, fifth duke of Beaufort (1744-1803), and his wife, Elizabeth (1747-1828), daughter of Admiral Edward Boscawen. Among his brothers were the army officers Lord FitzRoy Somerset, first Baron Raglan, Lord (Robert) Edward Henry Somerset, and Lord John Thomas Henry Somerset ['see under 'Somerset, FitzRoy James Henry]. 
Educated at Westminster School and at Trinity College, Oxford (MA 1786), Somerset became a colonel in the 1st West India regiment (major-general 1798), and attained the rank of a full general in 1814. In June 1788 he married Elizabeth (died 1815), daughter of William Courtenay, second Viscount Courtenay; they had three sons and four daughters. His second wife, whom he married on 9 August 1821, was Lady Mary Poulett (died 1860), daughter of John Poulett, fourth Earl Poulett; they had two daughters and a son, Poulett George Henry Somerset ['see under 'Somerset, FitzRoy James Henry] He was appointed gentleman of the bedchamber to the prince of Wales in 1791, represented Scarborough (1796-1802) and Monmouth (1802-13) in the House of Commons, was sworn of the privy council in 1797 and was comptroller (until 1804) of the household, then joint paymaster-general of the forces under the premiership of William Pitt and the third duke of Portland in 1804-13, before accepting the governorship of Cape Colony, where he arrived on 6 April 1814. 
Lord Charles Somerset's governorship was marked by important developments on the colony's unsettled eastern frontier, in the administration of affairs related to the transfer from Dutch to British rule, and in political conflict with radical elements on the issue of freedom of speech, and was also distinguished by poor relations with both British and Dutch settlers. In 1815 the authorities put down a rebellion by landless Dutch-speaking colonials and mismanaged the execution of convicted ringleaders -- in four of the five hangings, the ropes broke and the proceedings had to be repeated. Somerset tried to placate colonists' feelings by persuading Xhosa chiefs to allow them to follow the spoor of stolen cattle across the frontier and exact compensation. But Chief Ngqika, through whom Somerset worked, did not have power to carry this out, and the incident was long remembered by frontiersmen as a grievance against the British. Somerset then cleared a buffer zone east of the Fish River, but a later decision to allow a military settlement there ensured further conflict. Meanwhile Somerset had sought to stabilize the frontier by establishing British immigrants, the 1820 settlers, on the west bank of the Fish. 
Somerset's governmental changes included the legalization of the English language as the official medium, the introduction of British currency, the setting up of a council of advice, and attempts to ameliorate the treatment of slaves in accordance with new policies laid down in London. Doctrinaire Anglicization marked some of these changes, but Somerset's enduring reputation was rather that of an autocrat, as appeared from his conflict with leaders of English-speaking opinion in the colonial community, George Greig, John Fairbairn, and Thomas Pringle, who successfully used the governor's quarrels with two reprobate settlers to demand press freedom. The commissioners of eastern inquiry, who included the Cape in their brief, found little justification for personal criticism of Somerset, though they were critical of the form of government in which the colony's governor exercised the sole authority. A council of advice was appointed in 1825. After overreacting to criticism, in March 1826 Somerset returned to Britain, where his critics kept up pressure on him. He did not return to the Cape, and died in Brighton on 20 February 1831. 


@@@@@


doc= 37993


Somes, Joseph (1787-1845), shipowner, was born in Stepney, London, on 9 December 1787, the younger son (there were also four daughters) of Samuel Somes (1758-1816), victualler, waterman, coal merchant, and shipowner, of east London, and his wife, Sarah Green (1762-1835), the daughter of a coal-meter. Apprenticed to his father as a lighterman, and sent to sea at the age of fifteen, Somes's early experience was in the coal and coastal trades. 
At the age of twenty-one he became a captain of his father's ships and remained at sea until 1818, acquiring a worldwide knowledge of shipping and navigation. The death of Somes's father in 1816 left him as partner with his elder brother, Samuel, in what was by then a prosperous family shipping firm. This firm continued to prosper during the more difficult post-war years, and by the time of Samuel's death in 1829 Joseph was operating extensively as owner, charterer (especially for the East India Company), sailmaker, and chandler. 
It was under Somes's sole ownership in the 1830s that the firm rose to become the largest in England. Somes seized the opportunity offered by the breakup of the fleet of the East India Company to purchase a number of its best ships, for example, the 'Lowther Castle' and 'Earl of Balcarres'. His ships sailed primarily to the East Indies but entered vigorously into the newly opening trade of Australasia, including whaling, sailing more rarely to Africa and the Americas, and occasionally to the Baltic. By 1842 the Somes shipping empire, that of the largest private shipowner in the world, embraced about forty ships registered at Lloyd's. Somes specialized in chartering ships to the government for the transport of convicts, stores, and troops. 
Somes's prominence and wealth led him to develop an interest in the colonies, and he invested in the Western Australian Company, the North American Colonization Society of Ireland, and, above all, the New Zealand Company. Somes joined the latter company when it was refounded in 1838, sold to it its first ship, the 'Tory' (sent to New Zealand in 1839 with a shipload of settlers without government permission), and became governor of the company in 1840. As governor, Somes was the figurehead for an aggressive and ruthless campaign aimed at securing government recognition for the New Zealand Company. This onslaught won financial concessions but not the decisive part in the colonization of New Zealand which the company sought. 
Somes entered the House of Commons as Conservative MP for Dartmouth in December 1844. He was obliged to transfer the ownership of his ships to his nephews in order, narrowly, to avoid disqualification as a government contractor. His political aims were unclear, and his closest allies believed that in 1845 he was about to betray the company, which was in a state of virtual collapse at the time of Somes's death. 
Somes was well known on the stock exchange and at Lloyd's, and was one of the originators of the new 'Lloyd's Register of Shipping' in 1834. He was also active within the General Shipowners' Society. Often called to give evidence before government inquiries, he was a stout defender of the part played by the 'Navigation Acts' and mercantile marine in the prosperity and defence of the nation. 
In 1811 Somes married Mary Ann (1788-1835), daughter of Thomas Daplyn of Stepney. They had one surviving daughter. Second, in 1837, Somes married Maria (1816-1911), daughter of Charles Saxton. She was the sister of both the Revd Charles Waring Saxton, an early migrant to New Zealand, and of Somes's solicitor, Edward Saxton. Somes died on 25 June 1845 at his home, New Grove, Mile End Road, London. He was buried in the family vault in St Dunstan's parish church, Stepney, on 2 July. 
A. C. Howe', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37994


Sophia, princess palatine of the Rhine (1630-1714), electress of Hanover, consort of Ernst August, was born on 4 October 1630 in The Hague, the youngest of five daughters and the youngest but one of the thirteen children of Frederick V (1596-1632), elector palatine (1610-32) and the 'winter king' of Bohemia (1619-21), and his wife, Elizabeth (1596-1662), the daughter of James I. Born in exile because of Frederick's expulsion from Bohemia and the Palatinate, Sophia's importance in history was derived from her parentage and from the unpredictable fate of the Stuarts. 
Brought up at Leiden until 1641, Sophia was taught French, German, English, Dutch, Latin, Greek, theology, history, mathematics, and law before moving in 1641 to her mother's court at The Hague, an environment where learning was encouraged. Her mother suggested that Sophia marry the exiled Charles II, but he was not interested, and, her pride hurt, in 1650 she moved to the court of her eldest brother, Charles Lewis (Karl Ludwig), now restored to Heidelberg. 
Sophia married Ernst August of Brunswick-Luneburg (1629-1698) in 1658, on 17 October NS according to some biographers, after his elder brother had withdrawn an offer. Ernst August and Sophia had six sons and one daughter; their eldest son, Georg Ludwig ['see 'George I], was born in 1660; among their other children was Ernest Augustus, duke of York and Albany. Ernst August benefited from the failure of his three elder brothers to father any legitimate sons, and, from prince bishop of Osnabruck in 1661, he progressed to duke of Calenberg (1679) and elector of Hanover (1692). As the territories of the different branches of the house of Brunswick-Luneburg were consolidated, Ernst August became a more powerful individual. Sophia was proud of her husband and delighted by his rise. She had made a lengthy visit with him to Italy in 1664-5 and enjoyed the company of learned men, including G. W. Leibniz. Sophia was not intolerant in religious matters. 
The death of William, duke of Gloucester (1689-1700), the last surviving child of Queen Anne, led to fresh concern over the succession in Britain. In 1701 by the 'Act of Settlement', Catholics were debarred from the English succession, and Sophia and her heirs were named heirs to William III and Anne. The 'Act of Union' of 1707 ensured that this succession would extend to Scotland. The granddaughter of James I, Sophia was the nearest protestant claimant by blood; fifty-seven Roman Catholics nearer in blood were passed over. 
After William III's death in 1702 and Anne's succession Sophia became the immediate heir to the throne. The relationship between Sophia and the monarch was never free from tension, and the succession also created difficulties between Sophia and her eldest son, Georg, a particularly serious crisis occurring in 1706 over Sophia's attempt to intervene in English politics. Expectation about becoming queen helped to give Sophia a powerful interest in her last years, but she was denied her chance, dying on 28 May 1714 after hurrying to shelter from sudden rain during a walk in the palace gardens at Herrenhausen. Anne died two months later, on 1 August 1714. Thus the British were denied the chance of a monarch who would have been more cultivated than any of the other Hanoverians, while Sophia, born in exile, died without ever visiting the country to whose throne she was heir. Her eldest son, Georg Ludwig (George Lewis), became George I, king of Great Britain and Ireland in 1714. 


@@@@@


doc= 37995


Sophia Dorothea (1666-1726), electoral princess of Hanover, was born in the castle of Celle, Germany, on 15 September 1666 OS, the eldest child of Georg Wilhelm, duke of Brunswick-Luneburg (1624-1705), ruler of the Celle portion of the duchy from 1665, and Eleonore Desmier d'Olbreuse (1639-1722), an exiled French protestant aristocrat. At the time of Sophia Dorothea's birth her mother and father were of unequal status; their legal union in 1665 was less than a marriage, consisting of a promise by Georg Wilhelm never to leave Eleonore and not to marry anyone else. None the less, Georg Wilhelm and Eleonore continually worked to regularize their union. Sophia, the only surviving child, gradually transformed from an illegitimate daughter into an eligible heiress. In 1674 her mother became a reigning princess as countess of Wilhelmsburg. On 2 April 1676 Georg Wilhelm and Eleonore were formally married; as part of the marriage settlement Sophia Dorothea was fully legitimized as a Brunswick-Luneburg princess. 
Georg Wilhelm fielded several proposals for his daughter's hand. Sophia Dorothea was at first engaged to Friedrich August, son of Anton Ulrich, duke of Brunswick-Wolfenbuttel, but the young prince was killed in battle in 1676. In the succeeding years Georg Wilhelm negotiated with his brother Duke Ernst August, reigning at Hanover from 1679, on behalf of his eldest son Georg Ludwig (1660-1727), later George I of Great Britain. The marriage of Sophia Dorothea to Georg Ludwig was designed to secure the succession of Ernst August and his heirs to Celle. The union of Celle and Hanover was a vital part of Ernst August's scheme to become an imperial elector. The marriage took place in Celle on 22 November 1682. 
The couple formally resided together in Hanover but Georg Ludwig was frequently away on military campaigns. Many of Sophia Dorothea's biographers have seen the contrast between her arranged marriage to Georg Ludwig and the love match of her parents as the root of her later disaffection. Despite the long absences of her husband, the couple had two children, Georg August (later George II of Great Britain) and Sophia Dorothea, subsequently queen of Prussia to Frederick William I and mother of Frederick the Great. 
Sophia Dorothea was introduced to Philipp Christoph, Count von Konigsmark (1665-1694), during 1689 soon after he had been granted a commission by Ernst August. The count was from a distinguished Swedish military family and has been contrasted as 'ardent' and 'poetic' alongside the 'matter-of-fact' Georg Ludwig (Hatton, 54-5). The two began corresponding in July 1690 and were lovers by early 1692. 
The relationship alarmed the Hanoverian court because of the couple's lack of discretion. They ignored warnings and began to prepare for an independent life away from Hanover. Sophia Dorothea agitated for control over some of her inheritance, signed away by her father in her marriage contract, while in June 1694 Konigsmark accepted a commission from his friend Friedrich August I of Saxony. He returned to Hanover to wind up his affairs, but disappeared on 1 July 1694 after leaving for the Leine Palace to visit Sophia Dorothea. 
The disappearance of Konigsmark was never satisfactorily explained. Georg Schnath, based on a study of circumstantial evidence, suggested that Konigsmark was mortally wounded soon after entering the palace, probably on the orders of Ernst August's mistress Clara von Platen. Konigsmark's house was searched and his papers seized. Sophia Dorothea was placed under guard but proved eager to accept the divorce arranged by Ernst August and Georg Wilhelm and consented to be named the guilty party without admitting to her adultery. The consistorial court of Hanover pronounced the divorce on 28 December 1694 and Sophia Dorothea was forbidden to remarry. 
Sophia Dorothea remained a political liability. As she could not be allowed to seek help from the emperor or from Saxony should she wish to revise the divorce settlement, Georg Wilhelm and Ernst August agreed to confine her at the manor house of Ahlden in the territory of Celle, built in 1613 as a magistrate's residence. The 'castle' was fortified, supposedly for Sophia Dorothea's own protection, and she was guarded by a marshal and forty infantry and cavalry. On 28 February 1695 Sophia Dorothea arrived at Ahlden, where she was to be imprisoned, with a brief interlude, for the rest of her life. She was allocated the title duchess -- or princess -- of Ahlden. Her mother was the only visitor from her old life permitted to see her, and correspondence with her children was forbidden. 
The duchess of Celle sought to improve Sophia Dorothea's condition but her efforts -- which included negotiations with both Louis XIV and William III -- came to nothing. From April to September 1700 Georg Ludwig (who had succeeded his father in 1698) allowed Sophia Dorothea to live at Celle in the face of a French invasion of the Brunswick duchies. Once the threat subsided Georg Wilhelm, who had refused to see his daughter, sent her back to Ahlden. 
Sophia Dorothea had been marginalized to reduce any damage she might do to the dynastic fortunes of the house of Brunswick. At the time of her divorce it was feared that any action she took against the family would jeopardize both recognition of the Hanoverian electorate and acceptance of the Electress Sophia as heiress presumptive to Great Britain. The danger did not abate once the 'Act of Settlement' had been passed as it was conceivable that Sophia Dorothea would use any freedom she was granted to attack her husband's character and so help the Jacobite cause. Conscious that his divorce was a political and religious embarrassment in Great Britain, Georg Ludwig never explained the absence of his wife to British visitors. However, the story of Sophia Dorothea's relationship with Konigsmark and her imprisonment at Ahlden circulated widely, most sensationally through the sixth volume of Duke Anton Ulrich's epic 'roman-a-clef' the 'Roman Octavia' (1708), which emphasized the brutality of Georg Ludwig and the virtue of Sophia Dorothea. Opponents of the Hanoverian succession in Great Britain used the Konigsmark story to allege that the future George II was not the son of Georg Ludwig. 
Georg Ludwig succeeded to the British throne in 1714 as George I, but this brought no change in Sophia Dorothea's position. She began a clandestine correspondence with her daughter soon after her wedding, but the queen of Prussia failed to arrange her mother's freedom as Sophia Dorothea had hoped. The discovery that her financial adviser the count de Bar had embezzled the money she had entrusted to him to invest on the Amsterdam stock exchange further reduced her confidence. Depressed, she died at Ahlden, possibly following a stroke or heart attack, on 13 November 1726 NS; George I intended that she should be buried in the castle grounds at Ahlden but the soil was too waterlogged and her remains were placed in a lead coffin until further instructions were received from London. George eventually conceded that she be interred in the ducal vaults in the Old Church, Celle, where her body was placed in May 1727. 
Sophia Dorothea's legend continued to grow after her death. It was said that the death of George I in 1727 was brought on by reading a final letter from Sophia Dorothea written shortly before her death. Variations on her life story continued to appear and she became a measure for the Hanoverian dynasty's immorality. When George IV began divorce proceedings against his wife, Caroline, in 1820, an attack on his conduct was published as 'Sophia, Princess of Zell, to George the First, on his Accession to the Throne of England'. The discovery by historians of Sophia Dorothea's correspondence with Konigsmark ended the myth that Sophia Dorothea had been falsely accused of adultery but did nothing to dispel the romantic allure of her story. This continued to be the basis for several historical novels in the twentieth century, most famously 'Saraband for Dead Lovers' (1935) by Helen Simpson, filmed in 1948. 


@@@@@


doc= 37996


Sorley, Charles Hamilton (1895-1915), poet, was born in Aberdeen on 19 May 1895, the elder twin son and third surviving child in the family of three sons and one daughter of William Ritchie Sorley (1855-1935), professor of moral philosophy at Aberdeen University, and his wife, Janetta Colquhoun Smith. When Sorley was five his father was appointed Knightbridge professor of moral philosophy at Cambridge University and elected a fellow of King's College, and from then on Sorley was brought up in Cambridge, where until he was nine he was taught at home by his mother. From 1906 to 1908, with his twin brother Kenneth, Sorley attended King's College choir school as a day boy, and it was there, at the age of ten, that he wrote a publishable poem, 'The Tempest', in form and content a clear portent of his adult work. Compulsory regular attendance at services in King's College chapel may account for numerous biblical references in later poems; Sorley was deeply religious in the philosophical sense but always remained out of tune with conventional belief. When he was thirteen, despite an erratic academic performance at King's, Sorley gained an open scholarship to Marlborough College, where he developed two abiding sensual passions, for food and cross-country running. His poetry began to appear in 'The Marlburian' in 1912, influenced by John Masefield and by the Wiltshire downs, with their irresistible evocation of the past. Impending death was an early subject, and one of his most accomplished schoolboy poems is 'The River', based on an actual suicide. 
In his last year at Marlborough, Sorley won the senior Farrar prize for English literature and language, the Buchanan prize for public reading, and a scholarship to University College, Oxford. It was decided that before going up to Oxford, which in fact he never did, he should spend time with a German family in Mecklenburg and three months studying at the university in Jena, where he attended lectures on philosophy and political economy and made many close friends among German Jews. Hence his stay on the continent strongly influenced the ambivalent feelings he was to entertain towards the war, reflected so strikingly in his poetry. He had rashly embarked on a walking tour in the Moselle region when war was declared, and he spent the night of 2 August 1914 in prison at Trier. Although Sorley was to make light of the experience, he had been in considerable danger. On his release he made his way back to England through Belgium, sailing from Antwerp in the hastily requisitioned 'Montrose'. 
Sorley was deeply divided in his loyalties, but, believing the war to be an evil necessity, he immediately enlisted and received a commission in the 7th battalion of the Suffolk regiment. He was promoted first lieutenant in November 1914 and captain nine months later. He arrived in France with his battalion on 30 May 1915, having told his mother, 'I do wish people would not deceive themselves by talk of a just war. There is no such thing as a just war. What we are doing is casting out Satan by Satan.' He served for several months in the trenches around Ploegsteert, and displayed considerable courage in saving the lives of two men. When his battalion moved south to take part in the battle of Loos, Sorley commanded an attack on two trenches known as the Hairpin, south of the Hohenzollern redoubt, and was killed by a sniper on 13 October 1915. He was buried near the spot where he fell. He was twenty. 
A posthumous collection, 'Marlborough and other Poems', was published in 1916 and went into six editions in the first year. Robert Graves pronounced Charles Sorley 'one of the three poets of importance killed during the war', rating him alongside Wilfred Owen. Sorley is certainly remarkable for rejecting the prevailing enthusiasm for war so early on, and for forecasting, through a mixture of irony and pity, the horrors of Flanders before ever he reached the front. Typical of his best work, much of which he had no opportunity to revise, are 'Barbury Camp', written at Marlborough, 'The Song of the Ungirt Runners', and his last poem, 'When you see millions of the mouthless dead', scribbled in pencil and discovered in his kitbag after he had been killed. His parents published a collection of his letters in 1919, 'The Letters of Charles Sorley', which the 'Manchester Guardian' thought 'contained the first mature impressions of a nature which was all vigour and radiance, a boy who may be said to have had a genius for truth'. His collected poems appeared in 1985. 
Michael De-la-Noy', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37997


Sparke, Michael (b. in or before 1586, d. 1653), bookseller, was the son of Richard Sparke, husbandman, of Eynsham, Oxfordshire. It seems likely that he had at least a grammar-school education since he could read and write Latin, and made a bequest to an Oxfordshire grammar school in his will. He was apprenticed on 7 June 1603 to the London bookseller Simon Pauley, but was transferred successively to two other stationers, the latter of whom, Bartholomew Downes, freed him on 10 June 1610. 
Sparke later described himself as a 'wholesaleman' and in 1652 claimed that he had 'dealt in 'Books' above 40 yeares for my self' (Sparke, 'Second Beacon', 5). He may have spent some years as a journeyman since his first entry in the Stationers' Company register was in 1617; by his own account he had sold books through the countryside with Pauley and was well acquainted with provincial networks of chapmen, pedlars, and mercuries. From 1617 onwards he was dwelling and working at the sign of the Blue Bible in Green Arbour Court, London, near the Old Bailey. He sold books printed by the university printers at Oxford and Cambridge with whom he had a sustained working relationship. Sparke's brother Thomas and nephew Nathaniel were colonists in Virginia and Bermuda respectively, which may have inspired his interest in publishing works about colonization, including those of Captain John Smith and the first English edition of Mercator's 'Atlas'. His will indicates that he also exported books to the American colonies. 
In later life Sparke denounced Pauley as a papist who sold ''Popish Books, Pictures, Beads', and such 'Trash'' in the countryside (Sparke, 'Second Beacon', 6). He also denounced a notorious papist bookbinder and other papists in the trade who had defrauded him. Indeed, Sparke's life and work were characterized by his maniacal devotion to the protestant religion. He later reminisced about visiting Leiden, probably about 1630, to line up books, especially bibles, for importation. In the 1620s he published 'Crumms of Comfort', a collection of prayers intended to serve as a daily prayer book, perhaps as an alternative to the official prayer book of the state church. Sparke's little volume proved immensely popular and went into forty-four editions through the early eighteenth century. 
From 1626 Sparke was the dedicated publisher of the religious radical William Prynne and, according to Prynne, it was about this time that Sparke's troubles with church and crown regulatory authorities began. He was first in trouble in the aftermath of the parliament of 1626 for publishing Bishop Carleton's book refuting Richard Mountague. Following his arrest in April 1631 for publishing unlicensed books, Sparke was described as having been 'within 10 years past several times committed in prison and admonished, and although he promised to submit to his governors as other moderate men do, has as yet been more refractory and offensive than ever' (Rostenberg, 261). On a number of occasions Prynne and Sparke were in trouble together, notably at the appearance of 'Histriomastix' in 1633 for which both author and publisher were publicly pilloried, Sparke 'with a Paper in his Hat' (Jackson, 256). In addition, Sparke was fined $500 by the Star Chamber and suspended from the livery of the Stationers' Company to which he had been admitted in December 1626. He also published the works of the Revd Henry Burton, another religious radical and associate of Prynne. Sparke was frequently in trouble for selling imported bibles to the detriment of the king's printer, and was still ranting about the monopoly over bibles in 'Scintilla', which he wrote and published in 1641. At other times he ran foul of the church, state, and Stationers' Company for printing unlicensed books. He was prosecuted also for having printed at Oxford books registered to other stationers in London. 
From 1636 Sparke was in business with one of his sons, Michael, who was freed of the Stationers' Company on 1 March 1641, although their names continued also to appear separately in imprints and the son owned no copyrights. Not much is known of the son except that he died on 17 November 1645, 'Wounded by his unnaturall Brother [Philip] causelesly' according to an acrostic ballad memorial (Vere). 
The convening of the Long Parliament in 1641 was something of a turning point for Sparke. His clients and friends, Prynne and Burton, were reprieved and hailed as heroes. Sparke's $500 fine from the 'Histriomastix' case was remitted and he was granted a licence by the committee for printing to publish and republish Prynne's works. Sparke was also called on as an expert witness for the parliamentary government as, for example, in the trial of Archbishop William Laud: the publisher cuts a prominent figure in Hollar's engraving of the trial. 
But as with many religious radicals of the period, Sparke became disillusioned with the Long Parliament and its godly revolution. He was also frustrated with his chosen trade. Between 1641 and 1645 he was a leader of a group of 'rebel Stationers' who unsuccessfully sought reform in the governance of the company and in particular in the allocation of monopolies and the power the monopolists exercised within the trade. He continued to protest as an individual. In 1652 he upbraided stationers who would print and sell anything for profit, and who had no dedication to the protestant religion. He lamented that 'our Reformation is now a Desolation' and that ''Poor honest Stationers'' could not pay their rents or feed their families (Sparke, 'Second Beacon', 9). 
Sparke died in December 1653 in Hampstead, Middlesex, and was buried on the 29th. He left a will indicative of his religious fervour and his moderate success in the book business. Sparke was married twice, and while he left a generous settlement to his second wife, Isabel, he requested to be buried in St Sepulchre's, Holborn, London next to his first wife, Elizabeth, who may have been connected to the Warwickshire gentry. To his 'good frend' William Prynne, Sparke bequeathed his 'seale ring of gold'. He specified that the livery of the Stationers' Company, along with all women save his daughters and grandchildren, should be excluded from his funeral, and further, that there should be no funeral sermon; his favoured devotional books rather than refreshments were to be distributed to those who attended. 


@@@@@


doc= 37998


Spence, Peter (1806-1883), industrial chemist and alum manufacturer, was born on 19 February 1806 in Brechin, Forfarshire, Scotland, the younger son of a hand-loom weaver of Brechin, and his wife, whose family had been farmers for generations. Spence was educated at the parish school in Brechin, but began his working life very early, apprenticed to a grocer, an uncle, in Perth. After finishing his apprenticeship he set up a business with this uncle, but it failed. 
In 1832 Spence married Agnes (died 1883), second daughter of Francis Mudie, linen manufacturer, of Dundee. They had four sons and four daughters. In the same year he joined a gasworks in Dundee, where he acquired a good knowledge of practical chemistry and patented minor innovations in manufacture (for example, of Prussian blue). In 1834 he set up on his own in London as a general chemical manufacturer. He did not prosper, and moved to Burgh by Sands, near Carlisle. There his fortune changed after his discovery in 1845, after much experimentation, of a new and rapid method of making alum from coal shale (colliery refuse) and the ammoniacal liquor by-product of gasworks. Alum, an outstanding mordant, was an essential chemical for the printing and dyeing of textiles and was also used in the treatment of sewage and in paper manufacture. In 1846 he moved his main manufacture to Pendleton, near Manchester, and became the principal supplier of this important substance. He opened a second factory in Gode in 1854. His ammonium alum gradually displaced the potash alum which had been made principally at Whitby. Spence was awarded a medal for his process at the exhibition of 1862. In the 1860s he had become interested in copper smelting, and in 1866 he set up a company in Gode to develop his ideas. He was forced to sell this in the 1870s, after the failure in Redonda, in the West Indies, of his company formed to mine phosphate deposits and convert them to fertilizers. 
As a staunch Congregationalist Spence was active in social reform, notably in promoting total abstinence. He also campaigned against pollution but suffered the irony of being prosecuted himself for pollution in 1857, which caused him to move his works to Miles Platting. He never forgave the chemist Edward Frankland, who had been a colleague, for appearing for the prosecution. He was an active member of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, his papers to it showing a wide range of interests. Spence died at his home, Erlington House, Whalley Range, Manchester, on 7 July 1883. 
Frank Greenaway', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 37999


Spiers, Walter Lewis (1848-1917), museum curator and architect, was born on 27 July 1848 in Headington, Oxford, and baptized on 1 October at St Giles', Oxford, the fourth son in the family of seven sons and six daughters of Richard James Spiers (1806-1877), stationer and mayor of Oxford in 1853-4, and his wife, Elizabeth Phene Joy (1818-1858). In 1858 he won a choristership at Magdalen College, Oxford, and entered the college's school. In 1864 he entered the engineering department of King's College, London. He was articled to his brother, Richard Phene Spiers, in 1866, when he also joined the Architectural Association, later gaining first prize in the class of design. He became a student at the Royal Academy in 1868. 
From 1870 to 1880 Spiers was at the office of the architect Thomas Henry Wyatt and later went into partnership with the latter's son Matthew. In 1875 he was elected an associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects. In 1887 he was appointed district surveyor for Charlton, Lee, and Kidbrooke under the Metropolitan Board of Works and continued in this post under the London county council. In 1888-9 he was involved with the building of the headquarters of the Artists' volunteer corps (the Artists' Rifles), of which he was an enthusiastic member for many years, retiring with the honorary rank of major. 
Spiers's appointment as curator of Sir John Soane's Museum at a salary of $300 per annum was announced on 16 July 1904; he had been acting curator while his predecessor George H. Birch had been on sick leave. His successor as curator, Arthur T. Bolton, claimed that 'it is no disrespect to his distinguished predecessors in that office to assert that he was the best curator that ever held that position of trust', an opinion that was shared by John Summerson, who succeeded Bolton. Spiers did much to make the museum's collections more accessible to students and placed his wide-ranging knowledge ungrudgingly at the service of enquirers. The inventory of the museum's contents that he drew up with such meticulous care, accompanying his sections for each room with an admirable sketch showing the location of each item, remained in use and he also took an invaluable series of photographs recording the interiors of the museum and some of the objects. Spiers also catalogued the museum's large collection of drawings by Robert Adam and did preliminary work on the arrangement and classification of Soane's archive, laying the foundations on which Arthur Bolton was to build. 
Spiers enjoyed the ardours of research. While at the Soane he edited and wrote a commentary on two small books in the museum, 'The Notebook and Account Book of Nicholas Stone, Master Mason to James I and Charles I' ('Walpole Society', 7, 1919), which he illustrated with photographs of that sculptor's monuments taken during numerous journeys devoted to studying Stone's work. He also contributed several important articles to the 'Journal of the London Topographical Society', of which he was one of the earliest members and to the council of which he was elected in 1902. As a result of this special interest he made a topographical index to the drawings in the Soane museum. His own large personal collection of prints and maps, some of them annotated by him and much consulted in his lifetime, was sold at auction by his family after his death. He was elected fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1916. Spiers was trained in the Gothic school, but Bolton, who knew him well, insists that he never referred to any buildings of his own and little is apparently known about his work as an architect. The announcement of his appointment as curator in the 'Builders' Journal and Architectural Record' for 13 June 1904 included the information that he would relinquish his private practice. He did, however, carry out some repairs to the fabric of the Soane museum. Bolton stated that Spiers 'disliked his name being quoted in any way' and that it was 'difficult for his services to be adequately acknowledged'. Spiers was an unassuming and kindly man, whose painstaking scholarship was greatly admired by those who knew him. 
Spiers refused to take a holiday of even a single day during the German air attack on London in 1916-17, wishing to be present should any emergency arise. This confinement apparently affected his health and, after a short illness, he died suddenly at the museum on 28 May 1917. He was unmarried. He was buried at Brookwood cemetery, Surrey, on 31 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 38000


Squibb, Arthur (d. 1679/80), Fifth Monarchist politician, came of minor Dorset gentry stock with strong exchequer connections. He was the fourth son of John Squibb; his mother, Anne, was a sister of Sir Robert Seymour of Hanford. Arthur Squibb the elder, his father's first cousin, was a teller of the exchequer, and his elder brother Lawrence also became one in 1640, in which year he himself acquired a reversion to a tellership. Unlike Lawrence, but like his elder namesake, the younger Arthur was a parliamentarian, and he adventured $300 in the prospective purchase of Irish lands. He was described as clerk to Sir Edward Powell, a master of requests, in the earlier 1640s, and later in the decade he served on various commissions for Surrey or Westminster or both, including those for the assessment, the militia, and sequestrations. He rose further under the Commonwealth, becoming a commissioner for compounding and a JP in February 1650 and a commissioner for indemnity in 1652. A lay preacher, his house was the meeting place of a gathered church by 1649. 
At some stage Squibb became an ardent Fifth Monarchist -- certainly before he was nominated to Barebone's Parliament in 1653 as a member for Middlesex. He was one of those who led that assembly in prayer on its first full day's sitting, which it devoted entirely to religious exercises. He took an extreme position on law reform as well as in matters religious, and his fellow millenarians took to meeting regularly at his house to concert their parliamentary tactics. That, however, owed more to the convenience of his nearby residence than to any personal pre-eminence. He was a zealous MP and served on numerous committees, although as Aylmer notes '[h]e was constantly late... perhaps he was waiting for the Second Coming, or at least for the rule of the Saints upon Earth' (Aylmer, 217). The house never elected him to the council of state. When the moderate majority finally resigned their power back into Oliver Cromwell's hands, Squibb was one of the radical remnant who sat on until they were evicted in January 1654. 
Like all Fifth Monarchists, Squibb regarded Cromwell's protectorate as a usurpation of the promised kingdom of Christ. He remained a JP but his other public employments terminated, and he sold his reversion to a tellership to his half-brother Edmund. In 1655-6 he engaged in discussions with some disaffected Commonwealthsmen about a possible basis for an alternative government, but he steered clear of active conspiracy or rebellion. He was re-employed by the restored Rump in 1659, but after the army's second seizure of power he was briefly imprisoned in the Isle of Man. After the Restoration, pursuing his erstwhile reversion on Edmund's behalf, he was pronounced unfit for a tellership (in 1662 he was compared to the recently executed regicide Thomas Harrison), but he kept out of trouble until 1671, when at a date before 1 July he was sent to the Tower as one of a group of thirty-five Fifth Monarchists and Seventh Day Baptists, and as having refused to swear the oath of allegiance ('State Papers, Charles II', 1671, 11.357). He was free a year later, however, when, on 28 October, he was licensed under the declaration of indulgence, as a Baptist, to preach at his house in Chertsey (ibid., 14.93). Here he died some time between 30 November 1679 and 1 April 1680; his will, which was proved on the latter date, shows him in possession of lands in Essex and Ireland. It made modest but adequate provision for his wife, Martha, daughter of John Ireland of Hale in Lancashire, and for a son and three daughters. 
Austin Woolrych', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38001


Standidge, Sir Samuel (1725-1801), shipowner, was born in relatively comfortable circumstances in Bridlington Quay of old Hull mercantile stock. Little is known of his family life beyond nineteenth century gossip. He was a younger son of a second marriage, cast adrift, it was said, with nothing but his father's assurance that 'Samuel had brains enough to work his own way' ('DNB'). In fact he was sent to Hull and trained for a lucrative captaincy in transatlantic trade, where his undoubted adventures -- captured by privateers off Hispaniola in 1744, storm bound on the Nantucket coast in 1749 -- were less important than mercantile skills acquired as master or owner serving Hull's America merchants, making enough in one voyage to purchase a 130-acre farm, renamed New York, in Preston (Holderness). More significantly, he became acquainted with the whale fishery while importing oil from Nantucket, its principal source. Although not an owner -- though he may have been a captain -- during Hull's first whaling ventures in 1754, when war in America disrupted supplies, it was he who revived the industry by sending the old whaler 'Berry' to Greenland in 1766 after colonial-caught oil was taxed, and proved the importance of seal skins as supplementary income. By 1769 he had three whalers -- 'Berry', 'Britannia', and 'British Queen' -- and his enterprise so encouraged others that Hull dominated British whaling into the nineteenth century. His knowledge of the Arctic was acknowledged when he was consulted by Daines Barrington and he tried, unsuccessfully, to mount an Arctic expedition of his own in 1775. 
Standidge owned six whalers altogether, continuing in the trade until the 1780s, though he retired from the sea about 1770 as one of the first generation of specialist shipowners. Though out-of-season Baltic voyages were common to gain maximum deployment for whalers, Standidge preferred long-term government charters for moving troops and supplies. In his most lucrative venture 'Berry' was sent to New York in 1775 and earned $17,000 in seven years' service, but his most prestigious charter took three vessels to the Russo-Turkish war in 1789, when their part in defeating the Turkish fleet brought him a Russian 'knighthood' and a fabulous gold and topaz jewel containing a lock of Catherine the Great's hair. 
Throughout his business life Standidge was variously called -- or called himself -- master mariner, merchant, shipowner, and shipbuilder, though this latter may have stemmed from his granddaughter's marriage into the Walton shipbuilding family. How far he practised these professions concurrently is unclear, but he was certainly an all-round maritime man, latterly designated 'gentleman'. It was natural that he was involved in Hull Trinity House, of which he was five times warden, and took an active part (with William Hammond) in establishing its navigation school in 1787 to ease the shortage of competent master mariners as trade boomed in response to industrialization. He held all the senior borough offices starting with high sheriff in 1775, but was not mayor until 1795, a fortuitous year since he was knighted for delivering a loyal address following an attack on the king. He retired from business three years later. 
Standidge was a dissenter who lived quietly and devoted himself to his whaling fleet, of which he was proud enough to have a panoramic view painted in 1769. He married on 15 October 1767 Mary Spooner, daughter of a York mercer who died in 1803, but had only one daughter and very few relations. He did not figure largely in the town's social life or, so far as is known, enter into mercantile partnerships. He bought scattered properties in the East Riding of Yorkshire and a country house at Thorngumbald (where he built a dissenting chapel), but died at his High Street house in Hull on 10 February 1801 and was buried in St Mary's Church. He left $76,000 to his great-grandson, Samuel Standidge Walton, and the Standidge mercantile line died out. 


@@@@@


doc= 38002


Stanford, Edward (1827-1904), map maker and publisher, was born on 31 May 1827 in Holborn, London, the second son and third child in a family of four sons and three daughters of William Stanford, tailor and draper, of 29 Holborn Hill, and his wife, Ann Phillips. Educated at the City of London School, after Easter 1841 he was apprenticed to a printer and stationer in Malmesbury, Wiltshire. On his master's death in 1844 he returned to London to work for various stationers, including Trelawny W. Saunders of 6 Charing Cross Road, to whom he returned as partner in 1852. The partnership was dissolved by mutual consent in July 1853. 
In October 1853 Saunders successfully proposed Stanford for fellowship of the Royal Geographical Society, whose 'Proceedings' Stanford later published. Maps of Heinrich Barth's central African travels and of the geology of India by G. B. Greenough were published by Stanford in 1854. As agent he sold Ordnance Survey, Admiralty, Geological Survey, trigonometrical survey of India, and India Office publications. By 1856, owning the maps of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge, he prepared for Harrow School the 'Harrow Atlas of Modern Geography' and one of classical geography. In 1857 he founded Stanford's Geographical Establishment, employing Saunders and A. K. Johnston the elder to prepare and engrave his 'library maps': 'Europe' (1858), 'London and its environs' (1862), and others. He also supplied maps to the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, the National Society, the Metropolitan Board of Works, the Palestine Exploration Fund, and the school board of London. Noteworthy productions were: the 'Map of western Palestine' (1880) by C. R. Conder and H. H. Kitchener; 'A map of eastern Equatorial Africa' (1881-3) by E. G. Ravenstein; H. H. Kitchener's and S. C. N. Grant's 'A trigonometrical survey of... Cyprus' (1885); and the 'Compendium of Geography and Travel' (1878-85) by several distinguished geographers. He was much helped by John Bolton, who rose from draughtsman to become a director in 1912, and his maps received two gold medals and one silver at international exhibitions from 1862 to 1884. Stanford acquired the bookselling business of C. H. Law in 1860, the plates and stock of the map maker John Arrowsmith in 1874, and Staunton & Son (stationers) in 1877, so that by 1881 he employed eighty-seven people; his business premises remained at 6 Charing Cross Road. Illness obliged him gradually to relinquish active control of his firm to his son Edward. His last major work was 'Stanford's London Atlas of Universal Geography... Folio Edition', dedicated to Queen Victoria (1887), a revised, expanded, and lithographed version of the 'London Atlas' of John Arrowsmith. 
The Stanford range in British Columbia was named after him by John Palliser. Like many other publishers he subscribed to the relief of Parisian colleagues during the 1870-71 siege, afterwards becoming an honorary member of their Cercle de la Librairie. A fellow publisher, Edward Marston, wrote: 'In business he was clear-headed, prompt, and decisive, and all who knew him would testify to his absolute straightforwardness and integrity. Socially he was lovable, kind, and generous'. From at least the time of his retirement he was a Conservative. 
In 1855 Stanford married Mary, daughter of William Nesbitt Baker, bookseller and stationer, of Harrow, Middlesex. Their son, Edward (appointed geographer to the queen in 1893), was born in 1856; Henry Woodbridge of Harrow was adopted. Mary died in 1867, and on 1 January 1871 Stanford married Constant Mary, daughter of William Hewer, in Battersea. They had two sons, William, also a map publisher and seller, and Arthur Edward. Stanford died on 3 November 1904 at his home, Helens, Sidmouth, where he had moved with his wife in 1890. 
Francis Herbert', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38003


Stanley, Simon Carl (1703-1761), sculptor and stuccoist, was born in Copenhagen on 12 January 1703, the son of a British father and a Danish mother. He was apprenticed in 1718 to a Danish sculptor-stuccoist, J. C. Sturmberg, and assisted his master at Fredensborg Castle and with a monument in Roskilde Cathedral. Following a period in Amsterdam with Jan van Logteren, Stanley came to London in 1727 and entered the studio of Peter Scheemakers, a former assistant of Sturmberg. Only three well-executed monuments have been identified as by Stanley, all of them of the 1740s and obviously reminiscent of those by Scheemakers. Two are large, with lifesize figures, and are to members of the Maynard family at Little Easton, Essex, and at Hoxne, Suffolk. The third, in Ely Cathedral, is a simpler mural monument, with a bust of Humphry Smith (died 1743), and was designed by the architect John Sanderson. 
Stanley was also an able stuccoist, but, as with his sculptural works, little can as yet be assigned to him with certainty until the 1740s. Ceilings decorated by him are at Compton Place, Sussex, 'c'.1728, with mythological subjects in high relief, as well as a plaster medallion with a portrait of an architect, who might be Colen Campbell. Among other houses in which Stanley was engaged on decoration are Ditchley, Oxfordshire ('c'.1739), Langley Park, Norfolk ('c'.1740), and perhaps Kirtlington Park, Oxfordshire ('c'.1745). For a time Stanley worked in collaboration with an Oxford plasterer, Thomas Roberts, at the Radcliffe Camera ('c'.1744). In 1738 he took John Dawson, a plasterer, as his apprentice. 
While working at Okeover, Staffordshire ('c'.1745), on decorative plasterwork, chimney pieces, and picture frames, Stanley left England suddenly in October 1746, on being offered the post of court sculptor to Christian VI of Denmark. As the king had died before Stanley's departure, he landed to find an uncertain future, until the appointment was confirmed by Frederick V. He spent the remainder of his life in Denmark, was appointed professor of sculpture at the Danish Royal Academy, and besides continuing to produce monuments, ceilings, garden sculpture, and other decorative artefacts, he was a musician, composed an oratorio, and translated books into Danish, including 'Joseph Andrews' (1753) by Henry Fielding. 
Stanley married twice. On 21 May 1730 he married Anna Allen (died 'c'.1735), in Eastbourne, Sussex; they had three daughters. On 2 August 1737 he married Magdalen Margrethe Lindemann (died 1763), half-sister to Dr Butjeman, German chaplain to the court of St James. They had two sons, one of whom, Carl Frederick ('b'. 1738), was also a sculptor. Stanley died on 17 February 1761 in Denmark. 
John Physick', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38004


Stanton, William (1639-1705), tomb sculptor and mason, was born on 6 April 1639, the son of Edward Stanton (1595/6-1686) and nephew of the mason-sculptor Thomas Stanton (1609/10-1674). Thomas Stanton had, by 1635, established the business which members of the family were to control for a century from a house and yard on the west side of Shoe Lane, in the City of London, adjoining the churchyard of St Andrew's, Holborn. A prolific tomb-maker, Thomas was master of the Masons' Company in 1660-61. 
William Stanton was apprenticed to Thomas and became free of the Masons' Company in 1663. Church monuments signed by him are known from 1665. He took the first of twenty-four apprentices in 1666, the year of the baptism of the first of nine recorded children he had with his wife, Dorothy (1639/40-1707). After Thomas's death in 1674 William took sole charge of the yard; in 1678 he was employing nine assistants. 
During much of his career Stanton was probably the most prolific tomb-maker to the gentry and aristocracy of England and Wales, producing monuments and grave slabs placed inside churches and a smaller number of churchyard monuments. About 100 memorials of these various kinds are authenticated as having been supplied by him, but it is clear that they represent only a small proportion of his total output, because many more can be assigned on stylistic grounds. Memorials were made in the Holborn yard and transported unassembled by land or water. Their distribution was centred on London but extended to distant and remote locations. 
Stanton's monuments claim for him an important place in the history of English sculpture. His skill in handling architectural forms stands out, as does the excellence of his best figures. He employed a very wide range of monument types, but the established pattern consisting of a framed inscription flanked by two columns and surmounted by a pediment is that to which he turned most frequently, developing it in rich and varied ways. His earliest effigial memorials are derivative, but in the later 1670s he perfected a distinctive figure style, marked by dignity imparted by careful attention to repose and counterpoise. His masterpiece is the monument to Sir John Poley at Holy Trinity Church, Boxted, Suffolk ('c'.1680?), by virtue of the quality of the standing figure of alabaster and the exceptional interactive unity of the whole work. It was followed by several important marble figures, culminating in the noble semi-reclining effigy of Thomas, first earl of Coventry (died 1699), at St Mary's, Elmley Castle, Worcestershire. 
In the Victoria and Albert Museum survive twenty-one drawings by William for monuments and a small terracotta model (which provides valuable evidence of his working procedures) for the effigy of Lady Atkins (1691) in St Paul's, Clapham. Stanton carried out extensive masonry work at Gray's Inn from about 1672, and many of his tomb commissions evidently resulted from inns of court contacts. Jointly with Edward Pearce he took the principal contract for the rebuilding of St Andrew's, Holborn, in 1684. He was the mason for the building of Belton House, Lincolnshire (1685-8), and Denham Place, Buckinghamshire (1689-94). Stanton was master of the Masons' Company in 1688 and 1689-90. He died on 30 May 1705 and was buried two days later at St Andrew's, Holborn. 


Stanton was appointed mason to the City of London in 1708 and was the sculptor of the statue of George I which was set up at the Royal Exchange in 1718 (now lost). He expanded the masonry side of the business, for example by undertaking very extensive work at Westminster Abbey, and thereby became considerably more wealthy than his father. From about 1720 he worked in partnership with Christopher Horsnaile the elder. Edward Stanton was master of the Masons' Company in 1719-20. He was a captain in the City of London trained bands. He was thrice married. A year after the death of his first wife, Sarah Fulkes (1678-1717), he married Lucy Child, and, following her demise in 1730, Jane Churchill. Stanton was buried at St Andrew's, Holborn, on 30 May 1734. 


@@@@@


doc= 38005


Stark, William (1770-1813), architect, was born on 25 May 1770 in Dunfermline, Fife, one of the three sons and two daughters of Mark Stark of Kirkhill, Lasswade, Edinburghshire, a Glasgow merchant who had established spinning and beetling mills, and his wife, Margaret Paton. An elder sister, Sarah, had in 1787 married the Glasgow architect John Craig, and it may have been his brother-in-law who provided Stark's initial professional training. He married Catherine, sister of George Thomson, collector of Scottish music, and daughter of Robert Thomson, schoolmaster. They had one daughter. 
In 1798 Stark was in St Petersburg with his elder brother, who died there. He returned some time before 1804 to Glasgow, where family connections enabled him to compete successfully against David Hamilton for the Hunterian Museum at the university. Square on plan and domed, its Roman Doric portico was by far the grandest then built in Scotland. In the following year, 1805, he designed for Greenock a domed school with a Greek Doric portico, and in 1808 a French neo-classical scheme with Greek Doric porticoes for the enlargement of Broomhall, Dunfermline, for Thomas Bruce, seventh earl of Elgin, both of which remained on paper. 
In 1807 Stark designed the lunatic asylum in Glasgow, in which he adapted Benthamite prison planning to contemporary theories on the segregation of patients by sex, rank, and degree of derangement. Built in 1810-11, it was a memorable exercise in neo-classical geometry, comprising four residential blocks radiating from a central drum of day-rooms crowned by a tall glass dome over the stairwell at its core. Stark published the plans in the form of a pamphlet, subsequently developed into 'Remarks on the Construction of Public Hospitals for the Cure of Mental Derangement' (1810), which resulted in the building's cruciform planning being widely adopted. In his later asylums at Gloucester (1811) and Dundee (1812) Stark himself adopted markedly less institutionalized concepts, the former being planned as a crescent set in gardens and the latter as a domestically scaled rural farm. 
Although Stark, uniquely at that date, had experimented with a severe part Wren, part Russian neo-baroque at the steeple of his St George's Church, Glasgow (1807), his next major design, the Greek Doric judiciary buildings in Glasgow's Saltmarket (built in 1810-11), established his reputation as the pioneer of the Greek revival in Scotland. Internally its main court, a Doric colonnaded hemicycle, drew inspiration from the rebuilding of Chester Castle by Thomas Harrison. 
By 1811 Stark was in bad health and on medical advice left Glasgow for Edinburgh, where the writers to the signet and the Faculty of Advocates commissioned him to redesign their libraries (later both occupied by the signet) for which the carcass had already been erected by Robert Reid. In these he brilliantly overcame the problems set by Reid's window levels to create colonnaded interiors worthy of imperial Russia. 
When he died, Stark's career was on the brink of still greater success, since his posthumously published report on the plans for Edinburgh's Calton area, in which he advocated attention to contours rather than the imposition of grid plans, had a profound effect on Edinburgh's town planning. Sir Walter Scott, for whom Stark designed 'an English vicarage house' for Abbotsford, lamented that in him 'more genius died than is left behind among the collected universality of Scottish architects' ('Letters of Sir Walter Scott', ed. H. J. C. Grierson, 8 vols., 1932-5, 3.368). Stark died in Drumsheugh, Edinburgh, where he lived, on 9 October 1813, and was buried in Greyfriars churchyard, Edinburgh. 
David M. Walker', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38006


Steers, Thomas (c.1672-1750), civil engineer and merchant, possibly a native of Rotherhithe, Kent, was of unknown parentage. He was commissioned in the 4th regiment of foot and fought at the battle of the Boyne in 1690. He then served in the Netherlands, where he may have gained experience of hydraulic engineering. Following the treaty of Ryswick in 1697, Steers returned to England, and shortly after, in 1698 or 1699, he married Henrietta Maria (died 1717), daughter of Abraham Barber, property owner of Rotherhithe, where Steers was then living. Of their five sons, two died in infancy, and one of their two daughters died in childhood. 
At this time Steers was able to observe the construction of the country's first large wet dock, the Great Howland Wet Dock at Rotherhithe, which was in use by 1703. He produced a survey of the Wet Dock Field for Elizabeth Howland, the landowner, in 1707. In 1708 the engineer George Sorocold was consulted about a dock scheme in Liverpool. Following the passage of the relevant act of parliament, in May 1710 Steers went to Liverpool and produced his own plans for the town's first dock. Its construction was a considerable engineering feat -- an enclosed wet dock of 31/2 acres built within the pool, a tidal creek of the Mersey. The dock was in use by 1715 and the surrounding area reclaimed. In 1717 Steers was appointed dockmaster, and the following year he designed a wooden pier which he later replaced with a stone structure. From 1738 until his death Steers worked on Liverpool's second wet dock, the South (later Salthouse) Dock. 
Steers was granted the freedom of the borough of Liverpool in 1713 and established a flourishing anchor smithy near the dock. He had interests in the West Indies trade and the Liverpool Waterworks Company. His public appointments and offices included water bailiff from 1724, town councillor from 1719, and mayor in 1739-40. His reputation as an architect was based notably on St George's Church, completed in 1734, and on the first architectural stone-fronted dwelling house in Liverpool, in Hanover Street, built about 1740. As a speculative venture he built the Old Ropery Theatre in the 1740s. He strengthened Liverpool's fortifications in the Jacobite rebellion of 1745. 
Steers was also a pioneer of river navigation and canal construction. In 1712 he surveyed the Douglas and the Mersey and Irwell navigation. He became one of their undertakers and carried out work on the Douglas near Rufford. Commissioned as consultant for the Newry Canal, he completed his survey in 1736 and between 1737 and 1741 spent twenty-five months on the project. This was the first summit-level canal in Britain, built to transport coal from co. Tyrone to Dublin. In 1740-41 he produced a survey of the Calder and Hebble navigation. 
Following the death of his first wife, in the second half of January 1721 Steers married Anne (died 1765), widow of Thomas Tibington, mariner, of Rotherhithe and Wapping. They had two sons, one of whom died in childhood, and two daughters, the elder of whom died in infancy. Apparently a modest man, Thomas Steers was buried 'in a decent and private manner' in St Peter's churchyard, Liverpool, on 2 November 1750. His son Spencer, the first child of Steers's second marriage, continued his interests in Liverpool. Steers was a distinguished early English civil engineer, and his dock laid the foundation of Liverpool's prosperity as a seaport. 


@@@@@


doc= 38007


Stewart, James, of the Glen (b. before 1700, d. 1752), convicted accessory to murder, born James Stewart (the son of John Stewart of Ardshiel, a merchant), was the illegitimate elder brother of Charles Stewart (died 1757), fifth of Ardshiel, who led out the Appin Stewarts from north Argyll in the Jacobite rising of 1745. About 1725 he married Margaret, sister of William Stewart, a merchant from Maryburgh; they had three children, Alan, Charles, and Elizabeth. 
Although he fought at the battle of Culloden in April 1746, as a captain in the Appin regiment, Stewart's talents were entrepreneurial rather than military. As well as managing the township of Glen Duror, he was a leading shopkeeper in Appin, associated with smugglers, and was connected through his wife's family to colonial traders in Fort William. Because of his business acumen, James Stewart was entrusted with the management of his half-brother's estate at the outset of the 1745 rising and, subsequent to the enforced exile and forfeiture of Ardshiel, remitted his rents to France. 
Stewart's covert dealings were known to, and tacitly supported by, Colin Campbell of Glenure (usually called Glenure), crown factor for the Ardshiel estate. However, amicable relations deteriorated steadily as Glenure came under increasing pressure from the Scottish barons of the exchequer to discriminate against known Jacobite tenants. Lady Ardshiel was prosecuted through the courts in an unsuccessful attempt to recover rents received by her since April 1746. Stewart lost Glen Duror, and though compensated with a lease of the township of Aucharn, was deprived of his shop. Despite indiscretions induced by excess alcohol, relations between Stewart and Glenure had not broken down irretrievably. Indeed, Glenure's relationship with the Camerons of Callart and of Lochiel was more fraught, troops having been called in to collect rents and effect evictions while he factored these forfeited estates. 
Early in 1752 Stewart was instructed to evict a number of tenants from the Ardshiel estate. He protested and made an unsuccessful visit to Glenure in Edinburgh on 5 May. Glenure then travelled north to carry out the evictions. Returning home from Fort William on 14 May, he was murdered by a gunman who escaped unrecognized. Alan Breac Stewart, a known Jacobite and former ward of James Stewart, was presumed to have carried out the 'Appin murder', although he was never apprehended. James Stewart was charged with being an accessory to the murder and tried at Inveraray in September 1752. The trial, before which Stewart was denied legal counsel, is widely recognized by historians to have been a travesty of justice. Archibald Campbell, third duke of Argyll, the political manager for the Scottish whigs, presided. Stewart faced a prosecution concerned primarily with political advancement and deferring further clan resistance. In his defence he claimed that the murder had been carried out by John Cameron (alias Sargeant Mor), a vindictive Jacobite soldier of fortune. Oral tradition affirms that the Camerons as well as the Stewarts of Appin had actively countenanced two, if not three, attempts on Glenure's life in May 1752. A series of intimidated witnesses failed to corroborate Stewart's story, and he was found guilty by a jury of eleven Campbells and four others. He was sentenced to hang at Ballachulish ferry on 8 November 1752. His body, bound in chains, was left on the gibbet for over two years before being removed by John Stewart, younger of Ballachulish, the one member of the Appin gentry who actively promoted the legal defence of his kinsman. The Appin murder has always aroused great curiosity because of its insolubility as well as its treatment by Robert Louis Stevenson in 'Kidnapped' and 'Catriona'. 


@@@@@


doc= 38008


Stewart, William Arnold (1882-1953), exponent of modern technical education in the Middle East and painter, was born on 17 July 1882 in Ilkley, Yorkshire, the youngest of four children (two sons and two daughters) of John Reich Stewart, who was of Scottish descent, and his wife, Naamah Arnold, who was from Yorkshire. He was trained at Bradford Technical College and the Royal College of Art, and was employed as a textile designer in Bradford until 1911, when he took up a post as inspector of arts and crafts in the Egyptian ministry of education in Cairo. In 1918, at the invitation of Ronald Storrs, the military governor of Jerusalem, he was seconded for several months to Palestine to advise on the renewal of crafts and light industries destroyed during the war, and worked closely with C. R. Ashbee, the governor's civil adviser and secretary to the Pro-Jerusalem Society. In 1919 or 1920 Stewart married in Cairo Kathleen Margaret, daughter of Henry Cleveland Beardshaw, a stockbroker. They had two daughters and a son. He returned to Palestine in 1922 to participate in the work of the Palestine crafts and industries commission. 
In the summer of 1927 Stewart, like many other British officials, was retired from the Egyptian government service. In September of the same year he started working with Dr George Andrew Reisner, director of the Harvard-Boston expedition, on the restoration of the furniture of Queen Hetep-heres, the mother of King Khufu (2560-2537 BC), discovered at Giza by Alan Rowe two years earlier. Stewart's workshop was a mud-brick hut near the pyramids where he worked with his two Egyptian assistants. Many of the tools had to be made on the spot specially for the task. The reconstruction of all the objects could not be completed (this was later achieved by Bernard Rice and Ahmad Youssef Moustafa) because of Stewart's appointment as supervisor of technical education in Palestine in 1930, but his name remains connected with the first attempt in Egyptian archaeology to restore objects which the loss of wood reduced to a mass of precious metal and faience components. The restored objects are on display in the Egyptian Museum in Cairo. 
In his new post Stewart displayed enthusiasm and flair. He personally was responsible for the instruction of many young Arab teachers in drawing, design, and handicraft, and for the introduction of these subjects to schools. He was actively involved in the preservation and revival of local crafts such as glass-blowing, leather-work, dyeing, spinning, and weaving, and maintained contacts with craftsmen in various parts of Palestine. He was never patronizing, and freely admitted that 'if I taught them anything, I certainly learnt (as) much by watching them at work.' He helped to establish the Palestine Conservatoire of Music and was chairman of its board of directors (1932-47). In July 1942 he was appointed technical adviser to the controller of light industries in Palestine. 
Stewart was a versatile artist; painting was his lifelong passion and his pictures can serve as a guide to his career. In 1915 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts. His 'Feast of Nebi Musa', showing a Muslim public procession near Jericho, was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1938. In 1947 Stewart retired and went to live in High Wycombe. He died there at his home, 26 Lucas Road, on 18 January 1953. 
Jaromir Malek', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38009


Stillman, Marie (1844-1927), painter and artist's model, was born in Hornsey, near London, on 10 March 1844, the eldest of the three children of Michael Spartali, merchant and later Greek consul-general in London, and his wife, Euphrosyne Varsini. Shortly after her birth the family moved to Clapham, Surrey, where she was educated at home, languages and artistic subjects being her main interests. Showing an early talent for painting and drawing, she became in 1864 the pupil of the Pre-Raphaelite painter Ford Madox Brown, who was numbered among the family's wide acquaintance of artists, writers, and musicians. Brown remained her adviser for over a decade, although she also sought occasional guidance from the painter Edward Burne-Jones. 
Spartali made her exhibition debut in 1867 at the Dudley Gallery, London, with three watercolours of female figures drawn from various sources, including Edmund Spenser ('The Lady Prays Desire') and classical history ('Corinna'). Keeping to watercolours, she rapidly expanded her exhibitions to include the Royal Academy (from 1870), Liverpool, Birmingham, and Manchester, and minor London shows. She was also invited to show at the Grosvenor Gallery, London, from 1879. Acclaimed in 1871 as a follower of Pre-Raphaelitism by the school's chief commentator, W. M. Rossetti, she became recognized during the 1870s as one of those artists following in the footsteps of D. G. Rossetti and, later, as an admirer of Burne-Jones. She also became a celebrated beauty after posing for the photographer Julia Margaret Cameron and the painters Brown, Rossetti, Burne-Jones, and Val Prinsep. 
On 10 April 1871 Spartali married the American journalist and painter William James Stillman (1828/9-1901), a widower and father, by his first wife, of two daughters and a son (died 1874). The match was against her father's wishes and caused considerable family conflict. A daughter, Euphrosyne, was born in 1872 and a son, Michael, in 1878; a third child died shortly after birth. The Stillmans moved to Florence in 1878; Marie Stillman continued to send work regularly to exhibitions in Britain and the USA, where her first appearance in 1875 had drawn favourable notice from the novelist and art critic Henry James. Her subject matter became increasingly Italianate, often drawn from Dante and Boccaccio. 
For health reasons Marie Stillman returned to England in 1883, staying in the Isle of Wight and London, but her husband's appointment in 1886 as Italian and Greek correspondent for 'The Times' drew her back to Italy, where she lived in Rome until 1898. On returning once more to England the artist and her family settled in Surrey, where her husband died in 1901. From 1898 she exhibited only sporadically, mostly at the New Gallery, London. Her range of subjects expanded to include landscape, religious narratives, and flower painting. In 1900 she met the American collector Samuel Bancroft, who became her most consistent patron. She had solo exhibitions in the USA in 1903 in Boston, and in 1908 in New York. Her last major work was painted in 1914, though she continued to paint regularly until her death. 
Marie Stillman was credited by her friends not only with great beauty but also with a generous and amiable disposition. Brought up in a wealthy home, she had to supplement her husband's erratic income during their married life through her painting, though her sales were always irregular. Her stepgranddaughter recalled her ceaseless industry as an artist, as well as her 'Greek rages' and her enduring appeal to men. One of a group of women seen in their own lifetimes as emblems of Pre-Raphaelitism, she made a considerable executive contribution to this important British art movement, and was recognized at her death as the last surviving link with it. She died on 6 March 1927 at her home, 19 Ashburn Place, Cromwell Road, Kensington, London. Her work is represented in the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool, the Delaware Art Museum, the Richard F. Brush Art Gallery, New York, the National Trust collection and the Lloyd-Webber collection. 


@@@@@


doc= 38010


Stirling, Patrick (1820-1895), mechanical engineer, was born in Kilmarnock, Ayrshire, on 29 June 1820, the eldest in the family of five sons and two daughters of the Revd Robert Stirling (1790-1878), a minister in the Church of Scotland, and inventor, and his wife, Jane (died 1892), daughter of William Rankine, wine merchant, of Galston. He was educated privately. Engineering was a considerable family influence, his great-grandfather Robert Stirling having built a threshing engine in 1758 and his father having invented the hot-air engine and inspired C. W. Siemens's regenerative furnace for the melting and reheating of steel. In 1837 he was apprenticed to his uncle James S. Stirling at Dundee foundry, where he worked for the next six years and where some locomotives were built for the Arbroath and Forfar Railway which influenced his own later designs. 
From 1843 he worked on marine engines with Robert Napier on Clydeside, doing installation work on four early Cunard liners. He joined Neilson & Co. in 1846 at their Hyde Park (Glasgow) works, becoming a foreman in the locomotive construction department. In 1851 he became locomotive superintendent of the small Bowling and Balloch Railway on Loch Lomond, before returning to marine work with Laurence Hill of Port Glasgow. He then joined R. and W. Hawthorn & Co. of Newcastle, a firm which supplied locomotives to the Glasgow and South Western Railway, of which he became locomotive superintendent in 1853. His first task was to select a site for, and to design, new locomotive workshops in Kilmarnock to replace existing inadequate facilities in Glasgow. He then introduced several new locomotive types from 1855 onwards for passenger and freight service, the former being of 2-2-2 type with outside cylinders and inside bearings to all axles. Later examples had boilers without a steam-collecting dome, which strengthened the boiler shell and which characterized all his later locomotives, as well as those of his brother James on the South Eastern Railway and of his son Matthew on the Hull and Barnsley. 
In 1866 Stirling succeeded Archibald Sturrock as locomotive superintendent of the Great Northern Railway at Doncaster, and in the next year his 0-4-2 type mixed-traffic locomotive was first introduced, with construction continuing over the next twenty-eight years, as well as the 2-4-0 type for passenger service. However, he considered that only locomotives with a single pair of driving wheels were really suitable for express-train service, and the first of these was built in 1868, followed two years later by the larger 4-2-2 type with outside cylinders and driving wheels 8 feet in diameter, whose simple and elegant outline created great interest. These, and a series of 2-2-2 type machines with inside cylinders, continued to be built until 1895 and hauled the principal express trains. They also pulled those in the railway 'races' from London to Edinburgh in 1888 and to Aberdeen in 1895, when there was keen competition between the east and west coast routes; Stirling's locomotives averaged over 60 m.p.h. between London and York. However, the steadily increasing weight of express trains in the 1890s made it obvious that more powerful locomotives would be required. 
Stirling was charming if somewhat reserved in manner, and he retained a strong Scottish accent throughout his life. He was a strikingly handsome figure, 6 feet 4 inches in height. He maintained his defence of his 8-foot single locomotives when contemporaries were increasingly convinced that coupled-wheel engines were preferable. He was dedicated to his work and to his men, by whom he was much respected for his design and organizing ability and for his fairness and kindness in cases of individual hardship. During times of recession he did everything possible to avoid making men redundant, preferring that all should work short time. On his seventieth birthday his workmen presented a drinking fountain to the town of Doncaster as a token of their esteem. He was a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers and the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, and was one of the earliest members of the Institute of Engineers and Shipbuilders of Scotland. 
The date of Stirling's marriage to Margaret Laird of Port Glasgow is not known; she outlived him. They had four sons, all of whom became railway engineers, and one daughter. Stirling died at his home, Highfield House, Wheatley, near Doncaster, on 11 November 1895 and was buried on 14 November in Doncaster cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 38011


Stockmar, Christian Friedrich, Baron Stockmar (1787-1863), courtier, was born on 22 August 1787 in Coburg, of German parentage and Swedish descent, the eldest son and second child in the family of two sons and two daughters of Johann Ernest Gotthelf Stockmar, a scientific lawyer. A quiet, unobtrusive youth, Stockmar was educated at Coburg Gymnasium and from 1805 to 1810 studied medicine at the universities of Wurzburg, Erlangen, and Jena. 
In 1812 Stockmar opened a military hospital in Coburg. He was favourably noticed by Prince Leopold of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld, and in 1816 was invited to be Leopold's physician-in-ordinary. Leopold made Stockmar promise never to leave him after his wife, Princess Charlotte, died in childbirth in 1817 at Claremont House near Windsor. Prudently, 'Stocky' had not attended her, just held her hand. He was promoted to be Leopold's private secretary and in 1831, when his master became king of the Belgians, a Bavarian baron. He helped organize Leopold's court, devised the constitution, and inspired the Coburg-Portuguese marriage of 1835; above all he promoted the marriage between Queen Victoria and Prince Albert, Leopold's nephew, in 1840. Stockmar's royal career was well under way. 
On 20 June 1837 Victoria had ascended the British throne. Sixteen days earlier 'the Baron' (as Victoria and Albert called him) had been sent to England by her 'Uncle Leopold' as his 'alter ego', and was Victoria's guest at breakfast on her first day as queen. He was soon working on a valuable theory of the crown as above party politics. He left England in 1838 to assess the suitability of Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha for Victoria's consort, returning when they married. For the next seventeen years he spent only the summers in Germany, saying of Albert, 'I love him as if he were my own son.' With Albert he planned the royal children's education (which had, in the case of the prince of Wales, such disastrous results) and systematized the royal household. He took care not to get involved in court favours, such as the bribe offered by an MP of $10,000 to obtain him a peerage. 
Stockmar's political views were sometimes absurd. 'The omnipotence of the House of Commons', he wrote, 'is revolution itself and death to the true old English constitution' -- of which he fancied himself the best judge. He distrusted British statesmen: Sir Robert Peel was 'myopic', Lord Palmerston 'insane'. He advised the monarch to avoid being 'a Mandarin figure' but to become a 'Permanent Premier'. The European revolutions of 1848 he saw as a golden opportunity for introducing constitutional monarchies and for a united Germany in alliance with Britain. His position was not an easy one: in England he was suspected of being an intriguer, while some in Germany saw him as an English spy. 
By 1855 Stockmar's health was failing. In the past he had settled several disputes between Victoria and Albert. Now his 'nerves' were too weak to make his advice effective. He returned to Germany for good in 1857, moving for a time to Berlin to be near the princess royal and her husband, Prince Frederick William of Prussia. When Prince Albert died in 1861, Stockmar's hopes were shattered and his influence diminished. It was not until his last years that he enjoyed a real home life, though married in 1821 in Coburg to a cousin, Fanny Sommer (died in or after 1863), the daughter of a physician; they had two sons and one daughter. He died on 9 July 1863 in Coburg. His son Ernest wrote Stockmar's 'Memoirs', describing them as lifting the veil 'but a little'. An angry Queen Victoria, however, felt it had been lifted far too much, particularly over the clashes between Palmerston, as foreign secretary, and the prince consort. 
Elizabeth Longford', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38012


Stoker, Abraham (1847-1912), novelist and theatre manager, was born on 8 November 1847 at 15 Marino Crescent, Clontarf, Dublin, the second of the five sons and two daughters of Abraham Stoker (1799-1876), clerk at Dublin Castle, and Charlotte, 'nee' Thornley (1818-1901), social activist and advocate for the poor. Stoker's childhood was marred by illness. He was bedridden with an unknown ailment and did not walk until he was seven. These years of confinement, during which he watched the passing scenes from his bedroom window, was read to by his parents, and learned to read, cultivated his fascination with storms, shipwrecks, sea rescues, and the supernatural. 
Despite his childhood infirmity, Stoker grew into a tall, handsome young man with a striking red beard and brown hair. He had a gift for oratory, an interest in acting, and was a champion athlete at Trinity College, Dublin, from which he graduated with a degree in science (1871) and a master's degree in pure mathematics (1874). Later, in 1890, he was called to the bar as a member of the Inner Temple, London, but never practised. 
Stoker followed his father to Dublin Castle as a civil service clerk. Bored and restless, he volunteered as unpaid drama critic for the 'Daily Mail', and thus met Henry Irving, the first actor to be knighted. When Irving leased the Lyceum Theatre in London in 1878, Stoker joined him as business manager and remained by his side for twenty-seven years. Together they made the Lyceum the cultural heart of London. 
An innovative administrator, Stoker was the first to number seats, to promote advance reservations, and to advertise an entire season rather than one play at a time. He supervised a staff of 128 employees, handled all Irving's correspondence, and organized the American and provincial tours. The Lyceum, the first company to tour with their own costumes and sets, made eight trips to the United States between 1883 and 1904. 
Stoker had always wanted to be a literary man. His first prose, a novella entitled 'The Primrose Path', was published in 'The Shamrock' in 1875. His first book, 'The Duties of Clerks of Petty Sessions in Ireland' (1879), was written to codify the bureaucracy he was leaving. Before settling in London, on 4 December 1878 he married Florence Anne Lemon Balcombe (1858-1935), a Dublin beauty and the daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel James Balcombe of the 43rd regiment, who was also being courted by Oscar Wilde. They had one son, Noel, born in 1879. Despite long hours working for Irving, Stoker found the time between 1881 and 1895 to publish a book of fairy-tales called 'Under the Sunset' (1882), a travel narrative entitled 'A Glimpse of America' (1886), and three adventure-romance novels: 'The Snake's Pass' (1891), 'The Watter's Mou' (1895), and 'The Shoulder of Shasta' (1895). 
In 1890 Stoker began to make notes for a Gothic adventure story about Englishmen who safeguard their country by tracking down and killing a foreign invader, a Hungarian vampire. Complex and highly symbolic, the plot illustrated his fears about a world approaching a new century, about the unspeakable things which could happen to ordinary people, and about male insecurity and the dangers of subservience to another person. More Irish than Transylvanian, Count Dracula embodies the Celtic phenomenon known as 'shape shifting', the ability to become anything -- a wolf, bat, rat, or swirling mist. Stoker was familiar with Irish folklore and with the early prose vampires: John Polidori's 'The Vampyre' (1819), after a fragment by Lord Byron; Charles Robert Maturin's 'Melmoth the Wanderer' (1820); and James Malcolm Rymer's 'Varney the Vampyre' (1847), a penny dreadful chronicling the adventures of an eighteenth-century aristocratic bloodsucker. Also influential was Wilkie Collins's 'The Woman in White' (1860), a sensation novel employing Gothic elements, and, like 'Dracula', written in an epistolary form. 
The major precursor of 'Dracula', as shown in the short story 'Dracula's Guest', which originally began the novel, was 'Carmilla' (1872), a vampire-lesbian novel written by (Joseph) Sheridan Le Fanu, a fellow Irishman. Stoker's knowledge of eastern Europe was garnered from library research and conversations with his brother George, a medical officer who had served in the Russo-Turkish War of 1877-8. During a holiday in Whitby, Stoker drafted the scene in which the count arrives in the fishing village on a ghost ship, and during other holidays at Cruden Bay in Aberdeenshire he walked daily to the ruined Slains Castle, considered the inspiration for Dracula's castle. 
In his research Stoker had read about Vlad IV of Wallachia (1431-1476), known as Vlad Dracula or Vlad the Impaler, a tyrant who reputedly feasted al fresco amid rows of impaled bodies. The count takes his name from this historical figure but Henry Irving was the model for the vampire's physical characteristics and mesmerizing personality, in particular the desire to control. Stoker also wanted to create a dark, sinister role to swell the actor's repertory of villains, from Mathias to Macbeth to Mephistopheles. 'Dracula' was a homage to Irving; however, Irving refused the part and the dramatic version was never performed in Stoker's lifetime. Originally titled 'The Un-Dead', the novel became 'Dracula' shortly before publication in 1897. Favourably compared with Mary Shelley's 'Frankenstein', Emily Bronte's 'Wuthering Heights', and Edgar Allan Poe's 'The Fall of the House of Usher', it was considered weird and powerful, one of the best in the supernatural line, but no one examined its sexually unsettling themes until the 1970s. 'Dracula' went through eleven editions during Stoker's lifetime, bringing in annual royalties but never the wealth he craved. 
In 1931 Universal Pictures in Hollywood dressed Bela Lugosi in a white tie and opera cape for the film which spawned some 500 films worldwide. Where Stoker pictured a smelly, bloated predator hunted down in an epic adventure, film-makers saw a romantic-erotic myth. Through the years Count Dracula, the most filmed character in history after Sherlock Holmes, has grown younger, sensitive, and more handsome. Once film-makers had emphasized the connection between blood and sex, the Stokerian vampire achieved icon status. 
Stoker wrote ten more books, including the supernatural novels 'The Jewel of Seven Stars' (1903), inspired by the Egyptian adventures of Oscar Wilde's father, which is credited with starting the mummy cult in films; 'The Lady of the Shroud' (1909), one of whose characters is Lady Teuta, a make-believe vampire; and 'The Lair of the White Worm' (1911), featuring Lady Arabella, a giant, primordial worm, made into a film in 1988 by Ken Russell in his fantasy style. But there is no character with the sustaining power of Count Dracula, or of Renfield, the zoophagous patient who eats flies and spiders, or of Dr Van Helsing, the heavily accented psychic detective. 
The Lyceum went into receivership in 1902 and Stoker never worked again in the theatre. His 'Personal Reminiscences of Henry Irving' (1906) forms a glowing two-volume tribute to his beloved friend. Following Irving's death in 1905, Stoker suffered a series of strokes and died from kidney failure on 20 April 1912 at his London home, 26 St George's Square, Pimlico; he was survived by his wife. His alleged syphilis has never been proven. He was cremated at Golders Green crematorium in Middlesex. 
Each generation creates anew a liberating vampire, while scholars return to Stoker's novel hoping to learn more about the xenophobic and homophobic Victorians. A vampire in evening dress has usurped the red devil with pitchfork and pointed tail as the most popular symbol of evil. As writers, Stoker, Maturin, and Le Fanu constitute the Irish-Gothic triumvirate. The novel's enduring fascination stems also from Stoker's ambiguous ending. It is often assumed that Dracula was staked -- so deeply imprinted is this violent film scene -- rather than dying from multiple knife wounds. The power of the novel's ending inheres in the reader's ultimate uncertainty as to the permanence of Dracula's end. 


@@@@@


doc= 38013


Stoakes, John (c.1610-1665), naval officer, was a native of Plymouth, which remained his home. Bred up to the sea, he probably commanded merchant vessels before entering the Commonwealth navy. He first appears as captain of the 'Hector' in the spring of 1649, serving in the western approaches, and helped to transport the Cromwellian army to Ireland later that year. He continued in the western station, commanding the 'Dragon' in 1650-52 with considerable success. He carried the royalist frigate 'Grenvile' into Plymouth in February 1652, and in September captured a Swedish vessel with a rich cargo of gold bullion, which was transported under armed guard from Plymouth to the Tower. Stoakes's rise to prominence came with the First Anglo-Dutch War (1652-4), during which he took part in the actions off the Kentish Knock and Dungeness late in 1652 and in the three great sea battles of 1653, in the second of which he was wounded. He was advanced to more senior commands, and during the final winter served as rear-admiral of the blue in the Channel Fleet. 
In August 1654 Stoakes sailed as flag captain to Robert Blake in the 'George' in the expedition to the Mediterranean; he took part in the attack on Porto Farina, and was advanced to rear-admiral from 1 September 1655 on Joseph Jordan's return to England, succeeding him in command of the 'Unicorn'. The expedition returned to England early in October. Stoakes sailed again with Blake and Edward Mountagu in March 1656 on the expedition to Spain, commanding the 'Rainbow'. After returning to England in November he rejoined the fleet in February 1657, and commanded the squadron blockading the coast in April 1657 when Blake took the rest of the fleet to attack the plate fleet at Santa Cruz. When Blake sailed for England in July Stoakes stayed on to command the English squadron remaining on station, transferring to the 'Lyme'. At the end of the year he led his squadron through the Strait of Gibraltar and on to Leghorn, where he angered the duke of Tuscany by stopping and searching vessels entering and leaving the port; unperturbed, Stoakes wrote home complaining of the duke's 'impertinences' ('Thurloe', 7.75), and found his actions approved. He then sailed for Tunis, arriving off the port on 28 January and calling on the dey to free his English captives. Both parties recognized, however, that with only six ships Stoakes could not hope to emulate Blake's attack on Porto Farina, and he was obliged to ransom the captives as part of a general treaty of peace and friendship. He secured the release of seventy-two English slaves, including three women, for a third of the sum originally demanded. A similar treaty with Tripoli, negotiated in the summer, was well received in England. 
Stoakes's operations against Spanish shipping were hampered by a long and bitter feud with his deputy, Thomas Whetstone, the protector's nephew. A rash young man promoted on the strength of his connections, Whetstone openly flouted the admiral's authority, and Stoakes eventually arrested him in September 1658 and sent him back to England for trial. The squadron itself was summoned home in May 1659, reaching England in September. Stoakes was relieved to find his conduct fully approved. 
In November 1659 Stoakes was one of the naval officers ashore who wrote urging Monck to accept the army's coup against the restored Rump Parliament. Despite this he was given a new command by the reinstated Rump in March 1660, probably because Mountagu, now commanding the fleet once more, judged him an officer too important to exclude. He played no part in Mountagu's manoeuvring to restore the monarchy, and Mountagu neither liked nor trusted him. None the less Stoakes made no overt protest, and sailed with the fleet that brought the king home in May. 
Towards the end of 1660 Stoakes was made second in command of an expedition to Guinea, led by the fiery cavalier Robert Holmes, to support and protect the interests of the Royal African Company. That may suggest earlier trading connections with the region, or simply that the new regime wanted him at a safe distance. There was an inauspicious beginning when his ship, the 'Amity', foundered at Woolwich during a sudden storm on 9-10 December, before the expedition was ready to depart, and he commanded the 'Assurance' in her stead. Relations became strained between the two commanders; Holmes scorned his 'old, fat' deputy and 'would have been well contented to have seen him hanged' (Ollard, 67-8). The small English force attacked several Dutch forts in the Gambia, and arrived back in England in July 1661 with ivory but none of the gold they had been hoping to find. Stoakes, now in the 'Marmaduke', returned to Guinea in 1663, ahead of Holmes's second expedition, and his exploits in driving out the Dutch and erecting a warehouse and fort for English traders prompted a bitter complaint by the Dutch West India Company in September. The following spring his small force crossed the Atlantic to Barbados, probably carrying slaves, and on to Jamaica in June, bringing Sir Thomas Modyford to take up his post as governor and 700 settlers from Barbados. 
The outbreak of the Second Anglo-Dutch War, to which the exploits of Holmes and Stoakes had contributed, ensured that Dutch complaints were quickly forgotten. Stoakes was appointed captain of the 'Triumph', one of the most powerful ships in the fleet, but soon fell ill and died at Portsmouth, probably on board the 'Triumph', on 11 February 1665; he was presumably buried in either Portsmouth or Plymouth. Stoakes was a pugnacious and capable commander, and during the 1650s had won tributes from four of the generals-at-sea (Blake, Richard Deane, Monck, and Mountagu). Samuel Pepys enjoyed his company, and relished his tale of an African king who had invited him (and Holmes) to sleep with any of his hundred wives. In his will, drawn up in 1662, Stoakes described himself as 'gentleman' and divided his estate equally between his wife, Katherine, and his married daughter, Katherine Heydon. 


@@@@@


doc= 38014


Stone, Edward (1702-1768), Church of England clergyman and discoverer of the active ingredient in aspirin, was born in Lacey Green, Princes Risborough, Buckinghamshire, on 5 November 1702, the only son of Edward Stone (died 1740x42), yeoman, and his first wife, Elizabeth Reynolds (died before 1707). On 23 April 1707 his father married as his second wife Elizabeth Grubb (died 1751), daughter of John Grubb (1625-1700) of Horsenden and Owlswick, both in Buckinghamshire; they had a daughter, Elizabeth ('b'. 1709). In 1716 Stone's father bought his wife's two sisters out of their shares of the manor of Owlswick, and was thereafter styled gentleman. Stone remained in close contact with the Grubb family, and acted on his stepmother's behalf in money matters until her death. 
Stone matriculated at Wadham College, Oxford, in 1720 and graduated BA (1724) and MA (1727). He was ordained deacon on 17 March 1728 by the bishop of Lincoln, becoming assistant curate of Saunderton, Buckinghamshire; four months later, on 16 June 1728, he was ordained priest in order that he could take up the curacy of Charlton-on-Otmoor, Oxfordshire. He remained there until 1730 when he was elected a fellow of Wadham. Stone preached the university sermon on 10 December 1732, which was later printed. This led to an exchange of polemical pamphlets. Although undoubtedly worsted by Thomas Chubb, Stone retained his dignity and courtesy. 
In 1738 John Grubb (1674-1760), his stepmother's brother, presented Stone as rector of Horsenden, Buckinghamshire. He never resided in the tiny parish, and seems only to have visited it occasionally. In the scandal that arose in Wadham in 1739 concerning the predatory homosexual activities of the warden, Robert Thistlethwayte, Stone was consulted by an aggrieved undergraduate and his friends, even though he was not resident at the time, and suggested that they seek legal advice. In 1741 he resigned his fellowship to marry Grubb's daughter, Elizabeth (died 1751), on 7 July at Mercers' Hall chapel, Cheapside, London. They had one son, Edward (1744-1811), who also entered the ordained ministry, and a daughter, Elizabeth, who died in infancy. Sir Jonathan Cope presented him as rector of St Peter's, Drayton, near Banbury, which he held in plurality with Horsenden until his death. In 1745 he moved to Chipping Norton, Oxfordshire, as chaplain to Sir Jonathan Cope at Bruern Abbey. 
In the Oxfordshire election of 1754, Stone was agent in Chipping Norton on behalf of the whig candidates. He was described by Lady Susan Keck as 'a good man, but slow for a very celebrated canvasser' (Robson, 50). Stone was rewarded for his service with his appointment in 1755 as a JP for Oxfordshire, where he was active in enforcing the poor law, and it is in this capacity that he appears most frequently in local records. 
On 25 April 1763 Stone wrote to George Parker, second earl of Macclesfield, president of the Royal Society, describing the use of dried willow bark as a remedy for fevers and agues. He explained that for some time he had suffered from 'aguistic intermitting disorders', which may have been malaria (Stone, 195). About 1757 he had 'accidentally' tasted willow bark and noted its extreme bitterness and its resemblance to the bark of the cinchona tree (quinine) from Peru. Arguing from the doctrine of signatures -- 'that many natural maladies carry their cures along with them, or that their remedies lie not far from their causes' (ibid.) -- Stone concluded that the willow tree that 'delights in a moist or wet soil' (ibid.) might provide an antidote for agues that chiefly abounded in that environment. He therefore experimented by gathering about a pound weight of willow bark from the shoots of pollarded willows, dried it for more than three months in a bag on the outside of a baker's oven, pounded and sifted it. He dosed himself, using very small quantities at first, but finding that the powder had a salutary effect, increased the dose to two scruples repeated every four hours. To his delight 'the ague was soon removed' (ibid.,, 196). 
During the next five years Stone had continued to administer powdered dried willow bark to about fifty people suffering from agues or fevers, and in almost every case it achieved the same success. In treating those fevers that appeared to be more resistant to willow bark, he added a small quantity of quinine. No other accompanying treatment was used. Stone concluded that quinine was more effective than willow bark, but that in other respects their action was similar. He observed also that powered dried willow bark was 'a safe medicine' (Stone, 198), but in this he would prove mistaken. In this way Stone had accidentally stumbled on salicylic acid, the active ingredient in aspirin. 
Stone's letter to Macclesfield was read before the Royal Society on 2 June 1763 and published in volume 53 of its 'Philosophical Transactions' that year. Willow bark thereafter received occasional mention in herbals, and nineteenth-century pharmacists experimented in producing salicylic acid from willow bark and meadowsweet. Unacceptable side-effects were mitigated by the development in 1853 of a new compound between acetyl chloride and sodium salicylate which proved more digestible, but it was not until 1897 that Felix Hoffman synthesized salicylic acid in a pure and stable chemical form. This was produced commercially by Hoffman and Heinrich Dreser in 1899, and was marketed by Bayer under the name 'aspirin', derived from 'Spiraea', then the Latin name for meadowsweet ('Filipendula ulmaria'). 
Stone's interests also included astronomy. Following the transit of Venus observed on 6 June 1761 he published 'The whole doctrine of parallaxes explained... by an arithmetical and geometrical construction of the transit of Venus' in 1763. One purpose of the book was to identify places where the next transit, of 1769, could best be seen. A second edition followed in 1768. 
In January 1764 a fire destroyed Bruern Abbey and so ended Stone's chaplaincy there. He was still rector of Horsenden and Drayton, but continued to live in Chipping Norton, occupying the remaining four years of his life by serving as assistant curate for Churchill and Cornwell, and by applying himself more assiduously to his duties as a magistrate. Stone died intestate in Chipping Norton on 26 November 1768 and was buried at Horsenden on 2 December. Administration of his estate was granted on 2 January 1769 to his son Edward. 


@@@@@


doc= 38015


Stormonth, James (1824-1882), Episcopalian minister and lexicographer, was reputedly born in Edinburgh ('The Athenaeum', 11 Feb 1882), the son of James Stormonth, fish curer, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Robertson. He had at least one younger brother. He was educated at the Canongate burgh school, Edinburgh, and the University of Edinburgh (1845-7, 1851-7) where he read arts and divinity but did not proceed to graduate. He entered the ministry of the Church of Scotland as a licentiate at New Street Church, Edinburgh. He married, at some time after the third proclamation of the banns on 29 August 1847, Mary Trotter Hunter ('b'. 15 April 1826), the daughter of the Revd Robert Hunter, a schoolmaster of Colinton, Midlothian, and Joanne Menzie Hunter ('nee' Mehison). Appointed to a teaching post at the Canongate burgh school, he remained there until 1864, when disagreements with the school's directors led to his dismissal. In 1862 he had been admitted to the eldership of the Canongate Kirk; he was subsequently elected its session clerk. In 1867 this post was terminated amid recriminations, although he remained a member of the session until 1871. Between 1867 and 1869 he had a licentiate and teaching appointment in the parish of Annbank, Ayrshire, and from 1869 to 1870 in the parish of Dunbog, Fife. From 1870 to 1875 he worked in the Orkney Islands, at Rendall, Firth, and Stenness. It was during the five years he spent in Orkney that he began to make a name for himself in the field of English-language studies; he was also the writer of the 'Orcadian Boatman's Song'. Arguments with his congregation in Stenness and the presbytery of Cairston, in part caused by the 'miserably inadequate income' he received ('Orkney Herald', 22 Dec 1875) led to his demitting his post towards the end of 1875 and returning to Edinburgh shortly afterwards. Stormonth's philological work focused on the lexis, pronunciation, and orthography of English. His 'Etymological and Pronouncing Dictionary of the English Language' (1871) was immensely popular with the general public -- by 1918 it had passed through eighteen editions. Its success lay in the clarity and succinctness of exposition of the subject matter. In the academic world, however, the work was received less approvingly. A devastating review by Henry Bradley in 'The Academy' (April 1884), after Stormonth's death, exposed the numerous weaknesses in his etymological analyses. From the dictionary Stormonth derived other publications, including a series for schoolchildren and students on the vocabulary and spelling of English. 
In 1880 Stormonth became a deacon of the Scottish Episcopal church; in 1881 he was ordained priest and served at the church of St John the Evangelist, Edinburgh. His tenure of the post was short: his health had been declining progressively for several months as a result of overwork, and he died on 5 February 1882 at his home at 7 Cornwall Street, Edinburgh. He was survived by his wife, two sons, and four daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 38016


Storr, Paul (bap. 1770, d. 1844), manufacturing silversmith, was baptized in St Marylebone, Middlesex, on 28 October 1770, one of several children of Thomas Storr (died 1803), a silver-chaser who by 1788 had become a victualler, and his wife, Sarah. Paul, who may himself have been trained as a silver-chaser, was apprenticed in 1784 to William Rock of Westminster, another victualler, becoming free of the Vintners' Company in 1791. Following a short-lived partnership during 1792 with the working silversmith William Frisbee, Storr removed to premises in Church Street, Soho, formerly occupied by Andrew Fogelberg, the Swedish-born silversmith, whose business had flourished there since about 1772. It is possible that Storr continued the concern, Fogelberg perhaps acting as the sleeping partner. 
In 1796 Storr moved to 20 Air Street, Piccadilly, where a successful manufacturing silversmith of the previous generation, Thomas Pitts, had had his workshops. Supplying the retail trade with special orders and quality goods, Storr built up his business over the next eleven years into one of the most important of its kind in London. Then in 1807 he entered into an exclusive manufacturing arrangement with Rundell, Bridge, and Rundell, the crown jewellers, installing craftsmen in new jointly owned workshops in Dean Street, Soho. This subsidiary of the celebrated retail house on Ludgate Hill was known as Storr & Co., the first partners, besides Storr himself, being Philip Rundell, John Bridge, the sculptor William Theed, and Edmond Waller Rundell. It is said that Rundells had to satisfy so many orders at this time that Storr & Co. was obliged to work some 10,000 ounces of silver a month in the shape of dinner services, centrepieces, and other ceremonial and domestic plate. 
Storr's agreement with Rundells terminated on 18 February 1819. By then he had already found suitable workshops in Harrison Street, Gray's Inn Road, where he set up once more as an independent manufacturer. During 1822 he also went into business as a retail goldsmith and jeweller in Bond Street with John Mortimer (died 1871). This partnership, which included the silver manufactory, traded as Storr and Mortimer until Storr's retirement on 31 December 1838; thereafter the firm continued first as Mortimer and Hunt and then as Hunt and Roskell. 
The lack of suitable evidence renders Storr's career, like that of so many contemporaries in the smaller industries, difficult to assess. Of his own personal work in any branch of the goldsmith's craft there is not a single identifiable item. Nor is there any other documentary evidence to support the contention, reinforced by the fact of his so-called maker's marks entered at the London assay office between 1792 and 1834, that he was an actual worker in the precious metals. All that may be stated with any certainty is that his knowledge of the craft must have been more than merely adequate and that he was a good businessman. In short, Storr's latter-day fame rests upon two particulars: first, that he was fortunate in working alongside some of the most talented artists, designers, and craftsmen of his time; and second, that the bulk of Rundell, Bridge, and Rundell's productions in silver during the years of their greatest success were made under his management at Storr & Co. and thus bear his mark. 
In 1801 Storr married Elizabeth Susanna (1771-1843), youngest daughter of Ann and Adam Beyer (1729-1804), who with his brother Lorence traded as a piano and organ builder in Compton Street, Soho. They had ten children. Storr retired to Hill House, Tooting, Surrey, and died in Tooting on 18 March 1844. He and his wife, who predeceased him, were buried in the churchyard of Tooting parish church. 
John Culme', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38017


Strachey, Rachel Pearsall Conn (1887-1940), feminist activist and writer, was born on 4 June 1887 at 40 Grosvenor Road, Westminster, London, the elder daughter (there were no sons) of (Benjamin) Francis Conn Costelloe (1855-1899), solicitor, and his wife, Mary Pearsall Smith, a member of the distinguished Philadelphia Quaker family and sister of the writer (Lloyd) Logan Pearsall Smith (1865-1946). Ray and her sister, Karin ['see 'Karin Elizabeth Conn Costelloe 'under' Gwyneth Bebb], were baptized Catholics, but after their mother's elopement in 1891 with Bernhard Berenson, the art historian, they were brought up by their Quaker grandmother, Hannah Tatum Whitall Smith. Ray was educated at Kensington high school and at Newnham College, Cambridge, where she achieved third class in part one of the mathematical tripos (1908). Both at school and at Newnham she had been a passionate sportswoman with a particular enthusiasm for hockey and cricket. Following a year at Bryn Mawr College in Philadelphia (then headed by her cousin Carey Thomas and regarded by her mother as a necessary finishing school), she attended lectures on electrical engineering at Oxford University in 1910. 
In 1909 Ray Costelloe had met and become very attached to the Strachey family, to which she became formally connected through her marriage, on 31 May 1911, to Oliver Strachey (1874-1960), later cryptographer and intelligence officer, brother of (Giles) Lytton Strachey (1880-1932). He was thirteen years her senior, divorced, and recently returned from India, where he had worked on the East Indian Railway. He was the son of Sir Richard Strachey, lieutenant-general. They had a daughter and a son, Christopher Strachey. 
Though born into a family of feminists it was not until she went to Newnham that Ray became interested in women's suffrage. Her friend Ellie Rendel (a niece of Lytton Strachey) took her to suffrage meetings, and together they organized further meetings at Newnham and established a short-lived Younger Women's Suffrage group. When she left university Ray became increasingly involved in suffrage organization. Though briefly attracted to the militant movement she became a member of the moderate constitutionalist London Society for Women's Suffrage. There she began her lifelong collaboration with her close friend and, later, sister-in-law, Philippa Strachey (1872-1968). She worked closely with Millicent Fawcett, sharing her liberal feminist values -- and opposing any attempt to integrate the suffrage movement with the Labour Party. 
Ray Strachey's suffrage activity was temporarily interrupted in 1911, when immediately after her marriage she went with her husband to India. Though she hated India she attempted to use the Strachey imperial background to establish a career in the writing of Indian history for herself and Oliver. They produced one slim volume, 'Keigwin's Rebellion' (1916), but this enthusiasm did not last. When Ray discovered she was pregnant she and Oliver returned to London, where to her mother's horror she immediately resumed her suffrage activity. 
During the First World War, Ray Strachey's working life became increasingly hectic. An ardent patriot and strong supporter of the British war effort, she worked closely with Millicent Garrett Fawcett to expel what she referred to as 'the poisonous pacifists' from the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies (NUWSS). In 1915 she became parliamentary secretary of the NUWSS, a role that became increasingly time-consuming after the speaker's conference of 1916, when the need for reform of the existing suffrage laws to enable soldiers to vote put the question of parliamentary reform and of women's suffrage back on the agenda. The highly visible work of women during the war brought greater sympathy for the demand for women's suffrage than had been the case in earlier decades. 
The direction of Ray Strachey's own interest during the war shifted from suffrage to the question of women's employment. She worked with Pippa Strachey to organize the Women's Service, which provided war work and training for women, and became chairman of the Women's Service Employment Committee. In 1918 she privately commented that gaining the admission of women to the Amalgamated Society of Engineers was 'quite the most important thing that could happen for women in England' now that the vote was won. Strachey was one of the few feminists at the time who combined full-time work with motherhood. She gave birth to her second child in 1916, but the demands of the suffrage movement were such that she refused to give up her work for more than a few weeks. 
After the war Strachey continued to devote her attention to furthering women's employment and campaigning for equal pay. She rejected the attempt by Eleanor Rathbone to establish a broad-based feminist programme in the 1920s, concentrating her efforts rather on the London Society for Women's Service (the successor to the London Society for Women's Suffrage), which campaigned for an extension of women's professional employment and for equal pay. She fought particularly for women's admission to the legal profession and to the civil service, and headed the Women's Service Bureau, which campaigned for equal pay for professional women. She was a founder of the Women's Employment Federation and first chairman (1930-39) of the Cambridge University women's employment board. 
Though often insisting that parliamentary politics were boring Strachey stood as an independent candidate for Bromford and Bow in 1918, 1920, and 1922 but expressed great delight when she was defeated. She also acted for some years as unpaid parliamentary adviser to Nancy Astor and, sharing as she did the view of many of her contemporaries that questions such as married women's citizenship needed to be dealt with on an international as well as a national basis, was involved for a short time in the League of Nations Union. 
In addition to her feminist work Strachey had a lifelong career as a writer. Her first novel, 'The World at Eighteen' (1907), was published while she was in her teens and was followed by a stream of fiction and biography. First came a study of her grandmother's great heroine -- 'Frances Willard: her Life and Work' (1912) -- then an affectionate biography of Hannah Whitall Smith, 'A Quaker Grandmother' (1914), and two novels: 'Marching on' (1923) and 'Shaken by the Wind' (1927). Her best-known and most successful book, 'The Cause' (1928), was for many decades regarded as the classic account of the English women's movement. While acknowledging in a limited way the importance of the militants it established a version of the suffrage movement that endorsed the views and celebrated the role of Millicent Fawcett and the NUWSS. Strachey's adulation of Fawcett was evident also in the biography, 'Millicent Garrett Fawcett' (1931), that she wrote shortly after Fawcett's death. Her final books focused closely on her own feminist interests. 'Careers and Openings for Women' (1935) was both a practical handbook and a sociological survey of the female labour market, and the collection of essays that she edited, 'Our Freedom and its Results' (1936), sought to offer a summary of the changes in the legal, social, and economic situation of women since the gaining of suffrage. 
Throughout her married life Ray Strachey had depended on the money that she received from the family trust, amply supplemented by the generous allowances paid by her mother and Bernhard Berenson. This enabled her to have domestic help with her children, to drive a motor car, to travel constantly, and to attend the opera whenever she chose. Despite always insisting on her own frugality she was extremely extravagant and had little capacity to plan or manage money. She was also very enterprising, and when Berenson's financial difficulties during the depression brought her allowance to an end she immediately found paid work, first, in 1931, as a political secretary to Lady Astor and then, in 1935, as the head of the Women's Employment Federation. Her income was supplemented by her writing and by her regular broadcasts on the BBC. 
A woman of immense energy, Strachey built herself a country home and swimming pool at Friday's Hill, Fernhurst, Sussex. Her London life was filled with political activity and meetings, and satisfied her passion for gossip and intrigue -- but it needed the balance of country weekends. As one who had never taken any interest in fashion and disliked social life unless it involved close friends or the Strachey family, her rural retreat suited her extremely well, and she spent her weekdays in London, returning to the country every weekend to build, garden, and swim in the nude. Her social life became increasingly limited throughout the 1920s. Although friendly with many members of Bloomsbury in her youth, by 1919 she had come to dislike their parties and to disparage what she saw as their self-indulgence, nor would she have any kind of social interaction with her rural neighbours. As one who had suffered from her mother's extreme and passionate personal life she disliked any expression of emotion and attempted always to present herself as unemotional and cynical. But she was an extremely devoted mother and always a devoted friend to Pippa Strachey. 
Like the other women in her family Strachey suffered from bladder problems for decades. She had what was thought to be a minor operation for a fibroid tumour, but she never recovered, and died on 16 July 1940 in the Royal Free Hospital, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 38018


Strahan, Sir Aubrey (1852-1928), geologist, was born on 20 April 1852 in London, the younger son of William Strahan (1807-1866) of Blackmore Hall, Sidmouth, and Elizabeth Anne Dorothea ('b'. 1816), only daughter of General Sir George Bulteel Fisher. His father, who had changed his surname from Snow in 1831, was a banker until 1855, when he was convicted of fraud. Strahan was educated at Eton College (1865-70) and at St John's College, Cambridge (1870-75), where he obtained a third class in the natural sciences tripos of 1874, subsequently taking his BA in 1875, his MA in 1878, and his ScD in 1907. St John's was then an active centre of geological work and this led Strahan to decide to join the geological survey of England and Wales. He was appointed temporary assistant geologist in 1875. Between 1875 and 1890 he revised earlier geological mapping of many parts of Britain. Structural geology was his favourite area of investigation throughout his career and his field mapping was excellent. In 1891 the director, Archibald Geikie, appointed him to undertake a complete revision of the geology of the south Wales coalfield and by 1893 Strahan had five geologists working under him. When Jethro Teall became director in 1901, Strahan was appointed district geologist in charge of the south Wales region. In 1903 he joined the royal commission on the coal supplies of Great Britain (1901-5). His work did much to promote recognition of the importance of concealed coal deposits. In 1909 he was appointed assistant to the director of the geological survey and, when Teall retired in 1914, Strahan succeeded him. 
At the outbreak of war in 1914, Strahan supervised the preparation of a set of vital military geological maps of Belgium and other war zones; and with the cessation of foreign sources of supply an exhaustive inventory of native sources of strategic minerals (ranging from barytes to sand) was needed. This led to the publication of the special reports on the mineral resources of Great Britain which, together with the thirteen memoirs on the geology of the south Wales coalfield (1899-1921, all edited by Strahan, by then author or co-author of forty-five memoirs and fifteen shorter articles), established him as one of the foremost British economic geologists. He retired to Reading, Berkshire in July 1920, moving from 12 Marlowes Road, Kensington, London, where he had lived (when not in the field) since 1888. 
Strahan's contemporaries thought of him as a very successful administrator and organizer, finding him shrewd, diligent, methodical, and impartial. Although his manner appeared reserved on first meeting, he could be a genial, friendly, and charming companion. His interests included archaeology and photography. 
Strahan was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1903 and served on its council (1921-3). He also served as president of the Geological Society (1912-14); president, section C (geology) of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (1904); and vice-president, International Geological Congress (1913). He was appointed KBE in 1919, partly in recognition of his services during the war years, and was also awarded the Wollaston medal of the Geological Society (1919) and an honorary LLD (Toronto). 
On 25 August 1886 Strahan married Fanny Evelyn Margaret (1851-1926), daughter of Edward Henry Roscoe, gentleman, of Chester, and his wife, Fanny Catherine ('nee' Parry). They had one son. Strahan died of heart failure on 4 March 1928 at his home, Fairfield House, near Reading, and was buried at Streatley church, near Goring, Oxfordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 38019


Strangways, Giles (1615-1675), politician, was born on 3 June 1615 in Melbury Sampford, Dorset, and baptized there on 15 June, the second but eldest surviving son of Sir John Strangways (1584-1666) and his first wife, Grace (1583-1652), daughter of Sir George Trenchard of Wolveton, Dorset. Of his six brothers and sisters only Howard, the wife of Sir Lewis Dyve, and James, a colonel of foot in the civil war, lived to maturity. His ancestors had established themselves in Dorset in the fifteenth century, and between 1529 and 1713 the parliamentary representation of the county was held by successive members of the family. His father, who sat in nine parliaments for Dorset or Weymouth, was prominent as an opponent of the court in the 1620s and as a royalist in the civil war. Giles was educated at Wadham College, Oxford, 1629-32, and Sir Francis Wortley later wrote of him: 'What study e'er he undertakes, to master it he's able' ('DNB'). On returning from travel in France he married Susanna, daughter of Thomas Edwards, a London mercer and marine insurer, with a portion of $10,000. Three of their children died young, but three sons survived to sit in parliament and three daughters to marry into minor gentry families. 
Strangways represented Weymouth (with his father) in the Short Parliament (1640) and Bridport in its successor, and as a student of mathematics he was chiefly occupied in counting votes for the nascent royalist party in the Commons. After the outbreak of civil war he left Westminster to raise a cavalry regiment for the king. Taken prisoner with his brother-in-law at the fall of Sherborne Castle (1645) he spent nearly three years in the Tower with Wortley and other leading cavaliers until his father paid the maximum delinquency fine of $10,000. Strangways later presented Charles II with $100 in gold when the fleeing monarch visited Melbury Sampford after military defeat at Worcester. He was also listed by a contemporary among those who acted 'very zealously to advance the king's business' in the west (Smith, 284). His involvement in royalist conspiracy during the interregnum did not exceed the bounds of prudence, however. 
From 1661 Strangways sat in the Cavalier Parliament for Dorset, and was in opposition under both the Clarendon administration and, after 1667, the Cabal, in which his local rival, Anthony Ashley Cooper, held high office. But his stalwart churchmanship brought him an honorary DCL from his old university in 1665, when he probably seconded the 'Five Mile Bill' against dissenting ministers. He succeeded to the Melbury estate with an annual value of at least $5000 in 1666. 
Election defeats at the hands of Ashley (now earl of Shaftesbury and lord chancellor) in 1673 put Strangways into 'a great rage' (HoP, 'Commons, 1660-90', 3.496) and brought him to the fore in parliamentary debates. He attacked with equal vigour the indulgence shown to dissenters and Roman Catholics, the French alliance, and the venality of placemen. Sir William Temple described his principal aims as being to 'secure the business of religion [and] break the war with Holland' (ibid.). After the disruption of the Cabal, he was honoured by the Royal Society with a fellowship (1673) and by admission to Gray's Inn (1674). To him was also ascribed the chief credit for the failure to carry the impeachment of Danby, whose policies at the head of the new administration, both at home and abroad, harmonized with his own. 
Strangways possessed real ability as a politician and was a prominent personality in the Commons. On secular matters he was far-sighted in his approval of neutrality between the French and the Dutch, and in proposing re-election as a requirement for members accepting office. Yet Andrew Marvell, who had applauded his single-handed resistance during a debate on the excise in 1666, later described him as 'a flagrant Churchman' ('Poems and Letters', 2.320), and rejoiced at his death before he could embark on renewed persecution of dissenters. For after a number of outrageous demands for office Strangways was eventually rewarded with a seat on the privy council, but held it for less than a month before he died of apoplexy on 20 July 1675 at Melbury Sampford, where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 38020


Stratford, John (b. 1582?, d. in or after 1634), merchant and entrepreneur, came of ancient gentry stock. He was the seventh son of John Stratford and his wife, Margaret, daughter of William Tracy of Toddington and Stanway, in Gloucestershire. John and Margaret had eight sons and one daughter, and in the early years of their marriage lived at Paynes Place, Bushley, Worcestershire. Margaret died at Bushley, leaving a nuncupative will dated 10 October 1621. Their son John Stratford became a London salter, being apprenticed to Peter Robinson, and marrying his daughter Joan at Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, on 20 April 1602. There were two sons and five daughters of this marriage, all born between 1603 and 1615 and baptized at St Matthew's Church, Friday Street, London. 
Stratford traded first in Cheshire cheese and woollen hose, sent from the country by Robinson's chapmen, but then switched to rough flax, linen yarn, wheat, and rye, bought from Eastland (Baltic) merchants in exchange for English broadcloth. He entered into partnership with John Hopkins, a fellow apprentice, who also married one of Robinson's daughters. When, through a second marriage, Hopkins became a kinsman of one Vickares, a woollen draper, Hopkins took over the broadcloth trade and Stratford concentrated on the flax trade, in partnership with three others, his half-brother Ralph, Thomas Lane, married to a third daughter of Robinson, and Humphrey Thornbury. They prospered and employed many poor in and near London to dress flax, until the Netherlanders brought in dressed flax. 
Then business diminished, and the partners persuaded Stratford to live off his Prescott estate in Gloucestershire. He began to grow tobacco, raising some capital from Abraham Burrell, but Henry Somerscales was his main partner, for Somerscales had learned in the Netherlands how to cultivate tobacco, and took responsibility for the sale of the matured crop. Each lease of land involved separate partnerships, usually sharing the costs and profits equally. Lessees included Thomas Lorenge of Cleeve and John Ligon of Beauchamp Court, Worcestershire, each being promised inflated rents of $5 and more per acre for four years. Stratford employed many poor, spending $1400 on labour in one year, and taking trouble to conceal planting procedures from prying eyes. The first crop was sown in February 1619, on 100 acres, but a proclamation banned tobacco growing on 30 December. He attempted to cancel his leases, and much litigation followed, but he failed to escape his obligations, and became deeply indebted. 
At the same time Stratford was engaged with his half-brother Ralph in soap-boiling in London, and dealt in tallow, potash, soap-ash, and oil. An appeal to the privy council in 1623 prompted their recommendation that his creditors forbear, for one year, later extended, to press for payment. He paid off some debts in sheep, and by growing flax at Winchcombe and Cockbury on 40 acres, employing 800 poor. He also experimented with linen manufacture. He urged the growing of flax and hemp as a state policy, and more ploughing of pasture to make work. The date and place of his death are unknown; a lawsuit implies that Stratford was still living in 1634, but he predeceased his wife, who died at Cheshunt, Hertfordshire. Her will was proved on 1 May 1654, and the administration of the estate of a John Stratford of Monmouth was granted to his wife Joan in 1638. 
Joan Thirsk', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38021


Stringer, Moses (d. 1714), chemical physician and master of mines, was one of the eleven children of Richard Stringer of Loughborough, Leicestershire. He practised paramedically before leaving the Newcastle under Lyme area in 1690 and obtaining a medical licence at Chester in July 1691. Stringer was admitted a member of the Society of Mineral and Battery Works in December 1692 and of the Society of Mines Royal in June 1693. After studying chemistry and medicine under Benjamin Woodroffe, principal of Gloucester Hall, Oxford (later refounded as Worcester College), in 1692, he taught chemistry and experimental philosophy there until about 1696, by which time he was working at his refineries in the High Peak, Derbyshire. 
In March 1698 Stringer was settled in the Strand, London, and he published a congratulatory poem to Peter the Great on the tsar's arrival in England, together with accounts from the 'Protestant Mercury' of his dramatic cure of a person bitten by a viper and his spectacular experiments with metals and minerals for the tsar at the Deptford manor house belonging to John Evelyn. In his 1699 pamphlet, 'English and Welsh Mines and Minerals Discovered', 'M. S.' advocated to the House of Commons the employment of the poor for profitable mining. The following year he moved to Hugh's Court, Blackfriars, considerably extending the premises with a large laboratory and foundry. 
In 1701 the Admiralty ordered a squadron to the West Indies, commanded by John Benbow, to carry out the first recorded naval therapeutic trials of two chemical medicines invented by Stringer to combat scurvy and fevers. Admiral Sir Cloudesley Shovell may also have used them in the Mediterranean. Three editions of Stringer's tract, 'Variety of Surprising Experiments' (1703, 1705, and 1707), supplemented by three published open letters to Woodroffe (in 1704 and 1707), evince his skill in devising these and other chemico-mineral medicines along Paracelsian lines. 

'State Papers' and other sources indicate that Stringer ran a large foundry business, owned ships for exporting and importing metals and ordnance, and planned to set up a company for colonizing West Indian islands. The societies of Mines Royal and of Mineral and Battery Works, incorporated in 1568, had become virtually moribund by 1695. Stringer, whose book 'Opera mineralia explicata' ('By M. S., M. D.', 1713) presents a detailed history of the societies, played a decisive part in preserving their records, salvaged by Sir Isaac Newton, and in renewing their rights and charters. They amalgamated under him as mineral master general in 1709-10. He persuaded the bishop of London to be a governor and Newton to become a deputy governor. Sir Christopher Wren helped build a new meeting-room above Stringer's laboratory in Blackfriars. Robert Boyle was one of several distinguished members of the societies. 
Stringer's titles of chemist and physician to King William and chemist, physician, and mineralist to Queen Anne in some of his publications were probably honorary designations. A controversial character, he was incarcerated in the Fleet prison on three occasions. In January 1713 Stringer issued an advertisement to scotch rumours of his death occasioned by the demise of the empiric William Salmon in Blackfriars. 
Stringer was married by 1692. He and his wife, Mary, had at least seven children. He died intestate at Blackfriars in 1714. 
John H. Appleby', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38022


Stringfellow, John (1799-1883), bobbin manufacturer and aeronautical engineer, was born in Attercliffe, near Sheffield, on 6 December 1799, the son of William Stringfellow, cutler, and his wife, Martha. His father was a man of wide scientific interests from whom he inherited a considerable degree of mechanical aptitude and ingenuity. 
At an early age Stringfellow was apprenticed to the lace trade in Nottingham, but about 1820 moved to Chard in Somerset, a centre of lace making, and was so successful that within a few years he had established his own business as a manufacturer of bobbins and bobbin carriages. Thus provided with a steady income, he was able to devote much of his time to aeronautical experiments and other scientific pursuits. 
In 1831 and again in 1832 Stringfellow launched hot-air balloons at local festivals, one of which flew a distance of more than 4 miles, but even at that time his goal was powered flight with fixed-wing aeroplanes. The idea was developed in discussions with another manufacturer of lace-making machinery who had moved to Chard in the late 1830s, William Samuel Henson (1812-1888), and was inspired by the aeronautical writings and experiments of Sir George Cayley. Henson and Stringfellow began testing various wing forms in model gliders, and by 1840 had evolved their projected full-size passenger-carrying flying machine or 'aerial steam carriage', which Henson patented in April 1843. 
A 20 foot wingspan model powered by a steam engine, of Henson origin but much improved by Stringfellow, was tested in 1845 but could not sustain itself in the air. Henson then abandoned his aeronautical ambitions altogether. Stringfellow persevered on his own, however, and built another 10 foot model powered by a smaller steam engine of his own design. More than one witness recalled that it gained height steadily after being launched on several occasions in 1848, and Stringfellow himself certainly considered that he had demonstrated with it the possibility of powered flight. 
Stringfellow then built a number of other model aeroplanes and engines before entering a model steam-powered triplane and a model steam engine in the aeronautical exhibition at Crystal Palace in June 1868. His steam engine was awarded a prize of $100 by the Royal Aeronautical Society for having the greatest power-to-weight ratio of all the fifteen engines exhibited, but unfortunately the triplane could never be tested in the still-air conditions to which it was suited, and so never proved itself to be, if indeed it was, a practical flying machine. 
Stringfellow was an outstanding designer and builder of small lightweight steam engines, but his model aeroplanes suffered from the twin disadvantages of being too large to be fully tested indoors, and not stable enough to be tested out of doors. It is remarkable, however, that his fixed-wing propeller-driven models showed the way ahead so clearly at a time when most other proposals for aerial machines involved flapping wings or unlikely applications of the helicopter principle. 
In the late 1850s Stringfellow took up the new art of photography, becoming so proficient that he advertised himself as a professional portrait photographer, with a studio in Chard High Street. He was elected a member of the Royal Aeronautical Society in 1868, and with his prize money erected a building 70 feet long in which to continue his experiments, but his sight began to fail and he was unable to make any further progress. He patented in 1870 a wheeled apparatus for affording protection from bullets and other missiles, but did not succeed in selling it to any of Europe's warring armies. 
On 24 February 1827 Stringfellow married Hannah Keetch, said to have been born in Newfoundland. Their surviving family consisted of six sons and four daughters. Stringfellow died in High Street, Chard, on 13 December 1883. 
Ronald M. Birse', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38023


Strode, Sir William (1562-1637), politician, was born on 5 March 1562, the only child of Richard Strode (1528-1581), landowner, of Newnham, near Plymouth, Devon, and his wife, Frances Cromwell (died 1563), daughter of Gregory, second Baron Cromwell. He was admitted to the Inner Temple in 1580, and avoided the penalties of wardship by marrying, on 15 July 1581, less than a month before his father's death, Mary (died 1619), daughter of Thomas Southcote, landowner and tinner, of Bovey Tracey, Devon. 
Strode was a JP for his county from the early 1590s and served as sheriff in 1593-4. His ancestors had regularly sat for Plympton, the borough neighbouring the family seat of Newnham, since 1437, but in 1597 he became the first of the family to represent the county. He left no mark on this parliament, but he was knighted in 1598 and became surveyor of crown lands in Devon upon his father-in-law's resignation. He commanded the local stannary regiment during the threatened Spanish invasions. 
Strode continued to sit in the next seven parliaments. In 1604 he complained that the king had been misinformed about proceedings in the House of Commons. No friend to the ecclesiastical hierarchy and a strong Calvinist, who in his home county actively supported the ministry of the militant rector of Modbury, Samuel Hieron, and later maintained weekly lecturers, Strode was named to most committees of puritan intent. On supply, he habitually favoured parsimony, not refusal, and in the interests of free speech preferred debate in committee, with the speaker out of the chair. Although he showed little inclination to comply with the government over purveyance, wardship, and union with Scotland, he was actively helpful with several private bills promoted on behalf of the earl of Salisbury, the king's chief minister. Bishop Cotton of Exeter complained that 'Sir William Strode's canvass against the ecclesiastical commission in Devon' gained strength from the 'favourable respect' in which he was held by the earl ('Salisbury MSS', 18.297). In 1610 he initially supported the great contract to put government finance on a sounder footing and reduce unparliamentary taxation. His 'diligent attendance and good service to the House' were noted in the 'Commons' Journal' ('JHC', 1547-1628, 350). 
As recorder of Plymouth, Strode represented the borough in 1614, showing increased concern over commercial matters, especially the attempt of the Londoners to monopolize trade with France and Spain, and the imposition of customs duties by the crown. Predictably he was outraged by the speech of Bishop Richard Neile (once Salisbury's chaplain) describing the spirit of the lower house as undutiful and seditious. Plymouth corporation voted Strode $20 for his services in parliament and 'for assisting the town in withstanding the patent for packing and salting of fish' (Worth, 152), but he was replaced as recorder before the next election by a lawyer. 
Sitting again for his family borough in 1621, Strode set out his position on taxation: 'I would help the King, and yet look to the country', which was suffering a severe depression (Notestein, Relf, and Simpson, 2.90). He admonished his fellow landlords to abate rents during the depression and to forbear from imposing taxes that chiefly hit the poor. He took a strong line against monopolies among other barriers to freedom of trade. Although an investor in the Virginia Company, however, he advocated a total ban on tobacco imports. He was troubled by the increase in petty crime in Devon, and introduced a bill to reduce those offenders unable to pay fines to slavery for eight years, at the end of which he hoped they would have acquired such skills and habits of industry as would enable them to earn an honest living. 
Strode had been without a patron at court since Salisbury's death in 1612, but by 1624, when he again represented his county in parliament, he had become a client of the duke of Buckingham. He expressed satisfaction with the duke's rambling account of his conduct in Madrid, 'If any man can take exception, reason to take consideration; but now no reason... to stay it' ('JHC', 1547-1628, 721). He supported the absurdly inadequate estimates of the cost of war, and was even prepared to defer the presentation of grievances. In 1625 Bishop John Williams described him as 'never out of my lord duke's chamber and bosom' (J. Hacket, 'Scrinia reserata', 1695, pt 2, 18), and in 1626 he acted as teller against his patron's impeachment. This was the last parliament in which he sat, and for the election of 1628 he gave his interest at Plympton to another of the duke's clients, Sir James Bagg. Meanwhile, at home in Devon during these years of war Strode, living near Plymouth with the problems of disorder and martial law raised by the presence of mutinous and ill-paid troops, had been active as a magistrate and deputy lieutenant. 
Lady Strode was buried on 24 February 1619, leaving a grown-up family of three sons and seven daughters. The eldest son, Sir Richard, married a sister of Sir Walter Erle and later became a Baptist; the second son, William Strode (bap. 1594, d. 1645), achieved prominence as one of Sir John Eliot's allies in the session of 1629 and as one of the five members in 1642. The daughters all married into prominent Devon families, two of them marrying baronets and four of them knights; the eldest daughter, Mary, married Sir George Chudleigh, a neighbour to the Strodes who shared Sir William's puritanism, and Elizabeth married a son of the diarist Walter Yonge. On 31 March 1624 Strode married his second wife, Dennes, daughter of Stephen Vosper of Liskeard, Cornwall. She died childless, and was buried on 16 September 1635. 
Under the personal rule of Charles I, Strode continued to be consulted over local matters. In 1632, now aged seventy, he was unsuccessful in his attempt to resign from the county bench and deputy lieutenancy. In January 1634 his brother justices reported that although his 'extreme sickness' had prevented him from attending their meetings, yet he had been 'very careful and forward' in implementing the 'Book of Orders' in his division (Wolffe, 67). His last public action was a protest against ship money. He died on 27 June 1637 and was buried alongside his two 'most loving and religious wives' at St Mary's Church, Plympton, the following day (will). An epitaph composed by his son William speaks of his religion, integrity, public justice, generous hospitality, and upright and successful management of his affairs. 


@@@@@


doc= 38024


Stuart, (Herbert) Akroyd (1864-1927), mechanical engineer, was born at 37 Victoria Street, Halifax, Yorkshire, on 28 January 1864, the second of six children of Charles Stuart, a pattern maker, and his wife, Ann, daughter of Jonathan Ackroyd, a worsted cloth weaver of Luddenden near Halifax. His father was born in Paisley, near Glasgow, but was working in Halifax by 1858. 
At the age of twelve Stuart was sent to St Bartholomew's Grammar School in Newbury, Berkshire. Shortly afterwards the family moved to Fenny Stratford, where his father had acquired the Bletchley ironworks, manufacturing steam engines and boilers. On leaving school Stuart joined his father as an engineering apprentice, and also worked for a time in the mechanical engineering laboratories of the City and Guilds Technical College in Finsbury, London. His father had installed a Spiel petroleum engine to drive some of the machinery in his workshops, and Stuart was inspired to work on the problem of developing an internal combustion engine that would run on heavier (and safer) grades of fuel oil. He took out his first two engine patents in 1886, and having progressively improved the design to give more complete combustion and avoid pre-ignition, in 1890 he was granted two patents for a hot-bulb oil engine, two years before Rudolf Diesel's first English patent for his compression-ignition oil engine. A small number of Stuart's engines had already been built and tested in Bletchley by 1890, on one occasion by the chief engineer of Richard Hornsby & Sons of Grantham, who soon afterwards became the sole licensees, manufacturers, and developers of the Hornsby-Akroyd oil engine. 
The engine was very simple, efficient, and reliable in operation, with the minor disadvantage that the vaporizer required preheating for a few minutes before the engine could be started; when running, it retained sufficient heat to ignite the injected fuel. Essentially slow running and of limited horsepower, the majority of the many thousands of engines made by Hornsby between 1892 and 1922 were used as stationary engines for agricultural and general workshop purposes. They were also used to power the first oil-engined tractor and the first practical oil-engined locomotive, both in 1896. A 20 hp Hornsby-Akroyd engine powered the world's first caterpillar tractor in 1905, but later attempts to match the development of the high-speed diesel engine were unsuccessful. 
Stuart was elected a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1901. A few years previously he had emigrated to Australia, where he involved himself in the design and manufacture of the Akroyd patent down-draught gas producer. He evidently resented the fact that the name 'diesel' had come to be applied to virtually every type of oil engine, hot-bulb (ignition) as well as compression-ignition, and in 1923 he asked the institution to declare that henceforth the word diesel should only be used to describe oil engines operating on the compression-ignition principle, hot-bulb engines to be known as akroyds. The institution, however, did not feel able to recommend such a change after the word diesel had been in universal use for so long. 
Stuart died in Claremont, Western Australia, on 19 February 1927, a disappointed if not embittered man, and in his will directed that all his papers should be burned. His body was brought home and buried in the Akroyd cemetery, Halifax. 
Ronald M. Birse', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38025


Stuart, James (1843-1913), educational reformer and politician, was born in Balgonie, Fife, on 2 January 1843, the eldest child of James Gordon Stuart, mill owner, and his wife, Catherine, daughter of David Booth, lexicographer, of Newburgh, Fife. He had seven brothers, three of whom died in childhood, and one sister. He was educated at Madras College in St Andrews, and at St Andrews University, where he graduated BA in 1861 (he was awarded an honorary LLD in 1875). In 1862 he won a minor scholarship to Trinity College, Cambridge, and he graduated third wrangler in 1866. Elected a fellow of Trinity in 1866, he became an assistant tutor in 1867. 
Stuart was aware of the 'vast masses who desire education', as he put it in his 'On the work of the universities in higher education' ('Transactions of the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science 1871', 1872, 373), and in addition to his college duties he organized intercollegiate lectures and courses of university extension lectures. From 1867 he gave a series of lectures in the north of England, the most successful of the several initiatives of Josephine Butler's North of England Council for Promoting the Higher Education of Women. From 1873 to 1876 he was the first secretary of the local lectures syndicate in Cambridge, and he materially assisted similar developments by an Oxford committee and by the London Society for the Extension of University Education. He should not, as has sometimes been the case, be seen as sole originator of university extension, but he was certainly its most prominent early activist. In 1875 he was elected the first professor of mechanism and applied mechanics at Cambridge and planned the mechanical science tripos. Practical training cut across Cambridge's theoretical tradition, and Stuart's approach and his radical politics led to criticism. He resigned his chair in 1889 when his tripos proposals were rejected and his department's existence threatened. 
In 1882 Stuart unsuccessfully contested one of the Cambridge University seats, standing as a Liberal; he was strongly opposed by the clergy. He was elected for Hackney in 1884 and represented Hoxton from 1885 to 1900, when he was defeated. He was MP for Sunderland from 1906 until 1910, when he was again defeated. He continued his association with Josephine Butler by assisting in the campaign for the repeal of the 'Contagious Diseases Acts', and was a vigorous advocate of female suffrage and of reform of the House of Lords. He was an energetic editor of the 'Star' and 'Morning Leader' from 1890 to 1898. To his acute disappointment, especially in 1892, he was never offered office by a Liberal prime minister, but he served on several royal commissions. He was an alderman of the London county council from 1889 to 1898 and an elected councillor (for Haggerston ward) from 1901 to 1907. He was sworn of the privy council in 1909. 
In 1890 Stuart married Laura Elizabeth, daughter of Jeremiah James Colman (1830-1898), the mustard manufacturer ['see under 'Colman family (per. 1814-1898)], and his wife, Caroline Colman, nee Cozens-Hardy ['see under 'Colman family (per. 1814-1898)]; they had no children. They moved on the fringes of the circle around Gladstone, staying at Hawarden Castle and organizing prime ministerial visits to Norfolk. When his father-in-law died unexpectedly in 1898, Stuart moved to Norfolk and managed the firm. He died at his home, Carrow Abbey, Norwich, on 13 October 1913. His widow founded an extramural lecturership at Cambridge in his memory; Stuart House, to which she contributed, was for many years the home of the Cambridge Board of Extramural Studies. Stuart's was a fragmented public career: he achieved some eminence in several capacities, but distinction only as an educational reformer in the early part of his public life. 


@@@@@


doc= 38026


Stuart, Jane (c.1654-1742), the alleged natural daughter of James II, was, according to an oral tradition first set down thirty years after her death by Samuel Peckover, a prominent Cambridgeshire Quaker, born in Paris, the daughter of James, duke of York ['see 'James II and VII], then in exile, and an unnamed maid of honour to Queen Henrietta Maria, and to have lived at the English court from the Restoration to 1688 without, apparently, any contemporary ever noticing her. The legend of the royal Quaker was lent credence because of James's friendship with William Penn and his generosity to Quakers. What is known about Jane is that she lived in a cellar in Wisbech, earning her living by reaping in the fields in the summer and spinning wool and flax in the winter. She was a mystery to her neighbours, whose curiosity was aroused when she was found reading the 'New Testament' in Greek. 
After the 1688 revolution, when she moved to Wisbech, Jane Stuart is reputed to have evaded questions from the government about the birth of the prince of Wales, whom she had nursed, but this was the last thing William III would have wanted to enquire into. Although several Quakers visited James II at St Germain, there is no record of her ever being there. During the rising of 1715 she was reported as having hired a chaise to take her to Scotland to see her half-brother James III (James Francis Edward). Yet she never visited her 'family' at St Germain; nor did James II, a tender father to his natural children, ever mention her. There is no connection between Jane Stuart and a namesake, a widow, who claimed to be a great-granddaughter of James I. Jane Stuart died in Wisbech on 12 September 1742 and was buried in the Quaker burial-ground there. She was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 38027


Studd, Charles Thomas (1860-1931), cricketer and missionary, was born in Spratton, Northamptonshire, on 2 December 1860, the third of the six sons (with one daughter) of Edward Studd (1819-1877), indigo planter in India, later of Tidworth House, Wiltshire, and his second wife, Dorothy (Dora) Sophia (died 1923), daughter of John Thomas, Calcutta merchant, of Bletsoe, Bedfordshire; there were four children of the first marriage. He was educated at Eton College and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he took a pass degree and graduated BA in 1883. Like his elder brothers, J. E. Kynaston Studd (later first baronet) and G. B. Studd, he played cricket for Eton and Cambridge. The three brothers captained Cambridge University from 1882 to 1884, with C. T. captain in 1883. He was a superb all-rounder, famous at the age of twenty-one for his century when Cambridge beat the Australians by six wickets in a celebrated match of 1882. That year he played for England at the Oval when Australia won by 7 runs. He was among the top all-rounders in England in 1882 and became only the second player (after W. G. Grace) to achieve the 'double' of 1000 runs and 100 wickets. In 1882-3 he went to Australia with the England team which recovered the 'Ashes'. 
A dedicated rather than a born cricketer, Studd trained himself to supremacy. He used a longer bat than was usual, had the typical upright stance of the top amateurs of the day, and had a hard wrist stroke, with which he scored rapidly. He bowled slightly above medium pace, round-arm, his best performance being eight wickets for 40 runs for Cambridge University against Middlesex, the county he later played for. In his brief career in first-class cricket he made 4391 runs (average 30.49) and took 441 wickets (average 17.36). 
By 1884 C. T. Studd was a household name. The sensation therefore was immense when he abandoned cricket, and a life of wealth and ease, to go as a missionary to China. In 1875 his father had heard the American evangelist D. L. Moody in London, and had sold his racehorses and devoted himself to personal evangelism. His three cricketing sons became committed Christians while still at Eton but after his father's death C. T. lost his fervour, until January 1884, after he had believed that his brother G. B. was dying. C. T. threw himself into Christian activity with the same discipline and dedication he had given to cricket, and determined to join another well-known Cambridge athlete, the oarsman Stanley Smith, in the then little-known China Inland Mission led by J. Hudson Taylor. Five of their friends followed their example and volunteered, making the celebrated 'Cambridge seven' who left for China in 1885. 
Studd spent nine years as a pioneer missionary in north China. In 1887 he gave away his fortune and 'lived by faith' (and, indeed, on the generosity of his family). On 7 April the following year, while in China, he married another missionary, Priscilla Livingstone (1864/5-1929), daughter of William Stewart, flax merchant, of Lisburn, Ireland. They had four daughters (two sons died in infancy). In 1894 he was invalided home and never completely recovered his health. In 1896-8 he toured North American universities. Though not a natural speaker his pithy style, backed by his fame and renunciation, strengthened the student volunteer missionary movement. 
From 1900 to 1906 the Studds served in India. In 1908, in Liverpool, C. T. saw a poster -- 'Cannibals want missionaries' -- the first step in an extraordinary saga which led him, against medical and family advice, to found the Heart of Africa mission in the Congo. In 1913 Studd and his daughter Edith's young fiance, Alfred Buxton, a descendant of the emancipator Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton, bicycled across east Africa to a populous region untouched by Christianity. In the next years Studd and a small band of young people overcame difficulties to found a flourishing church, the start of a new pioneer mission, the Worldwide Evangelization Crusade (1919). 
Studd's personality and methods became increasingly controversial; his autocratic leadership caused dismissals and resignations, and his determination to continue despite declining health led to dependence on morphine. Yet when he died in Ibambi, Belgian Congo, on 16 July 1931, 2000 Africans attended his funeral there in torrential rain. 


@@@@@


doc= 38028


Kennedy, Geoffrey Anketell Studdert (1883-1929), Church of England clergyman and poet, was born on 27 June 1883 in Leeds, the seventh child in the family of seven sons and two daughters of the Revd William Studdert Kennedy, vicar of St Mary's, Quarry Hill, Leeds, and his second wife, Jeanette Anketell. There were also one son and four daughters of a first marriage. Educated at Leeds grammar school, he graduated in classics and divinity at Trinity College, Dublin, in 1904, after which he taught for two years at a school in West Kirby in Liverpool. Following a year of ordination training at Ripon Clergy College he was ordained in 1908 to a curacy at Rugby parish church, moving from there in 1912 to be curate at Leeds parish church. In 1914 he married Emily, daughter of Alfred Catlow, coal merchant; they had three sons. Appointed that same year as vicar of St Paul's, Worcester, in 1915 he became a chaplain to the armed forces and began the wartime ministry among the troops in France and Flanders for which he is most remembered. 
Studdert Kennedy's considerable natural gifts as a preacher were combined with a talent for poetry, particularly dialect verse in the manner of the barrack-room ballads of Rudyard Kipling. In the carnage and suffering of the trenches his strongly sacramental Christianity was communicated in memorable addresses and in colloquial verse of sometimes powerful simplicity, which brought together the passion of Christ and the doubt, fear, and courage of soldiers caught in the squalid stalemate of the Flanders trenches. Studdert Kennedy preached a suffering God, Christ the revealer, 'pierced to the heart by the sorrow of the sword' (Wilkinson, 138). The experience of war made him question both the metaphysical assumption of an impassible God, and the hortatory patriotic moralism of many contemporary churchmen and political leaders. He could contrast sharply (in 'Peace Rhymes of a Padre') the God of glory in Isaiah's vision with the God revealed in the suffering Christ: '
God, I hate this splendid vision -- all its splendour is a lie... 

And I hate the God of power on His hellish heavenly throne... 

Thou hast bid us seek Thy glory, in a criminal crucified... 

For the very God of Heaven is not Power, but Power of Love. 
(Wilkinson, 137)' A bitter poem from the end of the war saw the statesmen who were meeting at Versailles to agree to a peace treaty as those who crucified Christ anew. After the war a number of volumes of Studdert Kennedy's collected poems were published, the most notable being 'Rough Rhymes of a Padre' (1918), 'Peace Rhymes of a Padre' (1920), 'Songs of Faith and Doubt' (1922), and 'The Unutterable Beauty' (1927). 
Given the nickname Woodbine Willie by the troops, Studdert Kennedy once described his chaplain's ministry as taking 'a box of fags in your haversack, and a great deal of love in your heart' (Mozley, 141) and laughing and joking with those he was called to serve. 'You can pray with them sometimes; but pray for them always' (ibid.). Ministering on the front line under fire he showed conspicuous bravery and was awarded the MC for his tending of the wounded under fire during the attack on the Messines Ridge. He was slightly built and liked to joke in public about his prominent ears and simian features, though contemporaries were much more likely to be arrested by the large and melancholy brown eyes. 
Demobilized in 1919, Studdert Kennedy was appointed a chaplain to the king. In 1922 he left his Worcester parish to run the church of St Edmund King and Martyr in Lombard Street in the City of London, a non-parochial cure, which left him free for his major post-war work as 'messenger' of the Industrial Christian Fellowship (ICF), which had come into being in 1920 as a result of the amalgamation of the Christian Social Union and the Navvy Mission Society. Critical alike of Marxist socialism and of capitalism, Studdert Kennedy commanded considerable audiences for his addresses during the ICF's missions and crusades in the years of the depression. He was sure that his Christianity had political consequences, but that it was religion not political panaceas that met human need. Archbishop William Temple, who described him as 'the finest priest I have known' (Mozley, 208), characterized him as evangelical without a trace of puritanism, and fired by a strong Catholic sacramentalism, with the cross at the heart of it all. The suffering of war and the suffering of the depression were alike uniquely met by the crucified God. 
Studdert Kennedy was on an ICF crusade at the time of his death, which occurred in Liverpool on 8 March 1929 at St Catherine's vicarage, Abercromby Square; he was survived by his wife. After a funeral ceremony in Worcester Cathedral, where a memorial plaque was erected in his memory, he was buried in St John's cemetery, Worcester. 
Geoffrey Rowell', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 38029


Stumpe, William (c.1497-1552), clothier, of Malmesbury, Wiltshire, was probably the son of a weaver of North Nibley, Gloucestershire. From obscure origins he rose to be the best-known Wiltshire clothier of his day, famous in the 1540s for his use of the buildings of Malmesbury Abbey as industrial workshops. Well before the dissolution of the monasteries Stumpe had settled in Malmesbury; by 1524 he was one of the town's richest inhabitants. He was elected MP for Malmesbury in 1529, and again in 1547, and may well have served in intervening parliaments for which the names of the members for Malmesbury are unknown. 
In 1536, when the court of augmentations was established to deal with the lands acquired by the crown through the dissolution of the smaller monasteries, Stumpe was appointed a receiver for north Wales, with a generous travelling allowance besides his salary of $20 p.a. In 1538 he was named a justice of the peace for Wiltshire, an appointment he retained until his death, and in March 1539, during an invasion scare, he helped to muster able men in Malmesbury and elsewhere in the county. On the surrender of the abbey to the king's commissioners in December 1539, the buildings assigned 'to remain undefaced' were given into the custody of its former steward, Sir Edward Baynton, but all those 'deemed to be superfluous' were committed to Stumpe as Baynton's deputy: they included the church, cloister, chapter house, dormitory, frater, and infirmary. Stumpe was instrumental in saving the nave of the church for use by the townspeople as their parish church. In 1541 Thomas Cranmer issued a licence for the conversion, which ensured the survival of at least part of the great abbey. 
Indirectly, the town probably also gained from Stumpe's decision to install broad looms in other parts of the abbey buildings. John Leland, visiting Malmesbury in the early 1540s, reported that 3000 cloths were being made there every year. (The city of Oxford in 1546 negotiated with Stumpe for a similar use of Osney Abbey, hoping to provide work for 2000 people, but nothing came of this project.) Finally, in 1544 Stumpe consolidated his interest in the property by paying over $1500 for a royal grant to himself and his heirs of the whole site of the abbey. By the end of the decade he was living in a new house built within the precinct. 
Stumpe was married three times. His first wife was Joyce, daughter of James Berkeley of Bradley, Gloucestershire; there were two sons of the marriage, the elder born in 1519. He married secondly, in or after 1533, Tibbilda, widow of William Billing, and thirdly, in 1551, Katherine (or Catherine), widow of Richard Mody, who survived him with the infant son of the marriage. Stumpe was named sheriff of Wiltshire in November 1551, but died on 22 July 1552, during his term of office. His second son succeeded him as a clothier, his eldest son, Sir James, having already moved into the ranks of the landed gentry. 
Helen Miller', rev. ' 


